## Acknowledgements

First and foremost, I am indebted to my doctoral advisor Antony
Valentini at Clemson University for his help in all matters from
technical to literary, and his support in enabling me to pursue the big
questions that fascinate me. I am also grateful to Lucien Hardy for many
discussions on foundations of quantum theory, and for his hospitality at
Perimeter Institute during 2012/2013, where a non-trivial amount of the
research in this thesis (especially chapter 11) was carried out. I
furthermore wish to thank Lee Smolin, who in early 2012 pointed me
toward the literature on the then very recent developments in Shape
Dynamics, and Rafael Sorkin, whose critical and novel way to look at
questions in both quantum theory and gravity has contributed to my own
approach. I owe much of my appreciation of the issues of gravity,
quantum theory and quantum theory of gravity to my education in
philosophy of physics at Oxford University, in particular to Oliver
Pooley, Harvey Brown, Simon Saunders and David Wallace.

I am also grateful to the Clemson University Department of Physics and
Astronomy and my PhD committee to allow me to pursue my work via
somewhat unconventional arrangements: first, through financial support
in the form of a minimal assistantship during my time at Perimeter
Institute, and second by allowing me to spend the last two years working
from my home, some three thousand kilometres from campus.

Finally, I wish to thank my wife, Jemma, for her patience.

###### Contents

-    1 Introduction
    -    1.1 Quantum theory and gravity
    -    1.2 Outline of this thesis
-    I Setting the scene
    -    2 The problem of time
        -    2.1 Time-reparameterisation invariance
        -    2.2 Vanishing Hamiltonians and frozen dynamics
        -    2.3 The problem of time in general relativity
        -    2.4 Other problems of time
    -    3 Physical time
        -    3.1 Choosing a physical time: Hamiltonian reduction
        -    3.2 The meaning of the reduced Hamiltonian
        -    3.3 Significance of the choice of time
    -    4 York time
        -    4.1 The initial-value problem of general relativity
        -    4.2 Properties of York time
        -    4.3 The reduced variables and their Poisson structure
        -    4.4 Cosmological history with York time
        -    4.5 York time as a solution to the problem of time
-    II Classical York-time cosmology
    -    5 The homogeneous isotropic universe with York time
        -    5.1 The role of cosmology in gravitational theories
        -    5.2 Friedmann-Lemaître cosmology ‘translated’ into York
            time
        -    5.3 Reduced-Hamiltonian Friedmann-Lemaître cosmology
        -    5.4 Inflation
    -    6 A cosmological extension
        -    6.1 An end to time?
        -    6.2 The necessity of a cosmological extension
        -    6.3 Dynamics on the other side
        -    6.4 Transition behaviour and classification of potentials
        -    6.5 Discussion
    -    7 Cosmological perturbation theory with York time:
        preliminaries
        -    7.1 The importance of cosmological perturbation theory
        -    7.2 Classical anisotropic cosmology: Exploration of the
            Poisson structure
        -    7.3 Mode freezing during inflation
        -    7.4 Re-entry of the Hubble radius in the
            radiation-dominated universe
    -    8 Cosmological perturbation theory with York time: Hamiltonian
        reduction
        -    8.1 Principles of cosmological perturbation theory via
            York-time Hamiltonian reduction
        -    8.2 The perturbative Hamiltonian constraint
        -    8.3 The physical Hamiltonian and the equations of motion
        -    8.4 Analysis of the dynamics
-    III Canonical quantum cosmology with York time
    -    9 Quantum Friedmann-Lemaître cosmology
        -    9.1 Quantum theory of the free scalar field
        -    9.2 Quantum theory with a potential
    -    10 Quantum York-time cosmological perturbation theory
        -    10.1 Quantisation, representations and the anisotropic
            homogeneous quantum universe
        -    10.2 Canonical quantisation of York-time cosmological
            perturbation theory
-    IV Quantum cosmology without the wavefunction
    -    11 Trajectory-Weyl quantisation
        -    11.1 Introduction to trajectory-based quantisation
        -    11.2 Relevant aspects of classical mechanics
        -    11.3 Review of Weyl geometry
        -    11.4 Quantum trajectories from an action principle
        -    11.5 Nodes and the phase-like nature of @xmath
        -    11.6 Discussion of trajectory-Weyl quantisation
    -    12 Quantum cosmology from trajectory-Weyl quantisation?
        -    12.1 Extension of the trajectory-Weyl approach
        -    12.2 Application to gravity and cosmology
-    13 Conclusion

###### List of Figures

-    2.1 Different ways of foliating spacetime
-    4.1 Surfaces of constant York time around singularities
-    4.2 The cosmological timeline with York time
-    5.1 The scale factor near scalar-field ‘turning points’
-    6.1 The extended York timeline with @xmath
-    6.2 The extended York timeline with @xmath

###### List of Tables

-    6.1 Transition behaviour for potentials bounded during the
    transition into the extended York-time cosmology

### Chapter 1 Introduction

#### 1.1 Quantum theory and gravity

Cosmology, the study of the history of universe, has a unique role in
the investigation of physical reality. Unlike, for example, particle
physics or condensed-matter theory it cannot be tested experimentally in
the laboratory. All evidence must come from observation of the one and
only universe to which we have access. To make matters worse, all our
observations are made roughly from a single point in space and time.

Yet despite these limitations, cosmology --- in particular the study of
the very early moments in the history of the universe --- is not only
fascinating in itself but also exceptionally useful in that it allows us
to explore physics at extremely high energies and on very small scales,
where both gravitational and quantum effects are expected to play a
crucial role. That is, through observations of remnants of this very
early period in the history of the cosmos, we can hope to probe physics
that is irreproducible in the lab to any degree of practicality, if not
in principle. ¹ ¹ 1 Since it is impossible to have the entire universe
inside a piece of apparatus that is itself part of the universe.

The observational investigation of the early universe is uniquely
challenging, but also uniquely rewarding.

Aside from technical difficulties (to which we come shortly) it is this
lack of experimental access that has led to the elusiveness of a
complete and testable theory of quantum gravity, a theory that is to
describe physics under the conditions that existed in the immediate
aftermaths of the big bang, ² ² 2 Throughout this thesis I will use the
term ‘big bang’ to refer to the initial singularity with which the
universe is thought to have started (unless quantum gravity were to tell
us otherwise). A particle physicist on the other hand would probably
place the ‘big bang’ at a point when the universe had a size of roughly
the Planck scale (where classical general relativity is sure to break
down), while some cosmologists would use the term to describe a point in
time as far forward as the end of inflation (since everything before
that is highly speculative). and that is to reduce to the testable
limits of classical general relativity and quantum field theory in the
appropriate regimes. The elusive theory of quantum gravity therefore has
a unique historical status: Advances in electromagnetism during the
nineteenth century were propelled forwards by observing phenomena such
as static electricity and the action of magnetic forces, thermodynamics
by observing the behaviour of gases and other fluids. During the early
twentieth century the mystery of spectral lines and other atomic
phenomena led, ultimately, to quantum mechanics. Even general
relativity, undoubtedly one of the most elegant theoretical developments
in the history of physics, was not primarily a quest for mathematical
beauty but one to explain the advancing perihelion of mercury, for
example. ³ ³ 3 In fact, later in life Einstein revised his own history,
stating that mathematical beauty had been the driving force behind his
development of general relativity. The documentation of the period
1910-1916 tells, however, a different story [ 123 ] . Einstein’s
motivation was almost entirely experimental. And while quantum field
theory was developed with the idea in mind of making quantum mechanics
compatible with the Lorentz-invariance of special relativity,
experimental progress kept up with theoretical predictions. ⁴ ⁴ 4
Perhaps a notable exception is the Higgs boson, which was only observed
some forty years after having been predicted theoretically. On the other
hand, the search for quantum gravity is driven not by experimental facts
in need of explanation but by a desire for a unified description of
phenomena, each of which is already well described by an appropriate
theory such as general relativity or quantum field theory.

The fact that the quest for quantum gravity is driven by theory rather
than experiment is exactly the reason why experimentally corroborating
any particular quantum-gravity contender is difficult; if appropriate
experiments were available in the lab we would likely already have
performed them, observed new phenomena and would have had empirical
evidence to guide our search.

That no accepted theory of quantum gravity exists is not due to a lack
of contenders. Proposals are numerous, albeit few are sufficiently
developed theoretically to justifiably claim the status of a
self-consistent theory with concrete predictions. The proposed theories
differ radically even in the answers they give to most fundamental
questions: Is spacetime fundamental or is there a true differentiation
between space and time? Are space and time infinitely divisible? Is
there a physically fundamental measure of time? Is time even physical at
all, and if so, what does that mean? Is everything dynamical or is there
a fixed ‘background’ structure that serves as the arena of the
universe’s dynamics?

The reason for this plethora of theoretical frameworks is the failure of
the ‘standard’ procedure when applied to gravity: the canonical
quantisation of the classical gravitational field of general relativity.
In the present work we will spend some time gaining an understanding of
why this method fails. Suffice to say at this stage, both the success of
canonical quantisation with anything but the gravitational field, as
well as the procedure’s failure with it are in their own way remarkable.

A priori the idea of canonical quantisation appears ludicrous: Begin
with a ‘classical’ theory describing entities such point particles, or
fields, or rigid objects, where the chosen classical theory is
experimentally adequate on sufficiently large scales and sufficiently
low energies. Now perform a series of ad-hoc mathematical steps to
arrive at a new theory whose ontology (that is, the physical entities
that purport to make up the world) is radically different from that of
the classical theory (if at all well-defined). Finally establish a link
with what is measurable by introducing highly questionable postulates
concerning the outcomes of ‘experiments’.

This new ‘quantum’ theory is now supposed to be understood as being more
fundamental than the classical theory from which it originated, the
latter being considered a limit of the former under appropriate
conditions. It appears that the reasoning is backward, with the
fundamental being derived from the approximation. Yet the phenomenal
experimental success of this ‘recipe’ in all areas of physics except
gravity is truly remarkable. When applied to the most fundamental
classical theory known, the fields comprising the standard model of
particle physics, the resultant quantum theory has been corroborated
experimentally to an extremely high degree of accuracy.

However, when the same procedure is applied to the metric field @xmath ,
a @xmath -tensor classically used to represent the gravitational field
(or, more accurately, to the spatial metric @xmath on a suitably chosen
space-like ‘slice’ taken from a foliation of the spacetime), it fails
spectacularly. In particular, the resultant theory implies that the
universe is frozen, that no dynamical processes are possible at all.
This is one facet of what has been dubbed the ‘problem(s) of time’,
which we will be discussing in some detail in chapter 2 .

At the heart of the problem lies the general covariance of the classical
theory, that is, the fact that the dynamical equations of general
relativity are covariant under arbitrary coordinate transformations on
spacetime. General covariance is not a physically meaningful property of
a theory. Any (classical) theory can be expressed in a generally
covariant form, a criticism going back almost a century [ 69 ] .
However, applying the quantisation recipe to distinct forms of the same
classical theory does not necessarily yield physically equivalent
quantum theories. This fact is central to the line of inquiry pursued in
this thesis and will be discussed further in future chapters.

In general relativity one can consider four independent generators of
coordinate transformations at each point in spacetime, three in space
and one in time. These are the gauge freedoms of the theory at any one
point in spacetime. Each of these gauge freedoms leads to a constraint
equation, totalling three so-called ‘momentum constraints’ and one
‘Hamiltonian constraint’ ⁵ ⁵ 5 Gauge constraints usually generate
(non-physical) gauge transformations (‘generate’ referring to motion in
the configuration space determined by the Poisson bracket of the
constraint and the configuration variable). However, it has been argued
that the Hamiltonian constraint described real physical change [ 11 ] .
We briefly survey the argument at the end of section 2.2 . stemming from
the three spatial and one temporal gauge freedom respectively. The
problem of time is associated with the latter.

Understanding how the ‘frozen’ dynamics follow from the temporal gauge
freedom is possible without reference to the full theory of general
relativity. In fact, a simple particle model suffices, provided its laws
(that is, its action) is given in a time-reparameterisation invariant
form. This time-reparameterisation invariance serves as a toy model for
the temporal gauge freedom of general relativity. It is however
important to emphasise that in general relativity there are other facets
to the problem of time which do not appear in the case of a particle
model, primarily due to the fact that while in the toy model there is a
single gauge degree of freedom determining the temporal
parameterisation, there is one such degree per spacetime point in
general relativity. As a consequence in general relativity it is not
only that the sequence of spatial slices constituting the history of the
universe may be freely relabelled, but it is not even clear how the
slicing should be done in the first place.

Short of more radical proposals, two ‘fixes’ come to mind. First, one
may consider partially gauge-fixing general relativity. Here one
specifies the temporal gauge, thereby choosing a unique slicing and a
unique labelling of those slices. This eliminates the Hamiltonian
constraint and hence the frozen dynamics. A second approach is to
construct an entirely new theory which does not possess the slicing
ambiguity in the first place and has a fixed temporal parameterisation,
provided the phenomenology of general relativity can be recovered
sufficiently closely in order not to contradict past observations. ⁶ ⁶ 6
It is not strictly necessary that all predictions of general relativity
are recovered by such a theory, but only those that have actually been
tested. Discrepancies would allow for the ability to distinguish between
the two theories in future experiments. One such contender is Shape
Dynamics, a theory whose dynamical variables are those describing a
conformal three-geometry (rather than the non-conformal four-geometry of
general relativity). Shape dynamics matches the phenomenology of general
relativity for spacetimes that can be foliated into globally hyperbolic
slices (for example, a spatially flat Friedmann universe) but differs in
its prediction for what to expect on the other side of a black-hole
event horizon, for example. It turns out that in the presence of such a
hyperbolic slicing Shape Dynamics and general relativity have a gauge
overlap. That is, there is an appropriate gauge fixing (a choice of
coordinate description) for each such that the resultant two gauge-fixed
theories are identical.

From the perspective of general relativity this gauge fixing consists of
splitting spacetime into slices of constant mean extrinsic curvature
(CMC), a concept we will introduce in some detail later. The slices are
labelled by ‘York time’, named after James York in whose work on the
initial-value problem of general relativity in the early 1970s this
parameter had special significance [ 143 , 28 ] . In a cosmological
setting York time is proportional to the negative of the Hubble
parameter. This choice has a number of convenient properties which we
will describe in chapter 4 . The choice corresponds to the gauge overlap
between Shape Dynamics and general relativity.

In the light of the problem of time, performing such a gauge fixing is
an obvious strategy. However, it is nonetheless radical in that it
constitutes an explicit abandonment of general spacetime covariance in
favour of a more limited spatial covariance. Physically speaking, it
assumes the existence of a fundamental slicing of spacetime into space
and time, at least if this gauge choice is meant to be more than a
convenient coordinate choice for general relativity. Since we intend to
construct a quantum theory from this choice, and since different gauge
fixings of the same theory may well lead to phenomenologically distinct
quantum theories after application of the quantisation recipe (see
chapter 3 ), the choice is indeed more than one of coordinates.

Abandoning spacetime in favour of space and time might appear to run in
the face of the last one hundred years of developments in physics, not
least quantum field theory whose development was in part motivated by
the desire to construct a Lorentz-covariant theory of particles.
However, at closer inspection it is not, in fact, as far-fetched as it
might appear. One reason is that in quantum theory the notion of ‘time’
takes on a fundamentally different role. Consider the quantisation of
field theories. The quantisation must be performed with a specific
choice of temporal parameter. It is only after the quantisation is
complete that one can show that the chosen splitting of space and time
(here in a Lorentzian setting with flat spacetime rather than the curved
spacetime of general relativity) is, in fact, undetectable and that no
superluminal ‘signalling’ is possible. That is, spacetime covariance is
recovered at the phenomenological rather than fundamental level.
Further, covariant quantisation of the electro-magnetic field (or
equally fields of the strong and electro-weak sector of the standard
model) leads to ‘ghosts’, unphysical modes in the field which are
nonetheless essential to the mathematical structure of such a
formulation. Once again these do not appear at the level of the
phenomenology, but their status is somewhat of an open question on the
ontological level if the quantum field theory is treated with any degree
of physical realism (which it rarely is in practice). A fundamental
choice of space and time would alleviate this concern.

A very different reason to suspect the existence of a fundamental
distinction between space and time is found in cosmology. It is well
established that the observable universe is highly homogeneous and
isotropic at sufficiently large scales. Over distances of hundreds of
megaparsecs matter and radiation are very evenly distributed throughout
the universe. However, this homogeneity is not generally invariant but
only holds in one particular foliation of spacetime (up to small
perturbations with scales smaller than the scale on which the
homogeneity holds).

Quantum theory demands an unambiguous notion of simultaneity. This is
because time is treated very differently from any other variable in
standard quantum theory.

The departure from a fundamentally ‘relativistic’ physics is radical,
but not unreasonable. In fact, even at the classical level one can very
naturally arrive at a field theory in which the universal light-cone,
that is, the constancy of the speed of light and the fact that this
‘speed limit’ appears to apply to all fields of matter equally, is a
result rather than a postulate of the theory. Starting from the desire
to implement a truly ‘relational’ viewpoint of dynamics this has been
achieved as part of the Shape Dynamics program. However, for the
emergence of the classical light cone a slightly simpler theory
suffices, dubbed ‘Relativity without relativity’ by its creators [ 12 ]
.

In order to arrive at a theory describing the evolution of CMC slices we
will perform a procedure called Hamiltonian reduction. It provides a
method to arrive at a physical (that is, non-vanishing) Hamiltonian for
the foliation-fixed theory starting from the gauge-general Hamiltonian
of general relativity in its Arnowitt-Deser-Misner (ADM) formulation [ 4
] . The ADM Hamiltonian vanishes in virtue of being the sum of four
constraints. In general, the Hamiltonian reduction cannot be completed
analytically since it involves solving a highly non-trivial (and
non-linear) differential equation [ 28 ] . However, at sufficiently
large scales on which the universe is spatially homogeneous the
procedure is relatively straightforward. For example, for a cosmological
model with a set of scalar fields the equation reduces to a cubic, which
can be readily solved (see chapter 5 ). At the level of perturbations it
is more intricate and a perturbative solution to the problem and the
discussion of the resulting perturbation theory will constitute chapters
7 and 8 .

The reduced-Hamiltonian theory, unlike the original constraint system of
general relativity, can be quantised without (too much) difficulty,
although we will encounter some subtleties in the process. How then is
the quantisation to be carried out?

It is important to remember that no quantisation method is intrinsically
superior to another. Ultimately empirical data corroborates the
contenders for the correct quantum-gravitational theory and eliminates
incorrect ones. If two theories, constructed from the same classical
theory using different methods of quantisation, are identical in their
prediction, one may be preferable for its conceptual clarity. However,
realists must proceed with care. The inference of facts about the
world’s underlying ontology necessarily involves a certain degree of
‘philosophy’ and one must be careful when choosing between two
empirically equivalent but ontologically distinct theories. This is not
to say that such reasoning is irrational, although many physicists
throughout the twentieth century and beyond have taken this attitude. ⁷
⁷ 7 More accurately, there are two distinct points here. First, there
are schools of thought that claim or at least imply that any form of
reasoning about the underlying reality of a theory is meaningless.
Historically the best known such group were the logical positivists,
most prominently represented by the famous Vienna Circle. In a similar
vein, arguably, falls the rising popularity of attempting to formulate
quantum mechanics in terms of partial knowledge and information with an
‘epistemic’ wavefunction (concerning knowledge rather than physical
facts), an approach appearing attractive to some at least in part due to
the progress in quantum computing and quantum information theory. The
other point we are referring to here is the unfortunate tendency of many
physicists to look down on any form of philosophical reasoning, in some
cases using the word in an almost (and sometimes outright) derogatory
manner. In fact, here we wish to argue that any fundamental physical
theory must make statements about what the basic ontological entities
are with which the theory is concerned. Lacking such information a
theory is more akin to a prescription for predicting experimental
outcomes, without or with only very little explanatory value.

Yet it is no hyperbole to say that the last century has been dominated
by confusion with regards to the correct ‘interpretation’ of quantum
mechanics, even in the context of, say, quantised non-relativistic
particle models. ⁸ ⁸ 8 It would be an apt if slightly too general
observation to criticise much of the work that has been done in the
foundations of quantum mechanics for being too focussed on
non-relativistic models. While mathematically and conceptually easier to
handle, it is by no means clear that any insight gained in this realm
generalises. On the contrary, as we will argue, insight into the correct
‘interpretation’ might be gained from insights in quantum gravity. We
chose to use quotation marks around the term since it is rather
inaccurate. What is generally counted among such interpretations
includes theories with potential experimental discrepancies (such as
dynamical-collapse theories and non-equilibrium pilot-wave theory), as
well as ‘interpretations’ that are in fact no such thing but an explicit
lack thereof (so-called operational pictures).

Given the extent to which the quantum field theory of the standard model
of particle physics has been tested it is highly doubtful that
discrepancies in the predictions of laboratory measurement outcomes by
different formulations will be detected in applications relating to
conventional (that is, non-gravitational) quantum field theory. On the
other hand, given the fundamental incompatibility of the standard
quantum formalism with general relativity, one or both of them must be
revised. This might plausibly lead to diverging phenomenologies in
appropriate regimes, in particular in cosmological observations. One is
therefore justified in the hope that cosmological observation may help
narrow down the set of viable proposals for theories of quantum gravity,
which in turn may contain indications for the correct formulation, or
interpretation, of quantum theory.

We already touched on how our theory of gravity may be modified in
agreement with astronomical observations, for example in the form of
Shape Dynamics instead of general relativity or by considering the
existence of a physically fundamental notion of time. We shortly turn
towards a discussion of appropriate formulations of quantum theory.

Before doing so however we must emphasise that there is no guarantee
that any choice of classical theory and quantisation method will
succeed. Given the ludicrousness of the quantisation method, it is
entirely plausible to expect that the correct theory of quantum gravity
can only be attained ‘from scratch’, that is, by direct construction
from fundamental principles and not via quantisation at all. One example
of such an approach is that of causal sets ( [ 124 ] and references
therein; for the original proposal, see [ 19 ] ) where the spacetime
four-manifold is only considered a smooth approximation to a discrete
set of spacetime elements that are related via a partial ordering. ⁹ ⁹ 9
Depending on the particulars of the approach, matter fields are either
defined on those spacetime elements or the elements are all there is and
matter fields are emergent via a Kaluza-Klein formalism [ 66 , 67 , 91 ]
. One should also add that even the causal-set approach does not
completely abandon the notion of quantisation. It employs a
‘sum-over-histories’ method in its construction. However, given the
success of quantisation in other areas, the attempt to obtain an
adequate theory of quantum gravity in the ‘conventional’ manner is at
least plausible.

It is not entirely clear what the ‘standard’ method of quantisation
(that is, canonical quantisation) is beyond the relationship between
mathematical quantities, even leaving aside the option of path-integral
quantisation completely. Formally, canonical quantisation is the
construction of an operator algebra from a Poisson algebra of classical
functions by ‘promoting’ variables and functions of variables to
operators [ 128 ] . This operator algebra may then be represented as
operators acting on complex functions on a Hilbert space. Quantum
mechanics is then itself about relationships between ‘observables’, ¹⁰
¹⁰ 10 Some authors [ 108 , section 3.2.4] suggest that in a relativistic
setting even classical mechanics is about the relationship of
observables. a misleading term used to refer to the set of those
operators that are self-adjoint on the chosen Hilbert space. It is
difficult to see how this formalism alone leads to the physical reality
of everyday objects or even that of particles or fields. At best, it
describes some structural properties thereof.

In slightly less mathematics-focussed approaches ‘canonical
quantisation’ is assumed to also include the existence of a ‘quantum
state’ or ‘wavefunction’, although the latter term is often reserved to
refer specifically to the quantum state when represented in the position
basis of the Hilbert space. This wavefunction is then considered to
represent the physical state of the universe or at least the system
under consideration and the action of operators on this wavefunction is
used to extract information about the likelihood of measurement outcomes
(hence the name ‘observables’), albeit without being clear what exactly
constitutes a ‘measurement’. The time evolution of the wavefunction is
determined by the action of a particular operator, the quantum
Hamiltonian. If ‘measurement’ is understood as referring to a physical
process (as it must or its meaning is entirely obscure), then it is
unclear why this process is supposed to have a special status and is not
itself encoded in the wavefunction and its evolution. This is
particularly problematic in the context of cosmology where the entirety
of the universe, including anything capable of performing a measurement,
is supposed to be described by the ‘universal wavefunction’. But even in
non-cosmological application the concept is problematic and a large
literature has been dedicated to various facets of the ‘problem of
measurement’ (see [ 139 ] for a relatively recent review with many
references).

In the minimalist sense canonical quantisation is a purely mathematical
procedure and does not constitute the construction of a physical theory.
If the term is used in a broader sense it is an incomplete if not
inconsistent recipe to construct one. Either way, by itself it is
insufficient to arrive at an ontologically meaningful theory, although
it may describe certain mathematical structures underlying such a
theory. In order to arrive at a more satisfactory picture canonical
quantisation must therefore be supplemented with a set of physical
principles that relate the operator algebra to physical reality. The
abstract notion of measurement does not suffice.

One can separate proposals to overcome the overcome the measurement
problem into two groups, those that are purely interpretative of the
quantum formalism and those that add or change ontological and dynamical
elements of the theory. Among the former one counts the Everett
‘many-worlds’ interpretation ( [ 42 ] , though see [ 139 , sec. 4] for a
review and discussion), and Quantum Bayesianism [ 48 ] and other
‘psi-epistemic’ (the quantum state describes a state of information or
knowledge) approaches. Among the latter are dynamical collapse model
such as those of Ghirardi, Rimini and Weber [ 49 ] and de Broglie-Bohm
pilot-wave theory [ 34 , 18 , 59 ] . The list is by no means exhaustive
and this is not the place for detailed critiques of these ideas, which
by themselves would easily fill several doctoral theses.

To us, de Broglie-Bohm theory will be of particular interest. The reason
is not that it is a picture that is conceptually or otherwise more
appealing than its contenders (although it arguably is, as I have argued
elsewhere [ 101 ] ), but that it provides mathematical tools that are
unavailable in other formulations. These tools are configuration-space
trajectories just like they exist in classical physics, although they
are governed by non-classical dynamics. Specifically, the trajectories
may be used to provide a new way to deal with quantum cosmological
perturbations. ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 There is no reason to think that the method we
use here does not generalise to other applications, although this will
be the subject of future work.

Does the unique availability of mathematical methods imply that
de Broglie-Bohm theory deserves greater credence? In the process of
constructing the quantum cosmological perturbation theory via the
quantisation of a reduced-Hamiltonian system we will see hints towards
the plausibility of de Broglie-Bohm. Yet in the absence of a full,
non-perturbative theory of quantum gravity that explicitly relies on
quantum trajectories any definite conclusion of the sort would be rash.

However, it is possible to develop a quantum theory from a classical
starting point based entirely on the notion of such configuration-space
trajectories and without reference to a wavefunction. The exploration of
such a framework and its tentative application to cosmology will form
the final part of this thesis. A wavefunction-free formulation of
quantisation may be particularly suited to gravity and to the quantum
theory of the universe as a whole. Whatever its conceptual benefits,
whether or not such an approach can really lead to a fully satisfactory
theory of quantum gravity remains to be seen. In part IV we sketch the
way forward.

#### 1.2 Outline of this thesis

This thesis is divided into three parts. Part I introduces the relevant
background and motivates the line of inquiry pursued in this thesis. In
part II we develop the classical theory of York-time cosmology and in
part III the corresponding quantum theory. Chapters 2 and 4 for the most
part review material (though hopefully introduce some new perspectives),
while chapters 3 (at least section 3.3 ), 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 11
and 12 contain primarily original work.

Most of the quantitative work has been published. The contents of
chapters 5 and 9 (with the exception of section 5.4 ) has been published
in ref. [ 106 ] , that of chapter 6 in ref. [ 104 ] , sections 7.2 and
10.1 in ref. [ 105 ] , while sections 5.4 , 4.4 , 7.3 and 7.4 correspond
to the content of ref. [ 107 ] . The work on perturbation theory proper
(chapter 8 and section 10.2 ) is contained in ref. [ 103 ] , while that
on trajectory-based quantisation methods (chapter 11 ) is presented in
ref. [ 102 ] .

We begin by setting the scene. Chapter 2 begins by considering the
classical laws governing a system of particles with the aim to express
them in a time-parameterisation invariant manner. That is, we wish to
describe the dynamics in a way that is invariant under the
transformation @xmath , the transformation from Newtonian time @xmath to
an arbitrary (smooth monotonic) function @xmath thereof. Classically
this turns out to be not difficult. However, we find that it is a
necessary condition of time-reparameterisation invariance that the value
of the Hamiltonian function vanishes, @xmath . This ‘Hamiltonian
constraint’ leads to difficulties after quantisation however, where it
seems to imply that the quantum dynamics is frozen. This is a facet of
the ‘problem of time’. We leave the particle system behind and review
relevant concepts in general relativity, in particular the ‘ @xmath ’
formalism of Arnowitt, Deser and Misner. The formalism has properties
resembling those of the parameterised particle model and once again
leads to frozen dynamics after quantisation. However, there are other
facets of the problem of time, related to the spatio-temporal symmetries
of general relativity.

In chapter 3 we review the idea of Hamiltonian reduction, a method to
‘pick’ a particular time parameter as physically fundamental and derive
an associated non-vanishing Hamiltonian, eliminating the problem of
time. We argue that while in the classical theory the choice of time is
purely aesthetic, without consequences for observation, quantisation
with distinct choices of time may lead to diverging phenomenologies,
implying that if indeed there is a physical time, the list of contenders
can be narrowed down empirically. We illustrate this using a particle
model.

Finally we introduce York time in chapter 4 , a particular choice of
time parameter in general relativity which is a plausible candidate for
an underlying physically fundamental time. We discuss its role in the
initial-value problem of general relativity, perhaps the strongest
motivation for taking York time seriously, before looking at some of its
formal and physical properties, specifically the Poisson structure of
the reduced variables, the behaviour of the York-time foliation around
singularities and how various aspects of the problem of time are
resolved.

Hamiltonian reduction cannot be performed explicitly in the case of full
general relativity without additional symmetry assumptions since in this
case the Hamiltonian constraint cannot be solved explicitly. In part II
we perform the procedure for various physically relevant scenarios in
which solving the Hamiltonian constraint is possible due to the presence
of symmetries or at least approximate symmetries.

In chapter 5 we consider the simplest possible cosmological scenario, a
homogeneous and isotropic (‘Friedmann-Lemaître’) universe. This
simplification leaves only one geometric degree of freedom: scale. This
one degree of freedom is ‘absorbed’ into the notion of time through the
Hamiltonian reduction, so that only matter degrees of freedom remain,
for which we consider one or more scalar fields. The model, though
simple, is nonetheless of relevance. First, it serves to illustrate some
of the features of the reduced-Hamiltonian method in practice. Second,
the model will describe the dynamics of the homogeneous background on
which cosmological perturbation theory is defined. Furthermore, aside
from the simplified matter content used here, the Friedmann-Lemaître
universe does, in fact, provide a good approximation to our actual
universe. We conclude the chapter with a discussion of cosmological
inflation in terms of the York-time description.

In chapter 6 we discuss an important, if unexpected implication of
considering York time the physically fundamental time parameter: the
history of the universe should (depending on the global geometry of
space, that is, whether the universe is closed, flat or open) be
extended beyond what is normally regarded as temporal infinity @xmath .
This point corresponds to a finite value of @xmath and a priori there is
no reason for @xmath to ‘end’ here. However, there are also concrete
physical reasons why the quantum theory based on York time requires this
extension for consistency. We consider the conditions on various
scalar-field potentials, with particular emphasis on potentials favoured
as candidates for inflation, for a smooth transition from ‘our’ side of
cosmological history to the extension.

Chapter 7 begins the development of the theory of cosmological
perturbations in York time. First we consider a simple model (a
homogeneous but anisotropic model classically equivalent to the ‘Kasner’
models) that explores the unconventional Poisson structure, that is, the
fact that the geometric reduced variables are only ‘almost’ canonical.
We then examine phenomena that are well understood in conventional
perturbation theory, such as the freezing of modes as their physical
wavelengths grow to scales larger than the Hubble radius, in the context
of York time cosmology.

Finally, drawing on the preliminary insights gained in the last chapter,
in chapter 8 we develop the formalism for cosmological perturbation
theory based on York-time Hamiltonian reduction, discuss a variety of
related conceptual points and aim to obtain a physical understanding of
the theory.

Chapter 9 begins part III the development of York-time quantum
cosmology. We consider the quantum theory of the cosmological
‘background’ by canonical quantisation of the theory developed in
chapter 5 , explore the dynamics and draw some conclusions for different
scalar-field potentials. We also discuss some of the more subtle
technical points of the quantisation procedure.

In the next chapter, chapter 10 , we undertake the project of
canonically quantising cosmological perturbation theory as developed in
chapter 7 . First, we consider the quantised anisotropic minisuperspace
model explored earlier. This quantum theory can be solved exactly, that
is, we are able to find the Hamiltonian eigenvalues and eigenfunctions,
for example. Following quantisation the non-canonicity of the Poisson
brackets has some curious consequences relating to the nature of
momenta. In particular, (1) the theory does not have a momentum
representation and (2) the momenta are not observables (are not
Hermitian). We discuss the implication thereof. We then move on to the
quantisation of perturbation theory proper and discuss a number of its
features. Because of its complexity, no explicit solutions can be found
and explicit connection with observation will likely require numerical
work.

Chapter 11 considers an alternative to canonical quantisation. After
all, the problem of time is the result of the application of the
canonical quantisation recipe to general relativity. In the rest of the
thesis we only modified general relativity by selecting a physically
preferred choice of foliation. In this chapter on the other hand we
consider a modification of the quantisation recipe by ‘quantising’ via
the mutual interaction of an infinite set of configuration-space
trajectories. The particular approach proposed here, we argue, is
preferable over similar quantisation methods developed in recent years
for certain technical reasons that we explain in detail.

The approach of chapter 11 is understood for simple finite-dimensional
particle models. Its application to gravity remains an open question. In
chapter 12 we discuss the application of the quantisation scheme
developed in the last chapter to gravitational field theories and
consider some cosmological examples. The mathematical development here
remains mostly schematic. Given that this line of inquiry is still in
its infancy, these last two chapters are to be understood as a
speculative guide and the beginning of a new direction of research
rather than a presentation of established results.

Finally, in chapter 13 we summarise what has been accomplished in this
work and discuss its implications and open questions, as well as future
directions of research.

## Part I Setting the scene

### Chapter 2 The problem of time

In this chapter we explore the problems that arise when attempting to
quantise a time-reparameterisation and refoliation invariant theory such
as general relativity. These ‘problems of time’ are perhaps the most
pressing difficulty when formulating a theory of quantum gravity.

#### 2.1 Time-reparameterisation invariance

Much of modern physics describes the physical world through the use of
variables . These are mathematical quantities — often real or complex
numbers, or entities representable as ordered sets thereof (such as
vectors, matrices and so on), or occasionally more complicated objects
with different mathematical behaviours (such Grassmann numbers) — which
are understood to have some physical interpretation, are subject to
certain laws expressible in the form of equations limiting the values
the variables can take and establishing relations between values at
different (often infinitesimally separated) points in time. We leave a
more careful characterisation of the relationship between the
mathematical entities and physical reality to philosophical discourse.

The variables and equations that provide the best known description of
our actual world, the quantum state vector on the space of field
variables of the standard model of particle physics and, somewhat
speculatively, of some appropriate theory of gravity along the lines of
general relativity, are so complicated that explicit calculations are
only possible for highly symmetric situations (such as
Friedmann-Lemaître cosmology) or through perturbative approaches (such
as particle scattering theory or cosmological perturbation theory). It
is therefore often beneficial to look at non-realistic, simple,
finite-dimensional models in order to understand individual physical
features of the more complicated realistic theory. The implications of
time-reparameterisation invariance , that is, roughly, the irrelevance
of the choice of temporal parameter to the form of the equations, is no
exception.

While the notion of a ‘variable’ is fairly clear, at least from a
practical perspective, the notion of ‘time’ is not. Greater questions
aside, one can ask: Should time @xmath itself be a variable? Suppose we
have a classical system of @xmath particles of identical mass @xmath ,
moving in three-dimensional space, whose instantaneous configuration may
therefore be described by a @xmath -dimensional vector in configuration
space. The set of all points that describe the particle configuration at
some time forms a trajectory in this configuration space. This
trajectory may well cross itself any (finite or infinite) number of
times. Suppose instead we consider the extended configuration space,
that is, the @xmath -dimensional configuration space together with an
extra dimension, time. Time @xmath is treated as a further variable. The
trajectory in this @xmath -dimensional space never crosses itself (since
every instant of time only occurs once). Furthermore, with time @xmath
explicitly included in the information given by the vector in the
extended configuration space, the trajectory may be parameterised by any
choice of parameter @xmath , not necessarily the value of @xmath .

The natural question raised by this picture is whether or not the
physical laws (equations) that govern which trajectories are dynamically
allowed (that is, are solutions to the equations of motion) can be
expressed in terms of the arbitrarily chosen parameter @xmath . For
simplicity, suppose the system is conservative (or scleronomic in
Boltzmann’s language), that is, its dynamics has no explicit time
dependence. Consider the form of the action when parameterised by @xmath
rather than @xmath : ¹ ¹ 1 In this and the next few paragraphs we follow
roughly the presentation in Lanczos beautiful book [ 72 ] on the
variational principles of classical mechanics, chapter V, section 6.

  -- -- -------- -- -------
        @xmath      
        @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . We limit our considerations to
Lagrangians without second or higher-order time-derivatives. This still
encompasses the majority of physically relevant Lagrangians and indeed
all those relevant for the present work. Note that the variable @xmath
appears only in the form @xmath . It is kinosthenic , or cyclic in
Helmholtz’s terminology. It is then a basic theorem of classical
mechanics that its conjugate momentum, @xmath is a constant of motion.
Bearing in mind that the Lagrangian in the action in @xmath -form is
@xmath rather than merely @xmath , this momentum is

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The momentum @xmath conjugate to time is just the negative of the
Hamiltonian of the system. This insight will form the basis of the
‘reduced Hamiltonian formalism’ we will employ below. At present, we
note that the fact that @xmath is a constant of motion therefore implies
that the total energy of the system is, too. This constitutes a proof
that the energy in conservative systems is conserved, although this was
not our primary objective here.

Another consequence of @xmath being a constant of motion is that @xmath
may be eliminated entirely from the variational problem defined by this
Lagrangian. This effectively constitutes a partial integration (hence a
partial solution) of the Lagrangian equations of motion. In our case
this eliminates any reference to the original notion of Newton’s
absolute time @xmath . The general procedure to eliminate kinosthenic
variables can be found in most textbooks on classical mechanics (or
e.g. ref. [ 72 , ch. 5, sec. 4] ). In brief, the procedure is as
follows.

Suppose variable @xmath only appears as ‘ @xmath ’ in the Lagrangian. In
this case the Euler-Lagrange equation for @xmath is simply the statement
that the conjugate momentum @xmath is constant, @xmath . One introduces
a modified Lagrangian,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now solve the original Euler-Lagrange equation of @xmath , @xmath for
@xmath and substitute the result into @xmath to arrive at a variational
problem leading to dynamics equivalent to the original but without
dependence on the kinosthenic variable.

Let us apply this procedure to the variable @xmath in order to eliminate
any reference to it. The momentum conjugate to @xmath is a constant,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The modified action is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

in which we must eliminate @xmath via equation 2.4 . Assuming that the
Lagrangian has the usual form @xmath , note that the integrand on the
right-hand side of eq. 2.5 is just twice the kinetic energy,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Having chosen to focus on Lagrangians of the usual form, eq. 2.2
combined with eq. 2.4 now gives the familiar relation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the argument @xmath is shorthand for @xmath , so that eq. 2.6
implies

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the resulting action is (after another use of eq. 2.7 ),

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

This action is of geodesic form : it may be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Kronecker delta function. That is, the configuration
space may be considered to be equipped with a metric @xmath and the
variational problem is one of minimising the path length in
configuration space with respect to that metric. We will meet actions of
this form throughout this thesis.

The action principle 2.9 has been used by Barbour [ 9 , 10 ] as a
starting point for time-reparameterisation invariant mechanics. He
justifies this by arguing that the ‘kinetic metric’ @xmath is the
natural choice of metric on the configuration space. We chose an
alternative route for its derivation by promoting Newtonian time @xmath
to a variable and parameterising the configuration-space trajectory by
an arbitrary monotonic parameter, identifying @xmath as kinosthenic and
hence being able to eliminate it, resulting in the geodesic action 2.9 .
The Euler-Lagrange equations for this action are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

These equations are dramatically simplified if we choose @xmath such
that @xmath . This is, of course, the case when @xmath , where one
recovers the familiar Newtonian equations of motion. The Newtonian time
parameter is special: when the dynamical laws are expressed with respect
to @xmath they take their simplest form. However, we are not forced to
make that choice or ascribe any fundamental meaning to @xmath . But
given that @xmath has this simplifying property it is no surprise that
Newton and his followers believed in the existence of an ‘absolute’
time. ² ² 2 Newton’s reasoning was, of course, considerably more subtle
and relied on philosophical and theological considerations as well [ 89
, 73 ] . Furthermore, the Lagrangian formalism had not yet been
invented, although it is interesting to speculate what he might have
thought of the above line of argument.

#### 2.2 Vanishing Hamiltonians and frozen dynamics

It is an obvious next step to try to understand time-reparameterisation
invariance in the Hamiltonian picture. However, promoting Newtonian time
@xmath to a variable and parameterising the configuration-space
trajectory instead via an arbitrary parameter @xmath leads to a
difficulty: The Hamiltonian vanishes. The Hamiltonian ³ ³ 3 We use a
subscript @xmath to identify the Hamiltonian as the one defined with
respect to the arbitrary parameter and not, say, the Hamiltonian @xmath
defined with respect to Newtonian time @xmath , which is given by @xmath
. is defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

since the Lagrangian is @xmath and the set of configuration variables is
@xmath . But from eq. 2.2 and @xmath it follows immediately that the
right-hand side vanishes,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

This result may be understood heuristically, although as with all
heuristic explanations care must be taken not to take this for being
more rigorous than it is. ⁴ ⁴ 4 It is not an uncommon occurrence for
heuristic explanations to become the canon that is repeated and
propagated without question. A prime example is undoubtedly Hawking
radiation, whose supposed heuristic explanation by spontaneous pair
production near a black-hole horizon has very little to do with the
rigorous derivation via the inequivalence of inertial frames at the
horizon and at infinity. The heuristic version goes back to a paragraph
in Hawking’s original paper [ 58 ] , though it is doubtful that the
author intended this idea to be popularised in the way it did. The
heuristic picture is as follows. A Hamiltonian function generates (via
the Poisson brackets) motion of the system in phase space that
corresponds to the physical evolution of the system in time. But @xmath
is to generate motion for all possible choices of @xmath . For example,
if @xmath generates the motion for one choice @xmath , exactly the same
Hamiltonian @xmath is to generate the motion for another choice, @xmath
given by @xmath , that is, a choice where the parameter-time ‘passes’
twice as fast. But this is inconsistent unless the Hamiltonian vanishes.

Eq. 2.2 followed from the parameterised form of the action 2.1 . The
vanishing of the Hamiltonian is a direct result of the definition of the
momenta (specifically @xmath ) for an action of this form and hence is a
primary constraint in the language of Dirac [ 36 ] . It is the so-called
Hamiltonian constraint . As an aside, note that the other momenta @xmath
conjugate to the original variables @xmath are independent of the choice
of time since

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

The result that the Hamiltonian vanishes remains unchanged if one
eliminates the cyclic variable @xmath first. Starting with the the
Lagrangian given by expression 2.9 (the Lagrangian of Barbour and
Bertotti [ 10 ] ) instead, the momenta are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

in virtue of which the associated Hamiltonian vanishes,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Hamiltonian constraint does not pose any problem for the dynamics,
at least classically. For example in a conventional particle system with
@xmath and @xmath it merely says that the total energy @xmath is zero.
Since the dynamics does not depend on the value of @xmath but only its
gradient (is invariant under a shift in the potential @xmath const.),
whether or not @xmath is not detectable and the choice of potential and
resulting dynamics is effectively unrestricted.

The Hamiltonian constraint does however pose a problem for quantisation.
During canonical quantisation the canonical variables are ‘promoted’ to
operators, which act on ‘states’, that is, complex functions @xmath over
the configuration space of the system. The constraint equations become
equations of operators, which may either be identically satisfied at the
operator level or, if not, select a subspace of states that are
considered ‘physical’ in virtue of satisfying this quantum constraint
equation, rather than mere mathematical artifacts. We will encounter
both cases in this thesis. This is not the place to review the
systematic treatment of constraints in the classical and quantum theory,
which is due to Dirac [ 36 ] . A comprehensive discussion of constraint
systems can be found in ref. [ 126 ] .

Accordingly, physical states in time-reparameterisation invariant
systems, that is, systems with a Hamiltonian constraint @xmath , must
satisfy

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Hamiltonian operator obtained in the usual manner by
replacing @xmath and @xmath by operators @xmath and @xmath respectively
in the functional expression for @xmath . In the context of general
relativity the analogue equation is known as the Wheeler-deWitt
equation, which we will encounter in section 2.3 . The implication of
equation 2.17 is that the Schrödinger equation for physical states is
then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

The state vector does not evolve and the quantum dynamics is ‘frozen’.
This static result is known as the ‘problem of time’, although in the
context of general relativity there are other, related issues summarised
under this label (see section 2.4 ).

The above treatment of canonical quantisation does, of course, not
constitute a rigorous discussion. As we discussed in chapter 1 , a more
rigorous approach would be formulated in terms of an operator algebra
whose commutator structure is inherited from the Poisson algebra of the
classical theory. For a thorough treatment, see ref. [ 128 ] . Suffice
to say, the problem of time is unaffected.

The Hamiltonians @xmath and @xmath were derived by extending the set of
configuration variables to include Newtonian time @xmath . One might
consider this counterintuitive to the stated goal that is the
elimination of an external time parameter. Is this the cause of the
problem?

Not so. Return instead to the parameterised action 2.1 . Suppose we wish
to eliminate any dependence on @xmath , which only appears in the form
of its derivative @xmath . If @xmath is to be meaningless in the desired
dynamics then @xmath merely denotes some arbitrary non-negative ⁵ ⁵ 5
What about @xmath ? This would suggest that an extended interval of
@xmath would correspond to a single point on the @xmath -timeline. A
physical interpretation of this is not immediately apparent. However,
later on we will discover examples with such a relationship between two
choices of time parameter, for example, York time with de Sitter space.
function, which we will call @xmath . Its counterpart in general
relativity, which we will meet in section 2.3 , is referred to as the
‘lapse’ function and we also adopt this nomenclature here. Our proposed
action is then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Having ‘forgotten’ the origin of @xmath , this is now an arbitrary
function that encodes the freedom of choice with regards to the temporal
parameter.

In many texts the argument proceeds by treating @xmath like another
dynamical variable. One then introduces its conjugate momentum @xmath ,
which must vanish since @xmath does not occur in the action. Such
variables do not introduce dynamical equations of motion but so-called
primary constraints. The easiest way to see this is to write the action
in canonical form , that is, introduce conjugate momenta and perform a
Legendre transformation of the integrand,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a function such that the expression matches the original
Lagrangian up to total derivatives and is, of course, the Hamiltonian of
the system. The new variable @xmath does not contribute to the sum since
@xmath vanishes. Note that the canonical action presents a new
variational problem with @xmath variables @xmath and its Euler-Lagrange
equations are just Hamilton’s equation. The Hamiltonian formalism can
therefore be understood as a special case of the Lagrangian formalism,
namely limited to problems in which the Lagrangian takes the form of a
sum made up of pairs of variables one of which (the ‘ @xmath ’) appears
as a time derivative while the other one (the ‘ @xmath ’) does not,
minus a function of the variables only (without time derivatives). This
result is independent of any notion of reparameterisation invariance and
the nature of the temporal parameter. It applies just the same to
mechanics in terms of standard Newtonian time [ 72 ] . In the case of
the action 2.19 , the canonical action is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

that is, the Hamiltonian is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Euler-Lagrange equation for @xmath then implies that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is exactly the Hamiltonian constraint obtained above.

The reasoning of the last paragraph — that is, the reasoning of most
texts reviewing the subject — is, on the whole, correct. The one step
that may be objectionable is the very first: Why should @xmath be
treated as a dynamical variable? It is a function of @xmath but has no
obvious physical meaning. The point we wish to make here is that it is,
in fact, not necessary to adopt @xmath as a dynamical variable. First
note that the form of the canonical action is independent of this step.
The system is expected to follow the ‘path of least action’ for any
choice of @xmath (since our dynamics is to be independent of that
choice), which is akin to demanding that it be extremised with respect
to @xmath . That is, the variational principle for @xmath is justified
on physical grounds, not because the function is adopted to the pool of
variables that are subject to the well-known Lagrangian machinery. The
formal consequence, namely the appearance of the Hamiltonian constraint,
is the same as in the standard argument. Here we merely took issue with
its justification.

The derivation of the Hamiltonian constraint (and the resulting frozen
dynamics following canonical quantisation) via the lapse function @xmath
is, in fact, the way the problem is usually understood in the context of
general relativity. There treating @xmath as a variable may more
justified depending on one’s perspective: The lapse is effectively the
information contained in the time-time entry of the spacetime metric
@xmath (i.e. @xmath ) and so from a spacetime point of view is indeed
one of the variables. On the other hand, if a ‘3+1’ formalism is
considered fundamental (that is, a slice of space evolving in time),
then @xmath should not be considered a physical variable. We will
discuss these perspectives and the contrast between them in greater
detail below.

Below we will also show that the problem of time may be addressed by
supposing the existence of a physically meaningful time parameter.
Formally this is done via a so-called ‘reduced Hamiltonian formalism’,
where the choice of physical time @xmath is extracted from the physical
variables and a corresponding (non-vanishing) Hamiltonian function is
derived. At this stage however it is important to acknowledge that this
is by no means the only possibility. In particular, the procedure of
canonical quantisation—itself questionable as we argued in chapter 1
—may be abandoned in favour of perhaps some other method to arrive at a
quantum theory with the appropriate classical limit (corresponding to
the classical system with which we started) but without the suffering
from the problem of time. This more ambitious endeavour is began in
chapter 11 .

{mdframed}

The relational particle dynamics of Barbour et al.

The elimination of a theory dependent on @xmath in favour of a
reparameterisation-invariant description was in part motivated by the
fact that @xmath had no physical role (although it did lead to the
simplest equations of motion). Yet @xmath is not the only variable that
has that property. Any gauge degree of freedom should similarly be
eliminated. In the context of Newtonian particle theories, for example,
concepts such as absolute position and orientation are physically
meaningless unless reference to a notion of ‘absolute space’ is made.
But since absolute space plays no role in the physics, its introduction
is unwarranted. For a system of @xmath particles in three dimensions the
real number of degrees of freedom is therefore not @xmath but @xmath ,
the coordinates of all the particles minus the centre-of-mass position
(three degrees of freedom) and the overall orientation in
three-dimensional space (three further degrees of freedom, for example
in the form of Euler angles).

Eliminating unphysical degrees of freedom of this kind motivated Barbour
and various collaborators to develop the ‘shape dynamics’ ⁶ ⁶ 6 Without
capitalisation we use this term to refer to any theory, which aims to
eliminate unphysical degrees of freedom as described. When capitalised,
‘Shape Dynamics’ refers to a particular theory of gravity based on
three-dimensional conformal geometries evolving in time, developed in
the last six years or so [e.g. 54 , 53 , 13 , 84 ] . The terminology
(shape dynamics versus Shape Dynamics) is my choice. In the literature
context and author usually determines which is meant. of particles and
fields [e.g. 9 , 10 , 8 , 2 , 12 ] . They include not only the six
degrees of freedom mentioned but also the overall scale (only ratios of
distances are considered physical), so that a total of seven degrees of
freedom are eliminated. Why this leaves the dynamics of ‘shape’ is best
illustrated by an example: Consider three particles, effectively forming
the three vertices of a triangle, naïvely having nine degrees of
freedom. However, the orientation of the plane of the triangle in space
is physically irrelevant (using up three degrees of freedom), as is the
position of the centre of mass on the plane (two more degrees of
freedom) and its orientation in the plane (one degree of freedom).
Finally, the overall size of the triangle is presumed physically
irrelevant (so that geometrically similar triangles are considered just
representations of a single physical triangle), eliminating a seventh
degree of freedom. The remaining two degrees of freedom determine only
the ratios of the three sides to one another — in other words the shape
of the triangle.

Formulating the dynamics explicitly in terms of physical quantities only
is difficult. Instead these ideas are implemented via a procedure called
‘best matching’. The idea is this: two system configurations differing
only by the value of variables considered unphysical are consequently
themselves physically equivalent. At each instant one can therefore
freely ‘slide’ the configuration-space point representing the system up
and down these gauge orbits. Now choose at each instant the gauge
variables such that the resulting system (the triangle, for example)
matches that of the previous instant most closely. This minimisation
procedure (one is minimising the difference in Newtonian representation
between temporally adjacent system configurations (triangles)) implies
that certain boundary terms in the action are forced to vanish,
resulting in constraints. ⁷ ⁷ 7 We will use a very similar construction
in the development of a new wavefunction-free quantisation procedure in
chapter 11 . In particular, the constraints are that the momenta
conjugate to the unphysical degrees of freedom vanish, namely

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --

In addition, the elimination of an specific time parameter introduces
the Hamiltonian constraint. Applied to a universe made up of particles,
the consequences are that this universe has zero total energy (due to
the Hamiltonian constraint), zero total linear momentum, zero angular
momentum and zero dilational momentum. The value of energy is not
detectable anyway since shifting the potential by a constant has no
dynamical effect. The value of the total linear momentum is also
undetectable unless Galilean relativity were violated. The total value
of angular momentum is however detectable, at least in principle (a
rotating reference frame can be dynamically distinguished from a
non-rotating one from within, and a similar result holds for the
dilational momentum. Hence this theory would be falsifiable via
measurement of the universe’s total angular or dilational momentum if
indeed we lived in a universe whose fundamental building blocks are
point particles in three-dimensional space.

A question here is however whether specifying initial data independent
of the gauge variables is sufficient to uniquely determine the future
evolution of the physical variables. If it is, this would arguably
constitute an implementation of Mach’s Principle, a concept that has
received ample philosophical discussion over the last one hundred years
but disagreement persists over what exactly the principle is.

One can apply analogous ideas to gravitational field theories, which led
to a series of papers on ideas such as conformal geometrodynamics [e.g.
12 , 2 ] and ultimately Shape Dynamics (see footnote 6 ).

Finally, the question arises whether the Hamiltonian constraint itself
can be the generator of physical transformations, since all the other
constraints relating to the total momenta do not, and according to
Dirac’s classification scheme [ 36 ] the constraint is primary and
first-class, normally associated with physically irrelevant motion.
Barbour and Foster [ 11 ] have however pointed out that the argument
relies on a absolute time being the independent variable. This
assumptions is explicitly violated in time-reparameterisation invariant
systems. The Hamiltonian constraint may therefore be a generator of
physical change, not just movement along a gauge orbit.

#### 2.3 The problem of time in general relativity

##### 2.3.1 General relativity

General relativity is a classical theory that describes gravity. General
relativity postulates a space-time , represented by a four-dimensional
(pseudo-)Riemannian manifold. The fundamental physical variables are
encoded in the spacetime metric @xmath , that is, ten real numbers for
each point of spacetime in the form of a four-by-four symmetric matrix.
⁸ ⁸ 8 Throughout this thesis we will use the raised prefix ‘ @xmath ’ to
denote quantities relating to four-dimensional space- time (e.g. @xmath
, @xmath , ,,,), while quantities concerning three-dimensional space are
written without a prefix (e.g. @xmath , @xmath , …). Greek indices
assume values @xmath with @xmath representing the temporal direction,
while Latin indices take values @xmath , ranging over spatial directions
only. Except where otherwise indicated (e.g. section 7.2 ) we follow the
usual Einstein summation convention, assuming a sum over repeated
indices. The metric encodes the geometry , that is, the notion of length
and angles by defining the scalar product between two four-vectors
@xmath at a spacetime point @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

The length of a vector is then given by @xmath . The equations governing
the behaviour of the metric are the ten independent Einstein Field
Equations (EFEs),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are, respectively, the scalar and Ricci
curvature derived from @xmath , and @xmath is the stress-energy tensor
of the appropriate matter fields, @xmath being the gravitational
constant. For a full introduction to general relativity we refer the
reader to [ 86 ] or another book of their choice. In what follows we
will assume the use of units such that the speed of light @xmath is
unity.

The number of geometric degrees of freedom is however less than ten.
This is because the entries in the matrix @xmath are coordinate
dependent. In other words, a single geometry corresponds to an infinity
of possible coordinate representations of that geometry. The EFEs take
the same form in all coordinate systems. That is, they are generally
covariant , whence the name ‘general relativity’. Furthermore, every
measurable quantity must be independent of the choice of coordinate
system.

The precise physical meaning of general covariance and its relation to
notions such as ‘background independence’ (the absence of non-dynamical
structures) and diffeomorphism invariance (roughly, that the theory
possesses a certain number of continuous symmetries) is, oddly, still
somewhat contentious. See ref. [ 99 ] for a recent contribution and
references therein. In brief: Coordinates have no physical content. They
are labels of points in space and time, that is, methods of describing
physical entities. Whether or not the description of the physics (that
is, equations and their formal solutions) is unchanged when the
labelling of points is changed is a question concerned entirely with our
description of the physics, not the physics itself. General covariance
is a property of our description, not physical reality. Indeed any
theory can be cast into a fully covariant form. ⁹ ⁹ 9 For example, to
obtain standard Klein-Gordon scalar-field theory in Minkowski spacetime,
promote spacetime derivatives @xmath in the Klein-Gordon equation to
covariant derivatives @xmath and introduce an additional equation to
determine the spacetime properties,

@xmath

This, in effect, was a point raised as early as 1917 by Kretschmann [ 69
] as a response to the undue importance some researchers — including,
arguably, Einstein himself — attached to general relativity being
general covariant.

The Einstein Field Equations follow from an action principle that is
simply the extremisation of the scalar four-curvature, the so-called
Einstein-Hilbert action,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the four-covariant Lagrangian of the matter content and
may include a cosmological constant @xmath . ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 Whether or not
this is conceptually appropriate depends on the proposed origin of
@xmath [see e.g. 17 ] . Either way, mathematically it is unproblematic.

In equation 2.26 @xmath denotes the reduced Planck mass. Its
relationship to the cosmological constant @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

but throughout the rest of this thesis we choose units such that @xmath
and @xmath . We refrain from setting @xmath (or equivalently @xmath )
since it can at times be insightful to see the dependence of the
dynamics on these constants explicitly. We have to choose if we wish to
make reference to @xmath or @xmath in our derivations. While this is
ultimately only an aesthetic choice, the two options do suggest slightly
different physical insights: how quantities and dynamics depend on the
Planck scale @xmath , which presumably encodes where our classical
theories break down entirely, versus how they depend on the ‘strength of
gravity’ @xmath . Since ultimately we are interested in the construction
of a theory of quantum gravity, we choose to make reference to @xmath in
this thesis.

##### 2.3.2 The Arnowitt-Deser-Misner formalism

The spacetime description of general relativity given above is widely
accepted as the correct way to interpret general relativity. Some
particular solution of the Einstein Field Equations is a description of
a block universe, the geometry (and value of matter fields) at all
points in spacetime. It is not a sequence of configurations labelled by
a time parameter. This makes a Hamiltonian formulation of the theory
impossible since a Hamiltonian is to be understood as a generator of
time translations, and this in turn means that the system cannot be
canonically quantised. Early attempts to construct a Hamiltonian
formulation of general relativity culminated in a series of papers by
Arnowitt, Deser and Misner in the late fifties and early sixties, in
particular [ 4 ] . Their approach became known as the
Arnowitt-Deser-Misner (or ADM) formalism and forms the basis of much of
the subsequent work on canonical quantum gravity. Other terminology used
is the ‘3+1’ or ‘Cauchy’ formulation of general relativity.

For a naïve approach to a Hamiltonian formulation of general relativity
one might propose the following: Choose some coordinate system that
covers the region of spacetime for which we wish to arrive at a
Hamiltonian description. Slices of constant @xmath automatically provide
a foliation of the spacetime into spatial slices. Two points in space on
slices labelled by @xmath and @xmath respectively are considered the
same point if and only if they have the same spatial coordinate. Now
construct a Hamiltonian density (by some appropriate method) that
adequately describes the evolution of all field values (matter field and
the spatial geometry induced on the slice) at all spatial points from
slice @xmath to @xmath .

Such an approach, or a variant thereof, would be, however, deeply
problematic. First, whether or not this can be carried out depends
crucially on the original choice of coordinate system. For example, the
spatial coordinates must cover the same ranges on each temporal slice,
which is by no means guaranteed. Second, even if the procedure can be
carried out, the Hamiltonian theory has lost a crucial feature of
general relativity: its general covariance.

Part of the feat of ADM was to come up with a formulation that retains
the full general covariance at the Hamiltonian level. That is, the
formulation has to be general enough to allow for any choice of
foliation, and any choice of coordinates on each slice, after the
Hamiltonian has been derived, but no such choice must be made prior to
it. In what follows we will not reproduce the full derivation, which can
be found in any textbook or set of lecture notes on the subject (e.g. [
86 ] ) but merely highlight critical points.

The first step is the decomposition of the spacetime metric @xmath into
a spatial metric @xmath that represents the geometry on a given spatial
slice and four functions, which establish the spatio-temporal
relationships between one slice and infinitesimally nearby ones and
points thereon. The decomposition is as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

The function @xmath is the lapse function and will be shown to indeed
correspond to a close analogy to the notion of lapse explored in section
2.2 . The three functions @xmath are the ‘shift’, which relate the
coordinate values of points of one slice with those of infinitesimally
close ones. For reference, we also note the expressions for the inverse
metric,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

and for the spacetime volume element,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the last equality is purely notational, @xmath .

The lapse @xmath receives its name from the fact that it denotes how
much proper time @xmath lapses per interval of coordinate time @xmath in
the direction in spacetime that is orthogonal to the embedded spatial
slice. This interpretation relies on the existence of the entire
spacetime, in which spatial slices have geometrical relations to one
another. This is a natural assumption if we consider the
four-dimensional spacetime picture to be fundamental and our ‘3+1’
formalism to be merely a re-description. On the other hand, if we
consider a picture in which the geometric properties of a spatial slice
evolve in time (in conjunction with matter fields defined on the slice),
then this interpretation is nonsensical as there is no notion of
orthogonality to a slice since there is no embedding. In this case
@xmath (and @xmath ) must be considered free functions without geometric
content, although it is the appearance of these functions in the
formalism that ultimately allows the reconstruction of a spacetime
picture by ‘welding’ spatial slices together in an appropriate manner.
The situation is mostly analogous to that in section 2.2 , where @xmath
may be understood to encode a relationship of the arbitrary time
parameter and Newtonian time if and only if Newtonian time is considered
to have a meaning in the first place, that is, if and only if the
parameterisation-invariant formalism is not considered the original
starting point. The situation is not entirely analogous however because
not being able to ascribe @xmath with an obvious interpretation is due
to slightly different reasons: In the particle formalism it was due to
the ‘non-existence’ of Newtonian time, while here it is due to the
absence of the notion of orthogonality. In the ADM formalism @xmath
relates the arbitrary coordinate time to proper time rather than some
‘background’ time à la Newton. We will discuss the notion of proper time
in section 4.2 .

Whether the ADM formalism is considered to describe the relation between
spatial slices and geometric variables thereon or rather the evolution
of a single slice also determines whether @xmath and @xmath should be
considered dynamical variables. In the former case they describe
geometric properties between slices and the identification of points
from slice to slice, and can therefore be considered geometric
variables, namely just a transformation on the time-time and time-space
components of @xmath . In the latter case @xmath and @xmath are simply
arbitrary function without dynamical meaning and therefore should not be
treated as variables. However, just like in the case of parameterised
particle mechanics there is no distinction between the resulting
equations and dynamics, merely between the lines of reasoning used to
arrive at them.

I am not aware that this point concerning the ambiguous nature of @xmath
has been made explicitly in the literature, although at least some
authors are clearly aware of it. For example, Unruh and Wald [ 132 ]
introduce @xmath and @xmath as arbitrary functions on the spatial slice
“which have the interpretation of lapse function and shift vector in the
spacetime constructed from the time evolution.”

In the space-time picture the shift @xmath relates the identification of
points by spatial coordinates on neighbouring spatial slices. In
particular, they denote how the point identified by a particular spatial
coordinate value @xmath is shifted from the point that lies orthogonally
to the future of the point identified by @xmath on the infinitesimally
previous slice. This implies that unlike the lapse @xmath the shift
@xmath depends on the purely spatial coordinates chosen on the slice. As
a consequence, the choice of how to split spacetime into space and time
fixes @xmath , but @xmath is only determined once a coordinate system is
chosen on the slice. If one therefore makes some choice of physical
time, such as the ‘York time’ we will choose later in this work, the
shift remains undetermined. In other words, because the way spacetime is
separated into space and time is more physically meaningful than the
choice of spatial coordinates (in particular with regards to subsequent
quantisation), the lapse and shift are not exactly analogous to one
another.

In order to establish the dynamics of the ADM picture, we must rewrite
the Einstein-Hilbert action 2.26 in terms of the new variables. This is
not fundamentally difficult, although the decomposition of the scalar
4-curvature @xmath into a scalar 3-curvature @xmath and other terms is
somewhat involved algebraically. Helpful here are the Gauss-Codazzi
relations (see ref. [ 86 ] ). The final result is the ADM action,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

All terms in the Lagrangian density are understood to be functions of
time and space. The term @xmath denotes the extrinsic curvature and
@xmath its trace. We will explain their meaning momentarily. We first
wish to remark however on the form of this Lagrangian density, which
matches the usual ‘kinetic-minus-potential’ form where the terms
involving @xmath constitute the kinetic term (which is furthermore a
squared first-order time derivative, as will become clear) and the term
@xmath , which depends only on the geometric variables @xmath and not
their time derivatives, takes the role of the potential.

The extrinsic curvature @xmath describes how the spatial slice is
embedded in the spacetime manifold in relation to other, temporally
infinitesimally separated slices. An isolated slice cannot be said to
have an extrinsic curvature, so at least at this stage we must still
assume that the spacetime picture is the fundamental one and the ‘3+1’
formalism only a re-description. Formally the extrinsic curvature may be
defined as the Lie derivative of the spatial metric along the normalised
vector @xmath orthogonal to the spatial slice,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

Another possible expression is in terms of a covariant derivative,
@xmath . In more useful and intuitive terms, the extrinsic curvature
denotes the fractional rate of deformation of a volume element—or
equivalently, the rate of change of @xmath —with respect to proper time
@xmath , orthogonal to the spatial slice,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

or in terms of an arbitrary coordinate time @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

The terms involving the shift @xmath ensure orthogonality since the time
derivative alone would measure the rate of change of the metric along
the line connecting points of equal spatial-coordinate value, which may
be shifted relative to the point orthogonally ‘above’ the starting
point. In many scenarios one is able to set the shift to zero, which
constitutes a partial gauge fixing of the spatial coordinates (a partial
coordinate choice) and indeed we will do so below since it significantly
simplifies the algebra without significant loss of insight.

The scalar extrinsic curvature @xmath is the rate of fractional
shrinkage of volume with respect to proper time. In a homogeneous and
isotropic cosmology like the one we will consider below this implies
that @xmath is nothing but the Hubble parameter up to a negative
constant.

It is important to emphasise the importance of an embedding spacetime
for the meaningfulness of @xmath . At the same time, however, it is not
essential for @xmath to have this geometric interpretation. Instead it
is possible to view @xmath merely as a convenient way to express the
kinetic term of the ADM action.

The other point of note is that the ADM action 2.31 is already in
parameterised form , analogous to the particle action 2.19 we obtained
in section 2.2 . There we had to ‘manually’ introduce an arbitrary time
parameter and treat Newtonian time as one of the dynamical variables.
Here this step is unnecessary. The reason is that in general relativity
the time parameter is already dynamical, or at least its rate of change
(given by the lapse @xmath or equivalently the temporal components of
the 4-metric) is. In the particle model there was no notion of shift
since it was not a field theory and the variables had discrete labels,
but otherwise the situation is exactly analogous. Consequently, as we
will see shortly, the ADM formalism also suffers from the problem of
time.

In order to make this apparent, first introduce the geometric momenta,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the Lagrangian density @xmath denotes the integrand of the action
2.31 and @xmath . The action can then be written in canonical form,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

where ‘ @xmath ’ stands for the canonical kinetic term of the matter
content (the @xmath terms that characterise the canonical action
integral) and

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.37)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.38)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

with @xmath and @xmath being place-holders for the terms appearing as a
result of the matter fields, which we are leaving general for now. It is
common terminology to call @xmath and @xmath the Hamiltonian constraint
and momentum constraint respectively, although this is somewhat
confusing since the literal ‘constraints’ are the demand that these
expressions vanish,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.39)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.40)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

not the name for the expressions themselves.

The reason that they do vanish is analogous to the situation in the
particle model of sections 2.1 , 2.2 . Either one takes the spacetime
view, in which case @xmath and @xmath are dynamical variables and then
the Hamiltonian and momentum constraints follow from their respective
variation, or, in the space-in-time picture, they are just arbitrary
functions but the action is required to be extremised for any choice of
@xmath and @xmath , in which case the constraints also follow.

Note that each constraint describes the vanishing of a density and
therefore constitutes four constraint at each spatial point . An
equivalent set of constraint could be imposed,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.41)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.42)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

for any choice of the four functions @xmath , @xmath . The expression on
the left-hand side have another role: The momentum constraint
expressions 2.42 generate canonical transformations that result from
spatial diffeomorphisms on the slice, that is, infinitesimal changes in
the spatial coordinates. Expression 2.41 is the generator of canonical
transformations corresponding to diffeomorphisms of the spacetime metric
(constructed from @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath if spacetime is
not presupposed), although there are subtleties with this interpretation
since the correspondence only holds if the field equations are satisfied
[ 132 ] . On the phase-space hypersurface on which all constraints are
satisfied however, the set of expressions 2.42 , 2.41 suffice to
generate all the spacetime diffeomorphisms of general relativity.

##### 2.3.3 The problem of time in the ADM formalism

From equation 2.36 we can read off the ADM Hamiltonian,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

which vanishes in virtue of eqs. 2.39 , 2.40 or eqs. 2.41 , 2.42 (simply
set @xmath , @xmath ). According to the canonical quantisation procedure
one now ‘promotes’ the canonical variables to operators, which are
acting on ‘states’, as we discussed in the introduction (chapter 1 ).
The quantum Hamiltonian given by expression 2.43 with @xmath and @xmath
replaced by @xmath and @xmath respectively (and similar replacements are
made for the matter variables) determines the time evolution of those
states. Operator-expressions derived from the constraints now select
which states are considered physically possible. The Hamiltonian and
momentum constraints 2.41 , 2.42 therefore lead to the conditions

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.44)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.45)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

These constraints ensure that @xmath is invariant under the same set of
spacetime diffeomorphisms as the classical theory. In particular, 2.45
ensures that @xmath only depends on the spatial three-geometry and not
its metric representation. This means @xmath is a function on superspace
, the space of three-geometries of the manifold, each of which is an
equivalence class of metrics related via spatial diffeomorphisms. An
analogous interpretation of 2.44 is not possible since its meaning
concerns the relationship between quantum states at different times. In
conjunction with 2.45 the effect is that acting with a spacetime
diffeomorphism in the spacetime constructed from the spatial slice at
different times on the argument of the state @xmath does not change it.

Equation 2.44 is known as the Wheeler-deWitt equation. It is the
equation central to the problem of time, more so than eq. 2.45 . The
reason is that in the Hamiltonian 2.43 and equivalently in its quantum
operator form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

one can set @xmath by an appropriate choice of coordinates but not
@xmath , since @xmath would lead to singular evolution—no proper time
would pass during a finite coordinate-time interval. That is, the
contribution of the momentum constraint to the Hamiltonian essentially
reduces to a matter of coordinates, the Hamiltonian constraint does not.
Equivalently the Wheeler-deWitt equation may be written as one
constraint per spacetime point,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

in analogy with the classical case.

In virtue of the Wheeler-deWitt equation 2.44 and of 2.45 , the
Hamiltonian annihilates physical states,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

and this once again makes the Schrödinger equation imply a frozen
dynamics,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

If @xmath is presumed to describe the physical state of the universe,
which is the case in quantum theory, then no evolution is possible. This
is not only a formal problem but it appears to outright contradict the
fact that the state of the universe is evidently changing. This
constitutes the problem of time in quantum geometrodynamics, the quantum
theory of the dynamics of spatial geometry as derived from the ADM
formalism, or at least one aspect of it. There are other issues arising
from the spacetime-diffeomorphism invariance (that is, the ability to
choose one’s foliation freely and parameterise the slices at will),
which we will discuss in the next section.

#### 2.4 Other problems of time

The problem of frozen dynamics is only one of a number of difficulties
and questions that arises when quantising (or even just preparing to
quantise) a classical theory that is refoliation invariant. A number of
these issues are essentially related to the fact that two theories that
are classically equivalent — or indeed two methods of expressing the
same theory (for example, once in a four-covariant and once in a
‘gauge-fixed’ form) — do not necessarily lead to equivalent quantum
theories when the rules of quantisation are applied. Many of these
problems do not have counterparts in a finite-dimensional models such as
the particle model studied above.

The classification of the following list is primarily due to Isham [ 64
] , Kuchař [ 70 ] and Anderson [ 1 ] . However, a number of issues are
linked and cannot strictly be separated, and in some cases a solution to
one issue would also constitute a solution to another. Anderson
fittingly calls them ‘facets’ of the problem of time.

###### The global problem of time.

It is not in general guaranteed that a system allows for a time
parameter that can be defined consistently everywhere. In particular,
there are scenarios where no function of the physical variables is
always monotonic. It is therefore not guaranteed that a global notion of
time can be constructed.

###### The (thin) sandwich problem.

Suppose data of the intrinsic spatial metric (such that it satisfies the
momentum and Hamiltonian constraints) is given on two (possibly
infinitesimally) separated hypersurfaces, each of which is considered to
be ‘space at a given time’. It is unclear whether (or to what degree)
this specification of the boundary data uniquely determines the
spacetime geometry. The reconstruction of a spacetime from a series of
spatial slices requires knowledge of the lapse and shift functions in
addition to the intrinsic variables on each slice. The problem is
already a classical one.

###### Spacetime reconstruction problem.

In the quantum version of the sandwich problem (presumably one would
have to give a wave functional over spatial geometries as data for the
initial and final time) it is not even clear if and in what manner a
spacetime geometry (or functional over spacetime geometries) can be
constructed at all. This touches on the much bigger question on the role
of spacetime in quantum gravity.

###### Independence of evolution on the foliation.

The (more or less) converse of the sandwich problem is: Suppose an
initial and final spatial surface is chosen and the initial data is
fixed. If one then evolves the data via two different intermediate
foliations, does one arrive at the same final data? Classically it can
be shown that this is guaranteed by the first-class nature of the
constraints (they Poisson commute with the Hamiltonian) [ 71 ] (and so
there is not actually a problem). But for a quantum theory this is not
clear:

###### The functional-evolution problem.

In particular, evolving an initial state @xmath via two different
intermediate foliations to a final state @xmath , it is not guaranteed
that the two final states obtained in this manner are the same. In other
words, are the quantum Hamiltonian and momentum constraints all that is
needed to determine consistent evolution of a state?

###### Multiple-choice problem.

This is essentially the issue that forces us to carefully consider how
to identify a physical time parameter. Different choices, while
associated with classically equivalent theories, lead to non-equivalent
quantum theories.

######

These problems are mostly concerned with the relationship between space
(or spatial geometry) evolving through time and spacetime, in particular
in a quantum theory. Therefore, if we are willing to abandon the idea
that spacetime is in some some fundamental, or that it must play some
role in the quantum theory, these problems are really no problems at
all. In fact, these problems arguably hint at the fact that the notion
of spacetime ought to be abandoned in the quantum theory. A spacetime
picture can be constructed in the classical theory in virtue of the
constraints. The construction is rather compelling — so much so that one
may be forgiven to consider it more fundamental than the theory of
spatial geometry evolving through time. However, ultimately the problems
of time hint at the fact that this may be a mistake.

That said, in the absence of a fundamental notion of spacetime it would
be desirable to have a better understanding of why the constraints
‘conspire’ in such a way that a spacetime construction is possible at
the classical level. More accurately, why is the (quantum) theory that
describes our universe such that its classical limit has a structure
(namely, the necessary symmetries) that allows for the construction of
spacetime? Of course, any question in physics beginning with ‘Why?’ is
notoriously difficult to answer and at best an answer consists of a
reduction of the problem to more basic and simpler statements (for
example, in the form of a simple physical principle). Nonetheless some
reduction of the sort would be highly desirable in order to do away with
the crutch of spacetime in explaining why the laws of gravity are what
they are. I am not at this stage aware of any work on the subject,
either by physicists or philosophers.

### Chapter 3 Physical time

In this chapter we explain how the existence of a physically fundamental
notion of time would alleviate the problem of time. We explain how to
derive via ‘Hamiltonian reduction’ a theory with a fundamental notion of
time from a classically equivalent theory with time-reparameterisation
invariance. We provide an example of how two classically equivalent
theories with distinct choices of time may lead to distinguishable
quantum theories.

#### 3.1 Choosing a physical time: Hamiltonian reduction

There are numerous ways to overcome or avoid the problem of time. Very
broadly speaking, these may be divided into two categories: approaches
that modify the quantisation formalism such that the vanishing classical
Hamiltonian does not lead to frozen dynamics in the quantum theory, and
approaches that modify the classical theory in order to avoid the
vanishing Hamiltonian, although some ideas may fall into both
categories. The former require for the most part a radical departure
from what is usually understood to constitute the framework of quantum
theory. In chapters 11 and 12 we explore a new method of quantisation,
although also in conjunction with a preferred spacetime foliation.

Among the latter type of approaches is what is perhaps the simplest idea
of them all, the choice of a fundamental time parameter. In the case of
relativity, this includes two separate steps: (1) the choice of
foliation, that is, how to split spacetime into space and time, and (2)
the choice of parameterisation of slices. In the case of the
time-reparameterisation invariant particle model of sections 2.1 and 2.2
only the second step is necessary.

Two claims constitute such a proposal, which a proponent will have to
justify. First, there is a claim of existence . The proponent claims
that there is a physically preferred foliation and time parameter.
Second, the proponent identifies a particular choice of foliation and
time parameter and must explain why this is a plausible choice from the
infinite number of options. Of course, it is a perfectly viable position
to make the first claim and be agnostic with regards to the second. In
fact, as conscientious scientists we do not, of course, subscribe to any
such proposal in particular. Rather, we consider this solution to the
problem of time plausible (it is no theoretical impossibility) and
therefore worth of investigation, but we do not believe that any
particular choice of time parameter is correct until we have empirical
or other ¹ ¹ 1 It is highly questionable what other form of evidence
there could be. Clearly a theory has to pass basic tests of mathematical
and physical consistency. However, any claims beyond this must be viewed
very critically. In fact, the tendency by a few physicists
(specifically, some string theorists [ 33 ] ) to argue for non-empirical
selection criteria for theories has prompted a critique by Ellis and
Silk [ 41 ] , which in turn has led to a fair degree of argument within
the high-energy theoretical-physics community over the last year or two.
For a very recent and insightful clarification on the subject, see ref.
[ 109 ] . evidence to support such a claim. However, in order to guide
our search for plausible choices of time parameter we must invoke some
theoretical ideas and since scientific inquiry is carried out by
fallible human beings our respective evaluation of particular proposals
may vary. ² ² 2 We are not only fallible with regards to our ability for
analytical assessment of theoretical proposals but also, for example,
with regards to our biases towards familiar concepts (what we understand
and built our career on appears more plausible) and the biases of our
funding agency (proposals more likely to receive grant money suddenly
become a lot more plausible). We will discuss a particular choice of
time parameter, York time, in the next chapter (chapter 4 ).

The basic idea is then as follows. Choose a time parameter that serves
as the physical time, derive a (non-vanishing) Hamiltonian that
describes the dynamics with respect to this parameter and quantise based
on this new Hamiltonian. In this section we will aim to understand the
procedure that allows us to derive the non-vanishing, physical
Hamiltonian based on a choice of physical time parameter. The procedure
to do so is called Hamiltonian reduction and the resulting theory with
the choice of York time is the central topic of investigation in this
thesis.

Of course, a crucial question is whether or not the choice of time has
any measurable consequence. That is, is the claim that some particular
choice is the correct physical time parameter falsifiable? Fortunately,
the answer appears to be affirmative at least in principle. In section
3.3 we will illustrate this using a simple two-particle model.

The central idea of Hamiltonian reduction is that the Hamiltonian is the
generator of transformations in time. In general, the quantity that
generates transformations in a variable @xmath is the momentum @xmath
conjugate to that variable. Therefore, if the physical time @xmath is
one of those variables (and this is what we mean by @xmath being a
‘physical’ time), then motion with respect to @xmath is generated by the
momentum @xmath that is conjugate to @xmath . The physical Hamiltonian
is therefore @xmath , where the minus sign is due to convention. If
@xmath is not one of the ‘ @xmath ’, then one must first perform an
appropriate change of variable to make it so. Depending on one’s choice
of @xmath , performing such a change of variable may not always be
possible—York time is a notable example of this—and one must instead
introduce @xmath and @xmath as additional variables in conjunction with
constraints. Furthermore, the remaining reduced variables may then obey
a non-standard Poisson structure. We will see this explicitly in later
sections.

The physical Hamiltonian, or equivalently the momentum @xmath , must be
expressed as a function of the other variables, so that equations of
motion may be derived. Of course, this assumes that @xmath is fully
determined by the remaining variables. This it is in virtue of the
Hamiltonian constraint, which provides exactly the one condition (or one
condition per spacetime point in the case of field theories, in which
one obtains the Hamiltonian density via this method) that implies that
having fixed all but one of the set of canonical variables, that last
one is determined. Hence one has to solve the Hamiltonian constraint for
@xmath as a function of the other variables (including @xmath ). This
gives the desired functional expression for @xmath . The existence of
the Hamiltonian constraint is guaranteed by the time-reparameterisation
invariance of the original dynamical description, in other words, the
parameterised form of the action. If the system is not parameterised, it
cannot be deparameterised.

It is by no means guaranteed that the Hamiltonian constraint is
analytically solvable. In fact, the full Hamiltonian constraint of
general relativity is not. This is the reason why we are restricted to
minisuperspace models and perturbative solutions in later chapters.

The physical time @xmath must be chosen in such a way that @xmath is
monotonic. Otherwise @xmath may become singular and at best the
reduced-Hamiltonian description is limited to time intervals during
which @xmath is monotonic. In the case of York time problems arise if
one attempts to describe a pure de Sitter space, in which @xmath is
constant over an extended interval of conventional cosmological time
@xmath , for example.

Let us apply the Hamiltonian reduction procedure to the particle model
of chapter 2 . The simplest possibility is a return to Newtonian time.
The vanishing Hamiltonian @xmath has the form 2.12 , which is just

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

The Hamiltonian constraint @xmath is then solved straightforwardly for
@xmath and one obtains

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

that is, the conventional Hamiltonian of such a finite-dimensional
model.

A less trivial example would be to pick one of the particles to function
as a ‘clock’. In other words, have some function of its position and
momentum correspond to the physical time @xmath . We will explore this
choice for a particular two-particle model in section 3.3 , where we use
it to illustrate that two quantum theories, derived via canonical
quantisation from a pair of physically equivalent parameterised and
deparameterised classical theories respectively, are not themselves
observationally equivalent.

{mdframed}

Proof: Classically the parameterised and deparameterised theories are
equivalent

So far we have merely asserted that the dynamics generated by the
reduced Hamiltonian @xmath are identical with those generated by the
vanishing Hamiltonian @xmath of the parameterised description. We
justified the reduction procedure by the fact that the ‘momentum’
conjugate to ‘time’ is the Hamiltonian, but it is not necessarily clear
that the functional expression obtained by solving the Hamiltonian
constraint for @xmath should indeed lead to a set of physically
equivalent equations.

I am not aware of such a proof anywhere in the literature, although
frequently it seems to be tacitly assumed that the reduced and unreduced
dynamics are identical. Nonetheless I do not doubt that workers in the
field (such as Arnowitt, Deser and Misner, or Choquet-Bruhat and York)
were aware of a proof such as the one below or similar and that for one
reason or another it was just never written down in their publications
(to my knowledge).

For easier readability we consider the case of a finite-dimensional
model such as the particle model of chapter 2 . We also assume that the
proposed physical time is identifiable with one of the variables, @xmath
. This can either be achieved by a suitable chosen canonical
transformation or by the introduction of an auxiliary variable together
with an additional constraint. (The latter would be required, for
example, in the case of York time, as we will see in the anisotropic
minisuperspace model discussed in section 7.2 .) This also means that
the Poisson brackets are the standard canonical ones after
deparamterisation and Hamilton’s equations take their usual form. As a
result the short proof given here is not fully general, although a
generalisation is readily possible if rephrased in terms of Poisson
brackets.

Let us abbreviate functional dependence by writing @xmath for @xmath and
so on. The parameterised system satisfies the Hamiltonian constraint,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are just another canonically conjugate pair of
variables and have not yet been given any special significance. The
Hamiltonian constraint also generates motion in the arbitrary time
parameter @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --

The Hamiltonian-reduction procedure now requires us to solve @xmath for
@xmath as a function of the other variables. Suppose we do so and obtain
@xmath . Then define new function @xmath as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

that is, as the function @xmath with the functional expression of @xmath
substituted in for the variable @xmath . By the nature of this
construction,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

identically, that is, for all values of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , and
so it is also the case that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

One can now express @xmath in terms of @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

But also, by the chain rule, since @xmath is a suitably monotonic
parameter by hypothesis,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so that Hamilton’s equation for the deparameterised dynamics in @xmath
follows,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The derivation of the equations for @xmath is exactly analogous.

The steps can also be easily inverted to obtain a proof in the other
direction, so that full equivalence is established.

#### 3.2 The meaning of the reduced Hamiltonian

A Hamiltonian is two things: First, it is a function of a set of
variables representing the physical degrees of freedom of a dynamical
system, and possibly of time. Second, the numerical value of the
Hamiltonian has some physical interpretation, usually ‘energy’. That is,
having arrived at solutions to Hamilton’s equations one can substitute
the values taken by the variables at some time back into the Hamiltonian
function to obtain a number. In many conventional cases the dynamics is
independent of @xmath , which implies that the value of the Hamiltonian,
the energy, is constant. It is doubtful that the concept of energy would
even be considered physically meaningful were it not usually conserved.
That is, we can talk of a ‘flow of energy’ from one part of a system to
another exactly because overall it is conserved and can therefore be
conceptualised as something that is passed around. This interpretation
is then applied to cases where the the numerical value of the
Hamiltonian is not conserved and we speak of energy being ‘lost’ or
‘gained’, usually representing interactions with the world outside the
system under consideration. In other words, even here energy is taken to
be conserved overall but the appearance of energy gain or loss is due to
our attempt to describe a system interacting with the rest of the
universe as if it were not. Yet the assumption is that if we were to
provide a complete description, then the Hamiltonian would once again be
time independent. ³ ³ 3 In gravitational system the notion of energy is
more complicated since here the energy density is part of the dynamics
itself, co-determining the stress-energy tensor and hence via the
Einstein equations the curvature of space-time. The two notions are can
be roughly identified with each other physically if we place a
finite-dimensional particle system into a gravitational field. This
description is not entirely consistent though and the two notions of
energy should really be kept separate, ideally using different
terminology.

This assumption is justified. The conventional variable @xmath has no
physical meaning in itself. While to Newton it was an absolute
‘background’ time at the very foundation of the structure of the
physical world, today we may view @xmath as the one choice of time
parameters that brings the physical laws into their simplest form (see
our discussion in chapter 2 ) and that can be ‘read off’ most easily
from the time evolution of systems such as pendula or the motion of the
planets (ephemeris time). Having no physical significance, the dynamics
cannot be @xmath -dependent except in cases where a @xmath -dependent
term (usually the potential) is used to represent evolution outside the
system under investigation.

In a formalism with a physical time @xmath however the situation is very
different. The interpretation of the numerical value of the Hamiltonian
is not ‘energy’ but whatever the physical meaning of @xmath , the
negative of the momentum conjugate to @xmath , since this is how the
physical Hamiltonian was defined. Hence if the position of some particle
is taken for @xmath , then the same particle’s momentum is identified
with @xmath . In general reduced Hamiltonians are time dependent and
their numerical values are not conserved in time. In the case of York
time, which we will explore in later chapters, the physical meaning of
the associated Hamiltonian density is the local spatial volume element
and the full Hamiltonian is the volume of the universe, both of which
vary in time.

When quantising a reduced classical system, the eigenvalues and
eigenfunctions of the Hamiltonian are consequently not ‘energy
eigenvalues’ and ‘energy eigenfunctions’ but also have physical
interpretations depending on the meaning of the Hamiltonian, such as
‘volume eigenvalues’ and so on in the case of York time.

#### 3.3 Significance of the choice of time

If one takes a realist view of scientific inquiry — the idea that our
theories not only provide models useful for predictions but in some way
are also a reflection of at least some properties of the world itself,
properties that are ‘really there’ — then theories with different
choices of physical time are manifestly distinct as their ontology is
manifestly distinct, even if their empirical predictions are identical.
A physicist who rejects a scientific realism on the other hand would
disagree. To them an empirical distinction, that is, a different
prediction for observation, is required for two theories to be distinct.

However, even a realist should find a situation where there are two or
more competing theories with identical predictions troubling. It would
imply that a fundamental feature of reality, namely, in our case, what
the true physical time parameter is, is undetectable in principle. The
question of which theory is correct cannot be answered scientifically
and becomes one of metaphysics rather than physics. In some cases one of
a set of empirically equivalent theories may be strongly preferable for
other reasons, such as mathematical or ontological simplicity. However,
here one invokes a priori assumptions about what reality is really like:
that it is ontologically simple or is governed by laws whose
mathematical form is concise.

While such assumptions, whether explicit or implicit, have undoubtedly
propelled forward progress in physics at multiple occasions in history,
to elevate them to ontological tie-breakers for observationally
equivalent theories is rash. Furthermore, the occasions that spring to
mind, such as the departure from geocentrism, the unification of
electricity and magnetism, special and general relativity, the
electro-weak unification and so on, all were at least in part
observationally motivated and verified. Mathematical and ontological
simplicity may have been ideas nudging the scientists’ minds in the
right direction but ultimately these theories made new predictions which
could be subsequently experimentally corroborated. By hypothesis, this
would not be the case for equivalent theories differing in their choices
of fundamental time.

At the end of the last section we showed that classically the
reduced-Hamiltonian theory is equivalent to the parameterised theory of
some particular system. This raises the question whether or not quantum
theories constructed via quantisation of these classical theories are
themselves identical. In fact, that the choice of time does not matter
even when composing the quantum theory is a tacit assumption frequently
made in particular in the context of cosmological perturbation theory.
Here one has to make a ‘gauge choice’, meaning a choice of coordinates
describing the small perturbations on the homogeneous cosmological
background. Changing the gauge leaves the background description
undisturbed (since the transformation is ‘small’) but transforms the
representation of the perturbations. A choice must be made (although
ultimately measurable quantities must turn out to be gauge invariant)
because the four-diffeomorphism invariance of general relativity implies
that some of the degrees of freedom are merely coordinate freedom,
although there is no matter of fact of which ones these are. The gauge
choice not only concerns spatial coordinates on a slice but also small
perturbations of the slice itself (small ‘bumps’ in the foliation), so
that it involves small deformations in the time parameter. Classically
this is known to be indeed only a choice of description and not physical
but it is then usually assumed without discussion that the gauge choice
is also irrelevant for the physical properties of the quantum theory
obtained through quantisation of the perturbations.

Such an assumption is problematic. For example, different choices of
gauge will lead to Hilbert spaces whose degrees of freedom have
different physical interpretations and it is entirely unclear that the
quantum dynamics is physically equivalent when moving from one Hilbert
space to another (the functional-evolution facet of the problem of time
in the context of cosmological perturbation theory). Different choices
of time lead to different reduced Hilbert spaces. A general argument
against the equivalence has been presented, for example, in ref. [ 79 ]
. Here we will consider a concrete two-particle model which illustrates
that different choices of time can indeed lead to observationally
distinct theories. ⁴ ⁴ 4 There are, strictly speaking, a number of
separate issues: (1) Can the canonical quantum theories based on two
distinct foliations be empirically separated? (2) Can quantum theories
based on identical foliations but distinct parameterisations be
distinguished? (3) Can quantised reduced-Hamiltonian theories be
distinguished from quantisations of the unreduced theories with gauge
choices corresponding to the same foliation but different
parameterisation? This last question is the one we answer in this
section. A full exploration of all three of these and the specific
conditions that lead to empirical distinguishability is left for future
work. This saves the realist from having to rely on metaphysics,
although there may remain classes of time parameters which lead to
equivalent physics, so that observation might only provide the
possibility of a partial determination of the true physical time.

Nonetheless it is encouraging to see that we might ultimately be able to
detect what this fundamental physical time is if indeed there is one.
The observation would necessarily be one of particular quantum
phenomena. In particular, this model suggests that differences may arise
with regards to observations relating to the physical degree of freedom
that has been chosen as time. If there may be other differences not
directly related to the choice of time itself remains uncertain.
Furthermore, a theory with a fundamental choice of time not only
competes with other choices of time but also other, radically different
theories of quantum gravity. How far observations can disentangle all
such choices is an open question and will depend on the details of the
various theories.

Consider then a system of two particles, each with mass @xmath , and
suppose they are constrained to a one-dimensional ‘box’ (or infinite
well) but are otherwise free. Denote the position of the particles by
@xmath and @xmath respectively and let the box be of length @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a constant. We consider two descriptions of this system.
First, the conventional ‘textbook’ description using Newtonian time
@xmath . Second, a deparameterised description using one of the two
particles as a clock. The parameterised action for this system is

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where the second line is the canonical form. The momenta are

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the function @xmath , whose vanishing constitutes the Hamiltonian
constraint, is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

As we discussed in chapter 2 the Hamiltonian constraint may be
considered the equation of motion for @xmath . Note that the Hamiltonian
constraint has no well-defined solution if one particle is outside the
box, since this would require

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Inside the box the Hamiltonian constraint implies that the total kinetic
energy is fixed to the constant @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

This equation illustrates why we chose to set the bottom of the well to
a negative finite constant rather than zero. Had we chosen the latter
option, the particles would have been forced to be at rest.

We begin now with the classical analysis in terms of Newtonian time
@xmath . Here we simply set @xmath and relabel ‘ @xmath ’ as ‘ @xmath ’.
This would be the textbook description of this scenario, although we
also retain the Hamiltonian constraint, which now constrains the total
energy to be equal to zero. ⁵ ⁵ 5 Dropping the Hamiltonian constraint in
order to have the system as it would actually appear in a textbook
indifferent to parameterisation invariance would not change the
conclusions drawn from the analysis of this section. The Newtonian
Hamiltonian is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

while the two particles are inside the well, which is guaranteed by the
Hamiltonian constraint. ⁶ ⁶ 6 It is a noteworthy if somewhat pedantic
point that without the Hamiltonian constraint one must additionally
impose the requirement that the initial conditions are such that the
particles are inside the well, or equivalently that the total energy is
finite. In that case, they can never leave the well. Otherwise starting
with a particle outside the well would constitute perfectly reasonable
boundary conditions. Hamilton’s equations are just those of a free
particle,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

excluding the instances when a particle hits a wall. For the purposes of
this model we are content not to treat collisions and instead limit the
applicability of our analysis to a time interval within which no
collision occurs. If we wanted to treat collisions, we would need to
treat the well as the limit of a continuous potential, for example by
expressing @xmath as a Fourier series terminated after @xmath terms for
the dynamical analysis before taking the limit @xmath . The solutions of
the equations 3.10 are, of course, trivial.

Now consider that we instead choose a physical time by considering the
particle described by @xmath a ‘clock’. Specifically, define @xmath and
its conjugate momentum @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

This choice will not only illustrate the point that the two resulting
quantum theories are observationally distinct, but it also is a choice
of time that is remarkably similar mathematically to York time in
minisuperspace models such as the ones explored in chapters 5 and 9 ,
and sections 7.2 and 10.1 . The fact that @xmath and @xmath do indeed
form a conjugate pair may be shown either by deriving their Poisson
brackets (using the known Poisson structure for @xmath and @xmath ), or
by considering the canonical kinetic term @xmath and showing that it is
equal to @xmath up to a total derivative. We now perform the coordinate
transformation @xmath , that is, we substitute @xmath and @xmath for
@xmath and @xmath in @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

from which we can then solve the Hamiltonian constraint @xmath for
@xmath in terms of the other variables and derive the physical
Hamiltonian according to the procedure described in section 3.1 ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

This leads to the Hamilton’s equations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

The second of these might have been predicted since @xmath and @xmath
have been untouched by the introduction of @xmath and @xmath and @xmath
above (something no change in time parameter chan change–if it is
constant, it is constant no matter how time is measured). The equations
of motion can be solved:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath , @xmath and @xmath being constants determined by the
initial conditions. We know that the dynamics must be equivalent in
virtue of the proof given in the previous section, but one can also
verify explicitly that the equations in @xmath and @xmath are indeed
physically equivalent.

Let us now canonically quantise the two descriptions. We are going to be
agnostic about the underlying quantum ontology and simply perform the
standard procedure of canonical quantisation of which we provided a
discussion in chapter 1 . In terms of @xmath the quantum system is well
known from any introductory textbook on quantum mechanics with the
exception of inclusion of the Hamiltonian constraint. The quantum
Hamiltonian operator is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the momentum operators take their usual form in the position
basis. In order to solve the Hamiltonian eigenequation, consider the
ansatz @xmath , which leads to the equation ⁷ ⁷ 7 For the purposes of
this section only, we include the constant @xmath explicitly.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

for @xmath -eigenfunction @xmath and @xmath -eigenvalue @xmath , and an
analogous equation for @xmath and @xmath , with @xmath . The
infinite-well potential manifests in boundary conditions @xmath , with
which the equation gives solutions (labelled by @xmath )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

An anologous results holds for @xmath . For a Hamiltonian eigenstate
@xmath the corresponding energy eigenvalue is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

This essentially completes the standard textbook analysis. We also
consider the presence of the Hamiltonian constraint. Constraints in a
classical system manifest in the form of conditions on the physical
wavefunction. The quantum Hamiltonian constraint states that physical
states satisfy @xmath , or

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

while states not satisfying this condition are considered mathematical
artifacts without physical relevance. Expressed in the Hamiltonian
eigenbasis,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

this condition becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

This has the rather peculiar implication that there are physical
Hamiltonian eigenstates (corresponding to having only one non-vanishing
coefficient @xmath ) only if @xmath is equal to one of a subset of
integer multiples of @xmath . The physical meaning of this is somewhat
of an open question but since the infinite square well is not a
realistic model of our universe this peculiarity may not concern us for
our purposes. The quantum constraint is effectively a
Wheeler-deWitt-like equation and implies that the dynamics is frozen

We alluded earlier that phenomenological differences arise when
considering measurements relating to observables associated with the
physical time @xmath , that is, the @xmath -particle. To see this,
consider the expectation value @xmath . For a general physical state
3.21 this is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

The term inside the sum in the first part of this expression is what one
has for Hamiltonian eigenstates, the second term corresponds to the
cross-term contribution only present in non-eigenstates. In general
@xmath has a time-dependent overall phase factor, so that the second sum
itself is time-dependent, while the first is constant. However, suppose
that @xmath is such that there exist physical energy eigenstates, that
is, @xmath is an integer multiple of @xmath . Then for such states the
second sum vanishes and there exist physically allowed states in which
@xmath is time-independent.

Now quantise the classical theory with physical time @xmath . We will
show that there are no states in this theory such that @xmath is
constant in time, illustrating disagreement with the quantised theory in
@xmath . Here the configuration space of the system is one-dimensional
since only @xmath remains as a variable, while @xmath and its momentum
have been ‘absorbed’ into the notion of time. Denoting the eigenvalue of
the Hamiltonian by @xmath , the Hamiltonian eigenequation @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is exactly analogous to the equation in the quantisation of the
@xmath -description except that there is an additional time-dependent
pre-factor. Hence the eigenfunctions are the same as @xmath obtained
above,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

(and vanishing outside the wel) and the eigenvalues are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Hamiltonian constraint has been eliminated as part of the
Hamiltonian reduction and as a result is identically satisfied as is
easy to check.

Above we calculated the expectation value @xmath and showed that at
least for some choices of @xmath there are states in which it is
constant in time. Here @xmath is, according to our discussion in section
3.2 , the Hamiltonian expectation value, since the physical meaning of
the Hamiltonian was defined as @xmath . For a general state

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

we find (using the orthogonality of the eigenstates)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is time dependent for all states since the part in parentheses is
not. This is in manifest disagreement with the range of possible
expectation values resulting from the quantisation of the @xmath
-description.

There remains a question of how this would be measurable in practice
given the above model. One might think it possible to simply wait a
sufficiently long time such that the expectation values are sufficiently
different to be easily distinguishable with good probability from a
single measurement, although one is of course limited by the limited
applicability of the model to the time frame between classical bounces.
Furthermore, a measurement process should be included dynamically, not
considered external, since it would have to be part of the
Hamiltonian-reduction process. Furthermore, it is arguably impossible to
test the expectation value via repeated measurements of systems prepared
in the same state since in the reduced formalism there is only one time
variable, not one per copy of the system. Physical time is always
extracted for the universe as a whole, not multiple times within a
universe, and multiple copies of a system are necessarily part of the
same universe if one claims to be able to make any statistical inference
from them.

These considerations suggest that great care has to be taken on how to
actually distinguish between the two quantum theories in practice, in
particular in a more realistic model. However, another way one might
hope to establish the distinction experimentally with a single
measurement is by simply measuring @xmath to high precision. For any
value of @xmath other than a discrete set of values the possible
outcomes of such a measurement do not match the possible values of
measurements obtained in the @xmath formalism. Hence one would be able
to say with great probability whether or not the measured outcome could
possibly be one that is allowed in the @xmath -formalism or not.

Despite these subtleties the above illustration is sufficient to show
that one may plausibly expect experimental differences in the respective
quantum theories with different physical time parameters. One might be
hopeful that such a time parameter might therefore be detectable for our
universe if indeed there is one. Considering York-time quantum gravity
is then not a purely formal exercise but may ultimately lead to
concretely different observable physics, at least in principle.

### Chapter 4 York time

In this chapter we introduce York time, arguably the most promising
candidate for a physically fundamental notion of time. We explain its
role in the initial-value problem of general relativity and discuss some
of its other properties and how it would address various questions about
the nature of quantum gravity.

#### 4.1 The initial-value problem of general relativity

In the last chapter we discovered that different choices of physical
time may lead to phenomenologically distinct theories following
quantisation. In principle, therefore, one can hope that observation
will ultimately constrain the list of temporal candidates, or rule out
such an approach to quantum gravity all together. However, a priori
there are an infinite number of ways to carry out the time-space split.
We must therefore apply theoretical considerations in order to identify
viable candidates. Roughly speaking one may divide proposals into three
categories:

1.  Intrinsic time: the time parameter depends only on the configuration
    variables within a spatial slice, that is, the metric @xmath .
    Furthermore, the parameter ought to be invariant under spatial
    diffeomorphisms, so that the parameter depends really only on the
    geometry, that is, an equivalence class of metrics. One simple
    example in cosmology would be to use a monotonic function of the
    scale factor @xmath as a time parameter. For example, Misner [ 85 ]
    proposed the use of @xmath to describe cosmological history.

2.  Extrinsic time: the time parameter depends only on geometrical
    degrees of freedom but this includes the relationship between
    infinitesimally separated slices, so that it may be a function of
    @xmath and the geometric momenta @xmath . Once again the parameter
    ought to be invariant under spatial diffeomorphisms, which may vary
    from slice to slice. York time is an example of an extrinsic time
    parameter.

3.  Matter time: the time parameter is extracted from the properties of
    matter. Whether some particular matter field and if so which, or
    perhaps a combination of all matter should be used to formulate the
    parameter is entirely open. Some illustrative proposals using dust
    have been made in refs. [ 26 ] and [ 63 ] .

In principle one could define a time parameter also by mixing geometric
and matter degrees of freedom, although it is difficult to see what
proposal of this sort would have any theoretical basis. Nonetheless it
cannot be ruled out.

With a plethora of choices available and a finite number of hours in a
researcher’s life, how should one select a candidate parameter for
further investigation? The most promising route is to look at the
structure of the theory, general relativity, itself. The first point to
note is that the physical degrees of freedom of general relativity are
not the variables themselves but only equivalence classes thereof. That
is, general relativity is generally covariant, meaning (roughly) the
equations are identical for different choices of coordinates. This
coordinate freedom is not physical and our choice of time, as already
indicated above, should not depend on the chosen coordinates. It should
not depend, that is, on the metric representation of the geometry.

In addition to the dynamical equations that govern how the spatial
geometry changes over time the space of solutions is subject to four
constraints, the three momentum constraints 2.40 and the Hamiltonian
constraint 2.39 . One consequence of the existence of such constraints
is that the initial-value problem of general relativity is non-trivial.
The initial-value problem is the task to specify a full set of Cauchy
data on a spatial slice such that the evolution is uniquely determined
at all times thereafter (and before). In practice this means specifying
values for @xmath and the geometric momentum @xmath at every point
@xmath on a spatial slice. Doing so uniquely determines their values on
all other slices via the evolution equations. This holds true no matter
how the spacetime is foliated to the future of the initial slice since
@xmath and @xmath being fixed for one foliation means they are
determined for any foliation as such a change corresponds to a mere
spacetime coordinate transformation.

For many other theories the initial-value problem is simple. For
example, in a system with @xmath particles one simply specifies the
momentum and position of each particle. If the total energy is
constrained (to zero, for example, as the result of
time-reparameterisation invariance) then we can imagine placing @xmath
particles as we like (depending on the form of the potential function
there might be a maximum total energy for those @xmath particles that we
have to observe) and then the position and/or momentum of the @xmath th
particle is at least partially determined by the constraint. The future
evolution of the system is then fully determined and the initial-value
problem is solved.

In general relativity there is a catch, however. There is no obvious
straightforward way to specify initial data @xmath and @xmath such that
all the constraints are satisfied. General relativity is a field theory
with an infinity of degrees of freedom and the constraints are
sufficiently non-trivial ¹ ¹ 1 An (artificial) example of sufficiently
trivial constraints would be constraints that are super-local, meaning
they do not involve spatial derivatives. In this case a finite set of
data could be found at each point individually and only continuity from
point to point is required. that no simple mechanical construction is
possible.

A beautiful solution to the initial-value problem was found by James
York in the early 1970s [ 142 , 143 , 144 , 28 ] . Specifically he
showed that only the conformal part of the metric and conjugate
momentum, meaning the ‘scale-free’ or ‘shape-only’ geometric degrees of
freedom describing the anisotropy of space, may be specified, and only
on slices of constant extrinsic curvature. The local notion of scale and
its rate of change are then determined by the constraints. The details
are as follows below. A reader not interested in the technical details
may choose to skip to the non-technical discussion at the end of this
section, taking note however of equation 4.12 .

Recall that the Hamiltonian and momentum constraints are respectively
the vanishing of

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      ( 2.37 )
     @xmath   @xmath      ( 2.38 )
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

Following [ 144 ] , the first step in specifying a full set of data that
satisfies the constraints is to construct data satisfying the momentum
constraints only. To do so, specify some arbitrary functions for the
metric and momentum, @xmath and @xmath . From these one can construct
uniquely a set of data that satisfies the momentum constraints by
decomposing it into pure-trace, longitudinal and transverse-traceless
parts at each spatial point. Consider for the sake of generality a
tensor @xmath and write

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

The trace contribution is determined by single degree of freedom @xmath
,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

while the longitudinal contribution may be expressed in terms of a
vector @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where indices are raised and lowered with the spatial metric @xmath and
its inverse @xmath as usual, and @xmath denotes the spatial covariant
derivative associated with the given metric. The transverse-traceless
part is defined as what is leftover to satisfy equation 4.1 , although
the fact that @xmath really is transverse and traceless is still to be
shown. We assume throughout that all tensor quantities are @xmath .

It is easy to show that @xmath is indeed traceless since @xmath from eq.
4.2 and @xmath for any @xmath in virtue of its definition 4.3 . The
non-trivial part of the construction is to choose @xmath such that
@xmath is indeed transverse,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

This effectively constitutes the requirement

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath denotes the tracefree part of @xmath . Introducing the
operator @xmath defined by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

one can show that @xmath is linear, second-order, positive-definite and
Hermitian. The first two properties are easily seen by inspection, while
the latter two may be shown by integrating by parts a global scalar
product over the manifold, giving

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

and for any two vectors @xmath , @xmath one can show by integrating by
parts twice that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

illustrating Hermiticity. The case @xmath is a special case, implying
that either @xmath or @xmath is a conformal Killing vector field. In
either case they do not affect the possible solutions for @xmath
(details are found in ref. [ 144 ] ). These properties of @xmath imply
that solutions exist and can be found by considering eigenfunctions of
@xmath . The solutions are, formally,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the inverse @xmath of @xmath exists in virtue of the same
properties, although a solution @xmath is unique only up to conformal
Killing vector fields. Thus, strictly speaking, one obtains an
equivalence class of vectors @xmath for any one initially selected
tensor @xmath . The tensor @xmath , which enters the definition of
@xmath is however unique for any one such equivalence class. Having
solved for @xmath , the transverse traceless part @xmath now has those
properties provably by construction.

Applying this method to the initially chosen momentum data @xmath helps
one to find the part @xmath of @xmath that satisfies the momentum
constraint with respect to the metric @xmath , as the momentum
constraint is effectively a requirement of transverseness.

Suppose then we have a set of data @xmath satisfying the momentum
constraints but not yet the Hamiltonian constraint. Consider a conformal
transformation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is an arbitrary smooth function on the slice. The momentum
constraint is invariant under such a transformation, that is, it is
satisfied by the data @xmath if it is satisfied by @xmath , if the slice
is maximal . A slice is maximal if and only if the trace of the momentum
vanishes everywhere, @xmath .

Assume then that the data is indeed given for a maximal slice. The
momentum constraints are assumed to be satisfied but the Hamiltonian
constraint, in general, is not. The goal is to perform a conformal
transformation 4.10 such that the transformed data @xmath does satisfy
the Hamiltonian constraint. If this can be done, then the transformed
data would indeed satisfy all constraints and the initial-value problem
would be solved, at least for data on maximal slices. Substitute
therefore the transformed data in the form @xmath into the Hamiltonian
constraint, which can now be understood as an equation determining the
correct choice of @xmath in terms of @xmath and @xmath , namely

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

This equation is known as the Lichnerowicz equation. Having solved this
equation for @xmath one has explicit data satisfying both the momentum
and Hamiltonian constraints.

The method described in the last two paragraphs assumes that the data is
given on a maximal slice. This restriction may be weakened to slices of
constant mean curvature (constant scalar extrinsic curvature), that is,
slices on which the parameter

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

is constant ( @xmath here still denotes the trace of @xmath , not the
constant relating geometric properties of circles). This requires an
extra step, the replacement of @xmath by its traceless part

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath , one has that if @xmath satisfies the momentum constraint
( @xmath ), then so does @xmath ( @xmath ). The crucial aspect of a
slice of constant mean curvature is that the decomposition 4.1 is
invariant under conformal transformations. ² ² 2 The distinction between
maximal and constant-mean-curvature slices is essentially that in the
former case the trace part @xmath as defined in 4.1 vanishes, while in
the latter case the part has to be subtracted ‘manually’ to arrive at
the transverse traceless part. One proceeds as for the case of maximal
slicing by substituting the transformed data @xmath into the
Hamiltonian, which now yields the extended Lichnerowicz equation ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

For @xmath one recovers the (unextended) Lichnerowicz equation 4.11 as
expected.

There are two key points that follow from this solution to the
initial-value problem. First, the degrees of freedom that may be freely
specified are the conformal geometric degrees of freedom, that is, the
variables determining local ‘shape’ (or angles together with
anisotropy), and not the local absolute scale. Second, the initial data
can only be given on a a slice of constant scalar extrinsic curvature,
or equivalently of constant @xmath .

If we take the idea of a theory of gravity described by
three-dimensional space whose geometry evolves through time (rather than
the four-covariant ‘spacetime’ picture) seriously, then the latter fact
strongly suggests that slices of constant @xmath are slices of constant
time, so that the foliation on which the initial-value problem can be
solved is indeed the foliation that corresponds to stacking of spaces at
consecutive instances. For if physical time corresponded to a different
time variable, that is, if the reconstruction of spacetime from the
space-through-time theory were not a reconstruction from a
constant-mean-curvature foliation, then as a consequence initial data
could not be specified at a single instance in time. This would pose a
major conundrum for the notion of what determines the dynamics of a
physical system.

Accepting that the correct physical foliation is one of constant @xmath
, two question remain. First, is @xmath itself a viable notion of time?
In other words, is it monotonic? And is the constant-mean-curvature
slicing unique?

We will consider the question of uniqueness in the next section.
Regarding the first of these, note first that there are solutions to the
equations of general relativity that do not permit a global
constant-mean-curvature slicing. One example is any solution with a
closed timelike loop. Such solutions of general relativity would
therefore not constitute solutions to our theory of gravity described by
space evolving through time. This inequivalence is likely unproblematic
since such solutions of general relativity do not as far as we know
correspond to our actual universe and the theories are therefore
phenomenologically equivalent given what we already know about our
universe. For solutions of general relativity that do allow a
constant-mean-curvature slicing (such as universes with closed or
asymptotically flat cosmologies) one can indeed show as a result of the
field equations that @xmath is non-decreasing. ³ ³ 3 This is in general
true provided a sufficiently well-behaved matter content is assumed.

This leaves only the possibility that @xmath is constant across multiple
slices. One example of such a scenario is de Sitter space, where
homogeneous space expands at a constant fractional rate. De Sitter space
often serves as a first approximation for the behaviour of the universe
during inflation, which we will treat in detail in section 5.4 .
Fortunately there de Sitter is only an approximation and a higher-order
calculation shows that @xmath is, in fact, increasing during this
cosmological period, albeit slowly (with respect to conventional
‘cosmological’ time). A true de Sitter space would pose issues for
considering @xmath as a time variable. However, once again we know that
our universe is not described by a pure de Sitter space, so that the
viability of the York parameter @xmath is as a time parameter is not
threatened.

The second insight gained from the initial-value problem was that
‘scale’ (and its conjugate momentum) are not freely specifiable but are
determined by the Hamiltonian constraint. This suggests that these
variables do not have the same physical status as the other,
shape-determining variables. Indeed, the (fractional) rate of change of
scale is just the value of the York parameter on the slice, or the
answer to the question ‘what time is it?’ The scale itself (expressed as
the local volume element @xmath ) is the momentum conjugate to the time
@xmath .

Considering @xmath as our physical time parameter implies then that
@xmath is equal to the physical Hamiltonian density, as discussed in
section 3.2 . The status of volume is therefore analogous to that of
‘energy’ in conventional theories; not a physical variable (although
arguably not void of physical meaning) and given by the numerical value
of the Hamiltonian. Exploring this idea will constitute the majority of
the remainder of this thesis.

In our argument there is one caveat. While it is true that York’s
solution to the initial-value problem gives reasons to take the proposal
of York time as physical time seriously, it is unproven that the
initial-value problem can indeed not be solved in another manner, in
particular with another foliation. It is the case that no other
solutions are known ⁴ ⁴ 4 although there were attempts along different
lines preceding York, for example due to Baierlein, Sharp and Wheeler [
6 ] , but at least the possibility of other solutions has not been ruled
out.

York time and constant-mean-curvature slicing do however also have a
number of other properties that support the plausibility of their
fundamental physical significance. This will be the subject of the next
section.

#### 4.2 Properties of York time

The York parameter @xmath plays a central role in the initial-value
problem in that it is to our knowledge only surfaces of constant @xmath
on which the problem can be solved. The notion of local scale and its
rate of change is ‘extracted’ from among the physical variables. Taking
the implication of this seriously, we argued, means to consider the York
parameter as the true physical time and its conjugate momentum as the
Hamilton density, whose physical interpretation is that of local volume.

York time however does have other properties as the result of which it
stands out from among the candidates for physical time. Suppose we were
unaware of York’s work on the initial-value problem and we wished to
identify a physical time based on a few simple theoretical
considerations. First, we wish to extract it from the geometric degrees
of freedom only (no matter-dependent definitions) and furthermore we
believe that it should only depend on the local degrees of freedom, that
is, ‘what time is it?’ should be answerable without reference to the
properties of other, distant points in space. The latter criterion
enables subsequently the identification of a local Hamiltonian density.
So physical time and the Hamiltonian density at @xmath are functions of
@xmath and @xmath only.

Further, it is reasonable to suppose that the time parameter be
identified as an isotropic quantity. There is nothing that leads us to
believe that there is any sort of fundamental anisotropy in the laws of
the universe. This then implies that any of the ‘shape’ degrees of
freedom, which determine the notion of angles, are not to be used. Only
the overall scale and its rate of change (or conjugate momentum), that
is, the metric determinant @xmath and the momentum trace @xmath ,
remain.

This still leaves various options. For example, one might consider the
local scale @xmath to be time and its conjugate momentum to be the
Hamilton, essentially a reversal of the roles we propose. The issue here
is however that in general @xmath does not change monotonically
according to the laws of general relativity. Disallowing such solutions
would be far more restricting than disallowing spacetimes that cannot be
foliated in the manner of constant mean curvature, although in
cosmological contexts (assuming a homogeneous universe) such a time
parameter may be viable and has been considered in the literature (by
Misner, for example, [ 85 ] ). The requirement of monotonicity rules out
the vast majority of possible functions of @xmath and @xmath .

I cannot say with certainty that only constant mean curvature slicing
guarantees monotonicity, although I am unaware of any other,
non-equivalent foliation of the sort. However, the simplicity of the
interpretation of the Hamiltonian is uniquely compelling. So, even if
there are other options, York time must be considered a favourite among
them based only on a few theoretical principles.

In the last section we also left unanswered the question whether the
constant-mean-curvature slicing of a spacetime that forms a solution of
the field equations of general relativity is unique. We already
discussed that not all such spacetimes are, in fact,
constant-mean-curvature slicable and those that are not would not be
solutions of our theory of York-time geometrodynamics. However, if the
spacetime is slicable by a constant-mean-curvature foliation, can there
be more than one such foliation?

The last question has been answered in the negative by Marsden and
Tipler [ 80 ] . They established that the constant-mean-curvature
slicing of a spacetime, if indeed there is one, is unique, at least for
a subset of solutions of general relativity. Specifically, these are the
cases of closed universes, that is, those that, roughly speaking,
experience a ‘big crunch’ after some finite proper time. However, their
argument also applies to universes which are asymptotically flat, that
is, where space in the infinite distance approaches a Euclidean
geometry.

Another encouraging aspect of constant-mean-curvature slicing is the
shape such a foliation takes in the presence of singularities. In the
1980s Qadir and Wheeler [ 100 ] discovered that the scalar extrinsic
curvature @xmath , or equivalently @xmath , approaches infinity as the
singularity is approached. This applies equally to a final singularity
that is the ‘big crunch’ in universes that have such a singularity and
to local singularities such as black holes. As a result slices of
constant @xmath ‘wrap around’ a singularity and all black holes are part
of the single, final singularity found at @xmath . ⁵ ⁵ 5 As in all parts
of this thesis, a slice is itself a three-dimensional object with
non-zero volume, and ‘wrap around’ is to be understood as a
three-dimensional (hyper)slice ‘wrapping’ in the fourth dimension.
Consequently there are no geometric singularities on any slice labelled
by a finite @xmath . ⁶ ⁶ 6 However: In a universe that expands forever
(and @xmath as @xmath in the homogeneous approximation), what is the
shape of the York foliation then? In the vicinity of a singularity the
cosmological properties are irrelevant and @xmath but in other parts of
the universe @xmath ends at zero. This apparent contradiction motivates
us to propose a cosmological extension for such universes. This we
discuss in detail in chapter 6 .

This completely preempts a difficult conceptual issue that any theory of
quantum gravity has to address. The issue concerns the existence of
singularities. The first question is whether or not singularities, which
are clearly solutions of the classical theory, are also part of the
quantum theory. If yes, then what is the quantum description of such
singularity? If not, then how do singularities arise as classical
approximations? I am not aware that any approach of quantum gravity has
answered these questions fully and with certainty.

The York slicing avoids classical singularities entirely since they are
‘banished’ to @xmath . Hence the quantum geometrodynamics, the quantum
theory of spatial geometries, can be defined on those slices without
concern regarding the recovery of classical singularities in any limit.

{mdframed}

Proper time

The attentive reader will have noticed that the notion of constant
extrinsic curvature and York time was introduced with reference to
another, more familiar notion: proper time. In particular, the physical
understanding of the scalar extrinsic curvature is the local fractional
rate of growth of volume, where ‘rate of growth’ refers to growth with
respect to proper time. Does this reliance on another notion of time,
proper time, spell doom to our idea to consider York time a physically
fundamental time parameter? What about proper time as a physically
fundamental time parameter? And what is this proper time anyway?

Our endeavour is not doomed. Referring to proper time provided a
physical intuition for the York parameter but in its formal definition
in terms of the geometric momenta @xmath and the metric @xmath no such
reference was made. The expression for the momenta, when traced back to
the original action principle, involved the lapse @xmath , whose own
physical interpretation is the amount of proper time passing per
coordinate time, but recall that mathematically @xmath merely encodes
the freedom to choose any monotonic time parameter. Its physical meaning
is not relevant for this, nor for the procedure of Hamiltonian
reduction, which will be used to derive the dynamical equations. The
notion of York time does not, in fact, rely on the idea of proper time
at all.

In fact, if we take the view that our theory of gravity is fundamentally
one of the time evolution of a spatial geometry and not just a ‘3+1’
description of a space time geometry, then the lapse @xmath and proper
time @xmath were never more than a crutch that allowed us to come up
with a theory that is phenomenologically equivalent with general
relativity anyway.

Proper time itself does not constitute a viable fundamental time
parameter. For one, it does not actually define a single preferred
foliation. At any point on a slice chosen in any desirably way one can
define the notion of proper time (of a comoving observer), but ‘what
proper time it is’ is not a notion that can be answered in an absolute
manner. A ‘slice of constant proper time’ is not a meaningful notion
unless there already is another such slice that is assumed to be such
and relative to which absolute values of proper time can be assigned.
That is, a constant-proper-time foliation is determined by choosing a
single slice, but how to choose that first slice is not unique. Proper
time further lacks a relation to what constitutes, arguably, the
physical variables given the initial-value problem.

Another issue proper time faces is the criticism made by Valentini [ 134
] that we discussed above.

Nonetheless, it is difficult to deny that the notion of proper time must
have some direct physical significance. After all, it is exactly the
time parameter that is measured by a clock,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A clock may be considered a ‘hodometer of spacetime’ [ 23 ] , measuring
the Lorentzian length of the spacetime path taken akin to the mileage
counter of an automobile. Clocks are physical systems governed by
dynamical equations depending on the exact constituents of the clock. It
is a remarkable conspiracy that all clocks — no matter whether
consisting of pendula, vibrating atoms or systems of orbiting bodies —
‘tick’ at the same rate. There are two views one can take: either this
conspiracy shows that there is an underlying spacetime structure that
the clocks ‘sense’; or it is exactly this conspiracy that allows a
description in terms of spacetime, but the conspiracy is purely a matter
of matter dynamics.

The first view is the one commonly presented in the majority of
textbooks on relativity, although too often clocks (and rods) are simply
considered as primitive entities that — almost by definition — display
the spacetime structure. Opening many a textbook one finds diagrams of
coordinate grids with clocks drawn at each intersection, or similar.
This apparently compelling view is called into question however when we
try to understand the details by which actual clocks sense this
spacetime structure. We are forced to consider the interaction between
dynamics and spacetime, but this then is just a rephrasing of the second
view. The notion of spacetime can be invoked because the universality of
the dynamics allows for a geometric description but the clock conspiracy
is ultimately a question of dynamics.

This universality is essentially due to the way the gravitational field
represented by the spacetime metric @xmath is coupled to the matter
fields via minimal coupling . (Co-)vectorial quantities (such as spatial
derivatives of fields) are summed, for example in the kinetic terms of a
scalar field, via contraction of the indices by the metric. The spatial
derivatives are furthermore modified to be covariant, giving them the
right transformation properties that the gravitational field may be
given a geometric interpretation.

The reliance on notions that ultimately require dynamical treatment,
such as rods and clocks, as primitive is as old as relativity itself.
Early in Einstein’s celebrated 1905 paper Zur Elektrodynamik bewegter
Körper [ 39 ] he writes,

  “Like all electrodynamics, the theory to be developed here is based on
  the kinematics of a rigid body, since the assertions of any such
  theory have to do with the relations among rigid bodies (coordinate
  systems), clocks, and electromagnetic processes.”

Few authors ⁷ ⁷ 7 Many years later Einstein himself however became
uneasy with his approach to special relativity as is evident from his
autobiographical notes, in which he calls the primitive treatment of
rods and clocks “inconsistent” [ 40 ] . have encouraged a dynamical
understanding of relativistic effects such as clock dilation and length
contraction without relying on spacetime geometry as a primitive
explanation. One notable exception is Bell, who provides a beautiful
discussion of the deformation of a moving atom in terms of
electrodynamics in “How to teach special relativity”, published as
something of an oddity among his collection of papers on quantum
mechanics [ 15 ] . The most careful discussion of the principles and
assumption of special relativity of which I am aware is due to Brown [
23 ] , who criticises the operationalist viewpoint of rods and clocks
exemplified by the above passage. Here we cannot do the subject justice.
Our point is merely that proper time, which can be understood as a
geometric notion in the context of spacetime, cannot be separated from
the dynamics of physical systems.

To consider spacetime conceptually prior to the dynamics of matter
would, one may argue, be putting the cart before the horse. ⁸ ⁸ 8 This
statement is intentionally a reference to a claim by Balashov and
Janssen [ 7 ] , who defend exactly the opposite view, although in the
context of Minkowski’s non-dynamical geometry. The paper is heavily
criticised by Brown, who argues that “[t]he appropriate structure [to
define a kinematics for mechanics] is Minkowksi geometry precisely
because the laws of physics of the non-gravitational interactions are
Lorentz covariant” (original italics) [ 23 , p. 133] . Proper time is
intrinsically dynamical, not an aspect of spatial or spatio-temporal
structure, and is therefore not obviously a viable choice of fundamental
time parameter.

#### 4.3 The reduced variables and their Poisson structure

Hamiltonian reduction is a mathematical procedure that reduces the
number of configuration-space degrees of freedom by one and the number
of phase-space degrees of freedom by two (one ‘position’ and one
‘momentum’). If the variables extracted to serve as time and as the
Hamiltonian (or Hamiltonian density) are simply one pair of canonical
variables chosen from among the full set of canonical pairs, then the
Poisson structure of the set of remaining variables is unchanged. On the
other hand, if the notion of physical time and Hamiltonian are definable
only in terms of multiple variables and there is no canonical
transformation that avoids this, then the number of reduced variables is
not smaller than the number of original degrees of freedom. Instead the
reduced variables must satisfy a new pair of constraints, so that the
number of degrees of freedom is nonetheless reduced. That these
constraints remain satisfied with time irrespective of the particular
form of the Hamiltonian is however guaranteed by modified Poisson
brackets. The new Poisson structure is obtained directly from the
Poisson structure of the original variables and some basic properties of
Poisson brackets.

The content of the preceding paragraph, describing abstractly how a
non-canonical Poisson structure arises, may appear obscure. A simple
example helps to clarify this mathematical process.

Consider a system described by three pairs of canonical variables @xmath
, @xmath . These may describe the position and momentum of three
particles confined to move in one dimension, for example. Let its
(unreduced) Hamiltonian be the usual one (setting the particle mass to
@xmath ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the subscript @xmath denotes the fact that this Hamiltonian
describes evolution with respect to @xmath . We demand
time-reparameterisation invariance (see chapter 2 ), so that the system
obeys a Hamiltonian constraint,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since the set of variables @xmath is by hypothesis canonical and
therefore obeys the usual Poisson structure,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

with all other Poisson brackets vanishing.

Define for convenience the quantities

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

somewhat resembling the metric determinant @xmath and the trace of the
geometric momentum, @xmath respectively. In fact, the model used here to
illustrate the appearance of non-canonical Poisson brackets describes a
homogeneous but anisotropic spatially flat universe and will be
developed in full in section 7.2 . We choose a physical time with
respect to which to perform a Hamiltonian reduction, namely

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

The choice is obviously analogous to York time and its conjugate
momentum. However, for our present purposes (to derive the Poisson
structure of the reduced variables) the exact form does not matter, only
that they are functions of the ‘scale’ variables: @xmath , @xmath .

There is no canonical transformation from the set of variables @xmath to
another set @xmath such that the latter includes @xmath and @xmath .
This implies that the set of reduced variables is not just an unreduced
set of canonical variables minus one canonical pair. Instead it is
another set of six variables from which the ‘scale’ is extracted via
constraints. The most obvious way to do this is to define the reduced
variables as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

The new variables configuration variables @xmath obey the constraint

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

identically in virtue of their definition. However, if we ‘kick away the
ladder’ and treat the variables @xmath as fundamental, that is, if we
‘forget’ how we arrived at the reduced description, then the constraint
is a genuine one. The variables also obey

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

which ensures that the first constraint remains satisfied with time
evolution irrespective of the exact form of the Hamiltonian. The
constraint also holds identically in virtue of the definition of the
momenta @xmath . In fact, the form of the momenta 4.20 is exactly such
that any motion generated by the momenta is tangent to the constraint
surface defined by eq. 4.21 . Other definitions, such as @xmath , would
not have this property. We will discuss this in more detail in section
7.2 .

For now we are only interested in the derivation of the Poisson
structure for the set @xmath . The procedure to find the new Poisson
structure (such that the reduced dynamics is physically equivalent with
the unreduced dynamics) is as follows: First write the Poisson bracket
to be determined in terms of the original variables. Second, use the
original Poisson structure together with general properties of Poisson
brackets to evaluate the selected bracket in terms of the old variables.
Rewrite the result in terms of the new reduced variables. This ensures
consistency of the new Poisson structure with the old.

For illustrative purposes we wish to determine @xmath . Following the
procedure just described we write,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now use the property of Poisson brackets that for a function @xmath it
is true that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

This follows from distributivity of the Poisson brackets and the for our
purposes reasonable assumption that @xmath is sufficiently well behaved
to have a series expansion. Evaluating the Poisson bracket in this
manner gives (after rewriting the right-hand side in terms of the new
reduced variables):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Proceeding analogously with the other Poisson brackets, one finds

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.26)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.27)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The existence of the second term in the expression 4.25 and the
non-vanishing of the right-hand side of eq. 4.27 are the reason the new
reduced variables are not canonical. We will return to this model, which
is a description of the geometrodynamics of a homogeneous but
anisotropic universe, in chapter 7 before proceeding to consider the
analogous Poisson brackets of the perturbation theory.

In contrast with this finite-dimensional model, the full theory of
York-time geometrodynamics is a field theory. The theory is, however,
local, so that Poisson brackets vanish if compared between two distinct
spatial points. Otherwise the Poisson brackets one obtains (proceeding
in the same manner as we did above) are very similar:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.28)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.29)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.30)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath and @xmath denote the reduced variables and @xmath and
@xmath denote points on the spatial slice. The argument of @xmath and
@xmath on the right-hand sides has been written as ‘ @xmath ’, although
we might as well have written ‘ @xmath ’ since the expressions are
non-vanishing only if the two selected spatial points are one and the
same.

If we consider the universe to be homogeneous and additionally restrict
the metric to have a form such that off-diagonal elements vanish, the
expressions 4.28 - 4.30 reduce to expressions 4.25 - 4.27 .

In section 7.2 we discuss the meaning and consequences of the
non-canonical Poisson structure further, and its implication for
quantisation in section 10.1 .

#### 4.4 Cosmological history with York time

A conventional description of cosmological history in terms of
cosmological time @xmath may be criticised for a variety of reasons: The
universe began at some finite time @xmath whose value is essentially
arbitrary. In other words, only intervals @xmath matter. However, at the
same time the universe might not end at a finite @xmath , so that the
cosmological timeline is semi-infinite. Furthermore, different eras of
interest vary hugely (by dozens of orders of magnitude) in their
duration. In particular, much of the early history of the cosmos took
place within the first @xmath (inflation) or even @xmath (Planck era) of
a second. ⁹ ⁹ 9 Changing units to, say, Planck units leads to absurdly
large numbers for later eras instead.

There is nothing intrinsically wrong with the description in @xmath .
One might, however, consider it lacking in an aesthetic sense.
Cosmological time @xmath is a highly unnatural choice of time parameter
when discussing the very early universe.

In 1969 Misner proposed that the quantity @xmath — or (more or less
equivalently) the logarithm of the temperature in the homogeneous
approximation — would provide a time parameter with which to give an
account of cosmic history that is more adequate than the conventional
cosmological time @xmath [ 85 ] . The new parameter would avoid the
absurdly small numbers needed to describe early epochs. Misner wrote:
‘The universe is meaningfully infinitely old, since infinitely many
things have happened since the beginning.’

In terms of York time it is the early history that takes up the longest
period @xmath . In fact, just as in the case of Misner’s parameter
@xmath , the ‘beginning’ lies in the infinite past and unlike in the
conventional description in terms of @xmath there is no notion of
‘before the Big Bang’. The Planck era stretches from @xmath to just
before the onset of inflation. Recent data [ 96 ] leads to an upper
bound on the Hubble parameter during inflation of @xmath , so that in
reduced Planck units (where @xmath ) this number also gives a rough
estimate of @xmath .

Following inflation and reheating, the energy density then becomes
dominated by radiation until @xmath years. At this point matter becomes
dominant and the Hubble parameter is of order @xmath s @xmath , or
@xmath in reduced Planck units, which is already within the final
moments of the universe when considered in terms of York time. Evidence
suggests that today, at @xmath , we are nearing a possibly final era
dominated by a cosmological constant.

The York time description clearly does not do away with absurdly large
order-of-magnitude differences in the way Misner might have envisioned.
Rather, periods of large @xmath -duration are of short @xmath -duration
and vice versa. The infinite ‘York age’ of the universe might however be
considered an aesthetic advantage.

One might speculate whether York time really ‘ends’ at @xmath or whether
cosmic history continues and our description ought to be extended.
Indeed, if @xmath does have fundamental physical significance, then it
is unwarranted to conclude that the universe would end then simply
because the usual parameter @xmath ceases to describe such speculative
future eras, although problems may arise if physical quantities are not
well behaved during the transition to @xmath . The existence of a
cosmological constant also raises questions. In such a case the
conventionally considered timeline never reaches @xmath but stops
slightly short since @xmath (up to constants) as @xmath rather than
approaching zero. An analysis concerning the viability or indeed
necessity of such an extension will be performed in chapter 6 .

#### 4.5 York time as a solution to the problem of time

In an important review on the subject of the problem of time and
approaches to overcome it, Isham [ 64 ] identifies the key questions
that any theory of quantum gravity must answer. The points raised are
(verbatim):

1.  the status of the concept of probability and the extent to which it
    is conserved;

2.  the status of the associated concepts of causality and unitarity;

3.  the time-honoured debate about whether quantum gravity should be
    approached via a canonical, or a covariant, quantisation scheme;

4.  the extent to which spacetime is a meaningful concept;

5.  the extent to which classical geometrical concepts can, or should,
    be maintained in the quantum theory;

6.  the way in which our classical world emerged from some primordial
    quantum event at the big-bang;

7.  the whole question of the interpretation of quantum theory and, in
    particular, the domain of applicability of the conventional
    Copenhagen view.

In this section we wish to briefly address what answer quantum
geometrodynamics based on York time and constant-mean-curvature slicing
gives to each of these. Some answers are not determined by this change
of the classical starting point from four-diffeomorphic general
relativity to a space-through-time theory with spatial diffeomorphisms
only, but will depend on one’s favoured formulation of quantum
mechanics. At this stage we will remain agnostic about the latter
question, although the reader will undoubtedly become aware of our
favoured approach.

York-time quantum geometrodynamics has a clear notion of time and
simultaneity across space, even if these simultaneity surfaces — the
foliation — is not classically detectable. Hence the quantum theory is
not plagued by the question of how to define quantum states and similar
issues. A quantum state @xmath is a complex function over the
configuration space of the theory, which is just conformal superspace ,
the space of all equivalence classes of spatial geometries where two
geometries are in the same class if they are related via a local
conformal transformation @xmath .

The notion of probability is therefore well defined and conserved as
much as this is the case in any theory. Rigorously defining probability
densities here requires defining a measure on the configuration space,
which has an uncountably infinite number of dimensions. These
complications are however inherent to all field theories and not
generally considered an issue. The main point here is that in York-time
quantum geometrodynamics instants of time are clearly-defined concepts
and no additional issue arises.

Since the foliation is fixed, the quantum state of the universe evolves
just like in other more conventional systems as the state space is well
defined. One quantum state follows another, so if one understands
causality in the sense of a temporal ordering with one state being a
necessary and/or sufficient condition for another state to arise at a
later stage, then the notion of causality makes sense. However, in
general I do not find the introduction of such a notion helpful. For
example, since the evolution of the quantum state is deterministic and
linear (given by a functional Schrödinger equation) if the universe is
described by a state @xmath at time @xmath , this is as much necessary
and/or sufficient for @xmath to be the state at a later time @xmath as
is the converse. So being necessary and/or sufficient is surely not what
the idea of ‘causality’ is trying to express. But then without any
temporal aspect to the notion of causality, how is one to understand the
question ‘is A a cause of B?’ The question is problematic independently
of any notion of space, time, spacetime or quantum theory and should be
left to philosophers to discuss, ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 The debate over what
constitutes causation goes back at least as far as Hume [ 62 ] , and
more recently has been tackled by philosophers such as Lewis [e.g. 75 ]
, Armstrong [e.g. 3 ] , Mellor [e.g. 83 ] and others too numerous to
list. although even there one may ask how far the exercise of defining
the notion of causality really is more than one of semantics. Unitarity
on the other hand is as well defined as in any field theory. One may
have to impose certain boundary conditions at spatial infinity, for
example, for unitarity and well-defined probability but there is no
additional issue from the fact that the theory is considered
‘gravitational’ or ‘geometrical’.

The canonical-versus-covariant debate has clearly been answered since
four-covariance is explicitly broken and only the more trivial
covariance under spatial diffeomorphisms remains. The approach to
quantisation here is canonical, although in chapters 11 and 12 we
suggest an alternative approach, which is neither canonical nor
covariant.

Is spacetime a meaningful concept in York-time quantum geometrodynamics?
This is a more difficult question to answer. In the classical theory
spacetime may be constructed from a sequence of spatial slices, that is,
from the classical state of the space and its matter content at a
continuous progression of instants. In other words, it may be
constructed from the trajectory of the system (the universe) in
conformal superspace. In standard quantum theory no such trajectories
exist and such a construction is not possible. If on the other hand one
introduces quantum trajectories as in de Broglie-Bohm theory or the
proposal in chapter 11 of this thesis, for example, then spacetime may
once again be constructed. However, even in this case this constructed
spacetime is not ‘all there is’ since the wavefunction (in
de Broglie-Bohm) that drives the evolution is a complex function over
the entire conformal superspace. It is also an open question whether or
not a quantum equivalent of the four-covariant field equations can be
written down, that is, a spacetime description of the quantum dynamics
that is detached from the York foliation. ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 If such a feat were
accomplished, could one kick away the ladder of York time all together?

Similarly the notion of the possibility of a geometric interpretation
depends on the chosen approach to quantum theory. For any particular
trajectory the geometry is clearly defined since each point on the
trajectory exactly determines the conformal geometry (and the conformal
factor, that is the scale, may be recovered via the numerical value of
the Hamiltonian density at the respective point in space, which is a
function of the dynamical ‘shape’ variables and was obtained in the
Hamiltonian reduction that produced the classical theory in the first
place). We discuss this in more detail in chapter 7 . In the absence of
trajectories one still has a complex function over conformal spatial
geometries, so the concept is not lost, although it is impossible to
associate a particular geometry with the universe at any one instant of
time.

Instead of considering the emergence of some primordial quantum event at
the big bang, York-time quantum geometrodynamics denies the existence of
such an event since the big bang is simply a name of the infinite past,
@xmath . One can, of course, instead ask about properties of the
universe prior to some very early time such as the Planck time, but even
here the quantum evolution is at all times well defined. The York-time
approach to quantum gravity gives no explanation of a beginning because
the universe simply has none. It is infinitely old. There are however a
series of questions one can ask about the early universe, such as how
the classical approximation of the universe that we observe today can be
extracted from the dynamics and whether one can expect such a classical
limit to arise independently of the boundary conditions or whether some
special assumptions must be made about the quantum state of the early
universe (a ‘quantum past-hypothesis’?) and how that state might be
explained.

Finally, as Isham’s wording indicates, the ‘whole question of the
interpretation of quantum theory’ is just that. It is a whole separate
question. Irrespective of the choice of York time however certain things
can be said. For example, by definition (of the universe) there is no
notion of an external observer who could perform a measurement. Hence
any approach to quantum theory that relies on such a notion is
inconsistent. Second, there is only one universe, so the notion of
probability cannot be understood in a frequentist manner. Similarly, in
de Broglie-Bohm theory, there is no notion of an ensemble density @xmath
, ¹² ¹² 12 In the approach proposed in chapter 11 the situation is
different since there is, ontologically speaking, an infinity of
‘classical’ universes (defined by classical variables, although not
evolving according to classical laws). However, here one really ought to
view the entire collection as ‘the universe’, so the exception is really
one of nomenclature rather than substance. so also the idea of quantum
equilibrium versus non-equilibrium is meaningless when applied to the
entire universe, although it may apply to subsystems of which many
copies exist within the universe, such as hydrogen atoms or some
primordial particle species. The conventional Copenhagen view is not
applicable although it may be possible to show, with an appropriate
definition of what constitutes a measurement dynamically, how
measurement processes within the universe appear to obey Copenhagen
quantum mechanics. There is nothing fundamental about these processes
though. Copenhagen quantum mechanics is problematic irrespective of the
application of quantum theory to the entire universe, although the
latter certainly makes some of the issues more apparent.

In summary, the answers York-time quantum geometrodynamics gives to the
conceptual questions of quantum gravity engendered by the problem of
time are on the whole relatively conservative in that quantum gravity is
reduced to a conventional field theory via the choice of a preferred
slicing. Even issues particular to gravitational theories, such as the
question concerning geometric singularities, are avoided via the
particular foliation chosen. In this limited sense the proposal made in
this thesis is anything but revolutionary and arguably less exciting
than other proposals that present more radical departures from the
gravitational and matter theories we understand. Observation must be the
ultimate arbiter.

## Part II Classical York-time cosmology

### Chapter 5 The homogeneous isotropic universe with York time

In this chapter we explore the Friedmann-Lemaître universe in the
context of York time and perform Hamiltonian reduction explicitly in the
case of a minisuperspace model with a scalar field. We also discuss
cosmological inflation in the York-time description. The contents of
this chapter were published in ref. [ 106 ] , with the exception of
section 5.4 , which was presented in ref. [ 107 ] .

#### 5.1 The role of cosmology in gravitational theories

The equations of the full theory of general relativity are too
complicated to allow us to visualise or otherwise intuitively grasp some
given solution thereof. It is, of course, not strictly necessary to have
an intuition or visualisation of such solutions in order to understand
the theory or arrive at new insights, purely formal or otherwise.
However, it would be insincere to state that intuitions play no role in
how we as human beings with limited mental capabilities (and with brain
functions primarily evolved to ensure survival and procreation rather
than consider mathematical abstractions) develop and indeed advance
comprehension of theories in physics.

Intuitive insights into a theory are gained via simplification. For
example, in Newtonian mechanics one might consider a small number of
rigid, perhaps pointlike bodies and neglect the rest of the universe or
model its influence as an external field. Indeed, this is how we spend
much of our early physics education. In some cases the simple scenario
considered may, in fact, provide a relatively good approximation to a
real-world system. This is also the case in general relativity and
reduced-Hamiltonian theories derived therefrom. To consider a cosmology
of a gravitational field theory is to impose a large number of
symmetries (such as spatial homogeneity) on the solution space, reducing
the degrees of freedom that characterise the physics to a finite number.
The remaining dynamics is then no longer a field theory. Such a model is
also commonly called a minisuperspace model since superspace — the
infinite-dimensional configuration space of the gravitational field — is
reduced to a ‘smaller’ finite-dimensional subspace. This terminology is
perhaps less ambiguous than ‘cosmology’, which is used differently in
other contexts.

Cosmologies (or minisuperspace models) can, in general, be visualised
because of their simpler mathematical structure and therefore allow for
an intuitive grasp of some of the implications of the equations of the
gravitational theory. Furthermore, observational evidence strongly
suggests that the universe is highly homogeneous at sufficiently large
scales, so that at least some cosmological models give solutions that
approximate the actual universe.

Considering cosmologies is clearly worth our time. However, one cannot
expect to gain a full understanding of a gravitational theory by looking
at cosmologies. Some features may be hidden by the symmetries. For
example, in this chapter we explore a model universe that is homogeneous
and isotropic (a ‘Friedmann-Lemaître’ cosmology). However, as we will
see, this hides the non-canonical form of the Poisson brackets of the
reduced variables since these are related to the anisotropic degrees of
freedom. In contrast, in section 7.2 we develop an anisotropic (but
still homogeneous) cosmology where their presence becomes apparent,
before proceeding to the perturbation theory itself in the rest of
chapters 7 and 8 .

Minisuperspace approximations also hide a number of the ‘problems of
time’ discussed in section 2.4 . Fortunately for our illustrative
purposes the problem of the frozen dynamics remains since it is a result
of reparameterisation invariance rather than anything strictly related
to field theories (in fact, we introduced it in chapter 2 first in the
context of finite dimensional theories). Yet evidently one cannot rashly
generalise from the cosmological theory to the full theory.

Later we also quantise the minisuperspace models (chapters 9 and section
10.1 ). Doing so is comparatively simple since the classical theories
are by design finite dimensional. This can be insightful as it gives us
a feel for some of the features of the theory of quantum gravity
obtained via quantisation of the Hamiltonian-reduced theory. Strictly
speaking however there is a missing step if the insights are to be of
any value: One first must have reason to believe that the cosmological
(dimensionally reduced / symmetrised) limit of the quantised theory of
gravity is the same or at least sufficiently similar to the theory
resulting from quantising an already cosmological (dimensionally reduced
/ symmetrised) classical theory. In other words, one must have reason to
believe that quantising the cosmology gives the same result as
‘cosmologising’ the quantum theory. This proviso ought to be kept in
mind.

#### 5.2 Friedmann-Lemaître cosmology ‘translated’ into York time

Our purpose here is to explore the cosmology that is the York-time
reduced gravitational theory when restricted to spatially homogeneous
and isotropic solutions. We learned in chapter 3 that at least
classically a reduced theory is equivalent to the original theory. We
therefore expect to recover the standard results of classical
Friedmann-Lemaître cosmology expressed in the ‘language’ of York time.
We can exploit this in order to check that our procedure is correct. To
do so, in this section we ‘translate’ the standard results of
Friedmann-Lemaître cosmology, usually expressed in cosmological time
@xmath or conformal time @xmath , into the York-time description. Only
later in section 5.3 do we perform the Hamiltonian reduction explicitly
and derive and solve the resulting equations.

Consider then a homogeneous and isotropic universe. For the matter
content we choose a single scalar field @xmath with potential @xmath for
simplicity. The Einstein field equations reduce to a set of equations
equivalent to the so-called Friedmann-Lemaître ¹ ¹ 1 Frequently the
homogeneous isotropic model is at least in part attributed to Robertson
and Walker and the equations are referred to as the FLRW or FRW
(omitting Lemaître) equations. However, the development of this model is
due to Friedmann [ 46 , 47 ] and separately Lemaître [ 74 ] . The
contribution of Robertson and Walker was to write influential review
articles on the subject a few years later, hence our chosen
nomenclature. equations:

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.1)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The first of these corresponds to the time-time component of the
Einstein field equations and the second to a combination of the
space-space and time-time components. Here a dot denotes differentiation
with respect to cosmological time @xmath , corresponding to a choice of
lapse @xmath . The parameter @xmath takes values @xmath for a flat,
closed and open universe respectively. The energy density is denoted by
@xmath and for a scalar field takes the form @xmath . The pressure
@xmath is given by @xmath . A cosmological constant may be included
formally as a constant contribution to @xmath .

Using @xmath , written in terms of York time, equation ( 5.1 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is purely algebraic if @xmath does not contain any
time-derivatives, as is the case for a dust-dominated universe, or if we
have a field for which appropriate “slow-roll” conditions — for example
during an inflationary phase — are satisfied, in which case we can
ignore the kinetic term. In cases where the equation is algebraic, it
does not describe a time evolution (how a quantity changes from one
instant to the next) but merely a time progression (what a quantity is
at any given time). This possible reduction of order in return for
explicit time dependence will be a key feature we encounter in the
reduced Hamiltonian formalism below. Note though that if @xmath does
contain time-derivatives as it is the case for a general scalar field,
then we must convert the derivative with respect to @xmath into one with
respect to @xmath in order to avoid reference to @xmath . In general
this requires determination of the York lapse @xmath , defined by @xmath
(since @xmath ).

As elsewhere in this thesis, let a prime denote differentiation with
respect to @xmath . It is @xmath , which together with @xmath implies
@xmath . Having determined the lapse in this manner, we can replace
@xmath by @xmath explicitly, for example. Since @xmath appears in the
lapse, the resultant form of the first Friedmann-Lemaître equation is
not algebraic. In the simplest case, namely a free scalar field ( @xmath
) in a flat ( @xmath ) universe, it takes the form @xmath , which gives

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

after multiplying both sides by the @xmath . In this particular case,
since the equation is homogeneous in time derivatives (all terms have
two first-order derivatives) explicit knowledge of @xmath would not have
been necessary.

In order to ‘translate’ the second Friedmann-Lemaître equation to York
time, one observes that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

and combines this with the previous expression for @xmath to obtain

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

For the scalar field the equation 5.2 , after some appropriate
rearrangement, takes the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is a first order equation even after replacement of @xmath by
@xmath . Here the reduction of order in return for explicit time
dependence is general, provided @xmath does not contain second or higher
order time derivatives, a property that holds true in most conceivable
physical examples. Alternatively this equation could have been obtained
by explicit differentiation using @xmath together with @xmath .

For a scalar field the last relevant equation is the Klein-Gordon
equation. In terms of @xmath this is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Expressed in terms of dependence on @xmath rather than @xmath this
equation can be written in the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where extra terms have arisen from the differentiation of the lapse in
@xmath .

We have transformed the Friedmann-Lemaître and Klein-Gordon equations
from the language of cosmological time @xmath to that of York time
@xmath . Since the classical dynamics are of the standard theory and the
reduced-Hamiltonian theory developed below are provably equivalent, the
‘translated’ equations found in this section give us the ability to
check the results of the reduction procedure.

#### 5.3 Reduced-Hamiltonian Friedmann-Lemaître cosmology

##### 5.3.1 Derivation of the Hamiltonian

In the previous section we arrived at equations for the dynamics of a
homogeneous isotropic universe by a transformation of the time
coordinate from cosmological time @xmath to York time @xmath . However,
the equations — in particular the Klein-Gordon equation in @xmath , eq.
5.9 — is rather awkward to use. In fact, these equations are not the
‘natural’ equations to describe York-time dynamics. In this section we
begin with an action principle for the Friedmann-Lemaître universe and
perform a Hamiltonian reduction to arrive at a different set of
equations, which forms a more natural description (although is, of
course, equivalent to the equations above).

The action principle with which we start is simply the Einstein-Hilbert
action for an homogeneous isotropic universe, that is, where the spatial
metric takes the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is constant and in spherical coordinates given by the
diagonal matrix

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

for @xmath (spatially closed), @xmath (spatially flat) or @xmath
(spatially open). In the flat case ( @xmath ) one can also use Cartesian
coordinates, in which case @xmath is just the identity matrix.

The only geometric variable is the scale @xmath , which is only a
function of time and not of spatial position. This makes the
Friedmann-Lemaître universe a special case in that the York-time
Hamiltonian reduction, in which the notion of scale is ‘absorbed’ into
the time parameter, reduces the number of geometrical dynamical
variables to zero and only leaves the degrees of freedom pertaining to
matter. For simplicity here we consider a single scalar field. One could
envision a scenario with no matter content at all except for a
cosmological constant. In this case the reduction would lead to an
expression for the Hamiltonian that is only a function of time and
directly encodes the volume of the universe. There would be no dynamics,
merely time passing.

With a scalar field @xmath with a potential @xmath the action takes the
form

  -- -- -------- -- --------
        @xmath      
        @xmath      (5.12)
  -- -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is, of course, the lapse associated with the arbitrary
temporal parameter @xmath and @xmath encodes the global properties of
space. A dot refers to differentiation with respect to @xmath (and not
cosmological time @xmath as elsewhere).

In order to obtain this expression from the Einstein-Hilbert action one
must integrate a spatial constant (essentially the instantaneous value
of @xmath ) over all space. This just introduces an overall constant
factor. However, unless the universe is spatially closed ( @xmath ) this
integral is technically infinite, so one must choose a ‘normalisation
volume’. Here we use a normalisation such that the volume is given by
@xmath without any numerical factor. For the flat case, on which we will
restrict our focus shortly, the choice of normalisation has no effect
and a numerical factor @xmath drops out at the level of the Hamiltonian
constraint when written in terms of York variables (since York time
@xmath and its conjugate momentum @xmath are then rescaled by @xmath and
@xmath respectively). For a closed universe the appropriate expression
for the volume is @xmath rather than @xmath .

The standard Friedmann-Lemaître equations in cosmological time @xmath
(eqs. 5.1 , 5.2 ) can be obtained by variation of @xmath and @xmath ,
setting @xmath in the resulting Euler-Lagrange equations and identifying
the time coordinate with cosmological time @xmath . The Klein-Gordon
equation (eq. 5.8 ) in cosmological time is obtained via variation of
@xmath , with @xmath .

The canonical momenta conjugate to @xmath and @xmath are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using these to rewrite the action in canonical form gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Variation of @xmath implies the Hamiltonian constraint,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is the origin of many of the problems in canonical quantum gravity
(see the discussion in chapter 2 ).

We now begin with the Hamiltonian reduction. Recall that the procedure
consists of first transforming the Hamiltonian constraint from the
variables @xmath , encoding scale and its rate of change, to York time
@xmath and its conjugate momentum @xmath , then solving it for @xmath as
a function of @xmath and the other variables. York time and its momentum
(eq. 4.12 ) take the form,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

in the Friedmann-Lemaître universe. It is easy to verify that indeed
@xmath up to a total derivative (which does not change the equations of
motion). With the change of variables @xmath the Hamiltonian constraint
is now

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is the equation we must now solve for @xmath , which will be
identified with our reduced (physical) Hamiltonian @xmath . It is the
minisuperspace counterpart to the Lichnerowicz equation, written in
terms of the York variables. The equation is seen to be a depressed
cubic in @xmath , which may be solved by standard methods, giving

  -- -- -- --------
           (5.19)
  -- -- -- --------

where we define

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.20)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.21)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

for notational convenience. This solution is not valid for @xmath , that
is, the singular case @xmath . The physical interpretation of the
numerical value of @xmath — as discussed in chapter 3 — is that of a
‘volume’ (although in the flat and open case only volume ratios are
meaningful).

In principle there is no reason not to work with this Hamiltonian,
except that it is algebraically rather unwieldy, as are the derived
Hamilton’s equations. We therefore choose to consider the case of a
spatially flat cosmology ( @xmath ), which simplifies the expression
significantly, ² ² 2 The results of this section were published in [ 106
] . However, there we erroneously wrote @xmath rather than @xmath in the
numerator. This had some consequences for the resulting analysis. The
error was corrected in [ 104 ] . There are implications of this for the
rigorous quantisation of the model. This will be discussed in chapter 9
.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

In fact, the flat case is physically the most relevant as current data
suggests that the universe is, in fact, spatially flat. Recent data
leads to an effective energy-density contribution of curvature given by
@xmath or @xmath depending on the exact choice of data and dark-energy
model [ 37 ] (flatness corresponds to @xmath ). For the remainder of
this section we will focus on the flat case and we will drop the
subscript ‘ @xmath ’ when denoting the Hamiltonian.

Since the Poisson structure of the non-geometric degrees of freedom is
the usual canonical ones, Hamilton’s equations for this Hamiltonian are

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.23)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.24)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The sign ambiguity arises from the fact that both sign choices for
@xmath are formal solutions to the Hamiltonian constraint. The physical
interpretation of the numerical value of @xmath is ‘volume’ (since
@xmath ), from which one can readily infer that @xmath constitutes the
physically relevant choice. Aside from this interpretation,
mathematically speaking the choice is arbitrary. The set of solutions
for @xmath is identical except for a reflection in phase space (swapping
the signs in the corresponding functions @xmath ). Henceforth we assume
the positive solution @xmath , although we emphasise that this is only
relevant for the physical interpretation, not the mathematical
development.

One may be concerned that the radicand @xmath in the denominator of the
Hamiltonian 5.22 (and 5.23 , 5.24 ) may take non-positive values.
Fortunately, this is never the case. The easiest way to see this is to
realise that the positivity of the radicand is equivalent to the
positivity of the kinetic energy. That is, using @xmath it is easy to
show that @xmath if and only if @xmath , which by the first
Friedmann-Lemaître equation ( 5.1 ) is exactly the condition for the
kinetic term @xmath to be positive. That the Friedmann-Lemaître
equations are obeyed follows from the equivalence of the
reduced-Hamiltonian and the standard formalism, which can be derived as
follows.

##### 5.3.2 Explicit equivalence between the reduced and standard
formalism in the case of the homogeneous isotropic universe

We already showed the equivalence of reduced-Hamiltonian and unreduced
dynamics in generality in section 3.1 . Nonetheless it is insightful to
see the equivalence explicitly for the present cosmological scenario.

The Friedmann-Lemaître equations with a scalar field @xmath in a
spatially flat universe ( @xmath ) written in terms of York time @xmath
are

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.25)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.26)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where the inverse York lapse is @xmath . These are eqs. 5.3 and 5.7 with
@xmath and @xmath . To show equivalence we must be able to recover these
equations from the reduced Hamiltonian dynamics, that is, eqs. 5.23 and
5.24 together with the interpretation of the numerical value of the
Hamiltonian as ‘volume’, @xmath , with @xmath given by eq. 5.22 .

Begin by noting that @xmath is to hold at all times, and so @xmath .
Using eq. 5.22 , the right-hand side becomes the sum of three terms, two
of which cancel (since @xmath for a Hamiltonian function @xmath , or
equivalently by using the equations of motion 5.23 and 5.24 ), leaving

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

The second factor on the right-hand side is just the expression for the
negative of the Hamiltonian @xmath , which cancels with the @xmath term
on the left, up to a sign, so that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using this and eq. 5.23 implies after a little algebra

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

which, after division by @xmath and identification of the lapse @xmath
yields eq. 5.25 .

In order to derive eq. 5.26 we return to eq. 5.28 , writing it in the
form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using eq. 5.25 and the expression for @xmath to eliminate the term in
parentheses in favour of @xmath then gives the desired result.

The Klein-Gordon equation ( 5.9 ) is recovered by differentiation of
eqs. 5.28 and 5.23 with respect to @xmath and elimination of the term
involving @xmath . Subsequent use of eq. 5.23 and 5.25 then allows
rearrangement into the form of eq. 5.9 .

Note the ‘holistic’ manner in which the dynamics is equivalent. All
dynamical equations and the interpretation @xmath were necessary
together in order to derive all of the standard Friedmann-Lemaître and
Klein-Gordon equations (although these are not the natural equations
with which to work in practice in the reduced Hamiltonian formalism).

##### 5.3.3 Evolution of the free scalar field

In order to discuss some of the features of cosmological Hamiltonian
dynamics in York time, we begin by discussing the free massless case,
setting @xmath . Dynamics with a general potential is treated in section
5.3.4 below. Mathematically this case is rather trivial. However, it is
our first actual application of the reduced-Hamiltonian formalism in
cosmology and helps to illustrate the role of the various physical
quantities and a number of features of such a reduced theory in
practice.

The equations of motion are

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.31)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.32)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

An interesting feature of these equations is that the evolution of the
field value @xmath depends only on the sign of the momentum, and not its
magnitude. With the momentum a constant, this sign does not change, so
that eq. 5.31 is easily solved. The physically viable range for @xmath
is @xmath for a spatially flat universe, so that @xmath in all cases
(unless we consider the extension discussed in chapter 6 ). Leaving the
sign of @xmath unspecified, we solve

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

to find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is an integration constant that has to be fixed by boundary
data at some reference time @xmath . Throughout the history of the
universe the field changes monotonically from positive to negative
infinity or vice versa (depending on the sign of @xmath ),how to
approach such problems in practice

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.35)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.36)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The physical interpretation of the value of the Hamiltonian is volume.
In order to make this explicit within the reduced-Hamiltonian framework,
we can re-introduce the scale factor @xmath , now defining its third
power as the value of the Hamiltonian @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

That is, we consider the reduced formalism the fundamental theory and
‘kick away the ladder’ used to derived it. The scale factor @xmath has
no natural role in the reduced formalism and is merely introduced as a
way to connect the results to the standard picture. In no way does
@xmath have any dynamical role however. The time evolution of the scale
factor is then easily calculated:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

and therefore (using @xmath again)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

As expected, the universe grows from zero volume at @xmath to infinite
volume as @xmath . Eq. 5.39 is independent of the arbitrariness in the
volume normalisation and in the definition of the scale factor @xmath .

##### 5.3.4 Evolution of a scalar field with a potential

In the presence of a field potential @xmath the full equations 5.23 and
5.24 must be considered. Once again the rate of evolution @xmath of the
field depends only on the sign of the momentum @xmath , not its
magnitude. ³ ³ 3 This is not a general feature however. In the presence
of multiple scalar fields @xmath with corresponding momenta @xmath the
numerator on the right-hand side of the corresponding equation of motion
for @xmath reads @xmath , so that at least the ratios of the momenta
matter, although @xmath is invariant under a uniform rescaling of all
momenta by the same factor. However, the momentum @xmath is not constant
and can change sign, leading to a discontinuity in @xmath . Let us call
such events ‘turning points’ and examine them more closely.

If @xmath or equivalently @xmath is considered to pass through zero at
the turning point (for example, if @xmath is treated as some appropriate
limit of a sequence of continuous functions), one finds that at such
points @xmath (one may infer from the first Friedmann equation 5.25 and
@xmath that @xmath , which also guarantees the non-negativity of the
radicand as discussed above). It appears that the expressions for the
Hamiltonian 5.22 and the rates of change of field and momentum 5.23 and
5.24 become singular.

Since we consider York time to be fundamental, let us frame our
discussion entirely in terms of @xmath without reference to @xmath or
the Friedmann-Lemaître equations. A turning point is defined by a change
in sign of @xmath , that is, by @xmath . Note that unlike @xmath , the
momentum @xmath changes continuously, so its vanishing at the turning
point is established without reference to any kind of limiting
procedure. But then the expression for the Hamiltonian 5.22 implies that
either @xmath (and therefore @xmath , constituting an initial or final
singularity), or (if the turning point is to occur at finite volume)
that @xmath as the turning point is approached, specifically @xmath .
The implication is that @xmath with opposite signs for approach of the
turning point from the future and past.

In order to understand the nature of these turning points, consider the
‘interpretation’ of the Hamiltonian as volume, @xmath . Using expression
5.22 and differentiating with respect to @xmath gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

so if the turning point is to occur at finite volume (and therefore
finite @xmath ), we see that @xmath as we approach the turning point. At
the turning point the fractional rate of expansion (with respect to York
time) diverges, although the total fractional growth remains finite and
there is no discontinuity in @xmath (see fig. 5.1 ). This corresponds to
a de Sitter phase (of infinitesimal duration in terms of cosmological
time), where the fractional rate of expansion is constant and the York
lapse diverges, @xmath . Note that even in a universe with a single
scalar field, where such turning points are relatively generic, they do
no necessarily occur. Their existence depends on the form of the
potential @xmath .

Finding general solutions @xmath is difficult even for comparatively
simple forms of the potential @xmath . However, one can draw some
conclusions about the evolution for certain regimes corresponding to
different cosmological periods. Of course, the present model containing
only a single scalar field does not adequately describe our actual
universe and so its ‘epochs’ do not match what we know about actual
cosmological history.

In the present model it is plausible to differentiate between an ‘early’
and a ’late’ epoch, respectively characterised by @xmath and @xmath and
qualitatively different from one another with regards to which one of
the two terms @xmath and @xmath dominates. Sufficiently early the term
in @xmath dominates and the field behaves like the free field discussed
in section 5.3.3 unless @xmath behaves such that @xmath grows at least
as fast as @xmath as one goes backwards in time. In the free theory the
evolution of the field is characterised by @xmath , so that if @xmath is
satisfied at some point in time and @xmath is bounded by some polynomial
in @xmath , then it is also satisfied at all earlier times. Indeed if
@xmath being at most polynomial is a sufficient condition for such a
sufficiently early time to exist. If the model were considered as
offering a partial description of our universe — for example, if @xmath
is considered as the field driving inflation — then one might wonder how
viable candidates for the inflaton potential fare. For an overview over
such contenders based on recent observation, see ref. [ 81 ] .

The end of this early epoch is reached when @xmath , where @xmath is
chosen to suit one’s desired level of accuracy ( @xmath would correspond
to the end of the universe, @xmath as the end of the early period). For
concreteness, consider a simple viable potential, such as a simple mass
term, instantiating so-called large-field inflation for parameter @xmath
(section A.3 in [ 81 ] ), that is,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a constant corresponding to a mass scale (related to the
chosen CMB normalisation if the proposal of @xmath as the inflaton field
in our universe is taken seriously). For a first (and rather rough)
approximation, let us assume that the free theory remains valid until
equality is reached. Then the boundary @xmath between epochs is given by
the equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

whose solution is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Lambert Product-Log function.

For any potential that is strictly non-negative, as is the case in the
chosen example, the free evolution forms a lower bound for the
(magnitude of) the scalar-field velocity @xmath as well as the
fractional rate of change of the scale factor. That is, the existence of
a positive potential accelerates the rate of change of @xmath as well as
the expansion of the universe in comparison to the free theory. This
applies to all epochs.

In the late epoch @xmath becomes comparable to @xmath in magnitude (by
definition of the onset of the late epoch). This implies that the
denominator in eq. 5.22 becomes small faster. Thus the interpretation
@xmath implies that the existence of a potential causes an increase in
expansion when compared to the free theory.

#### 5.4 Inflation

Before concluding our treatment of the homogeneous isotropic universe in
the York-time reduced-Hamiltonian formalism we return briefly to the
classical theory and consider a particular cosmological process that
plausibly characterised part of the early history of our actual
universe: inflation.

The theory of inflation poses an immediate puzzle for a description in
terms of York time. Inflation is characterised by a de Sitter phase,
that is, a phase during which the rate of spatial expansion (with
respect to proper time) is exponential. The Hubble parameter is constant
and therefore so is the York parameter as the two are proportional.
During this ‘era’ the universe appears to expand by a finite amount
while no time passes. The York-time description appears singular.

The puzzle is resolved if we recall that in a realistic inflationary
phase the Hubble parameter is constant only to a first approximation and
is, in fact, decreasing, albeit only by a small amount. The implication
is that an inflationary period corresponds to a very short time interval
and furthermore that the York-time description must use a higher order
of approximation than is conventionally used in the standard picture.

Conventional slow-roll inflation assumes that during this period the
matter content of the universe is dominated by a scalar field, whose
contribution to the energy density @xmath is in turn dominated by the
field’s potential function @xmath . (Recall that @xmath denotes the
derivative of @xmath with respect to conventional cosmological time
@xmath , or, more or less equivalently, proper time.) Specifically, one
assumes the ‘slow-roll conditions’

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

while the dynamics is determined by the Friedmann and Klein-Gordon
equations. Provided the slow-roll conditions hold, in terms of York time
@xmath the Friedmann equation 5.1 becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

which suggests that the numerical value of the potential effectively
provides a measure of York time. Approximating the potential to be
roughly constant is therefore not a viable description.

Instead one proceeds to calculate the next-order, time-dependent
correction to @xmath , and hence @xmath . At ‘zeroth’ order one ignores
the contribution of the kinetic term to @xmath , so that equation 5.1
becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

which can be substituted into the Klein-Gordon equation 5.8 . Applying
the second slow-roll condition, the second-derivative term @xmath can be
neglected, so one is left, in general, with a non-linear first order
differential equation, which can be solved in many relevant cases to
yield a first time-dependent approximation @xmath for the scalar field.
For example, for @xmath with @xmath the solution is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath being an integration constant that must obey certain
conditions that follow from the slow-roll conditions, namely that the
constant contribution to the potential @xmath is large compared to the
time-dependent one (we will show this explicitly below for a particular
example). This solution @xmath can then be substituted back into the
Friedmann equation 5.1 to give the next approximation @xmath to the
Hubble parameter and therefore to the York parameter. ⁴ ⁴ 4 One could
repeat the procedure iteratively but in general this is not necessary
for an approximate description of the homogeneous cosmological
background and would in any case not yield higher degrees of accuracy
due to our neglect of the contribution of other matter. The function
@xmath obtained can now be inverted to find @xmath in terms of @xmath
and give a ‘York-time only’ account of the evolution during inflation.

To illustrate this, consider a particular example of an inflationary
potential, namely the case of so-called large-field inflation already
considered above, @xmath . This simple choice helps to illustrate the
method of obtaining a York-time description since unlike many other
cases it leads to straightforward algebra (although it is not a choice
of potential favoured by current observation [ 97 ] ). One finds,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the value of @xmath at @xmath , which must be chosen
such that the approximation is valid at this time. We will justify the
condition on the sign, which arises due to the appearance of ‘ @xmath ’
in the Klein-Gordon equation, shortly. The first slow-roll condition
then says

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

which must be satisfied throughout inflation, in particular at @xmath ,
that is,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

The constant contribution @xmath dominates the scalar field until @xmath
, by which point the approximation has ceased to be valid, presumably
corresponding to a time well after the end of inflation. While the
approximation remains valid the sign of @xmath is just the sign of
@xmath , hence the sign dependence in equation 5.48 .

In this example the correction to @xmath due to the kinetic energy
contribution is constant,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

while time dependence arises via the potential term,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is consistent with the approximation since the time-independent
contribution dominates by virtue of equation 5.49 . Substituting these
back into the Friedmann equation gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the initial, constant zeroth-order approximation to the Hubble
parameter as given by equation 5.46 . From this one obtains the
expression for York time as a function of cosmological time,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

This expression may be straightforwardly inverted in order to express
@xmath as a function of @xmath rather than @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

The primary characteristic of inflation is the rapid (approximately
exponential) growth of the background scale factor @xmath . In the
York-time reduced-Hamiltonian formalism @xmath ceases to be a dynamical
variable however since the ‘volume’ @xmath is the momentum conjugate to
the time parameter (up to a sign). As we discussed in section 5.3 , the
volume (up to some suitable normalisation) is therefore given by the
numerical value of the reduced York-time Hamiltonian, which for a
spatially flat cosmology is given by eq. 5.22 . The York-time derivative
@xmath of the scale factor obtained was given by eq. 5.40 , which read

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      ( 5.40 )
  -- -------- -- ----------

Recall that the expression in the denominator is proportional to the
total kinetic energy as is apparent from the Friedmann equation ( 5.1 ).
In the example above it is constant and so one can easily calculate the
number of e-folds that correspond to some inflationary interval @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

has been defined for convenience. For other choices of potential the
solution @xmath is in general not a linear function of @xmath and so the
kinetic energy is not constant. However, even then one can take the
solution 5.47 and expand it, dropping terms of second and higher order
in @xmath since these are small compared to the constant and linear
terms by the first slow-roll condition. As a result the non-constant
contribution to the kinetic energy is negligible even compared to the
already small constant contribution. Equation 5.57 holds, therefore,
more generally.

Equation 5.40 is then trivially solved, giving

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the integration constant @xmath hypothetically denotes a
normalisation scale corresponding to the value of @xmath in the infinite
@xmath -future ( @xmath ), although such an interpretation is not
appropriate since the inflationary description only holds for a limited
duration.

A numerical estmate for the parameter @xmath can be derived. For the
example considered above with the inflaton potential @xmath , the
empirical estimate for the value of the Hubble parameter during
inflation, @xmath from ref. [ 96 ] (see section 4.4 ), can be used to
find an inequality (using equation 5.50 ) for the kinetic-energy
correction 5.51 ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

from which in turn one can derive an inequality for the constant @xmath
,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

The expression 5.59 (with the definition 5.58 ) shows how the growth of
the scale factor during inflation is characterised by the potential. We
have also solved (approximately) for the behaviour of the scalar field
during that period. In chapter 7 we will use inflation as the background
cosmology on which to study perturbations, in particular, the ‘freezing
out’ of tensor modes.

### Chapter 6 A cosmological extension

In this chapter we argue that York time as a physically fundamental
notion of time suggests a natural extension of the cosmological
timeline. We explain how the existence of this extension may have
implications for the possible matter content of the universe, such as
viable inflaton potentials. The contents of this chapter were published
in ref. [ 104 ] .

#### 6.1 An end to time?

Throughout this thesis we are concerned with developing an understanding
of the universe, in particular, of cosmology, in terms of a description
based on York time as a physical time, and with associated formal
developments. In a spatially flat universe — and we have observational
reasons to believe that we live in such a universe — cosmological
history apparently ends at some finite time @xmath , either equal to
zero or even earlier at some small negative number (in the presence of a
positive cosmological constant @xmath or an effective cosmological
constant taking the form of a positive @xmath limit of the matter field
potential @xmath ). This point corresponds to cosmological time @xmath
in the standard description, where the Hubble parameter approaches zero
or a constant proportional to @xmath .

Our hypothesis is that York time is physically fundamental. A valid
question is therefore: Why should time end at @xmath ? We leave it to
philosophical discourse to determine whether or not it is possible or
even meaningful for time to ‘end’ at some instant — that is, if instants
of universal history and the York timeline form a bijection — and what
the metaphysical implications are. Either way, there is no a priori
reason to assume that time indeed ends at some particular instant @xmath
, equal to zero or otherwise. Undoubtedly the point has certain
dynamical significance and given that time is physical it is not
obviously absurd that the end of time should have a dynamical origin. In
fact, this is in part what we will explore in this chapter. However,
this is a matter of fact that can only be determined a posteriori ,
following analysis and comparison to the observed universe.

In this chapter we explore the consequences of extending the York
timeline beyond @xmath , that is, beyond @xmath . The usual description
in terms of cosmological time @xmath fails to describe this era. In the
@xmath -description the transition corresponds to a coordinate
singularity. The idea is analogous to a Schwarzschild black hole, where
a new region of space-time is revealed by the use of Kruskal-Szekeres
coordinates, extending to the ‘other side’ of the singularity (where the
Kruskal-Szekeres variable usually denoted by ‘ @xmath ’ takes negative
values), a region not described by either Schwarzschild or
Eddington-Finkelstein coordinates [ 86 , Ch. 31] . ¹ ¹ 1 Arguably there
is another, simpler example: the extension of dynamics beyond a black
hole’s event horizon in the first place. The idea that spacetime
extended beyond the horizon of a Schwarzschild black hole into the
region @xmath took several decades to become apparent [ 38 , 74 , 127 ]
. However, a crucial difference here is that this extension concerns the
removal of a mere coordinate singularity. No physical quantities become
infinite (and geodesics crossing the surface @xmath are traversed in
finite proper time). In the York-time extension, as we shall see,
physical quantities may become infinite depending on the particulars of
the matter content.

Our reasons for pursuing this line of inquiry are not, however, purely
philosophical. In fact, there are concrete reasons (described in section
6.2 ) why such a cosmological extension is necessary for a consistent
quantisation. However, unfortunately there is (as far as I can see) no
viable way to explore the dynamics or even the existence of this ‘other
side’ of cosmological history in any direct empirical way.

The basic hypothesis here is that the dynamical equations in York time
found via the Hamiltonian reduction remain valid beyond @xmath . We
restrict our analysis to the homogeneous isotropic
(‘Friedmann-Lemaître’) universe explored in chapter 5 . In chapter 7 we
will explore perturbations and it would undoubtedly be interesting to
consider their evolution as the universe transitions to the ‘other
side’. However, this is left to future work.

At least two questions require answering. First, how do the dynamical
entities — in our case the scalar field — evolve during the transition?
Second, what evolution can we expect on the other side? The second
question is easier to answer and we will do so in section 6.3 . The
first is more difficult and will be explored in section 6.4 .

#### 6.2 The necessity of a cosmological extension

Why should one take the extension seriously? There may be some purely
philosophical arguments: that time should not end at some finite value,
or that the mere mathematical possibility of the extension should at
least prompt us to allow for the possibility of its physicality.
However, there is a considerably more compelling, physical reason to
consider it more than mere fiction.

The model employed in this chapter and chapter 5 above is that of a
homogeneous isotropic universe. This is, of course, an approximation.
Let us consider the existence of inhomogeneities in this universe, in
particular local singularities such as a Schwarzschild black hole formed