##### Proposition 2.1.15.

Let @xmath be an abstract shadow and @xmath and @xmath two compact
4-manifolds such that @xmath is a shadow of both @xmath and @xmath , and
the abstract gleams coincide with the ones induced by the embeddings of
@xmath in @xmath and @xmath . Then @xmath and @xmath are diffeomorphic.

###### Proof.

Since one such 4-manifold @xmath collapses onto @xmath we have that
@xmath is diffeomorphic to the regular neighborhood of @xmath in @xmath
. The regular neighborhood of the 1-skeleton of @xmath in @xmath
collapses onto a graph, hence it is an orientable 4-dimensional
handlebody (a manifold with a handle-decomposition with just 0- and
1-handles). The regular neighborhood of a region @xmath of @xmath in
@xmath is a @xmath -bundle with Eluer number the gleam of @xmath .
Therefore by the classification of @xmath -bundles the diffeomorphism
class of the regular neighborhoods of the various pieces of @xmath is
fixed. Moreover there is only one possible way to glue together all
these 4-dimensional pieces. Therefore if one such 4-manifold @xmath
exists it is unique. ∎

###### Theorem 2.1.16 (Reconstruction theorem).

From a (abstract) shadow @xmath we can construct a compact oriented
4-manifold @xmath such that @xmath is a shadow of @xmath and the gleams
of @xmath , as abstract objects, coincide with the ones given by the
embedding in @xmath .

###### Proof.

We just show how to get @xmath from a connected shadow @xmath with
orientable regions. We consider the framing of @xmath as a part of
@xmath so that each point has a neighborhood homeomorphic to Fig. 2.1
-(1), Fig. 2.1 -(2) or Fig. 2.1 -(3), but we do not add further points
to @xmath . If @xmath is a surface (closed or not) we take as @xmath the
oriented @xmath -bundle over @xmath with the gleam of the region as
Euler number.

Suppose that @xmath is not just a surface. There is a natural
3-dimensional thickening of the regular neighborhood in @xmath of
vertices and edges of @xmath (they can be both internal or external, it
does not matter). Following the combinatorics of @xmath we find a
natural gluing of these 3-dimensional thickenings. Thus we get a
possibly non orientable handlebody of dimension 3, @xmath , that
collapses onto the 1-skeleton of @xmath . On the boundary of @xmath
there is a a set of disjoint simple closed curves @xmath that is the
boundary of the regular neighborhood of the 1-skeleton of @xmath in
@xmath . As a 4-dimensional thickening of the 1-skeleton of @xmath we
take the orientable @xmath -bundle @xmath over @xmath (it is unique) and
we give it an arbitrary orientation. Hence @xmath is an oriented
handlebody of dimension 4 that collapses onto the 1-skeleton of @xmath .

In the boundary of @xmath there is the link @xmath and it has a natural
(maybe not orientable) framing @xmath that is the one given by the
inclusion @xmath . The components of @xmath are in bijection with the
set of all the boundary components of the regions of @xmath . Let @xmath
be a region of @xmath . The framing @xmath on the components of @xmath
that correspond to the boundary components of @xmath , coincides with
the interval bundle given by @xmath that we used to define gleams.

If @xmath on the component @xmath is an annulus (is orientable), @xmath
determines, up to isotopies, a parametrized solid torus @xmath that is a
regular neighborhood of the corresponding component of @xmath . If
@xmath is a Möbius strip (is non orientable) on the component @xmath we
add a positive half-twist following the induced orientation of the
boundary of @xmath . In this way we get an orientable @xmath -bundle
over all the boundary components of @xmath . Hence if we do it for each
region we get an orientable framing @xmath of @xmath .

Let @xmath be the number of components of the boundary of @xmath that
had a non orientable @xmath -bundle. We define @xmath , it is an integer
number. We fix a decomposition @xmath , where @xmath runs over all the
boundary components of @xmath and @xmath . For each @xmath we modify the
framing given by the @xmath -bundle on it, and hence also the
parametrization of the solid torus, by adding @xmath positive twists. If
we do it for each region we get an orientable framing @xmath of @xmath .

We attach @xmath to @xmath identifying each component of @xmath , @xmath
, with the corresponding solid torus @xmath following the chosen
parametrization, namely via the map (up to isotopies) that sends the
curve @xmath to the the @xmath -bundle of @xmath in @xmath . We repeat
this procedure for each region @xmath . The construction does not depend
on the choice of the decompositions @xmath . ∎

###### Lemma 2.1.17.

@xmath

1.   Let @xmath be a spine (Definition 2.1.3 ) of a compact, with non
    empty boundary, orientable 3-manifold @xmath . Then the shadow
    obtained by giving to each region of @xmath gleam @xmath is a shadow
    of @xmath and hence it is a shadow of the double of @xmath .

2.   If @xmath is a spine of a closed orientable 3-manifold @xmath ,
    then giving gleam @xmath to all regions of @xmath we get a shadow of
    the connected sum @xmath , where @xmath is @xmath with the opposite
    orientation.

3.   A shadow @xmath without boundary and with all gleams @xmath is a
    shadow of a manifold @xmath where @xmath is a compact orientable
    3-manifold with boundary @xmath such that @xmath is a spine of
    @xmath .

###### Proof.

@xmath The manifold @xmath collapses onto @xmath . In order to compute
the inherited gleams on a region @xmath of @xmath we have to take a
perturbation @xmath of @xmath whose boundary lies in the interval
bundles over @xmath given by @xmath . Since @xmath is a spine of an
oriented 3-manifold each connected component of the interval bundle is
orientable. We can easily find one such @xmath lying in @xmath that does
not intersect @xmath .

@xmath Since @xmath is closed by @xmath the shadow @xmath is a shadow of
@xmath , where @xmath is the interior of an embedded compact 3-disk
@xmath . We have @xmath , where @xmath is the boundary of @xmath , hence
@xmath .

@xmath There is a natural 3-dimensional thickening of the regular
neighborhood of vertices, edges and regions of @xmath . Since the gleam
of each region is an integer, we can naturally glue together these
3-dimensional pieces forming a compact orientable 3-manifold with
boundary @xmath such that @xmath is a spine of @xmath . Then the
4-manifold @xmath collapses onto @xmath and computing the gleams as in
@xmath we find the right numbers. ∎

In Fig. 2.2 is shown the Bing’s house with two rooms . This is a spine
of the 3-ball, hence by Lemma 2.1.17 if we give to each region gleam
@xmath we get a shadow of the 4-ball. It is composed of @xmath disk
regions, @xmath edges and @xmath vertices.

Let @xmath be an orientable compact 3-manifold with non empty boundary,
@xmath a spine of @xmath and @xmath a framed knotted trivalent graph in
@xmath . Orient the regions of @xmath and take a generic projection
@xmath of @xmath in @xmath given by the retraction of @xmath onto @xmath
with the further information of the over/under passes on the 4-valent
vertices (since both @xmath and the regions of @xmath are oriennted, we
can define an oriented @xmath -bundle over the region, hence get the
over/under passes information). The projection @xmath is a graph whose
vertices are 4-valent or trivalent and they lie in regions of @xmath .
For each component @xmath of @xmath attach @xmath to @xmath along @xmath
following a parametrization of the projection of that component @xmath .
We get a simple polyhedron with non empty boundary @xmath that has a
framing on the boundary @xmath . Starting from @xmath modify the gleams
of the regions in @xmath following the local rules in Fig. 2.3 .

###### Lemma 2.1.18.

The shadow constructed above is a shadow of the graph @xmath in the
double of @xmath . If @xmath is a link and we use disks instead of
annuli ( @xmath ) we get a shadow of the Dehn surgery along @xmath as a
framed link in the double of @xmath . If we look at dimension 4 we get a
shadow of @xmath in the first case, while in the second case we get a
shadow of @xmath with a 2-handle attached for each component of @xmath ,
where the 2-handles are attached following the framing.

###### Proof.

See [ Tu , Section IX.3] . ∎

###### Theorem 2.1.19.

An oriented compact 4-manifold admits a shadow (with or without
boundary) if and only if it admits a handle-decomposition with just 0-,
1- and 2-handles.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be a shadow of a compact 4-manifold @xmath . Fix a
triangulation @xmath of the closure in @xmath of each region @xmath of
@xmath (closure as sub-spaces, not @xmath ). Since @xmath collapses onto
@xmath , @xmath is diffeomorphic to the regular neighborhood of @xmath
in @xmath . Hence @xmath defines a handle-decomposition of @xmath where
there is a 0-handle surrounding each vertex of @xmath or of the
triangulation of a region, a 1-hangle surrounding each edge of the
triangulations, and a 2-handle surronding each triangle of the
triangulations.

Let @xmath be a handle-decomposition of a compact 4-manifold @xmath with
just 0-, 1- and 2-handles. We can suppose that every 1-handle is
attached to two or one 0-handles. The union of the 0- and 1-handles is a
4-dimensional oriented handlebody @xmath . We have @xmath , where @xmath
is a 3-dimensional oriented handlebody decomposed in 0- and 1-handles
corresponding to the ones of @xmath . Insert a Bing’s hose with two
rooms (Fig. 2.2 ) inside each 0-handle of @xmath . Let @xmath be a
1-handle of @xmath attached to the 0-handles @xmath and @xmath (maybe
@xmath ). Identify two closed disks embedded in the regions of the
Bing’s houses, one in the Bing’s house in @xmath and one in the one in
@xmath . If @xmath the disks are in the same Bing’s house and are
disjoint. Repeating this procedure for all 1-handles we get a spine of
@xmath , hence by Lemma 2.1.17 -(1.) we get a shadow of @xmath . The
attaching curves of the 2-handles lie in the boundary of @xmath . We
apply Lemma 2.1.18 to end. Note that this is a shadow without boundary.
∎

###### Lemma 2.1.20.

Every closed oriented 3-manifold has a shadow that is homotopically
equivalent to a bouquet of 2-spheres (in particular it is simply
connected) and has just disk regions.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be a surgery presentation of @xmath in @xmath (Definition
1.6.8 and Theorem 1.6.11 ). Put a Bing’s house (Fig. 2.2 ) inside the
4-disk @xmath ( @xmath ), then we apply Lemma 2.1.18 . The shadow is
homotopically equivalent to the 4-manifold that is homotopically
equivalent to a bouquet of @xmath spheres, where @xmath is the number of
components of @xmath . ∎

###### Proposition 2.1.21.

Every knotted trivalent graph @xmath in a closed 3-manifold @xmath has a
shadow that is homotopically equivalent to a bouquet of 2-spheres.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be the shadow of @xmath constructed in Lemma 2.1.20 and
@xmath the 4-dimensional thickening of @xmath ( @xmath ). To get the
simple polyhedron @xmath we proceed in the same way as Lemma 2.1.18 ,
then we compute the gleams using the embedding of @xmath in @xmath . ∎

In [ CoTh , Theorem 3.14] and [ CaMa , Proposition 2.2] there is a more
constructive proof of Proposition 2.1.21 for the case of graphs in the
connected sum @xmath of @xmath copies of @xmath . Following that method
we find a shadow homotopically equivalent to a bouquet of circles:

###### Proposition 2.1.22 ([CaMa]).

Every knotted trivalent framed graph in @xmath has a shadow that is
homotopically equivalent to a graph of genus @xmath .

###### Proof.

The connected sum of @xmath copies of @xmath is the boundary of the
orientable 4-dimensional handlebody of genus @xmath , @xmath . Pick a
diagram @xmath of @xmath in the disk with @xmath holes @xmath (see
Subsection 1.5.1 ). We suppose that there is a smallest closed disk with
@xmath holes @xmath that contains the diagram @xmath . This is
equivalent to ask that the diagram is connected, not contained in a disk
with @xmath holes, and no vertex of the diagram disconnects it: these
conditions can be easily achieved using Reidemeister moves. We push the
punctured disk @xmath entirely inside @xmath , obviously @xmath
collapses onto @xmath . We enlarge @xmath by adding an immersed cylinder
@xmath for each connected component @xmath of @xmath , such that the
part @xmath is properly embedded in @xmath , @xmath , and the part
@xmath is attached following a parametrization @xmath of the projection
of @xmath in @xmath . We do it for every component @xmath and we get a
simple polyhedron @xmath that is properly embedded in @xmath , @xmath ,
and @xmath collapses onto @xmath . To get the gleams we proceed as in
Lemma 2.1.18 . ∎

In Proposition 2.2.3 we improve Theorem 2.1.19 , Lemma 2.1.20 ,
Proposition 2.1.21 and Proposition 2.1.22 by showing that we can obtain
a standard shadow in all cases.

By Theorem 2.1.19 it seems that only a small class of 4-manifolds can be
studied by shadows. The following results say that shadows can be used
to study all the closed 4-manifolds.

We remind that the connected sum @xmath of @xmath copies of @xmath is
the boundary of the 4-dimensional orientable handlebody of genus @xmath
, @xmath .

###### Theorem 2.1.23 (Laudenbach-Poenaru).

Every diffeomorphism of the connected sum @xmath in itself extends to a
diffeomorphism of @xmath in itself.

###### Proof.

See [ LP ] . ∎

###### Corollary 2.1.24.

Let @xmath be a compact 4-manifold with a handle-decomposition with just
0-,1- and 2-handle. Then up to diffeomorphisms there is at most one
closed 4-manifold @xmath that is obtained adding 3- and 4-handles to
@xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath and @xmath be two closed 4-manifolds obtained adding 3- and
4-handles to @xmath . The union of the 3- and 4-handles of @xmath and
@xmath is an orientable handlebody @xmath . Therefore @xmath and @xmath
, where @xmath are two diffeomorphisms of @xmath in itself. By Theorem
2.1.23 @xmath is the restriction to the boundary of a diffeomorphism
@xmath . We can define a diffeomorphism between @xmath and @xmath as
follows:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

∎

### 2.2 Moves

Usually in a representation theory there are moves relating the
representing objects. For instance we can think about Reidemeister moves
for link diagrams in the disk or sliding and birth/death of handles for
handle-decompositions of manifolds. We have moves for shadows too, and
we introduce them in this section describing their behavior.

###### Definition 2.2.1.

There are three particular local moves on shadows called @xmath or lune
(Fig. 2.4 -(2)), @xmath (Fig. 2.4 -(1)) and @xmath (Fig. 2.4 -(4)). They
modify a shadow just in a little contractible portion and leave the rest
unchanged. They consist of a sliding of a region. In Fig. 2.4 just the
attaching curve of the sliding region is pictured in red. The moves
@xmath and @xmath create a new region and the gleam of this region is
specified in the figure. The gleams of the other regions change as
specified in figure. We look just at a part of the whole shadow and more
than one of the pictured parts of region may belong to the same global
region; if it is so, the gleam of such region is the sum of the local
gleams. Differently from @xmath and @xmath we can not completely draw
@xmath in @xmath . The move in Fig. 2.4 -(3) is interesting and useful
and can be obtained as a composition of the other moves in figure and
their inverses.

These moves together with their inverses are called shadow moves .
Shadows related by shadow moves are said to be equivalent .

It is easy to get the following:

###### Proposition 2.2.2.

Two equivalent shadows give the same 4-manifold.

We remind that a shadow is standard if all the regions that are not
adjacent to boundary edges are disks and the boundary edges are adjacent
either to annuli or to disks (Definition 2.1.6 ).

###### Proposition 2.2.3.

Every shadow without closed regions is equivalent to a standard shadow.

###### Proof.

We apply the @xmath move to the boundary of a region @xmath of genus
bigger than @xmath . This creates new disk regions and reduces the genus
of @xmath . We repeat this procedure for each region of genus bigger
than @xmath . ∎

By Proposition 2.2.3 we can improve Theorem 2.1.19 , Lemma 2.1.20 ,
Proposition 2.1.21 and Proposition 2.1.22 saying that those shadows are
standard too.

Let @xmath and @xmath be two shadows. Identify two embedded closed disks
@xmath and @xmath respectively lying in the interior of two regions
@xmath and @xmath . Give to the identification of @xmath and @xmath
gleam @xmath . Give to the complement of the disk in @xmath and @xmath
respectively gleam @xmath and @xmath . Assign to the other regions the
gleam that they have in @xmath and @xmath as separated shadows. Let
@xmath be the resulting shadow.

###### Proposition 2.2.4.

@xmath is a shadow of an oriented 4-manifold @xmath containing @xmath
and @xmath with intersection number @xmath . Namely @xmath intersect
transversely in a finite number of points ( @xmath ) and counting them
with sign we get @xmath .

###### Proof.

We can suppose that in the construction of the 4-dimensional thickenings
@xmath and @xmath of @xmath and @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are thickened
to a @xmath -bundle @xmath and @xmath with Euler number @xmath while
@xmath and @xmath are thickened to @xmath -bundle with Euler number
@xmath and @xmath . The identification of @xmath and @xmath extends to
an orientation reversing diffeomorfism @xmath . We get @xmath by taking
the disjoint union of @xmath and @xmath and identifying @xmath with
@xmath via @xmath . ∎

###### Remark 2.2.5.

Note that we can transport a region with gleam @xmath whose closure in
@xmath is an embedded disk through each region just by the @xmath moves
and their inverses. Hence we can perform the construction of Theorem
2.2.4 on each pair of regions @xmath and @xmath without changing the
equivalence class of @xmath , and hence without changing the resulting
4-manifold, provided that the gleam of the attaching disk is @xmath .

###### Definition 2.2.6.

Given two shadows @xmath and @xmath we denote by @xmath the shadow
@xmath constructed in Theorem 2.2.4 giving to the attaching disk gleam
@xmath and we call it the connected sum of @xmath and @xmath . By Remark
2.2.5 it is well defined up to @xmath moves and their inverses.

###### Corollary 2.2.7.

Let @xmath and @xmath be two shadows with 4-dimensional thickening
respectively @xmath and @xmath . Then @xmath is a shadow of the boundary
connected sum of @xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Note that the boundary connected sum of @xmath and @xmath contains
@xmath and @xmath in a way that they do not intersect. The boundary
connected sum is equal to attach a 1-handle connecting the components
@xmath and @xmath . We can suppose that the attaching 3-balls of the
1-handle lie in the intersection with the boundary of the 4-dimensional
thickening of @xmath and @xmath . The boundary connected sum of @xmath
and @xmath collapses onto the simple polyhedron obtained gluing @xmath
and @xmath , where the connecting 1-handle collapses onto the boundary
of such disk. The natural inclusions of @xmath and @xmath into that
simple polyhedron are exactly the embeddings of @xmath and @xmath in the
4-manifold. With a little perturbation we can see that @xmath and @xmath
are disjoint. Since the 4-manifold differs from the disjoint union of
@xmath and @xmath only for that 1-handle we have that the induced gleams
on the regions different from @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are
unchanged. ∎

###### Definition 2.2.8.

Two more important moves on shadows are the @xmath - bubble and the
@xmath - bubble moves, see Fig. 2.5 . Two shadows related by a sequence
of shadow moves, @xmath -bubble moves and their inverses are said to be
stably equivalent . The result of such moves to a shadow @xmath is
respectively @xmath and @xmath where @xmath is the 2-sphere @xmath
equipped with gleam @xmath .

We note that @xmath is a shadow of @xmath , while if we equip the sphere
with gleam @xmath we get @xmath minus an open 4-ball, @xmath has the
standard orientation in the case of @xmath , and the opposite one in the
case of @xmath . Therefore by Corollary 2.2.7 we have that applying a
@xmath -bubble move the 4-manifold changes by the boundary connected sum
with @xmath , hence its boundary changes by the connected sum with
@xmath . On the other hand if we apply a @xmath -bubble move we get the
boundary connected sum with a punctured @xmath with the proper
orientation that is equivalent to the connected sum with @xmath (or
@xmath ), hence its boundary does not change.

###### Theorem 2.2.9.

Let @xmath and @xmath be two shadows without closed regions of the same
compact oriented 4-manifold @xmath and with the same boundary @xmath .
Then @xmath and @xmath are stably equivalent.

###### Proof.

See [ Tu , Theorem IX.1.7, Section IX.7, Theorem IX.8.1.2] . ∎

###### Question 2.2.10.

Is it true that two shadows of the same compact oriented 4-manifold are
equivalent?

Experts think that the answer to Question 2.2.10 is no. In fact this
problem is related to the Andrews-Curtis conjecture that is probably
false.

The application of the @xmath -bubble move increases by @xmath the rank
of the second homology group of the 4-manifold @xmath . Therefore the
number of @xmath -bubble moves in a sequence relating two stably
equivalent shadows representing the same 4-manifold must be equal to the
number of their inverses in that sequence.

###### Conjecture 2.2.11.

Two shadows related by shadow moves, @xmath -bubble moves and their
inverses represent the same compact oriented 4-manifold if and only if
the number of @xmath -bubble moves in the sequence is equal to the one
of their inverses.

Costantino proved Conjecture 2.2.11 in the simply connected case:

###### Theorem 2.2.12 (Costantino).

Let @xmath and @xmath be two shadows related by a sequence of shadow
moves, @xmath -bubble moves and their inverses such that the number of
@xmath -bubble moves is equal to the number of their inverses. If @xmath
is simply connected (and hence also @xmath ) and @xmath then @xmath .

###### Proof.

See [ CoPhD , Theorem 1.9.1] . ∎

There is one more complicated move on shadows called trading move or
surgery along a curve in the shadow. This represents surgery along a
closed curve in the interior of the 4-manifold.

###### Theorem 2.2.13.

Let @xmath and @xmath be two shadows of the same pair @xmath , where
@xmath is an oriented closed 3-manifold and @xmath is a knotted framed
trivalent graph in @xmath . Then @xmath and @xmath are related by shadow
moves, @xmath -bubble moves, trading moves and their inverses.

###### Proof.

See [ Tu , Lemma IX.7.8] . ∎

The following result shows that for simply connected shadows the trading
move is useless.

###### Theorem 2.2.14 (Costantino-Thurston).

Let @xmath and @xmath be two simply connected shadows of the same pair
@xmath , where @xmath is an oriented closed 3-manifold and @xmath a
knotted framed trivalent graph in @xmath . Then @xmath and @xmath are
related by shadow moves, @xmath -bubble moves and their inverses.

###### Proof.

See [ CoTh:p ] or [ CoPhD , Theorem 2.2.7] . ∎

Theorem 2.2.14 could seem quite restrictive but by Lemma 2.1.20 it is
not so if we are interested just on colosed 3-manifolds.

### 2.3 Bilinear form and signature

Here we show how to get the signature and the intersection form of an
oriented 4-manifold from a shadow.

Let @xmath be a shadow without boundary and with all regions orientable.
Let @xmath be a region of @xmath and let @xmath . We denote by @xmath
the image of @xmath under the map @xmath induced by the quotient
identifying the complement of @xmath to a point. The group @xmath is
identified with @xmath once an orientation to @xmath is given. The map
@xmath is the bilinear form so defined:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the sum runs over all the regions of @xmath . This does not depend
on the choice of an orientation of the regions. We call @xmath the
bilinear form of @xmath . We denote by @xmath the signature of @xmath .
We call it the signature of @xmath .

###### Theorem 2.3.1.

Let @xmath be a shadow of the oriented 4-manifold @xmath , and let
@xmath be the isomorphism induced by the inclusion. Then for any @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the product on the left-hand side is the intersection product in
@xmath . Hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

See [ Tu , Section IX.5.1] . ∎

###### Example 2.3.2.

Let @xmath be the closed orientable surface of genus @xmath . Let @xmath
be the boundary of the oriented @xmath -bundle @xmath over @xmath with
Euler number @xmath . If @xmath is the 2-sphere @xmath , @xmath is the
lens space @xmath . The surface @xmath equipped with gleam @xmath is a
shadow of @xmath .

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By Theorem 2.3.1

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now we repeat all for the case with boundary.

Let @xmath be a shadow (maybe with boundary) with only orientable
regions. For any @xmath , @xmath is the image of @xmath under the map
@xmath given by the homomorphism @xmath . To define it we need to fix an
orientation of @xmath . The map @xmath is the bilinear form so defined:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath runs over all the regions and we do not need to fix an
orientation of @xmath . The group @xmath is contained in @xmath and we
call @xmath the restriction of @xmath to @xmath . This is the bilinear
form of @xmath . The signature of @xmath , @xmath , is defined as the
signature of @xmath . Theorem 2.3.1 works also for this case with
boundary (always with @xmath ).

### 2.4 Shadow formula for the Kauffman bracket

In this section we show how to compute the Kauffman bracket of graphs in
the connected sum @xmath of @xmath copies of @xmath (see Definition
1.3.10 and Section 1.5 ) via shadows collapsing onto a graph (maybe a
point). Hence we work in skein theory with coefficients in the field
@xmath of rational functions with rational coefficients.

#### 2.4.1 Statement

###### Definition 2.4.1.

Let @xmath and @xmath be respectively a region and an edge of a shadow
@xmath ( @xmath may be external). The Euler characteristic , @xmath and
@xmath , of @xmath and @xmath is the Euler characteristic of the closure
of @xmath and @xmath in @xmath as sub-spaces. We must not confuse them
with the Euler characteristic of @xmath and @xmath as topological
spaces. We have @xmath either if @xmath is a circle or if @xmath is
adjacent twice to the same vertex, otherwise @xmath . For a vertex
@xmath we can define @xmath ( @xmath may be external).

Let @xmath be a shadow with colored boundary. An admissible coloring
@xmath of @xmath that extends the coloring of @xmath is the assignment
of a color to each region of @xmath (a non negative integer), such that
for every edge of @xmath the colors of the three incident regions (maybe
two of the three regions are the same) form an admissible triple @xmath
(see Definition 1.3.25 ), and the color of a region @xmath of @xmath
touching the boundary @xmath is equal to the color of the boundary edge
@xmath .

The evaluation of the coloring @xmath is the following function:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here the product is taken over all regions @xmath , inner edges @xmath ,
inner vertices @xmath , boundary edges @xmath , boundary vertices @xmath
. The symbols

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

denote the skein element of these graphs in @xmath (see Subsection 1.3.4
), colored respectively as @xmath , @xmath , or as the regions incident
to @xmath , @xmath , or @xmath .

The phase @xmath is the following value:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are respectively the gleam and the color of
@xmath .

A shadow that collapses onto a graph of genus @xmath is a shadow of a
4-dimensional handlebody of genus @xmath , @xmath . We remind that the
boundary of @xmath is @xmath .

It might be non obvious in general to determine whether a polyhedron
collapses onto a graph. Luckily, on simple polyhedra there is a nice
criterion:

###### Proposition 2.4.2 (Costantino).

Let @xmath be a connected simple polyhedron. The following facts are
equivalent:

-   @xmath collapses onto a graph (maybe a point);

-   @xmath does not contain a simple polyhedron without boundary;

-    every coloring of @xmath extends to finitely many admissible
    colorings of @xmath (maybe no one).

###### Proof.

See [ Co2 , Lemma 3.6] . ∎

###### Corollary 2.4.3.

Let @xmath be a simple polyhedron that collapses onto a graph. Every
connected simple sub-polyhedron @xmath also collapses onto a graph.

###### Proof.

The polyhedron @xmath does not contain any simple sub-polyhedron without
boundary, hence @xmath also does not. ∎

###### Theorem 2.4.4 (Shadow formula).

Let @xmath be a shadow of the colored knotted trivalent graph @xmath .
If @xmath collapses onto a graph

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the sum is taken over all the admissible colorings @xmath of
@xmath that extend the coloring of @xmath .

###### Remark 2.4.5.

In Section 1.5 we saw that we can represent every link in @xmath with a
diagram in the disk with @xmath holes @xmath . Using this diagrammatic
representation and the skein relations we got Proposition 1.5.7 that
reduces the computation of the Kauffman bracket of a link to the one of
diagrams @xmath without crossings and without homotopically trivial
components. Here we explain how to easily end the computation using the
shadow formula. In Proposition 2.1.22 we already saw a method to get a
shadow of any link in @xmath , but the method we present now is better
than compute directly the shadow formula on that shadow. In fact we
reduce the computation to using the shadow formula just to shadows with
null gleams, without vertices and whose edges are closed circles. This
means that in the shadow formula we do not have graphs of the form and
and there are no phases @xmath .

Let @xmath be a link diagram without crossings and without homotopically
trivial components. Let @xmath be the shadow obtained attaching to
@xmath an annulus along each component of @xmath and giving to each
region gleam @xmath . The boundary @xmath of @xmath consists of the
components of @xmath plus the @xmath boundary components of @xmath .
Color the boundary components of @xmath corresponding to the components
of @xmath with @xmath (the remaining boundary components of the annuli
attached to the components of @xmath ), and the other ones with @xmath .
The polyhedron @xmath is a shadow of a framed link in @xmath that is the
union of the link described by @xmath and a link colored with @xmath .
Therefore the shadow formula applied to @xmath gives @xmath . Hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath runs over all the admissible colorings of @xmath that
extend the coloring of the boundary, @xmath runs over all the regions of
@xmath (the external regions do not matter because either they are
annuli or their color is @xmath ), @xmath is the Euler characteristic of
@xmath , and @xmath is the color of @xmath given by @xmath . Therefore
by Subsection 1.3.4 @xmath is a symmetric function of @xmath , namely
there are two polynomials @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If the diagram is one of the diagrams @xmath ’s, the constructed shadow
will be denoted @xmath .

#### 2.4.2 Proof

Now we prove the shadow formula (Theorem 2.4.4 ).

We recall the skein equalities in Fig. 1.12 . They take place in the
neighborhood of a 2-sphere @xmath , drawn as a @xmath -framed circle in
the picture. If @xmath intersects @xmath transversely in exactly one
point, then Fig. 1.12 -(left) applies, while if @xmath intersects the
sphere twice Fig. 1.12 -(right) applies. Note that after applying the
move we can surger along the sphere without affecting @xmath (see Remark
1.3.14 ).

###### Remark 2.4.6.

By Corollary 2.4.3 each move in Fig. 2.6 transforms a simple polyhedron
that collapses onto a graph into one or two simple polyhedra that
collapse onto a graph.

A simple polyhedron @xmath is atomic if it is the cone over @xmath , or
, namely @xmath is as in Fig. 2.1 -(3,2,1). We will use the following:

###### Proposition 2.4.7 ([CaMa]).

Let @xmath be a simple polyhedron that collapses onto a graph. The
polyhedron reduces to a finite union of atomic polyhedra after a finite
combination of moves as in Fig. 2.6 .

###### Proof.

We say that a region of @xmath is external if it is incident to @xmath ,
and internal otherwise. Suppose @xmath contains some internal regions.
There is an edge @xmath that is adjacent to one internal region and to
two external regions: if not, the interior regions would form a simple
sub-polyhedron contradicting Proposition 2.4.2 . The move in Fig. 2.6
-(bottom) applied to @xmath transforms the interior region into an
exterior one. After finitely many such moves we kill all the internal
regions.

Now we can use Fig. 2.6 -(center) to cut every interior edge in two
halves, and then Fig. 2.6 -(top) to cut every region into disks that are
incident to @xmath only in one arc or circle. We are left with atomic
pieces. ∎

If we apply one of the moves of Fig. 2.6 to a shadow @xmath of some
graph @xmath , we get a new simple polyhedron @xmath that can be
interpreted as a shadow of some graph @xmath in some manifold @xmath .
We show this fact for each move.

We start by examining Fig. 2.6 -(top). The yellow strip thickens to a
@xmath , with boundary @xmath . The 2-sphere @xmath intersects @xmath
transversely in two points. Topologically, the move corresponds to
surgerying @xmath along the 2-sphere @xmath and modifying @xmath as in
Fig. 1.12 -(right). We get a new graph @xmath inside a new manifold
@xmath , with a new shadow @xmath . If @xmath is separating, these
objects actually split in two components.

The move in Fig. 2.6 -(center) is analogous, the only difference being
that now @xmath intersects @xmath in three points. The move in Fig. 2.6
-(bottom) is the fusion shown in Fig. 1.11 .

###### Remark 2.4.8.

In the moves of Fig. 2.6 , some region @xmath is cut into two regions
@xmath . The gleams @xmath and @xmath of these new regions sum to give
the gleam @xmath of @xmath . The gleams of all the other regions of
@xmath do not change.

###### Proof of Theorem 2.4.4, [CaMa].

The formula holds when @xmath is atomic with zero gleams: there is a
single coloring @xmath on @xmath extending that of @xmath , and we get
@xmath . To prove that, note that the contribution of every non closed
boundary edge @xmath or boundary vertex @xmath cancels with the
contribution of the incident region @xmath or edge @xmath . Therefore:

-   if @xmath we get obviously ;

-   if @xmath everything cancels except @xmath ;

-   if @xmath everything cancels except @xmath .

Suppose now that @xmath is atomic with arbitrary gleams. We modify the
gleams using the following moves:

1.  add a gleam @xmath on a region: this corresponds to a @xmath full
    twist of the corresponding framed edge of @xmath ;

2.  add a gleam @xmath to the three regions incident to an interior edge
    of @xmath : this corresponds to a @xmath half-twist to each of the
    three edges of @xmath incident to a vertex of @xmath .

Fig. 2.7 shows that even the second move does not change the
orientability of the framing.

Using finitely many such moves we can reduce all gleams to zero. To show
that, color in green the regions having a half-integer (but non-integer)
gleam. Recall that the framing of @xmath is orientable: this implies
that every sub-circle @xmath intersects an even number of green faces,
and it is easy to check that with moves @xmath we can transform all
gleams into integers. Then we reduce them to zero using @xmath .

Let @xmath be obtained from @xmath by @xmath or @xmath . By Fig. 1.10 we
have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

corresponding respectively to moves @xmath and @xmath . In the formula
the contribution of the phases @xmath changes exactly in the same way:
this proves the theorem for any atomic shadow @xmath .

A more general @xmath decomposes into atoms via finitely many moves as
in Fig. 2.6 . Let @xmath be the number of moves necessary to atomize
@xmath : we prove the theorem by induction on @xmath .

Pick a move transforming @xmath into a @xmath with @xmath . The
polyhedron @xmath is a shadow of some graph @xmath in some manifold
@xmath . The objects @xmath and @xmath may have two components, but the
following arguments work anyway. We suppose by induction that the
theorem holds for @xmath and @xmath , and we prove it for @xmath and
@xmath .

Consider the move in Fig. 2.6 -(top). The pair @xmath is obtained from
@xmath via the move shown in Fig. 1.12 -(right), with @xmath inheriting
the coloring of @xmath . Therefore

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the yellow colored region that we have cut. There is an
obvious correspondence between colorings of @xmath and @xmath , and the
formula says that for each coloring @xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(We use here Remark 2.4.8 to show that the phases of @xmath and @xmath
with @xmath are the same). The theorem holds for the pair @xmath , and
hence holds also for @xmath .

The move in Fig. 2.6 -(center) is treated analogously. Using a fusion
and Fig. 1.12 we find easily that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the colored edge cut in Fig. 2.6 -(center). There is an
obvious correspondence between colorings of @xmath and @xmath , and for
each such coloring @xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Finally, the move in Fig. 2.6 -(bottom) is a fusion. The fusion formula
says

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the coloring @xmath on @xmath varies on the new colored edge
@xmath . Every coloring of @xmath induces one of @xmath and we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This proves the theorem. ∎

### 2.5 Shadow formula for the @xmath-Reshetikhin-Turaev-Witten
invariants

In this section we show how to compute the @xmath
-Reshetikhin-Turaev-Witten invariants (see Definition 1.6.14 ,
Definition 1.6.18 and Section 1.6 ) via shadows. Hence we fix an integer
@xmath and a primitive @xmath root of unity @xmath . We remind that we
need just that @xmath and @xmath for @xmath .

#### 2.5.1 Statement

We introduced the definition of Euler characteristic of a region, an
edge and a vertex of a shadow (Definition 2.4.1 ).

Let @xmath be a shadow with colored boundary. A @xmath - admissible
coloring @xmath of @xmath that extends the coloring of @xmath is the
assignment of a color to each region of @xmath (a non negative integer),
such that for every edge of @xmath the colors of the three incident
regions (maybe two of the three regions are the same) form a @xmath
-admissible triple @xmath (see Definition 1.6.5 and Definition 1.3.25 ),
and the color of a region @xmath of @xmath touching the boundary @xmath
is equal to the color of the boundary edge @xmath .

The evaluation of the coloring @xmath is the following function:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here the product is taken over all regions @xmath , inner edges @xmath ,
inner vertices @xmath , boundary edges @xmath , boundary vertices @xmath
. The symbols

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

denote the skein element of these graphs in @xmath (see Subsection 1.3.4
and Subsection 1.6.1 ), colored respectively as @xmath , @xmath , or as
the regions incident to @xmath , @xmath , or @xmath .

The phase @xmath is the following value:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are respectively the gleam and the color of
@xmath .

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the sum is taken over all the @xmath -admissible colorings of
@xmath . Note that since @xmath is compact and each color of the region
is at most @xmath , the sum is finite.

We denote by @xmath the signature of a oriented 4-manifold @xmath (see
Section 2.3 ) and with @xmath the Euler characteristic of @xmath . If
@xmath is a shadow of @xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the sum is taken over all the regions @xmath , edges @xmath and
vertices @xmath of @xmath . Moreover we introduced the notion of “
@xmath ” (Subsection 1.6.2 ).

###### Theorem 2.5.1 (Shadow formula, Turaev).

Let @xmath be a shadow of a oriented 4-manifold @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath . If @xmath is a @xmath -admissible colored knotted graph then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Example 2.5.2.

Let @xmath be the closed orientable surface of genus @xmath . Let @xmath
be the boundary of the oriented @xmath -bundle @xmath over @xmath with
Euler number @xmath . If @xmath , @xmath is the lens space @xmath . The
surface @xmath equipped with gleam @xmath is a shadow of @xmath . By
Example 2.3.2 @xmath . Therefore by the shadow formula (Theorem 2.5.1 )
we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proposition 2.5.3.

Let @xmath be an oriented compact 3-manifold and let @xmath be @xmath
with the opposite orientation. Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the conjugate of the complex number @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be a shadow of @xmath and let @xmath be the 4-dimensional
thickening of @xmath . If we change the orientation of @xmath we get an
oriented 4-manifold @xmath whose boundary is @xmath . If we change the
gleam of the regions of @xmath with its opposite we get a shadow @xmath
of @xmath . The signature of the 4-manifold is the opposite of the
previous one, @xmath , hence by the shadow formula (Theorem 2.5.1 ) we
get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath is a root of unity its conjugate is @xmath . The quantum
integers valued in @xmath are real numbers, hence @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath are real numbers too. The phases @xmath of
@xmath are the inverses of the ones of @xmath and are roots of unity.
Hence @xmath is the conjugate of @xmath . The skein @xmath is the unknot
with framing @xmath and color @xmath . This framed knot has a diagram
that is a circle with a curl. Since the conjugate of @xmath is @xmath
and we need just the smallest filed containing @xmath and @xmath , the
conjugate of the skein of a colored link is obtained substituting @xmath
with @xmath . If we substitute @xmath with @xmath we get the skein of
the mirror image of the diagram with the same color, namely the skein of
the unknot with framing @xmath and color @xmath that is @xmath . The
same topics apply to @xmath but it is based on the 0-framed unknot and
substituting @xmath with @xmath we still get @xmath , @xmath . Therefore
we have @xmath . ∎

The following is another famous quantum invariant [ TV ] .

###### Definition 2.5.4.

Let @xmath be a compact oriented 3-manifold and let @xmath be a spine of
@xmath minus some 3-balls. With the notations above the Turaev-Viro
invariant @xmath of @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath runs over all the @xmath -admissible colorings of @xmath .

If @xmath is closed and @xmath is the dual of a triangulation of @xmath
with @xmath vetices @xmath .

The following result has been proved by Walker [ Walk:p ] and Turaev [
Tu:p ] with a long and complicated method. Later Roberts [ RobPhD ]
proved it in an easy way without using shadows. The shadow formula
provides a very easy way to get the result.

###### Theorem 2.5.5 (Walker-Turaev).

Let @xmath be a closed oriented 3-manifold. Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the square of the absolute value of the complex number
@xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be a spine of @xmath . Equip every region of @xmath with
gleam @xmath . By Lemma 2.1.17 -(2.) @xmath is a shadow of the connected
sum @xmath , where @xmath is @xmath with the opposite orientation.
Therefore by the shadow formula (Theorem 2.5.1 ) we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the 4-dimensional thickening of @xmath . By Lemma 2.1.17
@xmath where @xmath is an open 3-ball, hence @xmath . We conclude noting
that by Proposition 1.6.17 and Proposition 2.5.3 @xmath . ∎

#### 2.5.2 Proof

Now we prove the shadow formula (Theorem 2.5.1 ). First we focus on the
case without boundary, then on the general case.

###### Proof of Theorem 2.5.1, case @xmath, [Ca2].

We follow the following steps:

1.  from a triangulation of the regions of @xmath we construct a surgery
    presentation @xmath of @xmath in @xmath , where @xmath is the
    framing and @xmath is the underlying link;

2.  we change the framing of the surgery presentation using the identity
    in Proposition 1.6.6 ;

3.  we apply the 2-strand fusion identity (Fig. 1.24 ) to remove the
    triangulation of the regions;

4.  we apply the 3-strand fusion identity (Fig. 1.25 ) to reduce
    ourselves to a trivalent graph in a tubular neighborhood of a tree
    (a union of trees);

5.  we reduce the trivalent graph to isolated tetrahedra;

6.  we note that the contributions of all our moves give the shadow
    formula.

##### Step 1

We can suppose that @xmath , and hence also @xmath , is connected. Let
@xmath be an embedding of the 1-skeleton of @xmath . Note that we may
choose @xmath so that it has only unknotted edges.

Select a small 3-ball @xmath centered in every vertex @xmath of @xmath .
The intersection of one of such 3-balls with @xmath consists of four
unknotted and unlinked strands with one end in @xmath and one in the
boundary @xmath of the ball. For each vertex @xmath of @xmath , put a
tetrahedron in @xmath whose vertices coincide with @xmath , and give it
the framing of the 2-sphere @xmath . Every non closed edge @xmath of
@xmath connects two different vertices @xmath , @xmath of the set of
framed tetrahedra (the vertices hold in the same tetrahedron if and only
if @xmath ). We connect the local framed strands incident to @xmath to
the ones of @xmath via three strips running in a regular neighborhood
@xmath of @xmath as follows.

###### Remark 2.5.6.

Usually a framed graph in @xmath with orientable framing, is represented
by a diagram in @xmath (or @xmath ) giving it the black-board framing.
Our pictures are made thinking to that method. Note that the regular
neighborhoods @xmath ’s are bridges maybe passing over a part of the
previous diagram (Fig. 2.8 ). We will describe the strips using their
projection into a rectangle inside @xmath . This rectangle is exactly
the planar one in Fig. 2.8 . In this way we can easily construct a
diagram of the final framed link.

The points @xmath and @xmath are trivalent vertices of the set of framed
tetrahedra. Let @xmath and @xmath be two small ball neighborhoods of
them. We can positively parametrize @xmath and @xmath as in Fig. 2.9 :
the vertex is in the origin of @xmath , the framing lies on the plane
@xmath , the first strand lies on the first positive semi-axis ( @xmath
, @xmath ), the second strand lies on the second positive semi-axis (
@xmath , @xmath ), and the third one lies on the first negative
semi-axis ( @xmath @xmath ).

The regular neighborhood of @xmath in @xmath describes a bijection
between the framed strands incident to @xmath and the ones incident to
@xmath . Up to enumerations of the incident strands, and up to
isotopies, we have just two possible bijections:

-   the second edge is fixed while the first and the third ones are
    exchanged;

-   all the enumerated edges are fixed.

In the first case we connect those strands with three strips passing
through @xmath and running around @xmath as described in Fig. 2.10
-(left): the strips lie in a rectangle whose intersection with @xmath
and @xmath is the plane @xmath (see Remark 2.5.6 ). In the second case
we connect those strands with three strips passing through @xmath and
running around @xmath as described in Fig. 2.10 -(right): the strips can
be drawn in that way in a rectangle whose intersection with @xmath and
@xmath is the plane @xmath (see Remark 2.5.6 ).

Every closed edge @xmath of @xmath has a solid torus @xmath as regular
neighborhood. We divide it in a 3-ball @xmath centered in a point @xmath
and in a 1-handle @xmath , @xmath . The graph @xmath intersects @xmath
in a unknotted properly embedded arc. Put a -graph in @xmath whose
vertices coincides with @xmath , and give it the framing of the 2-sphere
@xmath . Now we have the same situation as before, and we apply the
method above to connect the framed strands incident to @xmath with
strips running around the core of @xmath .

Now we have obtained a framed link @xmath (maybe with non orientable
framing) lying in a regular neighborhood of @xmath . Let @xmath be the
simple polyhedron @xmath equipped with the further structure of a
triangulation of each region. There is a natural bijectction between the
components of @xmath and the set of connected components of the boundary
of the regions of @xmath (every component has the information of an
ambient region, thus a component is taken twice if it is in the boundary
of two different regions), or, alternatively, with the set of connected
components of the boundary of the regular neighborhood of the 1-skeleton
of @xmath . Let @xmath be a region of @xmath . Let @xmath be the
sub-link of @xmath whose components are in bijection with the connected
components of @xmath ( @xmath , @xmath implies @xmath ). Let @xmath be
an embedding of the 1-skeleton of the triangulation of @xmath whose
restriction to @xmath is @xmath (without framing). With internal vertex
of @xmath we mean the image under the embedding of a vertex of the
triangulation that lies in the interior of @xmath . Select a small
3-ball neighborhood @xmath of every internal vertex @xmath of @xmath .
The set @xmath is a finite number of unknotted and unlinked strands with
one end in @xmath and one in @xmath . Put a 0-framed unknot in @xmath
containing @xmath . Every internal edge @xmath of @xmath (an edge
adjacent to an internal vertex) connects two distinct points, @xmath and
@xmath , lying in framed strands: either in @xmath or in a 0-framed
unknot around an internal vertex. Let @xmath be a regular neighborhood
of @xmath (see Fig. 2.11 ). As before we connect the local framed
strands incident to @xmath and @xmath with two strips running through
@xmath .

Let @xmath and @xmath be two small ball neighborhoods of @xmath and
@xmath . We can positively parametrize @xmath and @xmath as in Fig. 2.12
: the point is in the origin of @xmath , the framing lies on the plane
@xmath , the first strand lies on the second positive semi-axis ( @xmath
, @xmath ) and the second one lines on the second negative semi-axis (
@xmath , @xmath ).

The regular neighborhood of @xmath in @xmath describes a bijection
between the edges incident to @xmath and the ones incident to @xmath .
Up to enumerations of the incident edges, and up to isotopies, we have
just one possible bijection: the enumerated edges are fixed. Thus we
connect these strands with two strips passing through @xmath and running
around @xmath as described in Fig. 2.13 : the strips lie in a rectangle
whose intersection with @xmath and @xmath is the plane @xmath (see
Remark 2.5.6 and Fig. 2.11 ).

Repeat this procedure for every region @xmath of @xmath . Now we have
obtained a framed link lying in a regular neighborhood of a connected
graph @xmath containing @xmath . The graph @xmath is an embedding of the
1-skeleton of @xmath extending the one of @xmath and the ones of the
regions, @xmath . If @xmath is a circle, add a 0-framed meridian unknot
that encircles the framed link. By “ maximal tree ” we mean a
collapsible sub-graph of an ambient graph whose set of vertices is the
same as the ambient one. If @xmath has a vertex (is not a circle), take
a maximal tree @xmath of @xmath . For each edge of @xmath not lying in
@xmath add a 0-framed unknot that encircles the strips running around
its regular neighborhood.

We get a framed link @xmath in @xmath (the framing @xmath may not be
orientable) with some components, @xmath , corresponding to the boundary
components of the tubular neighborhood of the 1-skeleton of @xmath , and
the other ones, @xmath , are the added 0-framed unknots. For each region
@xmath of @xmath take the curves @xmath that lie in the regular
neighborhood of @xmath . Add to their framings some half-twists so that
the sum (with sign) of the added twists is equal to @xmath . So we get
the framing @xmath .

###### Remark 2.5.7.

The framing @xmath clearly depends on the choice made when we modified
@xmath . If @xmath is standard we can take the trivial triangulation:
just one triangle for each region. In that case there is only one choice
to modify @xmath and we can easily see that it makes @xmath orientable:

The gleam @xmath is an integer if and only if there is an even number of
edges of @xmath that form @xmath and define the second bijection in the
list given when we described the connecting strips. Only in that case we
applied a half-twist to each strip (see Fig. 2.10 -(right)). Hence
@xmath is a knot with an orientable framing plus an even number of
half-twists. Namely @xmath is orientable.

###### Theorem 2.5.8.

One of the choices above makes @xmath a surgery presentation of @xmath
in @xmath .

###### Remark 2.5.9.

Links in @xmath like @xmath , are called universal links . The word
“universal” is due precisely to the fact that we can get any orientable
connected closed 3-manifold by surgering on them. See [ CoTh ] and [ Co2
] , in particular [ CoTh , Proposition 3.35] and [ CoTh , Proposition
3.36] .

##### Step 2

Let @xmath be the surgery presentation in @xmath of @xmath described
above. We remind that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the skein element got by coloring each component of
@xmath with @xmath . The skein @xmath is equal to the sum over @xmath of
@xmath times the skein element obtained by giving to every @xmath the
color @xmath and to each @xmath the @xmath projector. Fix one of these
colorings.

We change again the framing of the @xmath ’s by adding @xmath positive
twists, namely we return to @xmath . For Proposition 1.6.6 each of these
framing changes produces a multiplication by @xmath ( @xmath ), the
phase of the colored region @xmath .

###### Remark 2.5.10.

@xmath depends on a made choice and not all gives a surgery
presentation. However we can easily check with this use of Proposition
1.6.6 that the skein elements given by all these @xmath ’s are the same.

##### Step 3

Near each @xmath encircling two strands, we have the situation of the
2-strand fusion (see Fig. 1.24 ). Apply the identity to each such @xmath
. The identity splits @xmath to a new link, and multiplies it by a
coefficient. Furthermore the identity says that the colors of the @xmath
’s related to the same region must be equal, otherwise the summand is
null. The new colored framed link consists of the curves @xmath colored
with @xmath and the colored curves @xmath encircled by the @xmath ’s,
all with the framing induced by @xmath . Applying an isotopy we can see
that the framed link @xmath is equal to the framed link @xmath we
constructed before introducing the triangulations of the regions.

##### Step 4

Near each @xmath we have the situation of the 3-strand fusion (see Fig.
1.25 ). Hence we apply it for each @xmath . Thus if there is a non
@xmath -admissible triple @xmath of colors of @xmath ’s encircled by a
@xmath , then the summand is null. After the application of all the
3-strand fusions it remains an unknotted 0-framed trivalent graph @xmath
in the regular neighborhood a tree.

##### Step 5

@xmath has two vertices for each edge of @xmath which does not lie in
@xmath and three parallel edges for each edge of @xmath . A tree graph
has vertices connected by an edge with only another vertex, the leaves ,
and the other ones are connected with two different vertices. Near a
leaf of @xmath , @xmath has the form of the left-hand side of the
equality in the following Lemma 2.5.11 . We apply the equality to the
parts of @xmath near a fixed leaf of @xmath . We get a multiple of
another trivalent graph @xmath that is made in the same way as @xmath
but encircling the embedding of the sub-graph @xmath of @xmath obtained
removing the fixed leaf and the adjacent edge. We repeat this procedure
until we finish the edges of @xmath . The lemma says also that if there
is an edge of @xmath with the three strands along it that are colored
with a non @xmath -admissible triple, then the summand is null.
Therefore our summation is taken over all the @xmath -admissible
colorings of @xmath .

##### Step 6

Fix one of these @xmath -admissible colorings @xmath . By the
applications of the 2-strand fusion identities and the framing change,
we get for each region @xmath a contribute of @xmath where @xmath is the
phase of @xmath colored with @xmath (we added also the contribution
@xmath times the considered skein element).

By the applications of Lemma 2.5.11 we get a contribute @xmath for each
colored vertex of @xmath , and a @xmath for each colored edge of @xmath
lying on the maximal tree of the 1-skeleton of @xmath .

By the applications of the 3-strand fusion we get a contribute of @xmath
for each colored edge of @xmath that does not lie on the maximal tree.

@xmath , where @xmath is the 4-manifold obtained attaching to @xmath a
2-handle along each component of @xmath . Let @xmath be the 4-manifold
obtained giving a dot to the @xmath ’s. Let @xmath be the 4-dimensional
orientable handlebody of genus @xmath (the compact 4-manifold with a
handle-decomposition with just @xmath 0-handles and @xmath 1-handles for
some @xmath ), and let @xmath be the boundary connected sum of @xmath
copies of @xmath . They have the same boundary: @xmath . The framed link
@xmath has a corresponding framed link @xmath in @xmath . Let @xmath be
the 4-manifold obtained attaching to @xmath a 2-handle along each
component of @xmath . We have @xmath and @xmath . The signature is
additive and @xmath . Therefore @xmath .

Moreover the 2- and 3-strand fusions give a contribute of @xmath .
Therefore we get that the summand of @xmath is equivalent to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath is the number of triagles of @xmath and @xmath is the genus of
its 1-skeleton. Hence @xmath . Therefore

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

∎

###### Lemma 2.5.11.

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

###### Proof.

  -- -- -------- -------- --
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

  -- -- -------- -------- --
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

∎

Now we discuss the general case.

###### Proof of Theorem 2.5.1, general case, [Ca2].

We proceed in the same way as the case without boundary:

1.  from a triangulation of the regions of @xmath we construct a surgery
    presentation of @xmath in @xmath (a union of copies of @xmath )
    together with the colored trivalent graph @xmath corresponding to
    @xmath ;

2.  we change the framing of the surgery presentation by using the
    equality in Proposition 1.6.6 ;

3.  we apply the 2-strand fusion identity Fig. 1.24 to remove the
    triangulation of the regions;

4.  we apply the 3-strand fusion identity Fig. 1.24 to reduce ourselves
    to a trivalent graph in a tubular neighborhood of a tree (a union of
    trees);

5.  we apply Lemma 2.5.11 to reduce the trivalent graph to isolated
    tetrahedra;

6.  we note that the contributions of all our moves give the shadow
    formula.

Here we give some clarifications in order to do the first step. Take as
@xmath an embedding of the 1-skeleton of @xmath minus the edges adjacent
to (or contained in) the boundary @xmath . After the procedure for the
edges of @xmath , not all the vertices of the isolated tetrahedra are
going to be removed. In fact the ones corresponding to internal edges
adjacent to @xmath remain. This happens if and only if @xmath has
vetices. There is still a bijection between the edges (closed or not) of
the resulting framed graph @xmath and a set consisting of all the
boundary components of the internal regions and all the components of
@xmath . Fix a triangulation @xmath for each internal region of @xmath .
As before we use the embeddings @xmath ’s, but this time @xmath runs
just over all the internal regions. The graph @xmath is an embedding of
the 1-skeleton of @xmath minus the edges (of @xmath ) adjacent to @xmath
. The graph @xmath is still a maximal tree of such connected graph
@xmath . The framed graph @xmath corresponding to @xmath is the
sub-graph of @xmath whose components correspond to the components of
@xmath .

To end we note that in the shadow formula the contribute of the external
regions together with the one of the external edges has no effects, and
the same happens for the contribute of the edges adjacent to external
vertices together with the external vertices. ∎

## Chapter 3 Some topological applications

Thirty years after its discovery, we know only a few relations between
the Jones polynomial and its topological properties and most of them are
just conjectures. In this chapter we explain some notable applications
of quantum invariants and just recall some other ones. As we will see,
several topological applications of quantum invariants concern their
behavior near a fixed complex point. We will say more about:

-   the Bullock’s theorem about the character variety (Section 3.1 );

-   the volume conjecture (Section 3.2 );

-   the Chen-Yang’s volume conjecture (Section 3.3 );

-   the Tait conjecture (Section 3.4 );

-   the Eisermann’s theorem (Section 3.6 );

-   the classification of rational 2-tangles (Section 3.7 );

-   a criterion for non sliceness of Montesinos links (Section 3.8 ).

The character variety is another very studied object in 3-dimensional
topology. The Bullock’s theorem concerns the evaluation in @xmath of the
entire @xmath -skein module.

The volume conjecture and the Chen-Yang’s volume conjecture are about a
limit of evaluations respectively of the colored Jones polynomial , and
the Turaev-Viro invariants and the Reshetikhin-Turaev-Witten invariants,
where the evaluation points converge to @xmath .

The Tait conjecture is a proved theorem about the crossing number of
alternating links , it concerns the breadth of the Jones polynomial that
is something like the degree, it concerns the behavior near @xmath and
near @xmath .

Eisermann’s theorem connects the Jones polynomial to 4-dimensional
smooth topology, in particular to ribbon surfaces . This theorem, the
classification of 2-tangles and the criterion for Montesinos links
concern the behavior of the Kauffman bracket in the imaginary unit
@xmath .

Section 3.5 introduces notions needed in Section 3.6 , Section 3.8 and
Section 3.9 . Section 3.9 is about an application of shadows that goes
in favour of the slice-ribbon conjecture.

The Tait conjecture (as a result, not just as a conjecture) and
Eisermann’s theorem have been extended by the author and Martelli [ Ca1
, Ca3 , CaMa ] in several directions by using the technology of Turaev’s
shadows (see Chapter 2 ). We are going to discuss these generalizations
in Chapter 4 and Chapter 5 .

A nice result of Frohman and Kania-Bartoszynska [ FK2 ] connects quantum
invariants near @xmath to normal surfaces theory. In particular it
studies the order at @xmath (Definition 5.1.1 ) of the Turaev-Viro
invariant (Definition 2.5.4 ). This result was used extensively for
instance in [ CoMa ] .

Another important conjecture is the slope conjecture [ Ga ] . This
relates the degree of the colored Jones polynomial of a knot in @xmath
with the slope of the incompressible surfaces of the complement. A
little more precisely, it says that for every @xmath the quantity @xmath
is the slope of a properly embedded, incompressible, @xmath
-incompressible surface in the complement of @xmath , where @xmath is
the degree of the @xmath Jones polynomial of the knot @xmath . This has
been proved for a large class of knots.

The AJ-conjecture (see for instance [ LT , Marc2 ] ) is another
important conjecture. This relates the colored Jones polynomial to the
@xmath - polynomial , an invariant related to the character variety of
the complement of a knot. This concerns some more complex algebraic
properties of the colored Jones polynomial, like generators of principal
ideals related to it.

### 3.1 Character variety and Bullock’s theorem

Let @xmath be a compact oriented 3-manifold. Let us consider the @xmath
-skein module of @xmath and evaluate it in @xmath (or @xmath ). With the
notations of Subsection 1.3.1 we are considering @xmath . We remind that
the universal coefficient property (Theorem 1.3.6 -(5.)) gives us an
isomorphism of @xmath -modules connecting @xmath and @xmath , where
@xmath has the structure of @xmath -module given by the map @xmath
defined by @xmath .

In @xmath the over/underpasses are not recognized:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The disjoint union of links gives a multiplication that makes @xmath a
commutative algebra with @xmath as identity.

###### Theorem 3.1.1 (Bullock).

There is a finite set of knots of @xmath that generate @xmath as a
@xmath -algebra.

###### Proof.

See [ B2 ] . ∎

###### Definition 3.1.2.

By a representation we mean a homomorphism from the fundamental group of
@xmath to the group of special complex matrices of rank 2:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The character of the representation is the composition with the trace:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath denotes the set of all characters.

###### Remark 3.1.3.

The trace is invariant under conjugation of matrices, namely if two
representations, @xmath and @xmath , are conjugate (there is a matrix
@xmath such that for every @xmath , @xmath ) their characters are the
same @xmath . It holds that two representations have the same character
if and only if they are conjugated.

A faithful (injective) representation of a 3-manifold @xmath with
discrete image is equivalent to a complete hyperbolic structure on
@xmath .

For every @xmath there is a function @xmath given by @xmath . The
following theorem has been discovered independently by Vogt [ V ] and
Fricke [ Fri ] , first proved by Horowitz [ Ho ] , and then rediscovered
by Culler and Shalen [ CS ] .

###### Theorem 3.1.4 (Vogt, Fricke, Horowitz, Culler-Shalen).

There exists a finite set of elements @xmath in @xmath such that every
@xmath is an element of the polynomial ring @xmath . Moreover @xmath is
a closed algebraic sub-set of @xmath .

###### Definition 3.1.5.

Recall that a closed algebraic set @xmath in @xmath is the common zero
set of an ideal of polynomials in @xmath . The elements of @xmath are
polynomial functions on @xmath , and the functions @xmath are
coordinates on @xmath . The quotient of @xmath by the ideal of
polynomials vanishing on @xmath is called the coordinate ring of @xmath
. Different choices of coordinates would clearly lead to different
parameterizations of @xmath , but it follows from [ CS ] that any two
parametrizations of @xmath are equivalent via polynomial maps. Hence
their coordinate rings are isomorphic and we may identify them as one
object: the ring of characters of @xmath , which we denote by @xmath .

Each knot @xmath in @xmath determines a unique @xmath by taking @xmath
as the free homotopy class of @xmath . We can define @xmath . Hence
@xmath determines the map @xmath . Conversely, any @xmath is determined
by some (non-unique) knot @xmath .

###### Theorem 3.1.6 (Bullock).

Let @xmath be a compact orientable 3-manifold. The map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a well defined surjective map of @xmath -algebras. If @xmath is
generated by the knots @xmath then @xmath are coordinates on @xmath .
Furthermore the kernel of @xmath is generated by the set of nilpotent
elements of @xmath .

###### Proof.

See [ B3 ] . ∎

In Theorem 1.3.5 -(9.), Theorem 1.3.5 -(10.) and Theorem 1.3.5 -(11.)
(respectively results of [ Marc1 ] , [ PS1 ] and [ PS2 ] ) we saw that
if @xmath

-   is the complement of a torus knot in @xmath ;

-   has abelian fundamental group ( e.g @xmath , @xmath , a lens space
    @xmath );

-   is an orientable compact surface (maybe with non empty boundary);

we have that the morphism @xmath is an isomorphism.

###### Conjecture 3.1.7.

For every compact 3-manifold @xmath , the algebra @xmath has no
nilpotent elements. Hence @xmath is an isomorphism.

### 3.2 The volume conjecture

Since the work of W. Thurston and Mostow we know that there is a deep
interaction between the topological study of 3-manifolds and
low-dimensional hyperbolic geometry. One of the most important problems
in modern knot theory is the volume conjecture . This was introduced by
H. Murakami and J. Murakami in 2001 [ MM ] with the formalism of quantum
groups and relates quantum invariants to the hyperbolic volume of the
complement of a hyperbolic knot. Mostow’s rigidity theorem states that
if a 3-manifold admits a complete hyperbolic structure with finite
volume, then every other hyperbolic structure is related to the previous
one by an isometry. Therefore every metric information (volume, length
spectrum, …) is also a topological information. A link is said to be
hyperbolic if its complement admits a complete, finite-volume,
hyperbolic structure. Almost all links are hyperbolic. For all the
information about hyperbolic geometry we can see [ BP ] . Originally the
volume conjecture concerns knots in @xmath and a limit of evaluations of
the colored Jones polynomial. This conjecture has been generalized in
many ways. Now we state it in an extended form.

Let @xmath be a framed link in the connected sum @xmath of @xmath copies
of @xmath and let @xmath be the Kauffman bracket of @xmath with each
component colored with the @xmath projector (normalized so that @xmath
). This depends on the framing of @xmath , but by the identity in Fig.
1.10 the module of an evaluation of @xmath in a root of unity does not.

###### Conjecture 3.2.1 ((Extended) Volume conjecture).

Let @xmath be a hyperbolic knot. Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the skein element of the unknot colored with the @xmath
projector ( @xmath , @xmath ), @xmath is the hyperbolic volume of the
complement of @xmath and the limit is taken over all natural numbers
@xmath such that @xmath has neither a zero nor a pole in @xmath . For
instance we know that if @xmath is @xmath -homologically non trivial,
and @xmath is odd then @xmath (Proposition 1.5.18 ), hence in this case
the limit is taken only over even numbers. If @xmath is not hyperbolic
@xmath is the sum of the volume of the hyperbolic parts of the
complement of @xmath in a JSJ decomposition, that is equal to @xmath ,
where @xmath is the volume of the regular ideal hyperbolic tetrahedron
and @xmath is the Gromov norm of @xmath .

We note that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Until 2008 the conjecture for knots in @xmath has been proved only for
the figure-eight knot , torus knots , Whitehead doubles of certain torus
knots, and connected sums of these knots [ Murk , KT , Z ] . It is well
known that the volume conjecture does not hold for many split links in
@xmath . Hence it is not clear how to extend the conjecture to links.
However the conjecture is true for the Whitehead link [ Z ] and
Borromean rings [ GL ] . More in general van der Veen defined the class
of Whitehead chains : a set of links in @xmath that comprehends the
Whitehead link and Borromean rings, and proved the volume conjecture for
these links [ vdV ] . Costantino proved the extended volume conjecture
for an infinite family of hyperbolic links in @xmath : the universal
hyperbolic links [ Co2 ] . To do that he used the formalism of Turaev’s
shadows (Chapter 2 ).

Usually the volume conjecture is expressed in terms of the colored Jones
polynomial . The @xmath colored Jones polynomial of a (framed or
oriented) link @xmath is defined in several (almost equivalent) ways:

-   -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

-   If @xmath

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where @xmath is the writhe number of @xmath with an arbitrary
    framing (the sum of the signs of all the crossings of an oriented
    diagram of @xmath ), hence @xmath if @xmath has the Seifert framing
    (in this way we get an invariant of oriented, non framed links and
    of non oriented, non framed knots in @xmath );

-   -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    with this normalization @xmath ;

-   -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

-   all the combinations of the previous variations of @xmath .

The colored Jones polynomial comes out from the finite-dimensional
indecomposable representations of the @xmath -Hopf algebra @xmath , also
called @xmath , where @xmath ( @xmath is the ring of Laurent series over
the complex numbers with variable @xmath ). @xmath is a non trivial (non
co-commutative) quantization (or deformation) of the universal
enveloping algebra @xmath of @xmath and has some good properties like a
natural ribbon algebra structure. The indecomposable representations
correspond to the irreducible representations of a field. As for @xmath
, the finite-dimensional indecomposable representations of @xmath are in
bijection with the positive integers. The @xmath representation @xmath
is the @xmath -dimensional free module over @xmath with a further
algebraic structure. If we define the @xmath Jones polynomial by giving
to @xmath the color @xmath , we get the one related to the @xmath
-dimensional representation, namely the @xmath representation. Usually
people using the capital letter @xmath , instead of @xmath , associate
to the @xmath Jones polynomial the @xmath -dimensional representation.

-   F. Costantino uses @xmath with variable @xmath . He uses
    half-integer colorings instead of integer colorings ( e.g. [ Co2 ]
    ).

-   J. Marché uses @xmath with variable @xmath ( e.g. [ Marc2 ] ).

-   T.T.Q. Le and T. Tran use @xmath with variable @xmath ( @xmath ).
    They define @xmath ( e.g [ LT ] ).

-   People using the representation theory of @xmath usually use the
    variable @xmath .

The volume conjecture for a hyperbolic knot @xmath in @xmath can be
expressed in terms of its Kashaev invariant @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

### 3.3 The Chen-Yang’s volume conjecture

This is a recent version of the volume conjecture for the Turaev-Viro
invariants @xmath (Definition 2.5.4 ) and the Reshetikhin-Turaev-Witten
invariants @xmath (Definition 1.6.14 ). This has been stated by Chen and
Yang [ CY ] and has been supported by many numerical evidences.

To get a Turaev-Viro or a Reshetikhin-Turaev-Witten invariant we need to
fix an integer @xmath and a @xmath root of unity @xmath . Usually the
root of unity is @xmath . It has been proved that with that choice of
@xmath for each @xmath the growth of these invariants is polynomial. The
main idea is to change the choice of the root of unity and to use the
fact that we do not need that @xmath is primitive, but just @xmath is
so, namely @xmath for @xmath . The choice is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Clearly @xmath , if @xmath , @xmath is a primitive @xmath root of unity.

###### Conjecture 3.3.1 (Chen-Yang’s volume conjecture for T-V).

Let @xmath be a 3-manifold with a complete hyperbolic structure (maybe
with cusps or geodesic boundary). Using the root of unity @xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath runs just over the odd integers and @xmath is the volume of
@xmath .

The numerical computations of the limit of Conjecture 3.3.1 for
complements of knots @xmath shows that these sequences converge to the
volume faster than the sequences of the volume conjecture (Conjecture
3.2.1 ).

The following extends Conjecture 3.3.1 for closed orientable
3-manifolds:

###### Conjecture 3.3.2 (Chen-Yang’s volume conjecture for R-T-W).

Let @xmath be a closed oriented hyperbolic 3-manifold. Using the root of
unity @xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some @xmath , where @xmath runs just over the odd integers, @xmath
is the volume of @xmath and @xmath is the Chern-Simons invariant of
@xmath .

These conjectures can be easily generalized to non hyperbolic
3-manifolds where @xmath is the volume of the hyperbolic part of @xmath
in the JSJ decomposition. It holds that @xmath , where @xmath is the
volume of the regular ideal hyperbolic tetrahedron and @xmath is the
Gromov norm of @xmath .

By Theorem 2.5.5 we have @xmath . Therefore we can compute the
Turaev-Viro invariants with the shadow formula for the
Reshetikhin-Turaev-Witten invariants (Theorem 2.5.1 ). In particular the
shadow formula can be used to study both Conjecture 3.3.1 and Conjecture
3.3.2 .

An oriented compact 3-manifold @xmath is said to be a graph manifold if
it can be decomposed by cutting along tori in blocks homeomorphic to
solid tori or the product of a pair of pants with @xmath . The set of
graph manifolds coincides with the set of 3-manifolds whose JSJ
decomposition has only Seifert-fibered or torus bundle pieces. Therefore
they are the 3-manifolds such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Moreover graph manifolds can also be characterized as the 3-manifolds
with zero shadow complexity , namely the manifolds which admit a shadow
without vertices (see [ CoTh ] ). Therefore to get the invariants of
graph manifolds we can use the shadow formula on such simple shadows
that has a nicer form than usual. Thus graph manifolds form a good
candidate to start proving the generalized Conjecture 3.3.1 .

### 3.4 The Tait conjecture

One of the first invariants of links in @xmath is the crossing number :
the minimal number of crossings that a diagram must have to present that
link. In general it is hard to compute. During his attempt to tabulate
all knots in @xmath in the @xmath century [ Ta ] , P.G. Tait stated
three conjectures about crossing number, alternating links and writhe
number (Definition 1.2.4 ). An alternating link is a link that admits an
alternating diagram : a diagram @xmath such that the parametrization of
its components @xmath meets overpasses and underpasses alternately. All
the conjectures have been proved before 1991.

###### Definition 3.4.1.

A diagram @xmath of a link in @xmath is said to be reduced if it has no
crossings as the ones in Fig. 3.1 (the blue parts cover the rest of the
diagram).

We focus just on one Tait conjecture, the following one:

###### Theorem 3.4.2 (The Tait conjecture in @xmath).

Every reduced alternating diagram of links in @xmath has the minimal
number of crossings.

###### Proof.

See for instance [ Li , Chapter 5] or Chapter 4 . ∎

This conjecture was proved in 1987 by M. Thistlethwaite [ Thi ] , L.H.
Kauffman [ Kau2 ] and K. Murasugi [ Murs1 , Murs2 ] .

Theorem 3.4.2 is one of the most notable applications of the Jones
polynomial. In fact the proof of Thistelwaithe-Kauffman-Murasugi is
based on the study of the breadth of the Jones polynomial:

###### Definition 3.4.3.

Let @xmath be a non zero Laurent polynomial. The breadth @xmath of
@xmath is the difference between the biggest and the lowest degree of
the non zero monom ials of @xmath . If @xmath we define @xmath .

The breadth of the Jones polynomial, or of the Kauffman bracket, is
independent of the chosen framings or orientations for the link, and we
have @xmath . The theorem of Thistelwaithe-Kauffman-Murasugi shows that
we can get information about the crossing number from the breadth of the
Jones polynomial (or of the Kauffman bracket). In particular we can
easily compute it if the link is alternating:

###### Theorem 3.4.4.

Let @xmath be a @xmath -crossing alternating link diagram. Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(with the variable @xmath and the normalization @xmath ).

###### Proof.

See for instance [ Li , Chapter 5] or Chapter 4 . ∎

We have a natural representation of links in the connected sum @xmath of
@xmath copies of @xmath with diagrams in the disk with @xmath holes (see
Subsection 1.5.1 ). This representation allows us to talk about crossing
number and alternating links even in this general case of links in
@xmath . Moreover we know that the Kauffman bracket is also defined on
@xmath (see Remark 1.3.9 and Definition 1.3.10 ). Therefore it is
natural to ask if the Tait conjecture holds also in this general case,
and if we can follow the same method of Thistelwaithe-Kauffman-Murasugi
by improving our knowledge of the Jones polynomial. In Chapter 4 we are
going to discuss this topic and we will prove that the proper version of
the Tait conjecture in @xmath is false for @xmath -homologically non
trivial links (Definition 1.5.9 ), and if @xmath or @xmath the proper
version of the Tait conjecture is true for @xmath -homologically trivial
links. In Chapter 4 the method of Thistelwaithe-Kauffman-Murasugi will
be followed and extended. Note that by Remark 1.3.14 studying diagrams
in the disk with @xmath holes @xmath that are contained in a disk with
@xmath holes is equivalent to studying links in @xmath . Therefore we
will get Theorem 3.4.2 just by focusing on diagrams contained in a disk.

### 3.5 Slice and ribbon

This section introduces the concepts of “ ribbon surface ”, “ ribbon
knot ”, “ slice knot ”, …We will need these notions for Section 3.6 ,
Section 3.8 and Section 3.9 .

Every link in @xmath bounds an embedded orientable surface. Given a link
we can consider all these surfaces.

###### Definition 3.5.1.

The genus of a knot in @xmath is the minimum genus of a connected
compact orientable surface embedded in @xmath whose boundary coincides
with the knot.

We note that a knot has genus @xmath if and only if it is the unknot ,
namely if it bounds a disk in the 3-dimensional ambient space.

#### 3.5.1 Slice

There is an obvious compact 4-manifold whose boundary is @xmath : the
4-disk @xmath . Given a link in @xmath we can consider the properly
embedded surfaces of @xmath whose boundary is @xmath and define another
important invariant for knots:

###### Definition 3.5.2.

The slice genus of a knot is the minimum genus of a connected compact
orientable (smooth or PL and locally flat) surface properly embedded in
@xmath whose boundary coincides with the knot.

###### Remark 3.5.3.

A locally flat surface is a topologically embedded surface @xmath such
that for each point @xmath there is a continuous map @xmath , such that
@xmath is a neighborhood of @xmath in @xmath , @xmath is the dimension
of @xmath , the restriction @xmath is a homeomorphism, and @xmath . As
said before we are in the smooth or PL category and we consider only
locally flat surfaces. This observation is fundamental for the
definition of the slice genus. In fact if we allowed all the topological
surfaces, we would have that each knot is the boundary of a properly
embedded disk that is just the cone in the 4-ball over the knot, hence
the slice genus would be always @xmath . If we look at the origin of
@xmath we can see that this disk admits a smooth structure if and only
if the knot is the unknot in @xmath .

Given a surface in @xmath we can push it in the interior of @xmath
getting a properly embedded surface. Hence the slice genus is
lower-equal than the genus. A knot has slice genus @xmath if and only if
it bounds a properly embedded disk in @xmath .

###### Definition 3.5.4.

A knot in @xmath is said to be slice if it has slice genus @xmath . More
generally a link in @xmath is said to be slice if it bounds a properly
embedded collection of disks in the 4-ball.

There are non trivial slice knots as the one in Fig. 3.2 .

We can extend the notion of “slice knot” to each compact orientable
4-manifold with boundary.

#### 3.5.2 Ribbon

###### Definition 3.5.5.

An immersed smooth surface @xmath in a 3-manifold @xmath is ribbon if
one of the following equivalent conditions holds:

-   the surface @xmath may be isotoped to an immersed surface in @xmath
    having only ribbon singularities as in Fig. 3.3 ;

-   the surface @xmath may be isotoped in @xmath into a properly
    embedded surface in Morse position, with only minima and saddle
    points (no maxima) with respect to the height function, @xmath ,
    @xmath , as in Fig. 3.4 .

A ribbon surface may be not connected and non orientable.

###### Definition 3.5.6.

The ribbon genus of a knot is the minimal genus of a connected
orientable ribbon surface bounded by the knot. Clearly the ribbon genus
is not lower than the slice genus. A link is said to be ribbon if it
bounds a ribbon surface that is a collection of immersed disks (as the
one in Fig. 3.2 ).

###### Remark 3.5.7.

In the 4-dimensional orientable handlebody @xmath of genus @xmath (the
compact 4-manifold with a handle-decomposition with @xmath 0-handles and
@xmath 1-handles) there is a graph @xmath of genus @xmath (if @xmath
@xmath is the 4-disk @xmath and @xmath is a point) whose complement is
diffeomorphic to a collar of the boundary @xmath . By an isotopy we can
put every properly embedded surface @xmath in a position such that
@xmath . Therefore an immersed surface @xmath is ribbon if and only if
may be isotoped in @xmath into a properly embedded surface in Morse
position, with only minima and saddle points (no maxima) with respect to
the distant function from the graph @xmath .

###### Proposition 3.5.8.

A link @xmath in a 3-manifold @xmath bounds a ribbon surface if and only
if it is @xmath -homologically trivial ( @xmath ). Hence every link in
@xmath bounds a ribbon surface.

###### Proof.

It is well known in low-dimensional topology that a link @xmath is
@xmath -homologically trivial if and only if it bounds an embedded
(maybe not orientable) surface @xmath , hence a ribbon one. By
definition if a link @xmath is ribbon it bounds a properly embedded
surface in @xmath , hence @xmath , hence @xmath . ∎

#### 3.5.3 The slice-ribbon conjecture

A very important conjecture in knot theory is the slice-ribbon
conjecture :

###### Conjecture 3.5.9 (Slice-ribbon conjecture).

A knot in @xmath is ribbon if and only if it is slice.

It is generalized in several ways:

###### Conjecture 3.5.10.

@xmath

-    A link in @xmath is ribbon if and only if it is slice.

-    In @xmath the ribbon genus coincides with the slice genus.

-    The previous facts hold also for different ambient 4-manifolds, for
    instance 4-dimensional orientable handlebodies.

There are some results which suggest that the slice-ribbon conjecture is
true. Lisca [ Lis ] in 2007 proved that the conjecture is true for
2-bridge links in @xmath by a gauge theoretic method. Further
developments were done by Greene and Jubuka [ GJ ] , Karimi [ Kar ] and
Lecuona [ Lec1 , Lec2 ] .

Gompf, Sharlemann and Thompson [ GST ] created a potential
counter-example both for the property @xmath conjecture and for the
slice-ribbon conjecture. The construction is based on non trivial
handle-decompositions of the 4-ball with only 0-, 1- and 2-handles. They
took the boundary of the co-core of two 2-handles, @xmath and @xmath .
Hence @xmath and @xmath are clearly slice knots in @xmath . They
discovered that both @xmath and @xmath are ribbon. We can consider the
link @xmath given by the union of @xmath and @xmath . The link @xmath is
clearly slice and for the moment we see no reason why it should be also
ribbon. They connected the bounded slice disks with a knotted band. The
result is clearly another slice disk and hence its boundary a slice knot
that may not be ribbon. Following this idea Abe and Tange [ AT ] created
a new family of slice knots that may not be ribbon. We can find an
introduction to these topics in [ A ] . Gompf, Sharlemann and Thompson
found also a diagram representing this link in @xmath .

### 3.6 Eisermann’s theorem

Eisermann’s theorem relates the Jones polynomial with ribbon surfaces,
hence with 4-dimensional topology.

#### 3.6.1 Statement

We know that the Jones polynomial (and the Kauffman bracket) for links
in @xmath is a Laurent polynomial, hence it can not have a pole in
points different from @xmath and @xmath . Moreover @xmath is the minimal
polynomial of a @xmath root of unity @xmath , hence for a link @xmath
the multiplicity of @xmath in @xmath as a zero is at least @xmath if and
only if @xmath is still a Laurent polynomial.

###### Theorem 3.6.1 (Eisermann).

If @xmath is a ribbon surface bounded by a link @xmath , then the
multiplicity of the Kauffman bracket (or the Jones polynomial) of @xmath
(with variable @xmath and normalization @xmath ) in a @xmath root of
unity @xmath as a zero is at least the Euler characteristic @xmath of
@xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Theorem 3.6.1 has been proved by Eisermann [ E ] using an easy and
combinatorial method. In [ CaMa ] the theorem was extended in several
directions: it concerns colored graphs in the connected sum @xmath of
@xmath copies of @xmath . In that ambient the Kauffman bracket may not
be a Laurent polynomial and we may have poles in @xmath roots of unity,
hence the notion of “multiplicity” has been extended to the one of order
(Definition 5.1.1 ). In that more general case the proof requires more
complicated tools, in particular the shadow formula has been used
(Section 2.4 ). We are going to discuss this extension in Chapter 5 .

#### 3.6.2 Alexander polynomial and 2-component slice links

###### Question 3.6.2.

Is there a @xmath -component slice link @xmath such that the
multiplicity of the Kauffman bracket of @xmath in a @xmath root of unity
(using the variable @xmath ) is lower than @xmath ? This wolud imply
that @xmath is slice but not ribbon.

Eisermann showed [ E ] that the multiplicity of the Kauffman bracket of
a @xmath -component link in @xmath in a @xmath root of unity @xmath is
at most @xmath (see Proposition 5.5.1 ). Since we use the normalization
@xmath , for every link @xmath we have @xmath . Therefore the
multiplicity of the Kauffman bracket of a knot in @xmath in @xmath is
always @xmath . Thus this multiplicity can not be used to get
information about the ribbon surfaces bounded by a knot in @xmath . We
end this section by proving a remark of Eisermann [ E ] , that says that
the Kauffman bracket of a @xmath -component slice link @xmath with
@xmath , is divided by @xmath (still getting a Laurent polynomial) (
@xmath ), hence if @xmath the multiplicity in a @xmath root of unity is
@xmath ( @xmath ). Therefore it can not be used to say that one such
link is not ribbon.

Let @xmath be an oriented link. We denote by @xmath the Alexander-Conway
polynomial of @xmath (see [ Li ] [Chapter 6]). We use the variable
@xmath instead of the classical @xmath . This is completely determined
by the following skein relations on oriented diagrams:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The skein relations imply that @xmath .

As an invariant of oriented links in @xmath the Jones polynomial with
variable @xmath , @xmath , is determined by the following skein
relations:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It follows that for every oriented link @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Theorem 3.6.3 (Kawauchi).

Let @xmath be a slice link with at least two components. Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

See [ Kaw ] . ∎

Hence for every oriented slice link @xmath with more than one component
@xmath , that implies the following:

###### Proposition 3.6.4.

Let @xmath be a @xmath -component slice link with @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

( @xmath ). Therefore if @xmath the multiplicity of @xmath in @xmath is
@xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

### 3.7 The classification of rational tangles

We introduced the notion of “ @xmath -tangle” and “diagram of a tangle”
(Definition 1.3.19 ).

###### Definition 3.7.1.

A tangle is said to be rational if there is an isotopy of the ambient
3-cube @xmath , maybe not fixing the boundary, that sends it to the
trivial one: @xmath straight (unkontted and unlinked) strands.

###### Theorem 3.7.2 (Conway).

Rational 2-tangles are in bijection with the extended rational numbers

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

See [ Con ] or [ GK ] . ∎

Given a diagram @xmath of a 2-tangle we can reduce it to an unique
linear combination of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

using the skein relations :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Theorem 3.7.3 (Goldman-Kauffman).

Let @xmath be a rational 2-tangle. Then for any diagram @xmath of @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the imaginary unit and @xmath is a square root of @xmath
.

###### Proof.

See [ GK ] . ∎

Using the skein relations every @xmath -tangle diagram @xmath can be
written in a unique way as a linear combination of the diagrams without
crossings and without closed components, let @xmath be the coefficients
of that linear combination.

In [ Kw2 ] Kwon “categorified” Theorem 3.7.3 showing that two diagrams,
@xmath and @xmath , represent the same rational 2-tangle if and only if
there is an integer @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The result seems to be useless since the invariant was already
injective, but this formulation can be easily generalized to rational
@xmath -tangles using the @xmath ’s and it comes out to be true for
alternating rational 3-tangles:

###### Theorem 3.7.4 (Kwon).

Let @xmath and @xmath be two diagrams of alternating rational 3-tangles.
Then they represent the same tangle if and only if there is an integer
@xmath such that for all @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

See [ Kw2 ] . ∎

In [ Kw1 ] Kwon described an algorithm to distinguish any two rational
3-tangles. It uses a modified version of Dehn’s method for classifying
simple closed curves on surfaces.

### 3.8 An infinite family of non slice Montesinos links

In this section we show a criterion to check if a Montesinos link is not
slice that is based on Eisermann’s theorem (Theorem 3.6.1 ) and we show
an infinite family of non slice 2-components rational links that come
out from this criterion and have null linking number.

We introduced the notion of “framed @xmath -tangle”, “closure” of a
framed tangle (Definition 1.3.20 ) and “product” of tangles (Definition
1.3.21 ).

###### Definition 3.8.1.

The closure of a rational tangle is called rational link .

A well known class of links is the one of 2- bridge links (see [ BZ ] ).

###### Proposition 3.8.2.

The closure of a rational 2-tangle is a 2-bridge link.

###### Proof.

See [ BZ ] . ∎

In Section 3.6 we saw some criteria to show that a link is not ribbon or
not slice. The following is a more famous one:

###### Theorem 3.8.3.

The linking number (Definition 1.6.13 ) of any two components of a slice
link @xmath is zero.

###### Proof.

See [ BZ ] . ∎

###### Remark 3.8.4.

Let @xmath be a framed 2-tangle, @xmath a diagram of @xmath , and @xmath
the closure of @xmath . The Kauffman bracket of @xmath is equal to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence if @xmath , the multiplicity of @xmath in @xmath as a zero is
@xmath ( @xmath ). Therefore by Proposition 3.6.4 if @xmath has more
than one component, it is not slice (and not ribbon).

###### Example 3.8.5.

A link @xmath depending on an integer @xmath is shown in Fig. 3.5 . If
@xmath the link is a knot, otherwise it has two components. For @xmath ,
@xmath has linking number @xmath . The link is the closure of a rational
2-tangle with number @xmath different from @xmath or @xmath (see Section
3.7 and Theorem 3.7.3 ). Hence @xmath . Therefore by Remark 3.8.4 if
@xmath , @xmath is not slice.

Montesinos links form another famous class of links in @xmath (see [ BZ
] ). They comprehend 2-bridge links and pretzel links . We can get all
of them with diagrams described by integers @xmath , @xmath , and
rational numbers @xmath ( @xmath ) as in Fig. 3.6 : the box decorated
with @xmath is the rational 2-tangle @xmath such that @xmath . Clearly
they comprehend the closure of a rational tangles ( @xmath , @xmath ).

In [ Wil ] is shown that no member of a five parameter family of
Montsinos knots is slice. In [ Lec1 ] is shown that the slice-ribbon
conjecture is true for a large family of Montesinos knots. In [ Lec2 ] a
necessary, and in some cases sufficient, condition for sliceness inside
the family of pretzel knots @xmath with one @xmath even is given.

###### Lemma 3.8.6.

Let @xmath be a 2-tangle that is the product of @xmath and @xmath . Then
@xmath is the sum of @xmath and @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath and @xmath be diagrams of @xmath and @xmath . A diagram
@xmath of @xmath is obtained putting @xmath over @xmath .

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -- -------- -------- --
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

Hence

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

∎

###### Proposition 3.8.7.

Let @xmath be a Montesinos link with at least two components. If its
diagram @xmath satisfies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then @xmath is not slice.

###### Proof.

The link @xmath is the closure of a 2-tangle @xmath . The tangle @xmath
is the product of @xmath rational 2-tangles @xmath with number @xmath
equal to @xmath , and the rational 2-tangles with number @xmath for
@xmath . Hence by Lemma 3.8.6

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By Remark 3.8.4 , if @xmath , @xmath is not slice. The number @xmath is
non null if and only if @xmath . ∎

### 3.9 An application of shadows to the slice-ribbon conjecture

Although the aim of the chapter is to present topological applications
of quantum invariants, in this section we talk about something a little
different. We present an application of Turaev’s shadows that goes in
favor of the slice-ribbon conjecture.

#### 3.9.1 Shadow links and handle links

###### Definition 3.9.1.

We say that a link @xmath in a closed 3-manifold @xmath is slice with
respect to @xmath if @xmath is a compact 4-manifold bounded by @xmath
and @xmath bounds a set of properly embedded disjoint (smooth) disks in
@xmath .

Let @xmath be a shadow of a closed orientable 3-manifold @xmath . The
manifold @xmath is the boundary of the 4-dimensional thickening @xmath
of @xmath . Every region @xmath is thickened to a @xmath -bundle over
@xmath , @xmath . The core of this thickening is @xmath , while the
co-core is a fiber-disk of @xmath over a point @xmath . The boundary of
a co-core of a region is a knot in @xmath .

###### Definition 3.9.2.

We say that a link @xmath in a closed orientable 3-manifold @xmath is a
shadow link with respect to the 4-manifold @xmath if @xmath and there is
a shadow @xmath of @xmath without closed regions such that each
component @xmath of @xmath is the boundary of the co-core of a region
@xmath of @xmath . In order not to make confusion with the notion of
“shadow of a link”, we say that @xmath is a support of @xmath .

###### Remark 3.9.3.

By definition each shadow link is slice with respect to the
4-dimensional thickening of the shadow. In fact each component bounds a
properly embedded disk in @xmath that is the co-core of a region, and
all these disks are disjoint because either they lie in different
regions or are parallel.

###### Remark 3.9.4.

By Proposition 2.2.4 we can easily find a shadow of a shadow link @xmath
(not a support). It suffices to take a support @xmath of @xmath , for
each component @xmath of @xmath attach an annulus to @xmath along a map
that identifies a boundary component of the annulus to the boundary of
an embedded closed disk @xmath in the corresponding region @xmath , give
to @xmath gleam @xmath , to @xmath gleam @xmath , and leave the other
gleams unchanged. In fact every component @xmath of @xmath bounds a
properly embedded disk (the co-core of @xmath ) that intersects the
region (the core of @xmath ) in just one point.

###### Definition 3.9.5.

A link @xmath in the connected sum @xmath of @xmath copies of @xmath is
said to be symmetric if given a description of @xmath as the double of a
3-dimensional orientable handlebody @xmath of genus @xmath , we have
that the following hold up to isotopies:

-   each component of @xmath is divided in two arcs by the boundary of
    @xmath ;

-   one of such arcs lies in @xmath and the other one lies in the other
    copy of @xmath ;

-   the link is symmetric with respect to this decomposition, namely
    doing the double of @xmath equipped with one of these arcs for each
    pair, we get the whole link @xmath .

We introduced the definition of ribbon link (Definition 3.5.6 ) and
Remark 3.5.7 .

###### Lemma 3.9.6.

Every symmetric link in @xmath is ribbon.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath and @xmath be two handlebodies of genus @xmath such that
@xmath . Put the link @xmath in a symmetric position with respect to
@xmath and @xmath . For @xmath there is a projection @xmath such that
the image @xmath is a graph @xmath not depending on @xmath , where
@xmath . The vertices of @xmath are either 4-valent or 1-valent
(leaves). The 4-valent vertices of @xmath may be equipped with the
further intormation of the over/underpasses. The 1-valent vertices of
@xmath are the intersection points of @xmath with the surface @xmath .
The projection @xmath is injective everywhere except in the inverse
image of the 4-valent vertices of @xmath where it is @xmath to @xmath ,
moreover the inverse image of the 1-valent vertices are the fixed points
of @xmath .

Let @xmath be a collar of @xmath in @xmath that contains @xmath . The
projection @xmath extends to a projection @xmath such that the inverse
image of the points of @xmath that satisfy: @xmath if @xmath is a
1-valent vertex, while @xmath is an arc if @xmath is not a 1-valent
vertex. The union @xmath is a ribbon surface consisting of disks and
bounded by @xmath . The ribbon singularities are contained in the union
of the inverse images of the 4-valent vertices of @xmath . ∎

###### Lemma 3.9.7.

Every shadow link in @xmath with support a shadow of the 4-dimensional
handlebody with only @xmath gleams is symmetric, hence by Lemma 3.9.6 it
is ribbon.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be such a support. By Lemma 2.1.17 the polyhedron @xmath is a
spine of the 3-dimensional handlebody of genus @xmath , @xmath , and the
4-dimensional thickening @xmath is @xmath . The 4-dimensional thickening
of a region is the product with an interval of its 3-dimensional one in
@xmath . Hence the co-core of a region @xmath is the product of a
properly embedded arc @xmath in @xmath with @xmath . The boundary of the
co-core of a region @xmath is exactly the double of @xmath in the double
of @xmath , @xmath . Therefore the link is symmetric and by Lemma 3.9.6
the link is ribbon. ∎

In Proposition 3.9.9 we show that if the shadow link given by all the
regions of a shadow @xmath is ribbon, then also the one given by all the
regions of any shadow @xmath equivalent to @xmath is ribbon. To prove
this, we apply the following lemma to embedded pants coming from the
thickening of points of edges of the shadow.

###### Lemma 3.9.8.

Let @xmath be an embedding of a pair of pants in a 3-manifold @xmath and
let @xmath , @xmath and @xmath be the boundary components of @xmath . If
the link @xmath bounds a ribbon surface @xmath that is the union of two
disks and consists of two connected components of a bigger ribbon
surface @xmath . Then the link @xmath bounds a ribbon surface @xmath
such that

-   @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are disks;

-    the restriction of @xmath to the disks @xmath bounded by @xmath is
    @xmath , @xmath ;

-   @xmath extends to a ribbon surface @xmath ;

-    the restriction to @xmath does not intersect the restriction to the
    disk @xmath bounded by @xmath , @xmath .

###### Proof.

Take a parallel copy @xmath of @xmath , and let @xmath and @xmath be the
boundary components of @xmath . By “parallel copy” we mean a disjoint
copy that locally follows the part of the ribbon disks as in Fig. 3.7 .
Hence @xmath and @xmath are isotopic. Let the disk @xmath be the pair of
pants @xmath with @xmath and @xmath glued to two boundary components,
and let @xmath be a band in @xmath connecting those boundary components.
Since @xmath is the thickening of an arc and @xmath is just an annulus,
we can find an embedding @xmath such that @xmath is isotopic to @xmath ,
@xmath , and @xmath . Thus we define the ribbon disk @xmath as the union
of @xmath and @xmath . Then @xmath is the union of @xmath and @xmath and
@xmath is the union of @xmath and @xmath . ∎

We introduced the notions of “shadow moves” and “equivalent shadows”
(Definition 2.2.1 ).

###### Proposition 3.9.9.

Let @xmath and @xmath be two equivalent shadows. If the shadow link
given by all the regions of @xmath is ribbon then it is so also the one
given by all the regions of @xmath .

###### Proof.

A Y- graph is a graph like a Y: three edges all adjacent in a vertex and
with a free end. A Y-graph @xmath has a natural 2-dimensional thickening
@xmath that is a 2-disk in which the graph @xmath is properly embedded
and is equipped with the natural retraction @xmath (see Fig. 3.8 ). The
4-dimensional thickening of an edge @xmath of a shadow is the orientable
@xmath -bundle over its 3-dimensional thickening that is a @xmath
-bundle over an open interval or a circle (see Remark 2.1.14 and Theorem
2.1.16 ). Hence locally the 4-dimensional thickening of @xmath is @xmath
. This contributes to the boundary of the 4-manifold with the two copies
of @xmath glued together with the identity of @xmath , where @xmath is
the boundary of the 2-disk minus the open regular neighborhood of the
intersection of the Y-graph with the boundary of the disk (the black
bold lines of Fig. 3.8 form @xmath ). This is @xmath minus a tubular
neighborhood of three strands of the form @xmath , namely the product of
a pair of pants with @xmath . For each (internal) point @xmath of an
edge of the Y-graph, the double of @xmath (the red segment in Fig. 3.8 )
is the boundary of the co-core of the region where @xmath lies. In
@xmath there are two copies of @xmath glued together along @xmath . This
gluing form a pair of pants @xmath in the boundary of the 4-manifold
whose boundary is the union of the boundary of the co-cores of the
regions adjacent to the edge @xmath .

The shadows @xmath and @xmath are related by a sequence of shadow moves.
Every shadow move modifies the shadow just locally. They slightly modify
some regions, introduce a new one or remove an old one.

The boundary of the co-cores of the regions modified by a shadow move
are the same curves in the boundary of the 4-manifold given by them
before the application of the move. In fact we can take the point @xmath
that defines one such co-core outside the small part that is modified by
the move. In particular if these were boundary components of a ribbon
surface @xmath , they remain to be boundary components of one such
ribbon surface.

Now we consider a move that adds a new region @xmath . Take an edge
@xmath adjacent to @xmath . The edge @xmath touches @xmath and two old
regions, @xmath and @xmath (maybe @xmath ). Since by hypothesis the link
given by all the regions of the starting shadow is ribbon, the pant
@xmath has two ribbon boundary components that are the boundary of the
co-cores of @xmath and @xmath . Therefore by Lemma 3.9.8 @xmath gives a
ribbon disk bounded by the boundary of the co-core of @xmath that does
not intersect the the previous ribbon surface. Therefore the link given
by all the regions of the final shadow is ribbon.

If the move removes an old region the link given by all the regions of
the the second shadow is equal to the first link minus the component
given by the removed region. Therefore it would remain ribbon if it was
so. ∎

###### Remark 3.9.10.

If the answer to Question 2.2.10 were true we would conclude that every
shadow link with respect to a shadow of a 4-dimensional handlebody is
ribbon just using Proposition 3.9.9 , Lemma 3.9.7 and Lemma 3.9.6 .
Unfortunately we do not know if it is true or false.

Let @xmath be a handle-decomposition of a compact 4-manifold @xmath .
Every handle @xmath is diffeomorphic to @xmath , where @xmath is the
index of @xmath . The core of @xmath is what corresponds to @xmath ,
while the co-core is @xmath . If @xmath has no handle of index 3 and 4,
up to isotopies each 2-handle @xmath intersects the boundary of @xmath
with @xmath . Hence in this case the boundary of a co-core of a 2-handle
is a slice knot in @xmath with respect to @xmath .

###### Definition 3.9.11.

We say that a link in a closed orientable 3-manifold @xmath is a handle
link with respect to @xmath if @xmath is a compact orientable 4-manifold
bounded by @xmath and there is a handle-decomposition @xmath of @xmath ,
composed only by 0-, 1- and 2-handles and such that each component
@xmath of @xmath is the boundary of the co-core of a 2-handle @xmath of
@xmath . We say that @xmath is a support of @xmath .

###### Remark 3.9.12.

Almost all the known possible counter-examples of the slice-ribbon
conjecture are known to be handle link.

The following proposition shows that the notion of “shadow link” is
equivalent to the one of “handle link”.

###### Proposition 3.9.13.

@xmath

1.   Every shadow link is a handle link with respect to the same
    4-manifold.

2.   Every handle link is a shadow link with respect to the same
    4-manifold.

###### Proof.

@xmath Each triangulation of a shadow gives rise to a
handle-decomposition of the 4-manifold where each vertex of the
triangulation is the core of a 0-handle, each edge is the core of a
1-handle and each triangle is the core of a 2-handle. The co-core of a
region is isotopic to the co-core of each triangle that subdivides the
region.

@xmath Let @xmath be a support handle-decomposition of the handle link.
In Theorem 2.1.19 we constructed a shadow of the same 4-manifold
starting from @xmath . This shadow is constructed by taking a shadow of
the union of the 0- and 1-handles and then attaching disk regions to it.
Each region of the final step corresponds to a 2-handle of @xmath and
their co-cores coincide. Hence that shadow is a support for the link as
a shadow link. ∎

#### 3.9.2 Slice @xmath shadow ?

###### Question 3.9.14.

Is every slice link a handle link (hence a shadow link) with respect to
the same 4-manifold?

###### Remark 3.9.15.

If both the answers to Question 2.2.10 and Question 3.9.14 were true we
could conclude that every slice link is ribbon just using Remark 3.9.10
. Unfortunately we do not know if they are true or false.

By “the contribute to the boundary” of a 2-handle @xmath attached along
a map @xmath , we mean the part @xmath .

The following theorem partially answers positively to Question 3.9.14 .

###### Theorem 3.9.16.

Every slice link @xmath of a closed 3-manifold @xmath with respect to a
compact orientable 4-manifold @xmath ( @xmath ) can be obtained in the
following way:

1.   take a 4-manifold @xmath with a handle-decomposition with just 0-,
    1- and 2-handles;

2.   construct a link @xmath taking the boundary of the co-core of some
    2-handles of @xmath ;

3.   add some 3-handles to @xmath whose attaching spheres do not
    intersect the contribution to the boundary of the 2-handles of
    @xmath giving the components of @xmath .

###### Proof.

Thick @xmath to @xmath . Attach a 4-dimensional 2-handle @xmath over
each component of the slice link @xmath in @xmath . This forms a
cobordism from @xmath to another compact orientable 3-manifold @xmath .
Moreover this is a 4-sub-manifold of @xmath . It is the regular
neighborhood of the union of the boundary and the slice disks bounded by
the components of the link. In fact the core of each @xmath is the slice
disk in @xmath bounded by the attaching curve of @xmath . Complete this
cobordism to get @xmath (that is a cobordism from @xmath to the empty
set @xmath ) by using only 1-, 2-, 3- and 4-handles. We can avoid using
0-handles because they would just add connected components of the
4-manifold or create complementary pairs of (0-1)-handles. Take the dual
of this cobordism and handle-decomposition. Hence we get a cobordism
starting from the empty set and arriving to @xmath that is @xmath with a
handle-decomposition without 4-handles. The co-cores of the dual of the
@xmath ’s are the cores of the @xmath ’s, hence their boundary are the
components of the link.

On the boundary view point attaching a 4-dimensional 3-handle is
selecting a 2-sided embedded 2-sphere @xmath (a sphere with a tubular
neighborhood diffeomorphic to @xmath ), cutting the 3-manifold along
@xmath and gluing a 3-disk along the two spheres created by the cut.
Since a 3-handle intersects the boundary just in two disjoint 3-disks we
can slide them with an isotopy so that they do not intersect the
attaching tori of the dual of the @xmath ’s. In particular we can attach
the dual of the @xmath ’s before attaching the 3-handles. ∎

###### Proposition 3.9.17.

Let @xmath be a link. Then @xmath is a handle link (hence a shadow link)
with respect to some simply connected 4-manifold @xmath . Furthermore
@xmath is homotopically equivalent to a bouquet of 2-spheres.

###### Proof.

Attach to @xmath a 2-handle @xmath along each component @xmath of the
link. We get a cobordism from @xmath to a closed 3-manifold @xmath that
is obtained by surgery on @xmath . We follow Lemma 2.1.20 to get a
cobordism @xmath from the empty set to @xmath with a
handle-decomposition with one 0-handle and some 2-handles. Complete the
cobordism @xmath adding the dual of the 2-handles @xmath ’s. The
components of @xmath are the co-cores of these latest 2-handles. ∎

## Chapter 4 The Tait conjecture in @xmath

We introduced the notions of “diagram” of a link in @xmath ,
“H-decomposition”, “e-shadow”, “alternating diagram”, “alternating
link”, “crossing number”, “ @xmath -homologically trivial” and “Kauffman
state” (Section 1.5 ).

The Tait conjecture states that reduced alternating diagrams of links in
@xmath have the minimal number of crossings (see Section 3.4 ). In this
chapter we extend the result to alternating links in the connected sum
@xmath of @xmath copies of @xmath . We follow [ Ca1 ] and [ Ca3 ] .

We find a dichotomy given by the @xmath -homology class of links: the
appropriate version of the statement is false for @xmath -homologically
non trivial links. On the other hand, in @xmath and @xmath the
appropriate version of the statement is true for @xmath -homologically
trivial links, and the proof also uses the Jones polynomial. In the
general case the method applied to @xmath -homologically trivial links
provides just a partial result and we are not able to say if the
appropriate statement is true. As we saw in Proposition 1.5.18 , the
Kauffman bracket is also very sensitive to the @xmath -homology class.

The results for the case of links in @xmath need just some basic notions
of skein theory, while the general case of links in @xmath needs more
complicated tools. We prove the results for general @xmath using
Turaev’s shadows (see Chapter 2 , Section 2.4 and Remark 2.4.5 ).

The proof of the results is based on the study of the breadth of the
Kauffman bracket. The Kauffman bracket of links in @xmath is an integral
Laurent polynomial (Proposition 1.5.14 ) and we can use the classical
notion of “breadth” (Definition 3.4.3 ). The Kauffman bracket of links
in @xmath for @xmath may not be a Laurent polynomial, but just a
rational function (see Example 1.5.8 ), hence we need to extend the
notion of “breadth” (Definition 4.1.14 ).

### 4.1 The extended Tait conjecture

In this section we introduce some further notions, give some results,
state the main theorems (Theorem 4.1.16 and Theorem 4.1.17 ), and we
show that the natural extension of the conjecture is false if we remove
the hypothesis of being @xmath -homologically trivial or, in the case
@xmath , if we substitute “ simple ” with “ quasi-simple ” (Definition
4.1.1 and Definition 4.1.2 ).

#### 4.1.1 Simple diagrams

###### Definition 4.1.1.

A link diagram @xmath is simple if there is no disk @xmath embedded in
@xmath whose boundary intersects @xmath exactly in one crossing (as the
ones of Fig. 4.1 , the yellow square is the disk @xmath ), and @xmath
has no crossings adjacent to two (possibly coinciding) external regions
(as the ones of Fig. 4.2 ).

There are no diagrams in the disk @xmath as the ones of Fig. 4.2 that
are not as the ones of Fig. 4.1 , hence clearly simple diagrams in
@xmath are exactly the reduced ones (Definition 3.4.1 : a diagram
without crossings as the ones of Fig. 3.1 ). In @xmath every link
diagram with the minimal number of crossings is reduced. It would be
nice if in @xmath every link except some obvious selected cases like the
knot @xmath in @xmath (Subsection 6.1.2 ), had a simple diagram with the
minimal number of crossings. With the following proposition we can note
that almost all links have one such diagram. The fact that we can not
remove all the crossings as the ones of Fig. 4.2 is the reason why we
adopt the word “simple” instead of “reduced”.

###### Definition 4.1.2.

A quasi-simple diagram is a link diagram @xmath without crossings as the
ones in Fig. 4.1 and with at most one crossing as the ones in Fig. 4.2 .

###### Proposition 4.1.3.

@xmath

1.   Every diagram @xmath can be replaced by another diagram @xmath
    without crossings as the ones of Fig. 4.1 , with no more crossings (
    @xmath , where @xmath is the number of crossings of @xmath ) and
    representing the same link in @xmath by the same e-shadow
    (Definition 1.5.2 ).

2.   If a link in @xmath does not intersect twice a non separating
    2-sphere, it has a simple diagram with the minimal number of
    crossings.

3.   For every e-shadow, every link in @xmath is represented by a
    quasi-simple diagram with the minimal number of crossings for that
    e-shadow.

###### Proof.

To get the first statement we simply apply an isotopy on the handlebody
where the punctured disk lies. The second statement follows from the
first one.

Consider the case @xmath . Applying some Reidemeister moves we can put
all the crossings as the ones in Fig. 4.2 in the same band, one after
the other (see the first move in Fig. 4.3 ). We can suppose that these
crossings are all of the same type: the band is represented by an
alternating part of diagram (see the second move of Fig. 4.3 ). If we
apply the move described in Subsection 1.5.1 we add or remove two
crossings as the ones in Fig. 4.2 (see the last three moves in Fig. 4.3
). Therefore, given a @xmath -crossing diagram @xmath with @xmath
crossings as the ones in Fig. 4.2 , we can get another diagram @xmath
representing the same link which has @xmath crossings, where @xmath if
@xmath and @xmath if @xmath , and has @xmath crossings as the ones in
Fig. 4.2 . ∎

Unfortunately we do not have an analogous version of Proposition 4.1.3
-(3.) for @xmath .

###### Question 4.1.4.

Are there links in @xmath with crossing number bigger than @xmath and
not admitting a simple diagram in the annulus with the minimal number of
crossings? Is it true that links in @xmath which are alternating, non
H-split (Definition 4.1.10 ), intersecting twice a non separating
2-sphere, @xmath -homologically trivial and not bounding an orientable
surface, do not have a simple diagram in the annulus with the minimal
number of crossings? Are these links the only ones not admitting such
diagrams?

###### Remark 4.1.5.

Applying the moves seen in the proof of Proposition 4.1.3 -(3.) we can
substitute a crossing as the ones in Fig. 4.2 with its mirror image and
get another diagram representing the same link in @xmath by the same
embedding of the punctured disk. However the induced framings are
different.

The following proposition shows that Theorem 4.1.16 becomes false if, in
the case @xmath , we simply replace “simple” with “quasi-simple”.

###### Proposition 4.1.6 ([Ca1]).

The diagrams in Fig. 4.5 represent the same @xmath -homologically
trivial knot in @xmath .

###### Proof.

By Remark 4.1.5 we can perform the moves in Fig. 4.4 to get diagrams of
the same link in @xmath . ∎

#### 4.1.2 More notions and results

Let @xmath be a link diagram and @xmath a state of @xmath . We
introduced the following notations (Section 1.5 ):

-   @xmath is the number of homotopically trivial components of the
    splitting of @xmath with the state @xmath ;

-   @xmath is the sum over the crossings of the signs assigned by the
    state @xmath ;

-   @xmath is the diagram obtained removing the homotopically trivial
    components from the splitting of @xmath with @xmath ;

-   @xmath is the shadow collapsing onto a graph of genus @xmath that is
    associated to the state @xmath (Remark 2.4.5 ).

###### Definition 4.1.7.

Let @xmath be a @xmath -crossing link diagram. We denote by @xmath the
minimal number of holes of a punctured disk containing @xmath that is
contained in @xmath . We denote by @xmath and @xmath the constant states
of @xmath assigning respectively always @xmath and always @xmath . The
diagram @xmath is said to be plus-adequate if @xmath for every @xmath
such that @xmath , namely for every state @xmath differing from @xmath
only at a crossing. It is said to be minus-adequate if @xmath for every
@xmath such that @xmath . The diagram @xmath is adequate if it is both
plus-adequate and minus-adequate. A link diagram is connected if it is
so as a 4-valent graph.

###### Remark 4.1.8.

If the diagram is contained in a 2-disk, being plus-adequate (resp.
minus-adequate) is equivalent to the following fact: in the splitting of
the diagram @xmath corresponding to @xmath (resp. @xmath ), for every
crossing @xmath of @xmath the two strands replacing @xmath lie on two
different components of that splitting of @xmath (remark after [ Li ,
Definition 5.2] ). If the diagram is not contained in a 2-disk the two
conditions are not related: Fig. 4.6 shows two diagrams in the annulus (
@xmath ) satisfying the condition described above, but only the diagram
on the right is plus-adequate.

###### Proposition 4.1.9 ([Ca3]).

Fix an e-shadow of @xmath . Every simple, alternating, connected link
diagram @xmath that represents a @xmath -homologically trivial link in
@xmath is adequate.

###### Proof.

Every link diagram @xmath divides the punctured disk in connected
regions of dimension 2. We say that a region is external if it touches
the boundary of @xmath , otherwise it is internal . Since @xmath is
connected we have that in the internal regions are 2-disks. We can give
to the regions a black/white coloring as in a chessboard. The link
represented by @xmath is @xmath -homologically trivial, hence the
external regions are colored in the same way. We say that a boundary
component of a region is internal if it is different from a boundary
component of @xmath . Since @xmath is alternating the splitting with
@xmath is equal to the union of the internal boundary components of all
the black regions or the white ones (see Fig. 4.7 ). We assume that the
components of the splitting with @xmath bound the black regions, hence
the splitting of @xmath with @xmath is equal to the union of the
internal boundary components of all the white regions. Changing the
splitting of a crossing either merges two different components of the
splitting of @xmath , or divides one component in two. The diagram
@xmath is not plus-adequate if and only if there is a crossing @xmath in
@xmath such that after splitting every crossing different from @xmath in
the positive way we have a situation as in Fig. 4.8 : if we change the
splitting from @xmath to @xmath on @xmath we get one more homotopically
trivial component by

1.  dividing in two a previous homotopically trivial component (Fig. 4.8
    -(left));

2.  dividing in two a homotopically non trivial component (Fig. 4.8
    -(center));

3.  fusing two homotopically non trivial components (Fig. 4.8 -(right)).

In the various cases this implies that

1.  there is a black region that is adjacent twice to the same crossing;

2.  the considered homotopically non trivial component must bound an
    external region that is a black annulus adjacent twice to the same
    crossing;

3.  the two considered homotopically non trivial components must bound
    two external regions and these are black and adjacent to the same
    crossing.

The first two cases happen only if the crossing is as in Fig. 4.1 . The
third case happens only if the crossing is as in Fig. 4.2 . Therefore
all these cases are avoided by our hypothesis. In the same way we prove
minus-adequacy. ∎

###### Definition 4.1.10.

A link @xmath is H-split if it has a non connected diagram in some
e-shadow (non connected as a planar graph).

The homotopic genus of @xmath is the minimum of @xmath (Definition 4.1.7
) as @xmath varies among all diagrams of @xmath in any e-shadow.

###### Proposition 4.1.11 ([Ca1]).

A link @xmath is H-split if and only if there are two non empty
sub-links, @xmath and @xmath , such that @xmath and they are separated
by either a trivial sphere or a Heegaard torus. That means that either
there is a 3-ball @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath , or there are two
disjoint solid tori, @xmath and @xmath such that @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath ( @xmath is the Heegaard torus).

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be non empty link diagrams such that @xmath is the disjoint
union of @xmath and @xmath . Up to enumeration there are two cases:
@xmath is contained in a 2-disk disjoint from @xmath , and neither
@xmath nor @xmath are contained in a 2-disk. Fix an e-shadow. In the
first case we have a 3-ball in @xmath that contains the components of
the link that project on @xmath and is disjoint from the ones that
project on @xmath . In the second case we have a simple closed curve in
the annulus that is isotopic to the core, this defines a separating
Heegaard torus. Conversely, if we have a sphere or a Heegaard torus that
separate the link components we can find one such diagram for some
e-shadow. ∎

###### Proposition 4.1.12 ([Ca3]).

The homotopic genus of a link @xmath is equal to the minimum @xmath such
that the complement has a connected sum decomposition of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some link @xmath .

###### Proof.

If @xmath has homotopic genus @xmath there is a diagram @xmath that
represents @xmath via some e-shadow and is contained in a disk with
@xmath holes lying in @xmath . Hence there is a factor @xmath in a
connected sum decomposition of the complement of @xmath . On the other
hand if we have a decomposition @xmath , we can get a diagram @xmath
representing @xmath via some e-shadow by adding @xmath 1-handles to
@xmath equipped with a diagram @xmath of @xmath . This implies that the
homotopic genus of @xmath is at most @xmath . ∎

###### Remark 4.1.13.

By Proposition 4.1.12 if a link @xmath has homotopic genus @xmath , its
complement @xmath is reducible, in particular it is not hyperbolic. By
Proposition 4.1.12 and Remark 1.3.14 the links with homotopic genus
@xmath can be seen as links in @xmath , hence the really interesting
links in @xmath are the ones with homotopic genus @xmath .

We need to extend the notion of “ breadth ” from Laurent polynomials to
rational functions:

###### Definition 4.1.14.

Let @xmath be a rational function and @xmath and @xmath be two
polynomials. The degree , or the order at @xmath , of @xmath is the
difference of the maximal degree of the non zero monomials of @xmath ,
@xmath , and the maximal degree of the non zero monomials of @xmath ,
@xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The order at @xmath of @xmath is the difference of the minimal degree of
the non zero monomials of @xmath , @xmath , and the minimal degree of
the non zero monomials of @xmath , @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The breadth of @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath we have @xmath and @xmath and we define @xmath .

Clearly the definitions above do not depend on the choice of @xmath and
@xmath . If @xmath , @xmath is equal to the multiplicity of @xmath in
@xmath as a zero. If @xmath , @xmath is the negative of the order of
@xmath in @xmath as a pole. If @xmath , @xmath is the negative of the
multiplicity of @xmath in @xmath as a zero. If @xmath , @xmath is the
order of @xmath in @xmath as a pole. Here are some easy and useful
properties:

-   if @xmath then @xmath ;

-   @xmath ;

-   if @xmath is symmetric (for all @xmath we have @xmath ), then @xmath
    ;

-   @xmath ;

-   @xmath if @xmath ;

-   @xmath ;

-   @xmath if @xmath ;

-   @xmath , @xmath ;

-   @xmath , @xmath .

We recall that @xmath is the Kauffman bracket of a 0-framed
homotopically trivial unknot colored with @xmath . We have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We note that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be a link diagram. Using the skein relations we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Moreover we recall that the shadow formula applied on @xmath gives
@xmath (Remark 2.4.5 ), hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath runs over all the admissible colorings of @xmath that
extend the coloring of the boundary (that is @xmath ), @xmath runs over
all the regions of @xmath (the external regions do not matter because
either they are annuli or their color is @xmath ), @xmath is the Euler
characteristic of @xmath , and @xmath is the color of @xmath given by
@xmath . Therefore @xmath is a symmetric function of @xmath , namely
there are two polynomials @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Definition 4.1.15.

Let @xmath be a state of the link diagram @xmath . We set:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that if @xmath the quantity @xmath is always null.

#### 4.1.3 Main theorems

###### Theorem 4.1.16 ([Ca3]).

Let @xmath be an alternating, simple diagram that represents a link
@xmath by an e-shadow @xmath . Suppose that @xmath is non H-split ( e.g.
a knot), @xmath -homologically trivial and with homotopic genus @xmath .
Then for any diagram @xmath that represents @xmath by an e-shadow @xmath
we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are the number of crossings of @xmath and @xmath
. In particular if @xmath , we have that @xmath is the crossing number
of @xmath .

###### Theorem 4.1.17 ([Ca3]).

Let @xmath be a @xmath -crossing, connected, alternating diagram of a
@xmath -homologically trivial link in @xmath without crossings as the
ones of Fig. 4.1 and not contained in a disk with less than @xmath holes
( @xmath ). Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the number of crossings adjacent to two external regions
(as the ones of Fig. 4.2 ), neither adjacent twice to just one external
region.

Theorem 4.1.17 gives us criteria to detect if a link in @xmath is
alternating:

###### Corollary 4.1.18 ([Ca3]).

Let @xmath be a non H-split @xmath -homologically trivial link.

1.   If @xmath is not a multiple of @xmath , then @xmath is not
    alternating.

2.   If @xmath is not a positive multiple of @xmath , then @xmath is not
    alternating with a simple diagram.

3.   If @xmath has homotopic genus @xmath , @xmath does not intersect
    twice any non separating 2-sphere and @xmath , then either @xmath is
    not alternating, or @xmath has crossing number lower than @xmath .

###### Proof.

It follows from Theorem 4.1.17 . To get the second statement we must
note that every connected diagram in @xmath that is not contained in a
disk with @xmath holes has at least @xmath crossings. ∎

###### Example 4.1.19.

The knots represented by the diagrams in Fig. 4.9 ( @xmath ) are @xmath
-homologically trivial and have Kauffman bracket equal to @xmath (left)
and @xmath (right). Therefore by Corollary 4.1.18 -(2.) they are not
alternating.

By Corollary 4.1.18 -(1.) the links in Example 1.5.8 -(6) and Example
1.5.8 -(7) ( @xmath ) are non alternating. By Corollary 4.1.18 -(3.) the
knot in Example 1.5.8 -(5) ( @xmath ) either is non alternating or has
crossing number lower than @xmath . For all the links in @xmath with
crossing number @xmath there is a non separating sphere that intersects
the link at most twice. The knot in Example 1.5.8 -(5) does not have one
such sphere, hence it is not alternating.

Unfortunately we are not able to say if the link in Example 1.5.8 -(11)
( @xmath ) is alternating.

#### 4.1.4 Alternating diagrams for @xmath-homologically non trivial
links

###### Proposition 4.1.20 ([Ca1]).

Once an e-shadow of @xmath is fixed, two link diagrams in @xmath
differing only in a part of the punctured disk that is a proper
embedding of @xmath where they are of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

represent the same link in @xmath . Therefore the diagrams in Fig. 4.11
represent the same knot @xmath in @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let us consider the diagram with three parallel strands. If we apply the
second Kirby move on the left strand of the initial diagram over a
0-framed unknot encircling the three strands (the move described in
Subsection 1.5.1 ), we get the second diagram of the sequence in Fig.
4.10 or its mirror image. To get the third diagram of Fig. 4.10 we apply
some Reidemeister moves. The fourth one is obtained applying again the
previous moves to the third diagram but on the opposite sense. The other
equivalences of Fig. 4.10 come applying Reidemeister moves. ∎

The knot @xmath of Proposition 4.1.20 is @xmath -homologically non
trivial. The diagrams are all alternating and simple but they have
different numbers of crossings. Therefore the natural extension of the
Tait conjecture for @xmath -homologically non trivial links in @xmath is
false for any @xmath . We think that the homotopic genus of @xmath is
@xmath , of course if @xmath it is so. In fact @xmath is not contained
in a 3-ball.

### 4.2 Proof of the theorems

In this section we prove Theorem 4.1.16 and Theorem 4.1.17 . We follow
the classical proof of Kauffman, K. Murasugi and Thistlethwaite (for
instance we can also see [ Li , Chapter 5] ) applying some modifications
for our case.

The following lemma is extremely useful to manage the quantity @xmath
and is no needed for the @xmath case.

###### Lemma 4.2.1 ([Ca3]).

Let @xmath be a diagram of a @xmath -homologically trivial link in
@xmath and let @xmath be a state of @xmath such that @xmath is non
empty. Then the following hold:

1.   there is a unique admissible coloring @xmath of the shadow @xmath
    that extends the boundary coloring and assigns only the colors
    @xmath and @xmath ;

2.  -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

3.  -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Every meromorphic function @xmath is of the form @xmath , where @xmath
is a unique non zero complex number and @xmath is a unique meromorphic
function such that @xmath . The equality @xmath holds if and only if
either @xmath or @xmath . For an admissible coloring @xmath of the
shadow @xmath let @xmath be its contribution to the shadow formula:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We get the second statement by showing that @xmath and the sign does not
depend on @xmath for each coloring @xmath . We have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The regions given by a diagram are colored odd or even like in a
chessboard. Therefore the parity of the colors of the regions does not
depend on the choice of the admissible coloring. Hence @xmath does not
depend on @xmath . We have @xmath . Therefore @xmath .

Since the link represented by @xmath is @xmath -homologically trivial
and the first skein relation does not change the @xmath -homology class,
we have that the link @xmath represented by @xmath is @xmath
-homologically trivial. The link @xmath is contained in the punctured
disk @xmath that is contained in the handlebody @xmath whose double is
@xmath . Hence @xmath . Therefore we can find a surface @xmath merging
some internal regions of @xmath (given by @xmath ) and whose boundary is
@xmath . We color with @xmath the regions that compose @xmath and the
annuli attached to the components of @xmath , and we color with @xmath
the remaining ones. We found an admissible coloring of @xmath that
extends the boundary coloring and assigns just color @xmath and @xmath .
Such coloring is unique because, as we observed before, the parity of
the color of a region does not depend on the admissible coloring. Let
@xmath be such coloring. Since the Euler characteristics of the regions
are all non positive and the colorings are all non negative, we have
@xmath for every admissible coloring @xmath . Therefore using this and
the second statement we get the third statement. ∎

Although we do not need it to prove the main theorems, it is interesting
to get also a lower bound of the quantity @xmath :

###### Proposition 4.2.2 ([Ca3]).

Let @xmath be a link diagram and @xmath a state such that @xmath is non
empty. For @xmath let @xmath be the number of internal regions given by
@xmath that are disks with @xmath holes. Then

1.  -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

2.  -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

###### Proof.

@xmath We proceed by induction on @xmath . If @xmath is contained in an
annulus ( @xmath ) obviously the equality holds. Suppose that the
inequality is true for every diagram @xmath such that @xmath . There are
two cases:

1.  there is an internal region that is a disk with @xmath holes (
    @xmath ) and the other internal regions are annuli ( @xmath for
    @xmath );

2.  there are no internal regions that are disks with @xmath holes (
    @xmath ).

In the first case the equality holds. Suppose we are in the second case.
The diagram @xmath is obtained merging three disjoint diagrams, @xmath ,
such that @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath is a (maybe empty) set of
parallel curves encircling @xmath . If @xmath is non empty there is an
@xmath such that @xmath and @xmath and @xmath for @xmath , @xmath . The
number @xmath is the number of holes of the region bounded by the most
internal component of @xmath . If @xmath is emty @xmath for all @xmath .
We conclude using the inductive hypothesis on @xmath and @xmath .

@xmath Clearly @xmath , furthermore the Euler characteristic of the
regions of the shadow @xmath is non positive. Therefore we have the
inequalities on the left and right of the statement. For the the point
@xmath and Lemma 4.2.1 -(3.) we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

∎

###### Definition 4.2.3.

Enumerate the boundary components of @xmath . Let @xmath be a link
diagram and @xmath a state of @xmath . We denote by @xmath the number of
components of the splitting of @xmath with @xmath that are parallel to
the @xmath boundary component of @xmath ( @xmath ), and with @xmath the
total number of homotopically non trivial components of the splitting of
@xmath with @xmath .

For @xmath it is not true that @xmath , but it is true if @xmath . The
links represented by a diagram @xmath are @xmath -homologically trivial
if and only if @xmath for any state @xmath and any @xmath . If this
holds, since @xmath , for every @xmath we have that @xmath if and only
if @xmath . These simple properties furnish some more information about
the Kauffman bracket of links in @xmath (we do not need it to prove the
main theorem):

###### Proposition 4.2.4 ([Ca3]).

Fix an e-shadow of @xmath . Let @xmath be a link diagram of a @xmath
-homologically trivial link in @xmath , and let @xmath be a state of
@xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

If @xmath for some @xmath ( @xmath ) then @xmath is contained in the
union of two disjoint annuli, @xmath and @xmath , that encircle the
boundary components different from the @xmath one. Let @xmath be the
diagram in the annulus @xmath . Then by Remark 1.3.14 @xmath where
@xmath and @xmath . Hence by [ Ca1 , Lemma 3.3] @xmath is a positive
integer number and so @xmath .

Suppose @xmath for all @xmath . The shadow @xmath has a region that is a
2-disk with two holes and the other ones are annuli. By Lemma 4.2.1 we
can compute @xmath using the admissible coloring @xmath , @xmath . Hence
@xmath , where @xmath is the region that is a disk with two holes. For
any admissible coloring @xmath of @xmath we have that the color @xmath
if and only if @xmath . We conclude since @xmath assigns just color
@xmath and @xmath . ∎

Let @xmath be a @xmath -crossing, connected diagram with @xmath that
represents a @xmath -homologically trivial link in @xmath by an
e-shadow. Then for a state @xmath we get

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Therefore

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The following is the part that needs most work to get the final result.
If @xmath there are less cases to analyze and @xmath is always null,
hence the proof is much easier:

###### Lemma 4.2.5 ([Ca3]).

Let @xmath be a @xmath -crossing, connected diagram of a @xmath
-homologically trivial link in @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Moreover if @xmath is adequate the equality holds:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

For every state @xmath we denote by @xmath and @xmath respectively the
order at @xmath and in @xmath of @xmath . Hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the equality holds if there is a unique maximal @xmath for @xmath
and a unique minimal @xmath for @xmath . We have:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Let @xmath and @xmath be two states differing only in a crossing @xmath
where @xmath and @xmath . We have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

After the splitting of every crossing different from @xmath we have some
cases up to mirror image. Four of them are divided in three types and
are shown in Fig. 4.8 (we pictured just an homotopically non trivial
annulus where the diagrams hold): the crossing @xmath lies on a
component contained in an annulus, @xmath . In the remaining cases
@xmath lies on a component that is not contained in an annulus, @xmath ,
they are shown in Fig. 4.12 (we pictured just a disk with two holes that
is not homotopically equivalent to an annulus where the diagrams hold).
Now we better examine the four types of case in order to get information
about @xmath , and get @xmath and @xmath .

In the first two types of case (Fig. 4.8 -(left) and Fig. 4.8 -(center))
@xmath , hence @xmath . Therefore @xmath , and @xmath .

In the third type of case (Fig. 4.8 -(right)) @xmath and @xmath differ
by the removal or the addition of an annulus region that produces the
fusion or the division of previous regions. Suppose we are in the third
case and the splitting with @xmath is obtained fusing two components of
the splitting with @xmath (the other case is analogous). Then @xmath is
obtained from @xmath removing two parallel components. The regions of
@xmath that do not touch the selected parallel components remain
unchanged in @xmath . The selected components of @xmath bound an annulus
region @xmath . The annulus @xmath touches two different regions, @xmath
and @xmath , that are disks respectively with @xmath and @xmath holes.
In @xmath the regions @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are replaced with a
region @xmath that is a disk with @xmath holes. Let @xmath and @xmath be
the admissible colorings of @xmath and @xmath that extend the boundary
coloring and assign only color @xmath and @xmath (see Lemma 4.2.1 ). We
have two cases:

1.  @xmath and @xmath ;

2.  @xmath and @xmath .

Since @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , we get that @xmath .
Therefore @xmath and @xmath .

Suppose we are in the fourth type of case (Fig. 4.12 ) and the splitting
with @xmath is obtained dividing in two a component of the splitting
with @xmath (the other case is analogous). In the same way we get @xmath
from @xmath . We have that the selected component of @xmath bounds on a
side a disk with @xmath holes, @xmath , and on the other one a disk with
@xmath holes, @xmath , while those two components of @xmath together
bound an internal region with @xmath holes, @xmath , and two different
punctured disks with @xmath and @xmath holes, respectively @xmath and
@xmath . Again, let @xmath and @xmath be the admissible colorings of
@xmath and @xmath that extend the boundary coloring and assign only the
colors @xmath and @xmath (see Lemma 4.2.1 ). We have two cases:

1.  @xmath and @xmath ;

2.  @xmath and @xmath .

Since @xmath and @xmath we get @xmath in the first case, and @xmath in
the second one. Therefore in each case @xmath and @xmath .

Given a state @xmath we can connect it to @xmath finding a sequence of
states @xmath such that @xmath differs from @xmath only in a crossing
and @xmath . Analogously for @xmath . Hence @xmath and @xmath . Thus we
have the first statement.

If the diagram is plus-adequate (resp. minus-adequate) the fourth type
of case (Fig. 4.12 ) is not allowed and it holds @xmath ( @xmath ) for
each @xmath such that @xmath ( @xmath ). Namely we have a strict
inequality already from the beginning of the sequence @xmath . This
proves the second statement. ∎

###### Lemma 4.2.6 ([Ca3]).

Let @xmath be a @xmath -crossing, connected diagram with @xmath of a
@xmath -homologically trivial link in @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

We proceed by induction on @xmath . We have @xmath , and, up to
homeomorphism of @xmath , there are exactly @xmath diagrams with these
characteristics (connected, @xmath , and representing a @xmath
-homologically trivial link) and with @xmath crossings: the ones
described in Fig. 4.13 . Now we prove the statement for the diagrams
with @xmath crossings (the base for the induction on @xmath ) by
induction on @xmath .

For @xmath we have just a homotopically trivial circle and its Kauffman
bracket is @xmath , hence the statement holds. Suppose that the
statement is true for such diagrams in @xmath with @xmath crossings. We
split the crossing on the right of Fig. 4.13 . The result is a diagram
obtained taking a one of those diagrams @xmath in @xmath and either
adding an hole in the external region surrounding the hole on the right
(according to the figure) of @xmath , or adding a hole in the internal
region and surrounding it with a circle. We did not add any
homotopically trivial components, hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now suppose that the statement is true for all diagrams in @xmath with
less than @xmath crossings. We claim, and prove later, that there is a
crossing @xmath of @xmath and a splitting @xmath of @xmath with the same
characteristics of @xmath (connected and @xmath ). We can suppose that
the splitting of @xmath is done in the positive way (the negative way is
analogous), hence @xmath and @xmath . Therefore

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Finally we prove the claim. Since @xmath is connected every crossing has
a splitting that is still connected. If there is a crossing not adjacent
to two external regions, every splitting @xmath of the crossing
satisfies @xmath . Since @xmath , we get the previous case if @xmath has
no more than @xmath crossings adjacent to two external regions. If there
are at least @xmath crossings adjacent to two external regions, we take
as @xmath one of them, its connected splitting @xmath satisfies @xmath .
∎

###### Lemma 4.2.7 ([Ca3]).

Let @xmath be a @xmath -crossing alternating connected link diagram with
@xmath that represents a @xmath -homologically trivial link in @xmath .
Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

The number of edges of @xmath as a planar graph is @xmath , hence with a
computation of Euler characteristic of @xmath we get that the sum of the
Euler characteristics of the regions is @xmath . All the internal
regions are disks and there are @xmath external regions that are annuli.
Thus there are @xmath internal regions. The diagram @xmath has a region
that is a disk with @xmath holes, and the others are annuli. Thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The regions of @xmath are all disks. Thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since the link is alternating, the number of internal regions is equal
to @xmath . Therefore

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

∎

###### Proof of Theorem 4.1.16.

Every diagram @xmath of @xmath for any e-shadow must be connected and
with @xmath . By Proposition 4.1.9 , Lemma 4.2.5 , Lemma 4.2.6 and Lemma
4.2.7 we get

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is the quantity @xmath related to the diagram @xmath .
Therefore @xmath . If @xmath , @xmath , but @xmath and @xmath are
integers, hence @xmath . ∎

###### Proof of Theorem 4.1.17.

We have already proved the case @xmath in Lemma 4.2.7 . Suppose @xmath .
We proceed by induction on @xmath . We apply the second identity of Fig.
1.12 (with @xmath ) near one such crossing. We get @xmath , where @xmath
is a @xmath -crossing, connected, alternating diagram with @xmath and
@xmath crossings adjacent twice to a region. We have that @xmath , where
@xmath is a link diiaigram in @xmath with the same characteristics of
@xmath . Moreover we can easily get a diagram @xmath representing the
same link of @xmath and is connected, alternating, with @xmath and has
@xmath crossings. Therefore by the inductive hypothesis

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

∎

### 4.3 Open questions

In this final section we ask some open questions whose solution in the
positive would produce a sharper, or more complete, result than Theorem
4.1.16 , and we provide some information that suggests that the natural
extension of the Tait conjecture in @xmath could be false for @xmath .

The first obvious question is the natural extension of the Tait
conjecture:

###### Question 4.3.1.

Fix an e-shadow of @xmath . Let @xmath be a connected, alternating,
simple diagram of a @xmath -homologically trivial link @xmath that is
non H-split and with homotopic genus @xmath . Is the number of crossings
of @xmath equal to the crossing number of @xmath ?

The following two questions aim to remove from Theorem 4.1.16 the
hypothesis of “homotopic genus @xmath ” and “non H-split”.

###### Question 4.3.2.

Let @xmath be an alternating connected link diagram. Once an e-shadow of
@xmath is fixed, is the link represented by @xmath non H-split?

###### Question 4.3.3.

Let @xmath be a connected, alternating link diagram. Is the homotopic
genus of the links represented by @xmath equal to @xmath ?

###### Remark 4.3.4.

If for every connected diagram @xmath with @xmath and representing a
@xmath -homologically trivial link in @xmath , we had

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we could improve Theorem 4.1.16 and answer positively to Question 4.3.1
. Unfortunately it is not true: a diagram @xmath is shown in Example
1.5.8 - @xmath , @xmath is simple, connected, with @xmath , represents a
@xmath -homologically trivial link, and it satisfies @xmath , @xmath ,
hence @xmath .

In Remark 4.3.4 we did not require that the diagrams represent
alternating links, and we know that the shown example represents a non
alternating link (see Example 4.1.19 ). So, it is natural to ask the
following:

###### Question 4.3.5.

Let @xmath be a connected (maybe not alternating) diagram with @xmath
that represents an alternating @xmath -homologically trivial link in
@xmath . Is it true that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

## Chapter 5 A generalization of Eisermann’s theorem

We introduced the notions of “ribbon surface”, “ribbon link”, “slice
link”, …(Section 3.5 ).

Eisermann showed that the Jones polynomial of a @xmath -component ribbon
link @xmath is divided by the Jones polynomial of the trivial @xmath
-component link (see Section 3.6 and [ E ] ). In this chapter we improve
this theorem by extending its range of application from links in @xmath
to colored knotted trivalent graphs in @xmath , the connected sum of
@xmath copies of @xmath . We follow [ CaMa ] .

We show in particular that if the Kauffman bracket of a knot in @xmath
has a pole in @xmath of order @xmath , the ribbon genus of the knot is
at least @xmath .

We prove these estimates using Turaev’s shadows (see Chapter 2 and
Section 2.4 ). We need to extend the notion of “multiplicity” in a point
@xmath as a zero and we call it order (Definition 5.1.1 ). In this
chapter we also provide more lower and upper bounds of the order at
@xmath .

Throughout this chapter we use the variable @xmath instead of the
variable @xmath .

### 5.1 Statement

The Kauffman bracket of a link in @xmath is just a Laurent polynomial.
We now consider also links in @xmath and framed trivalent colored
graphs. In general the Kauffman bracket is a rational function and may
not be a Laurent polynomial, in particular it may have poles in @xmath
(see Example 1.5.8 ). Hence we can consider also the order of a pole and
not just the multiplicity as a zero.

###### Definition 5.1.1.

Given a meromorphic function @xmath defined in a neighborhood of @xmath
, we denote by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the maximum integer @xmath such that @xmath vanishes in @xmath and we
call it the order at @xmath . If @xmath the function @xmath vanishes in
a neighborhood of @xmath , otherwise it has a Laurent expansion

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some @xmath . This number is equal to the multiplicity of @xmath in
@xmath as a zero, or to minus the order of @xmath in @xmath as a pole.

We are interested in the order of the Kauffman bracket at @xmath .

###### Theorem 5.1.2 ([CaMa]).

Let @xmath be a link and @xmath a ribbon surface bounded by @xmath .
Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

It follows directly from the more general Theorem 5.1.8 . ∎

Clearly if we consider links in @xmath ( @xmath ) we get Eiserman’s
theorem (Theorem 3.6.1 ).

An interesting corollary is of course the following:

###### Corollary 5.1.3 ([CaMa]).

If @xmath is a @xmath -component ribbon link then @xmath vanishes at
least @xmath times at @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In Section 3.6 we saw that the order at @xmath of the Kauffman bracket
does not give any information about knots in @xmath . Theorem 5.1.2 is
potentially stronger in @xmath than in @xmath because now @xmath can be
a negative number. In particular it provides non trivial information
also for knots, as the following example shows:

###### Example 5.1.4.

The framed knot @xmath drawn in Fig. 5.1 has

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and hence @xmath . Therefore @xmath bounds no ribbon surface @xmath with
@xmath . In particular, it is not a ribbon knot.

In order to be ribbon, a link @xmath must be homotopically trivial,
namely there is a continuous map @xmath such that the restriction @xmath
is the embedding of @xmath and the image of the restriction @xmath is a
finite set of points. This condition can be easily checked looking at
the diagrams in the punctured disk @xmath and the knot in Fig. 5.1
satisfies it. In Example 1.5.8 and Chapter 6 we can find more examples
of links and knots in @xmath together with their Kauffman bracket.
Throughout these examples there are links and knots that are
homotopically trivial, and by using Theorem 5.1.2 we can conclude that
they are not ribbon. In particular looking at Chapter 6 , we can
conclude that there are no ribbon (and non trivial) links in @xmath with
crossing number at most @xmath .

###### Question 5.1.5.

Is there a @xmath -component slice link @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By Corollary 5.1.3 a positive answer to Question 5.1.5 would imply that
the slice-ribbon conjecture is false for @xmath . In Subsection 3.6.2 we
saw that the answer is “no” for the case @xmath and @xmath .

The ribbon genus of a knot @xmath is the minimum genus of an orientable
connected ribbon surface @xmath with @xmath . As a consequence of
Theorem 5.1.2 , the ribbon genus of the knot @xmath shown in Fig. 5.1 is
at least @xmath . In this more general setting we get:

###### Corollary 5.1.6 ([CaMa]).

Let @xmath be a knot. If @xmath has a pole at @xmath of order @xmath ,
the ribbon genus of @xmath is at least @xmath .

We consider also framed colored graphs getting Theorem 5.1.8 . Theorem
5.1.2 follows immediately by Theorem 5.1.8 . We need the following new
definition:

###### Definition 5.1.7.

Let @xmath be an admissible triple. The following integers are called
angles of the triple:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We say that the triple @xmath is red if at least two of the three angles
are odd numbers.

Let @xmath be a colored framed knotted trivalent graph. A vertex of
@xmath is red if the colors of the three incident edges form a red
triple.

The edges in @xmath having an odd color form a sub-link @xmath called
the odd sub-link .

We denote by @xmath the number of red vertices of a graph @xmath . If
there is no ambiguity, we just use @xmath .

Clearly if the odd sub-link @xmath of a colored trivalent graph @xmath
coincides with the whole graph, @xmath , there are no vertices, in
particular there are no red vertices.

The following is the main theorem:

###### Theorem 5.1.8 ([CaMa]).

Let @xmath be a framed trivalent colored graph and @xmath the odd
sub-link of @xmath . Let @xmath be a ribbon surface bounded by @xmath .
Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the Euler characteristic of @xmath and @xmath is the
number of red vertices in @xmath .

###### Proof.

By Theorem 5.2.1 there is a shadow @xmath of @xmath that contains @xmath
and collapses onto a graph. Theorem 5.3.1 with the shadow @xmath implies
that the order of @xmath in @xmath is at least @xmath . ∎

The proof of Theorem 5.1.8 splits into two parts: the topological
Theorem 5.2.1 , and the more technical Theorem 5.3.1 , and we will see
them in the following two sections.

While the topological side of the story is a one-page proof, the
technical part needs a long case-by-case analysis that we would have
never pursued if we were not aware of Eisermann’s Theorem.

###### Question 5.1.9.

Is there a colored trivalent graph @xmath such that the odd sub-link
@xmath is a @xmath -component slice link and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath is the number of red vertices of @xmath .

A positive answer to Question 5.1.9 would imply that the slice ribbon
conjecture is false for @xmath . This question is open also in the
@xmath case, that is in @xmath .

#### 5.1.1 More manifolds and RTW

In this subsection we just ask some questions.

The notion of “ribbon surface” applies to any kind of 3-manifold @xmath
, but the Jones polynomial does not. To define @xmath as a rational
function we need the skein space @xmath to be 1-dimensional.

###### Question 5.1.10.

Let @xmath be a link in a closed 3-manifold @xmath with skein vector
space @xmath generated by the empty set. Let @xmath be a ribbon surface
bounded by @xmath . Is it always true that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

When @xmath is not 1-dimensional, quantum invariants survive only at
roots of unity: these are the well known Reshetikhin-Turaev-Witten
invariants. As we saw these invariants can also be calculated using
shadows, so it might be that some of the techniques used for the Jones
polynomial extend to that context:

###### Question 5.1.11.

Can we relate the ribbon genus of a link to Reshetikhin-Turaev-Witten
invariants?

For instance we can define:

###### Definition 5.1.12.

The order @xmath at @xmath of the Reshetikhin-Turaev-Witten invariant of
@xmath is the maximum integer @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a @xmath root of unity such that @xmath for @xmath ,
@xmath for @xmath , and @xmath is based on the evaluation at @xmath (for
instance @xmath , where @xmath is the integer part of @xmath ).

###### Proposition 5.1.13.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

It follows from the shadow formulas: Theorem 2.4.4 and Theorem 2.5.1 . ∎

Therefore we can shift the problem of the order at @xmath of the Jones
polynomial to the one of the Reshetikhin-Turaev-Witten invariants.

###### Question 5.1.14.

Can this approach lead somewhere?

Furthermore we note that we get the same object even if we use the
square of the module of the Reshetikhin-Turaev-Witten invariant @xmath
(and @xmath ). Hence maybe we can also shift the problem to the order at
@xmath of the Turaev-Viro invariants of a certain pair @xmath . We have
that the Turaev-Viro invariant of a pair @xmath , where @xmath is a
compact orientable 3-manifold and @xmath is a colored trivalent graph on
the boundary of @xmath , is equal to the Reshetikhin-Turaev-Witten
invariant of @xmath where @xmath is the double of @xmath and @xmath is
the image of @xmath under the standard inclusion of @xmath in @xmath .
If @xmath has no boundary we have that the Turaev-Viro invariant of
@xmath is equal to the square of the absolute value of the
Reshetikhin-Turaev-Witten invariant @xmath (Theorem 2.5.5 ).

###### Question 5.1.15.

Can we shift the problem of the order at @xmath of the Jones polynomial
of @xmath also to the one of the Turaev-Viro invariants of a certain
pair @xmath ?

### 5.2 The topological part of the proof

#### 5.2.1 The result

Let @xmath be the 4-dimensional orientable handlebody of genus @xmath
(the orientable compact 4-manifold with a handle-decomposition with
@xmath 0-handles and @xmath 1-handles). We recall that a ribbon surface
@xmath is equivalent to a properly embedded surface in @xmath that is in
Morse position with respect to the distance function from a graph @xmath
and has just points of minima and saddles (no maxima) (see Remark 3.5.7
).

The following purely topological fact is one of the two results that
lead to Theorem 5.1.8 :

###### Theorem 5.2.1 ([CaMa]).

Let @xmath be a knotted trivalent graph in @xmath and @xmath be a
sub-link of @xmath . Every ribbon surface @xmath bounded by @xmath is
contained in some shadow @xmath of @xmath such that @xmath collapses
onto a graph and @xmath .

We single out a couple of examples:

###### Example 5.2.2.

Consider the trivially embedded annulus @xmath as in Fig. 5.2 . A shadow
@xmath containing @xmath is constructed by attaching a disk @xmath to
its core. Note that indeed @xmath collapses onto @xmath that collapses
onto a point.

###### Example 5.2.3.

The 2-disk @xmath is properly embedded in the 3-disk and hence in @xmath
. The disk is itself a shadow of @xmath . However, a non trivial ribbon
disk @xmath is not a shadow: @xmath does not collapse onto @xmath (see
Proposition 2.1.8 ). The shadow containing @xmath may be rather
complicate.

###### Example 5.2.4.

The disk with @xmath holes @xmath is a properly embedded surface in the
3-dimensional handlebody of genus @xmath , hence it is an embedded
surface in its double @xmath . The surface is itself a shadow of @xmath
.

Every ribbon surface @xmath can be constructed from a trivalent graph
@xmath as in Fig. 5.3 , consisting of some disjoint circles and some
arcs connecting them in space.

###### Proof of Theorem 5.2.1.

For simplicity, first we suppose @xmath . Construct @xmath from a
trivalent graph @xmath as in Fig. 5.3 -(left) and let @xmath be a
diagram of @xmath . Via Reidemeister moves we may suppose that there is
a smallest surface in @xmath that is homeomorphic to @xmath and contains
@xmath . We construct a shadow @xmath for @xmath using the algorithm
described in the proof of Proposition 2.1.22 using @xmath .

Note that @xmath contains the yellow disks of Fig. 5.3 -(right). To
complete the construction, we simply add to @xmath the orange bands
shown in Fig. 5.3 -(right), and then push their interior a bit inside
the 4-dimensional handlebody @xmath . We end up with a shadow @xmath
containing the whole of @xmath and with @xmath .

Now we consider the general case @xmath . Let @xmath be a graph defining
@xmath . Up to isotopies we may suppose that @xmath is attached to
@xmath only at the circles that form @xmath . Hence the graph @xmath can
be easily extended to a trivalent graph @xmath such that @xmath and
after the thickening of the orange bands of @xmath we get the graph
@xmath . We proceed like in the previous case to get a shadow of the
trivalent graph @xmath from a diagram in @xmath . Then we add the orange
bands and get a shadow of @xmath . ∎

###### Example 5.2.5.

Fig. 5.4 illustrates the construction in a simple case. The ribbon
surface @xmath is a trivially embedded annulus with boundary @xmath the
unlink with two components; the annulus @xmath in Morse position has one
minimum and one saddle, and it is hence a ribbon surface constructed
from the graph @xmath shown in Fig. 5.4 -(top-right): a circle (the
minimum) with a diameter (encoding the saddle). A shadow for @xmath is
shown in Fig. 5.4 -(bottom-left). By adding a band we obtain a shadow
@xmath for @xmath containing @xmath , and @xmath is just @xmath with a
disk attached to its core. Note that indeed @xmath collapses onto @xmath
that collapses to a point.

#### 5.2.2 Non-ribbon surfaces

One may wonder whether every surface @xmath is contained in a shadow. We
now show that this is not true: indeed being contained in a shadow is
quite restrictive.

###### Definition 5.2.6.

A properly embedded surface @xmath is homotopically ribbon if the
inclusion

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

induces an epimorphism on fundamental groups

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For a general properly embedded surface @xmath , the following
implications hold:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We have already proved the first implication, so we now turn to the
second.

###### Proposition 5.2.7 ([CaMa]).

If @xmath is contained in a shadow @xmath of the 4-dimensional
handlebody @xmath then it is homotopically ribbon.

###### Proof.

The shadow @xmath contains @xmath and is hence obtained from @xmath by
adding cells of index @xmath , @xmath , or @xmath . Therefore a regular
neighborhood @xmath of @xmath is obtained from a regular neighborhood
@xmath of @xmath by adding handles of index @xmath , @xmath , or @xmath
. Since @xmath collapses onto @xmath , we can take @xmath .

By turning handles upside-down we get that @xmath is obtained from a
collar of @xmath by adding handles of index @xmath , @xmath , or @xmath
. Since there are no 1-handles, the inclusion

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

induces a surjection on fundamental groups. ∎

###### Remark 5.2.8.

Note that in Proposition 5.2.7 we do not require that the shadow @xmath
collapses onto a graph.

We do not know if any of the two implications can be reversed. It is
easy to construct some surface @xmath that is not homotopically ribbon,
hence such an @xmath cannot be contained in a shadow. The following
example is certainly known to experts.

###### Proposition 5.2.9.

The trivial knot bounds some disk that is not homotopically ribbon.

###### Proof.

Pick a knotted 2-sphere @xmath whose complement has non cyclic
fundamental group @xmath , for instance a spun knot [ Rol , Chapter 3.J]
.

By tubing one such knotted sphere with a trivial properly embedded disk
we get a disk @xmath such that @xmath . Since @xmath is the trivial
knot, the complement @xmath is a solid torus and has cyclic @xmath . The
map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

cannot be surjective since the left group is cyclic and the right one is
not. ∎

###### Question 5.2.10.

Is every homotopically ribbon surface of @xmath ribbon?

The requirement that @xmath is contained in some shadow lies between
these two properties and breaks this question in two parts:

###### Question 5.2.11.

@xmath

1.  Is every homotopically ribbon surface in @xmath contained in a
    shadow of @xmath ?

2.  Is every surface contained in a shadow of @xmath ribbon?

### 5.3 The more technical part of the proof

#### 5.3.1 The results

We turn to quantum invariants. By analyzing carefully the shadow formula
for the Kauffman bracket we prove all the needed estimates at @xmath .
The main result of this section is Theorem 5.3.4 from which follows
Theorem 5.3.1 , which is one of the two ingredients of the proof of
Theorem 5.1.8 .

###### Theorem 5.3.1 ([CaMa]).

Let @xmath be a framed trivalent colored graph and @xmath be the odd
sub-link of @xmath . Let @xmath be a shadow of the 4-dimensional
handlebody @xmath that collapses onto a graph and @xmath . Let @xmath be
a (unique) surface with @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the number of red vertices in @xmath .

We will need the following:

###### Proposition 5.3.2 ([CaMa]).

Let @xmath be a shadow collapsing onto a graph of a trivalent knotted
graph @xmath . There are natural 1-1 correspondences:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and a natural injective homomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

According to the correspondences the surface @xmath is sent to @xmath .
The empty surface is included. Moreover if @xmath the homomorphism is
surjective too.

###### Proof.

The morphism @xmath is injective because @xmath collapses onto a graph
and hence @xmath . If @xmath we have @xmath hence in that case the
homomorphism is also surfective. Using cellular homology, every @xmath
-homology class in @xmath is realized by a unique cycle, and that cycle
is a surface since @xmath has simple singularities. ∎

Let now @xmath be an admissible coloring for @xmath . Its reduction
modulo @xmath is a cycle in @xmath because the admissibility relation
around every interior edge of @xmath reduces to @xmath (mod @xmath ).
This cycle gives a surface @xmath that consists of all regions in @xmath
having an odd color: we call @xmath the odd surface of @xmath .

Proposition 5.3.2 implies the following:

###### Corollary 5.3.3 ([CaMa]).

Let @xmath be a colored framed knotted trivalent graph and @xmath be any
shadow of @xmath that collapses onto a graph. The odd surface @xmath of
a coloring @xmath that extends that of @xmath is the unique surface
whose boundary @xmath is the odd sub-link of @xmath . In particular
@xmath does not depend on @xmath .

###### Theorem 5.3.4 ([CaMa]).

Let @xmath be a shadow colored by @xmath . We have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the number of red vertices in @xmath .

In contrast with the topological Theorem 5.2.1 , this theorem has a long
technical proof, to which we devote the rest of this section.

Before starting with the proof we prove Theorem 5.3.1 :

###### Proof of Theorem 5.3.1.

We have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath runs over all the admissible colorings of @xmath that
extends the coloring of @xmath . By Theorem 5.3.4

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By Corollary 5.3.3 for each @xmath the surface @xmath coincides with
@xmath . ∎

#### 5.3.2 Localization of Theorem 5.3.4

We now localize the proof of Theorem 5.3.4 , by reducing it to the
building blocks [] , [] , and [] . The following lemma will be proved in
the next subsection:

###### Lemma 5.3.5 ([CaMa]).

Let @xmath be a colored @xmath , or . We have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the odd (un-)link @xmath , @xmath is the number of
components of @xmath , and @xmath is the number of red vertices in
@xmath . If @xmath or then the equality holds.

Note that for @xmath we have:

-   @xmath if @xmath contains some odd colored edges,

-   @xmath otherwise.

We postpone the proof of Lemma 5.3.5 to the next subsections, and we now
deduce Theorem 5.3.4 from it.

###### Proof of Theorem 5.3.4.

We have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The phase @xmath is a monomial in @xmath and hence does not contribute
to @xmath . We get

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We now use Lemma 5.3.5 . Note that for every colored @xmath involved, we
have @xmath precisely when the corresponding stratum (vertex, edge, or
region) is contained in @xmath , otherwise we get @xmath . We denote by
@xmath the number of red vertices in @xmath and we get:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Let @xmath be an interior edge. The two vertices of @xmath are colored
by the same triple @xmath : hence @xmath has either zero or two red
vertices. If an interior vertex @xmath of @xmath is adjacent to @xmath ,
then @xmath has a corresponding vertex colored by @xmath . If an
exterior vertex @xmath is adjacent to @xmath , then both vertices of
@xmath are colored as @xmath . From this we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and therefore

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

because @xmath equals @xmath when @xmath is red and @xmath otherwise. ∎

#### 5.3.3 Order of generalized multinomials

It remains to prove Lemma 5.3.5 , and to do so we will need the
following:

###### Proposition 5.3.6 ([CaMa]).

We have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath            
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is the integer part of @xmath .

###### Proof.

The function

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

has simple zeroes at the @xmath roots of unity (except @xmath ), hence
at @xmath when @xmath is even. The equality @xmath follows. On the
multinomial, recall that @xmath by hypothesis. We get

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath            
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

∎

We can now evaluate @xmath , and at @xmath .

#### 5.3.4 Orders of the circle, theta, and tetrahedron

It remains to prove Lemma 5.3.5 .

###### Proof of Lemma 5.3.5.

If @xmath then @xmath equals @xmath if @xmath is odd and @xmath if
@xmath is even: the odd link @xmath is respectively @xmath and @xmath ,
therefore @xmath in any case.

If @xmath we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

To prove the last equality, note that the first addendum is @xmath if
@xmath are even and @xmath otherwise (there are either zero or two odd
numbers in @xmath by admissibility), and @xmath is respectively empty or
a circle. Concerning the second addendum, note that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and hence one easily sees that the second addendum equals

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is @xmath if the triple is red and @xmath otherwise, by
definition.

For @xmath we do a long case-by-case analysis. We recall the formula

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We now estimate the factor

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

in terms of the parity of the @xmath ’s and the @xmath ’s.

We first consider the case @xmath is even. In that case the number of
odd @xmath ’s is either @xmath or @xmath , while the number of odd
@xmath ’s is either @xmath , @xmath , or @xmath . Using Proposition
5.3.6 we easily see that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a number that depends on the parity of @xmath , on the number of odd
@xmath ’s ( @xmath or @xmath ) and of odd @xmath ’s ( @xmath , @xmath or
@xmath ) according to the tables:

  @xmath even            
  ------------- -------- --------
                @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath        @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath        @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath        @xmath   @xmath

  @xmath odd            
  ------------ -------- --------
               @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath       @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath       @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath       @xmath   @xmath

By taking the minimum we get that the order at @xmath of ( 5.1 ) is at
least:

  -- -- -- -------
           (5.2)
  -- -- -- -------

The case @xmath odd is treated analogously: now the number of odd @xmath
’s is either @xmath or @xmath , and the number of odd @xmath ’s is
either @xmath or @xmath . We get

  @xmath even            
  ------------- -------- --------
                @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath        @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath        @xmath   @xmath

  @xmath odd            
  ------------ -------- --------
               @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath       @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath       @xmath   @xmath

The order at @xmath of ( 5.1 ) is hence at least:

  -- -- -- -------
           (5.3)
  -- -- -- -------

We now turn to the factor

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The @xmath numbers @xmath are the angles of the vertices of the colored
[] , namely they are of type @xmath where @xmath are the colors of the
edges incident to some vertex: there are @xmath vertices and @xmath such
expressions at each vertex. The @xmath numbers correspond to the @xmath
red arcs in the picture

[]

where the red arc corresponding to @xmath is the one parallel to the
edges @xmath and opposite to @xmath . The parities of these @xmath
numbers determine the parities of all the quantities @xmath , and hence
also @xmath and @xmath . The possible configurations (considered up to
symmetries of the tetrahedron) are easily classified and are shown in
Table 5.1 and Table 5.2 .

As the tables show, the needed inequality

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is verified for all the configurations, except one bad case: when the
@xmath ’s are all even and the @xmath ’s are all odd. For that case we
need to prove that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

but we only get @xmath . This bad case holds for instance when @xmath
and hence @xmath and @xmath . If we look more carefully at this example
we find

  -- -- -------- -------- --
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

Now it turns out that the difference

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

has order @xmath in @xmath : this difference produces a cancellation
that increases the order of ( 5.1 ) at @xmath by two, giving overall the
desired @xmath instead of the @xmath expected by the tables.

We now prove that this kind of cancellation holds in general, provided
that the @xmath ’s are all even and the @xmath ’s are all odd. The sum

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

goes from the odd @xmath to the even @xmath and so contains an even
number of terms. Two subsequent terms @xmath and @xmath give

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

that may be rewritten as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The left factor has order @xmath as prescribed by Table 5.1 . Quite
surprisingly, the second factor

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

has order at least @xmath : all the quantum integers in the formula are
quantum odd numbers; the denominator is a non-zero constant at @xmath ,
while the numerator has order @xmath thanks to the following lemma.

###### Lemma 5.3.7 ([CaMa]).

Let @xmath be odd non negative integers with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

We set @xmath and write @xmath instead of @xmath to avoid confusion. Now

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

since @xmath and @xmath have the same parity by hypothesis. This gives
@xmath . We now calculate the derivative @xmath of @xmath . Note that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

vanishes when @xmath and @xmath is odd, since both @xmath and @xmath do.
Therefore the derivatives of @xmath and @xmath both vanish at @xmath and
hence @xmath . Therefore @xmath . ∎

To conclude the proof of Lemma 5.3.5 we must verify that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and apply Lemma 5.3.7 . This is equivalent to @xmath which is true since
actually @xmath . ∎

### 5.4 More lower bounds for the order at @xmath

In this section we investigate more lower bounds for the order at @xmath
of the Kauffman bracket.

###### Proposition 5.4.1.

Let @xmath be link in @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and this estimation can be sharp.

###### Proof.

The Kauffman bracket @xmath is a linear combination of diagrams in the
punctured disk @xmath without crossings and homotopically trivial
components

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(see Proposition 1.5.7 ). The order at @xmath of @xmath is bigger equal
than the one of the minimal order of the summands. The coefficients
@xmath ’s are integral Laurent polynomials, hence they can have only non
negative order at @xmath . We get a natural shadow @xmath of the link
given by @xmath with @xmath that has a number of boundary components
equal to @xmath , where @xmath is the number of components of @xmath
(see Remark 2.4.5 ). The shadow @xmath is obtained by attaching to the
punctured 2-disk an annulus to each component of the diagram and giving
to all the regions gleam @xmath . We have that @xmath is equal to the
Kauffman bracket of the boundary of @xmath with all the components
corresponding to the ones of @xmath colored with @xmath and the other
ones with @xmath .

The admissible colorings of @xmath that extend the one of the boundary
define a unique (probably disconnected) surface @xmath bounded by the
boundary components corresponding to the ones of @xmath (see Proposition
1.5.10 and Corollary 5.3.3 ). We have that @xmath is bigger equal than
the Euler characteristic of @xmath . The surface @xmath is diffeomorphic
to a sub-surface of @xmath that is bounded by @xmath . Since @xmath has
no homotopically trivial components, the lowest Euler characteristic of
one such sub-surface is exactly @xmath . It is reached by a smaller
2-disk with @xmath holes surrounded by some annuli. Hence @xmath . ∎

###### Question 5.4.2.

Let @xmath be a link in @xmath . Let @xmath be the minimal number of
holes of a punctured disk in @xmath that contains a diagram of @xmath (
@xmath is the minimal number such that @xmath can be seen as a link in
@xmath , see Remark 1.3.14 , Definition 4.1.10 and Proposition 4.1.12 ).
Let @xmath be a ribbon surface without components without boundary and
with biggest Euler characteristic that is bounded by @xmath . Is the
order at @xmath of @xmath equal to the maximum between @xmath and the
Euler characteristic of @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

More in general we have the following:

###### Proposition 5.4.3.

Let @xmath be a colored framed link. If at least one component of @xmath
has an odd color then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

We prove it by induction on the maximum color @xmath on @xmath . If
@xmath , this is the case of Proposition 5.4.1 . If some component
@xmath of @xmath has a color @xmath , we modify @xmath via the well
known skein move shown in Fig. 1.8 that takes place in a solid torus
neighborhood of @xmath . Each of the new two addenda is a colored link
with at least one odd-colored component. We perform this move on all
components with maximum color @xmath and we conclude by induction since
the order at a point is at least the lowest order of the summands. ∎

###### Remark 5.4.4.

Proposition 5.4.1 does not hold for any knotted framed colored trivalent
graph with at least one odd color in the obvious sense. In fact the
graph in Fig. 5.5 lies in @xmath and has order at @xmath of the Kauffman
bracket equal to @xmath .

###### Question 5.4.5.

Does Proposition 5.4.1 hold also for any knotted framed trivalent
colored graph @xmath with at least one odd color in the following sense:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath is the number of red vertices of @xmath .

###### Question 5.4.6.

Let @xmath be a knotted colored framed trivalent graph in @xmath and let
@xmath be its odd sub-link. Is it always true that @xmath is bigger
equal than the order at @xmath of @xmath where the components of @xmath
are colored with @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Remark 5.4.7.

We have to put “bigger equal” instead of “equal” in Question 5.4.6
because the graph in Fig. 5.5 is an example where the equality does not
hold. It is a graph in @xmath whose odd sub-link is the trefoil knot
colored with @xmath , the number of red vertices is @xmath and the order
at @xmath of the Kauffman bracket is @xmath ( @xmath ).

### 5.5 Upper bounds for the order at @xmath

In this section we provide some upper bounds of the order at @xmath of
the Kauffman bracket.

The following has been proved by Eisermann [ E ] for links in @xmath ,
the same proof applies to the case of links in @xmath .

###### Proposition 5.5.1.

Let @xmath be a @xmath -component link in @xmath or in @xmath . If
@xmath is homotopically trivial then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Evaluate the Kauffman bracket in @xmath . By Proposition 1.5.19 @xmath .
We know that @xmath , where @xmath is the order at @xmath of @xmath and
@xmath is a rational function with null order at @xmath . Therefore

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By Proposition 1.5.7 @xmath is an integral Laurent polynomial and hence
@xmath is so. Thus @xmath is an integer number and @xmath divides @xmath
in @xmath , namely @xmath . ∎

###### Question 5.5.2.

Does Proposition 5.5.1 hold also for links in @xmath with @xmath ?

###### Corollary 5.5.3.

The order at @xmath of the Kauffman bracket of every @xmath -components
ribbon link @xmath in @xmath or in @xmath is @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

It follows from Proposition 5.5.1 and Corollary 5.1.3 . ∎

The following slightly generalizes the previous result:

###### Proposition 5.5.4.

Let @xmath be a homotopically trivial, colored, framed link in @xmath or
in @xmath and let @xmath be the odd colors of @xmath . If @xmath with
@xmath then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

With some little complications that we are going to explain, the topics
of the proof of Proposition 5.5.1 work here too. The evaluation of the
Kauffman bracket in @xmath is still an invariant not distinguishing the
over/underpasses. In fact we can put the projectors outside the
crossings getting local situations consisting of some parallel straight
strands passing over another set of parallel straight strands. Here we
apply the first skein relation to show the equivalence of the two skeins
once evalued in @xmath . Therefore @xmath is equal to the evaluation in
@xmath of the Kauffman bracket of the colored unlink colored with @xmath
. We used the fact that @xmath . Now we have @xmath . Hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is an odd integer. ∎

###### Question 5.5.5.

Can we improve Proposition 5.5.4 saying that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Question 5.5.6.

Does Proposition 5.5.4 hold also for homotopically trivial, colored,
framed trivalent graphs in the following sense:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath is the number of red vertices and the @xmath ’j are the
numbers related to the odd colors that are described in the proposition.

###### Remark 5.5.7.

It seems to be impossible to have a sharper upper bound of the order at
@xmath of the Kauffman bracket of a link that is related just to easy
properties of the link (for instance number of components and homotopy
class). In fact we can find a knot in @xmath with homotopy class @xmath
whose order at @xmath is @xmath . This is pictured in Fig. 5.6 and its
Kauffman bracket is @xmath . Moreover there are @xmath -homologically
trivial links in @xmath whose Kauffman bracket is @xmath (see Fig. 1.20
), hence @xmath .

## Chapter 6 Table of knots and links in @xmath

In this chapter we classify the non H-split links in @xmath (Definition
4.1.10 and Proposition 4.1.11 ) that are not contained in a 3-ball and
have crossing number at most @xmath (Definition 1.5.4 ), and we compute
some invariants.

Links are seen up to reflections with respect to a Heegaard torus and
reflections with respect to the @xmath factor, namely the homeomorphisms
@xmath @xmath . This means that two diagrams @xmath represent the same
object if @xmath is equal to @xmath after changing all the
over/underpasses, and if @xmath is the image of @xmath under the maps
@xmath @xmath and @xmath .

The computed invariants are: the number of components, the @xmath
-homology class @xmath , if the link is homotopically trivial (there is
a continuous map @xmath whose restriction to @xmath is the embedding of
@xmath , and the image of restriction to @xmath is a finite set of
points), if the link is alternating (Definition 1.5.4 ), the Kauffman
bracket (or the Jones polynomial) @xmath , the order at @xmath @xmath of
the Kauffman bracket, the first homology group of the complement @xmath
, a presentation of the fundamental group of the complement @xmath , if
the link is hyperbolic (the complement has a complete finite-volume
hyperbolic structure), the hyperbolic volume (if it is hyperbolic),
(whether there are) some separating surfaces in the complement
(incompressible, not parallel to each other and not parallel to the
boundary).

The @xmath -homology class and if the link is homotopically trivial can
be easily checked looking at the diagrams (see Proposition 1.5.10 ).

The Kauffman bracket is the one computed using the pictured diagrams, we
look at this Laurent polynomial up to multiplications by an integer
power of @xmath so that it becomes an invariant of unframed and
unoriented links. The Kauffman bracket is sufficient to distinguish the
@xmath -homologically trivial links.

We can say that all the @xmath -homologically trivial links in the list
whose pictured diagram is non alternating are actually non alternating
by applying Theorem 4.1.17 .

The other (non trivial) invariants are computed using SnapPy. We say
that a link is hyperbolic if and only if SnapPy found a geometric
triangulation of the complement that has just positive tetrahedra,
otherwise we say that it is not hyperbolic. We remind that if SnapPy
finds one such triangulation it is extremely probable that the result is
correct. For the non separating surfaces we report the result of the
command “.splitting_surfaces()”.

Although we just consider links with crossing number at most @xmath ,
interesting examples come out. For instance we find a @xmath
-homologically trivial knot with null Kauffman bracket ( @xmath ), knots
and links whose complement has first homology group with torsion (
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath )
or with a free part with rank bigger than the number of components (
@xmath ).

In order to be ribbon, a link must be homotopically trivial (and so
@xmath -homologically trivial). There are knots that are not
homotopically trivial, computing the order at @xmath of the Kauffman
bracket of those knots and using Theorem 5.1.2 we can conclude that
there are no ribbon links in the list.

Sometimes there are more than one diagram to represent the same link
with the same embedding of the annulus. We can show the equivalence of
the represented links by Reidemeister moves and the move described in
Subsection 1.5.1 as shown in Subsection 4.1.4 .

There are three pairs of links in the list whose elements we are not
able to say if they are equivalent, in the sense described above, or
not: @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . They are all @xmath -homologically non
trivial. The invariants we computed give the same result on the elements
of the pairs (even the same presentation of the fundamental group).
Hence probably their complements are diffeomorphic. Unfortunately all
the known invariants do not distinguish two links @xmath that are
related by an orientation preserving diffeomorphim of the ambient
manifold @xmath , @xmath . In particular the complements of @xmath and
@xmath are isometric as hyperbolic manifolds, and it is conjectured that
such links are related by a diffeomorphism of @xmath . We count the
elements of these pairs separately.

We can find more examples of links in @xmath and their Kauffman bracket
in Section 1.5 .

Throughout this chapter we present some tables and we need some
abbreviations. “N. comp.” is for the number of components of the link.
On the fields “ @xmath -h.l. tr.”, “H.t.. tr.” and “Alt”, we say “yes”
if the link is respectively @xmath -homologically trivial, homotopically
trivial and alternating, otherwise we say “no”. “ @xmath ” is for the
order in @xmath of the Kauffman bracket of the link. We write “yes” on
the fields “H.l. tor.” and “Big h.l.”, if the first homology group of
the complement of the link has respectively torsion and rank bigger than
the number of components, otherwise we write “no”. We write “yes” or
“no” on the field “Hyp.” according to the convention about hyperbolicity
and SnapPy mentioned above.

### 6.1 Knots

#### 6.1.1 @xmath

@xmath
@xmath -homologically trivial: no. Homotopically trivial: no.
Alternating: yes. Kauffman bracket: @xmath . @xmath . Hyperbolic: no.
Homology group: @xmath . Fundamental group, @xmath . Separating
surfaces: no.

[]

( @xmath )

[]

( @xmath )

#### 6.1.2 @xmath

@xmath
@xmath -homologically trivial: yes. Homotopically trivial: no.
Alternating: yes. Kauffman bracket: @xmath . @xmath . Hyperbolic: no.
Homology group: @xmath . Fundamental group: generators: @xmath ,
relators: @xmath . Separating surfaces: no.

[]

( @xmath )

#### 6.1.3 @xmath

@xmath
@xmath -homologically trivial: yes. Homotopically trivial: yes.
Alternating: yes. Kauffman bracket: @xmath . @xmath . Hyperbolic: no.
Homology group: @xmath . Fundamental group, generators: @xmath ,
relators: @xmath . Separating surfaces: no.

[]

( @xmath )

#### 6.1.4 @xmath and @xmath

We do not know if they are equivalent or not.
@xmath -homologically trivial: no. Homotopically trivial: no.
Alternating: yes for @xmath , we do not know for @xmath . Kauffman
bracket: @xmath . @xmath . Hyperbolic: no. Homology group: @xmath .
Fundamental group, generators: @xmath , relators: @xmath . Separating
surfaces: no.

[]

( @xmath )

[]

( @xmath )

[]

( @xmath )

#### 6.1.5 @xmath

@xmath
@xmath -homologically trivial: yes. Homotopically trivial: yes.
Alternating: yes. Kauffman bracket: @xmath . @xmath . Hyperbolic: no.
Homology group: @xmath . Fundamental group, generators: @xmath ,
relators: @xmath . Separating surfaces: a two-sided torus.

[]

( @xmath )

#### 6.1.6 @xmath

@xmath
@xmath -homologically trivial: yes. Homotopically trivial: no.
Alternating: yes. Kauffman bracket: @xmath . @xmath . Hyperbolic: yes.
Hyperbolic volume: @xmath Homology group: @xmath . Fundamental group,
generators: @xmath , relators: @xmath . Separating surfaces: no.

[]

( @xmath )

#### 6.1.7 @xmath

@xmath
@xmath -homologically trivial: yes. Homotopically trivial: no.
Alternating: no. Kauffman bracket: @xmath . @xmath . Hyperbolic: no.
Homology group: @xmath . Fundamental group, generators: @xmath ,
relators: @xmath . Separating surfaces: a two-sided torus, and a
one-sided non orientable surface with null Euler characteristic.

[]

( @xmath )

#### 6.1.8 @xmath

@xmath
@xmath -homologically trivial: yes. Homotopically trivial: no.
Alternating: no. Kauffman bracket: @xmath . @xmath . Hyperbolic: no.
Homology group: @xmath . Fundamental group, generators: @xmath ,
relators: @xmath . Separating surfaces: no.

[]

( @xmath )

#### 6.1.9 @xmath and @xmath

We know that the complements of these knots are isometric as hyperbolic
manifolds. We do not know if they are equivalent or not.
@xmath -homologically trivial: no. Homotopically trivial: no.
Alternating: yes for @xmath , we do not know for @xmath . Kauffman
bracket: @xmath . @xmath . Hyperbolic: yes. Hyperbolic volume: @xmath
Homology group: @xmath . Fundamental group, generators: @xmath ,
relators: @xmath . Separating surfaces: no.

[]

( @xmath )

[]

( @xmath )

[]

( @xmath )

#### 6.1.10 Summary for knots

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

### 6.2 Links

#### 6.2.1 @xmath

@xmath
No. of components: @xmath . @xmath -homologically trivial: yes.
Homotopically trivial: no. Alternating: yes. Kauffman bracket: @xmath .
@xmath . Hyperbolic: no. Homology group: @xmath . Fundamental group,
generators: @xmath , relators: @xmath . Separating surfaces: a two-sided
torus.

[]

( @xmath )

#### 6.2.2 @xmath

@xmath
No. of components: @xmath . @xmath -homologically trivial: yes.
Homotopically trivial: no. Alternating: yes. Kauffman bracket: @xmath .
@xmath . Hyperbolic: no. Homology group: @xmath . Fundamental group,
generators: @xmath , relators: @xmath , @xmath . Separating surfaces: a
two-sided torus, and two one-sided non-orientable surfaces with null
Euler characteristic.

[]

( @xmath )

#### 6.2.3 @xmath and @xmath

We do not know if they are equivalent or not.
No. of components: @xmath . @xmath -homologically trivial: no.
Homotopically trivial: no. Alternating: yes for @xmath , we do not know
for @xmath . Kauffman bracket: @xmath . @xmath . Hyperbolic: no.
Homology group: @xmath . Fundamental group, generators: @xmath ,
relators: @xmath . Separating surfaces: a two-sided torus.

[]

( @xmath )

[]

( @xmath )

#### 6.2.4 Summary for links non knots

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

### 6.3 Summary

                                                                     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  ------------------------------------------------------------------ -------- -------- -------- --------
  Max. n. of components                                              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  N. of knots                                                        @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  N. of 2-components links                                           @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  N. of @xmath -h.l. non tr. knots                                   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  N. of @xmath -h.l. non tr., non knots, links                       @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  N. of h.t. tr. knots                                               @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  N. of h.t. tr., non knots, links                                   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  N. of alternating knots                                            @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  N. of alternating,non knots, links                                 @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  N. of @xmath -h.l. tr. alternating knots                           @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  N. of @xmath -h.l. tr. alternating, non knots, links               @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  N. of @xmath -trivial links with null Jones pol.                   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  N. of @xmath -trivial knots with symmetric Kauf. br.               @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  N. of @xmath -trivial, non knots, links with symmetric Kauf. br.   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  N. of hyp. knots                                                   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  N. of, non knots, hyp. links                                       @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  N. of knots with h.l. with tor.                                    @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  N. of, non knots, links with h.l. with tor.                        @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  N. of knots with big h.l.                                          @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  N. of, non knots, links with big h.l.                              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  N. of links with @xmath n. comp.                                   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  N. of ribbon links                                                 @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath