# Acknowledgements

First and foremost, I wish to thank my supervisor, Professor David
Berman, to whom I will always be grateful for his support, guidance and
encouragement throughout my time as a Ph.D. student. His wisdom,
intuition and experience, but most of all his enthusiasm for the
subject, were the driving force behind my research. He is a tremendous
mentor and has become a true friend.

I also want to thank my other collaborators, Joel Berkeley, Chris Blair
and Emanuel Malek, for our excellent cooperation, and the other
academics in the Centre for Research in String Theory for many
interesting and stimulating conversations. My years of research were
supported by an STFC studentship.

To my fellow Ph.D. students I want to extend the warmest of gratitudes
for making my time at Queen Mary such an enjoyable experience. They have
been a great source of inspirational discussion and helpful advice. In
particular I want to thank James McGrane, Brenda Penante, Edward Hughes,
Zac Kenton, Paolo Mattioli, Martyna Kostacinska, Emanuele Moscato,
Joseph Hayling and Rodolfo Panerai. I greatly value our companionship
and I am sure the friendships we have built over the years will last a
lifetime.

Finally I wish to thank my family and friends for their support and
belief in me. Especially my parents, to whom this thesis is dedicated,
deserve all my thanks. Without their backing this thesis would not have
been possible.

## Declaration

I, Felix Jakob Rudolph, confirm that the research included within this
thesis is my own work or that where it has been carried out in
collaboration with, or supported by others, that this is duly
acknowledged below and my contribution indicated. Previously published
material is also acknowledged below.

I attest that I have exercised reasonable care to ensure that the work
is original, and does not to the best of my knowledge break any UK law,
infringe any third party’s copyright or other Intellectual Property
Right, or contain any confidential material.

I accept that the College has the right to use plagiarism detection
software to check the electronic version of the thesis.

I confirm that this thesis has not been previously submitted for the
award of a degree by this or any other university.

The copyright of this thesis rests with the author and no quotation from
it or information derived from it may be published without the prior
written consent of the author.

Signature:

Date: @xmath July 2016

Details of collaboration and publications:

This thesis describes research carried out with my supervisor David S.
Berman which was published in [ 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 ] . It also contains some
unpublished material. We collaborated with Joel Berkeley on [ 1 ] and
Chris Blair and Emanual Malek on [ 4 ] . Where other sources have been
used, they are cited in the bibliography.

###### Contents

-    1 Introduction
    -    1.1 Overview of Bibliography
    -    1.2 Outline of Thesis
    -    1.3 Notation
-    2 Doubled Field Theory
    -    2.1 The Doubled Geometry with @xmath Structure
    -    2.2 Generalized Lie Derivative and Diffeomorphisms
    -    2.3 The Physical Section Condition
    -    2.4 The Action and Projected Equations of Motion
-    3 Solutions in DFT
    -    3.1 DFT Wave
        -    3.1.1 Goldstone Modes of the Wave Solution
    -    3.2 DFT Monopole
    -    3.3 T-duality in DFT
-    4 Exceptional Field Theory
    -    4.1 The Exceptional Extended Geometry of EFTs
    -    4.2 The truncated Theory
        -    4.2.1 The @xmath Duality Invariant Theory
        -    4.2.2 Divertimento: Equations of Motion with a Projector
        -    4.2.3 The @xmath Duality Invariant Theory
    -    4.3 The full non-truncated Theory
        -    4.3.1 Embedding Supergravity into EFT
-    5 Solutions in EFT
    -    5.1 The Wave in the truncated @xmath EFT
    -    5.2 The Monopole in the truncated @xmath EFT
        -    5.2.1 The M2- and M5-brane as a Wave
        -    5.2.2 The M5-brane as a Monopole
        -    5.2.3 The Situation for the M2-brane
    -    5.3 A Self-dual Solution in the full @xmath EFT
        -    5.3.1 Interpreting the Solution
        -    5.3.2 Twisted Self-duality
        -    5.3.3 Reductions to Supergravity Solutions
-    6 Aspects and Discussion of Solutions
    -    6.1 Singularities and Preferred Frame Choices
        -    6.1.1 The Core of the DFT Wave
        -    6.1.2 Wave vs Monopole
    -    6.2 Localization in Winding Space
        -    6.2.1 The Monopole Solution Localized in Winding Space
        -    6.2.2 Worldsheet Instanton Corrections
        -    6.2.3 Localization on a Torus
-    7 @xmath EFT – An Action for F-theory
    -    7.1 The Theory and its Action
        -    7.1.1 Local and Global Symmetries
    -    7.2 Relationship to Supergravity
        -    7.2.1 Metric Terms
        -    7.2.2 Splitting of eleven-dimensional Supergravity
        -    7.2.3 The EFT/M-theory Dictionary
        -    7.2.4 Splitting of ten-dimensional Type IIB Supergravity
        -    7.2.5 The EFT/Type IIB Dictionary
        -    7.2.6 Summary
    -    7.3 Relationship to F-theory
        -    7.3.1 M-theory/F-theory Duality
        -    7.3.2 Sevenbranes
    -    7.4 Solutions
        -    7.4.1 Membranes, Strings and Waves
        -    7.4.2 Fivebranes and Monopoles
    -    7.5 Comments
-    8 Conclusion
-    A Solutions satisfying EoMs
    -    A.1 DFT Wave
    -    A.2 DFT Monopole
    -    A.3 @xmath Wave
-    B Relating Solutions in @xmath
    -    B.1 From Wave to Fivebrane
    -    B.2 From Monopole to Fivebrane
-    C Embedding the Type II Theories into EFT
    -    C.1 The Type IIA Theory
    -    C.2 The Type IIB Theory
-    D Harmonic Function on @xmath
-    E @xmath EFT Appendices
    -    E.1 Cartan Calculus
    -    E.2 Tensor Hierarchy
    -    E.3 Topological Term
-    F Glossary of Supergravity Solutions
    -    F.1 Classic Supergravity Solutions
    -    F.2 Kaluza-Klein Decomposition of Solutions
        -    F.2.1 Wave, Membrane, Fivebrane and Monopole in @xmath
        -    F.2.2 Wave, String, Fivebrane and Monopole in @xmath
        -    F.2.3 D-Branes in @xmath

## Chapter 1 Introduction

In many disciplines of science symmetries provide a guiding principle in
the quest for classifying and unifying different concepts and ideas.
Even more so in theoretical physics, symmetries are a powerful tool to
discover the underpinning rules of the universe. A very rich and
fruitful example of the employment of symmetries to enhance our
knowledge of the physical world is superstring theory.

Since its formative years, string theory has grown into a giant edifice
firmly rooted in its mathematical foundations with branches reaching
into multiple diverse directions scaling new heights of insights into
and understanding of the fundamental laws of nature. At the heart of
string theory are three intimately connected pillars: the sigma model,
supergravity and dualities. The string sigma model describes the
dynamics of strings on general backgrounds. Supergravity provides the
low energy effective description of the theory, its solutions giving
string theory vacua. A web of string theory dualities then relates
seemingly different supergravity backgrounds.

Whereas a symmetry is is a property of an individual object or theory
expressing an invariance under certain transformations, a duality allows
for an identification of different theories or frameworks. This can be
very useful if a given problem is very hard to solve in one formulation,
but might be tackled much more easily in the dual description. An
interesting question now is how to promote a duality to a symmetry of a
grander theory such that the distinct yet dual frameworks simply become
different aspects of a single formulation which provides some kind of
unification. The analysis of dualities of string theory and how to make
them manifest symmetries is one of the key topics of this thesis.

Due to their extended nature, strings experience geometry with its extra
dimensions very differently than point particles. This is exemplified by
one of the dualities, namely T-duality. Some of the dimensions of string
theory might be compact, then a string can not only move along such a
direction in space (giving it quantized momentum) but can also wind
around it. Associated to this mode of the string is a quantum number
called winding . The presence of these winding modes of the string which
see spacetime differently than momentum modes leads to a much more
varied and complex structure of spacetime, the objects populating it and
the interactions between them.

T-duality states that a string propagating in a background geometry with
a circle of a given radius is equivalent to a string moving in a
background with inverse radius if one exchanges the winding and momentum
quantum numbers. This can be illustrated by considering the mass-shell
condition for a closed string in a geometry with a single compact
dimension of radius @xmath . Then we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath and @xmath are left- and right-moving oscillator modes of
the string, @xmath is the momentum and @xmath the winding quantum
number. As usually in string theory, the scale is set by @xmath which is
inversely proportional to the string tension @xmath . The first equation
shows the contributions of the oscillator modes, the zero-point energy
and the momentum and winding modes of the string to the mass spectrum.
The second equation is called the level-matching condition and relates
left- and right-moving modes.

These two equations are clearly invariant under the exchange of winding
and momentum and the radius with its inverse

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

This is a manifestation of T-duality; it exemplifies how strings differ
from point particles when probing the geometry of spacetime. More
generally, a duality – the presence of a hidden symmetry or relation
between theories – once found, immediately provokes a set of questions.
The very presence of the duality seems to imply a lack of understanding
of the theory; one hopes to discover the reason for the hidden symmetry
and perhaps construct a theory in which this duality is a manifest
symmetry. The question is therefore if there is a more appropriate
geometrical language to formulate string theory which takes T-duality
into account. We want to consider a more unified description of
spacetime where momentum and winding modes are treated on an equal
footing. In such a formalism T-duality would be manifest symmetry.

From a sigma model point of view, there have been a several approaches
of a duality symmetric string in a spacetime with double the number of
dimension [ 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 11 ] . By extending the target
space, geometries related by T-duality can be included in a symmetric
way. The description of the geometry of a doubled target space including
an action and equations of motion for the background fields is provided
by Double Field Theory (DFT). It was proposed by Hull and Zwiebach [ 12
] and was constructed utilizing string field theory. It is related to
earlier work by Siegel [ 13 , 14 ] and Tseytlin [ 6 , 7 ] . The extended
tangent space of the theory resembles the development of generalized
geometry by Hitchin [ 15 ] and Gualtieri [ 16 ] .

The basic idea of double field theory is to not only double the
dimensions to treat T-dual modes uniformly but also to encode the
dynamical field content in a generalized metric on the doubled space.
The generalized metric provides a geometric unification of the usual
spacetime metric with the Kalb-Ramond two-form field of the NSNS-sector
into a single object. This is a very elegant formulation in the spirit
of worldsheet theory where both fields arise from the level two mode of
the closed string as opposed to the traditional supergravity picture
where the metric forms a background on which the two-form field lives.
Now the action of DFT can be expressed in terms of the generalized
metric together with a shifted form of the string dilaton in a T-duality
manifest form.

Let us now briefly return to the mass spectrum of the closed string
given in ( 1.1 ). The contribution of the winding mode is proportional
to the string tension via @xmath while the momentum mode contribution is
independent of it. We can thus look at different limits of the radius
@xmath . For @xmath the momentum modes are light and should dominate the
low energy physics while for @xmath the winding modes become light. The
oscillator modes also depend on the string tension, but are independent
of @xmath . Therefore there are different regimes we can consider.

For @xmath the momentum modes are lighter than both winding and
oscillator modes. In this scenario supergravity provides a consistent
low energy effective theory. In the opposite case where @xmath the
winding modes are the lightest and again supergravity is a valid
description, but this time in the T-dual picture. If @xmath , i.e.
around the string scale, all modes – momentum, oscillator, winding –
have to be kept. At other scales there is a hierarchy with a
supergravity action for the lightest modes. The conclusion of this is
that there is no regime where one can only consider momentum and winding
modes but cast way the oscillator modes.

Therefore double field theory is not a low energy effective theory but
rather a truncation of string theory. Nevertheless DFT has proven itself
as a consistent framework without pathologies by passing the usual
quantum tests such as modular invariance [ 17 ] and vanishing of the
beta function [ 18 , 19 ] .

The non-perturbative version of string theory is M-theory whose low
energy effective action is eleven-dimensional supergravity. It is
related to the ten-dimensional string theories via various
compactification limits and a web of dualities. Besides T-duality there
is also S-duality (strong/weak or electric/magnetic duality) which
together are part of U-duality. The fundamental objects of M-theory are
the membrane and the fivebrane. They give rise to the string, fivebrane
and D-branes in string theory under dimensional reduction.

The M-theory dualities arise when the eleven-dimensional theory is
compactified on @xmath -dimensional tori. The relevant symmetry groups
@xmath of these “hidden symmetries” [ 9 , 20 ] in the low energy limit –
@xmath -dimensional supergravity – are listen in Table 1 . These are the
continuous version of the discrete U-duality groups of M-theory. In
order to obtain a better understanding of these dualities and their
influence on the full uncompactified eleven-dimensional supergravity,
the aim is to make them manifest symmetries along the lines of T-duality
in double field theory.

By introducing extra coordinates which now correspond to wrapping modes
of the membrane and fivebrane, a generalized metric on the extended
space can be constructed which geometrically unifies the spacetime
metric with the three- and six-form fields of M-theory the branes couple
to. This exceptional extended geometry has been constructed for several
U-duality groups but was originally restricted to truncations of the
eleven-dimensional theory [ 21 , 22 , 23 , 24 , 25 , 26 ] where the
“external” metric (for the @xmath dimensions) was taken to be flat and
off-diagonal terms (the “gravi-photon”) were set to zero. Furthermore,
coordinate dependence was restricted to the internal extended
coordinates. The term “exceptional” is taken from the presence of the
exceptional groups @xmath .

The full, non-truncated Exceptional Field Theory (EFT) allows for a
dependence on all coordinates, external, internal and extended. This
allows for eleven-dimensional supergravity to be embedded into a theory
that is fully covariant under the exceptional groups @xmath [ 27 ] .
These exceptional field theories have been constructed for the groups in
Table 1 in [ 28 , 29 , 30 , 31 , 32 , 33 , 4 ] .

Like the spacetime metric in general relativity, the generalized metrics
of DFT and EFT belong to a symmetric space G/H. In relativity we have
the global symmetry group @xmath with its maximal compact subgroup
@xmath in the Euclidean case or @xmath in the Lorentzian case where
local @xmath -transformations are a symmetry of the metric. In DFT we
have @xmath and @xmath or @xmath . For the various EFTs we have the
exceptional groups @xmath , their subgroups @xmath are also listed in
Table 1 . Additional local symmetries of the theories are the
diffeomorphisms from general coordinate transformations and the gauge
transformations of the @xmath -form fields. These local symmetries do
not commute, they form an algebroid ¹ ¹ 1 This algebroid is not of the
Lie-type but a generalization of a Courant algebroid whose bracket is
the so called C-bracket which reduces to the usual Courant bracket if
certain necessary constraints are imposed. . The diffeomorphisms and
gauge transformations can be combined into a single local symmetry of
the generalized geometry which is generated infinitesimally by a
generalized Lie derivative .

Besides the global and local symmetry groups G and H, Table 1 lists the
two representations ² ² 2 These are the relevant representations of
gauged or maximal supergravities in the given spacetime dimensions, see
for example [ 34 ] . @xmath and @xmath of @xmath . The first one is the
representation of the generalized coordinates with dimension of the
extended space. The second one is the representation of a constraint
that is required by all extended theories. The necessity of this can be
seen by considering the following.

The formulations of DFT and EFT are defined on an extended spacetime.
Since string theories are notoriously tied to a critical dimension, the
dynamics have to be restricted to end up with the correct physical
degrees of freedom and a consistent theory. The constraint which
achieves this is called the physical section condition . It specifies
locally a subspace of the extended space which forms the physical
spacetime in a given duality frame. In DFT this amounts to choosing a
maximal isotropic @xmath -dimensional subspace of the @xmath
-dimensional doubled space. In the EFTs the section condition is more
complicated and projects onto a @xmath -dimensional subspace of the much
larger exceptionally extended space.

The section condition has its physical origin in the level-matching
condition of the closed string given in ( 1.2 ) with the oscillator
modes set to zero. It can be stated in terms of the @xmath invariant
structure @xmath for DFT or a projection on the representation @xmath
for the EFTs (here @xmath are a generalized coordinate indices in the
representation @xmath )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

which will be explained in more detail in the main text where we will
also discuss a subtle difference between the weak and strong form of
this constraint and how it might be relaxed. Here the notation indicates
that the derivatives act on any field or gauge parameter and also
products thereof.

One way of satisfying the section condition in DFT is to restrict all
coordinate dependences of fields and parameters to the usual spacetime
coordinates, i.e. they have no dependence on the extra winding
coordinates introduced. In this case the theory reduces to the formalism
of generalized geometry where the tangent space is extended but the
underlying space itself is not. This ultimately means there is no extra
physical content in the theory beyond supergravity, but it provides a
very elegant and potentially powerful reformulation of the theory which
makes the duality a manifest symmetry.

Once the duality manifest theories have been established, one can look
for solutions to their equations of motions. The observation that the
setup of DFT and EFT is very similar to Kaluza-Klein theories is very
useful in the search for and construction of solutions. The form of the
generalized metric in terms of the spacetime metric and the form
field(s) is the same as for a KK-ansatz to reduce the extra dimensions.
This shared structure with KK-theory will be a guiding principle when
considering solutions to the extended theories. For example, a massless,
uncharged state in the full (say five-dimensional) KK-theory acquires a
mass and charge when viewed from the reduced point of view (in four
dimensions). It is the momentum along the KK-direction which becomes a
fundamental charge when writing down the KK-ansatz to split the five
dimensions into @xmath . This can be easily seen by considering the
mass-shell condition for the massless state in five dimensions

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now the five-dimensional momentum is split into @xmath where @xmath is
the direction of the KK-reduction (taken to be compact and an isometry
of the full theory). Then the above relation can be rearranged as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

and we see that from a four-dimensional point of view we have a state
with mass given by the momentum along the KK-direction @xmath . Note
that in this example the off-diagonal term in the KK-ansatz for the
metric was taken to vanish. If this KK-vector is non-zero, the state in
the reduced picture acquires a charge with respect to this @xmath gauge
field. Therefore, in Kaluza-Klein theories the origin of electric charge
is from momentum in the KK-direction. The quantization of momentum (due
to the KK-direction being a circle) then results in the quantization of
electric charge. The origin of magnetic charges comes from twisting the
KK-circle to produce a non-trivial circle bundle with non-vanishing
first Chern class. The first Chern class is the magnetic charge. The
construction of such a non-trivial solution for traditional Kaluza-Klein
theory was first given in [ 35 , 36 ] and is now called the KK-monopole.

In analogy, we want to consider solutions in the dual directions of the
extended field theories and interpret them from an ordinary supergravity
point of view. This has been done for the wave solution in DFT and in
the truncated @xmath EFT [ 1 ] which gives the fundamental string and
the membrane respectively; and for the monopole solution in DFT and in
the truncated @xmath EFT [ 2 ] which gives the NS5 and M5 fivebranes
respectively. By going to the full non-truncated @xmath EFT and
considering a self-dual solution with both wave-like and monopole-like
aspects [ 3 ] , a single solution can be constructed which gives all 1/2
BPS branes of ten- and eleven-dimensional supergravity, including bound
states (an executive summary of this can be found in [ 37 ] ).

Besides the analogy with solutions in Kaluza-Klein theory, the work on
null states in the dual space has been influenced by the fact that the
non-linear realization construction central to the @xmath programme (see
below) has its origins in the theory of pions as Goldstone modes of the
spontaneously broken chiral Lagrangian. This led to the idea that the
duality invariant theory may contain massless Goldstone modes from
spontaneously breaking the duality symmetry. Analyzing the Goldstone
modes of the DFT wave solution gives the duality symmetric string of
Tseytlin [ 6 , 7 ] in a doubled space. Whether the null states
identified are the relevant Goldstone modes though is an open question.

Other aspects of DFT, EFT and their solutions that have been studied in
[ 1 , 2 , 3 ] and which will be presented in this thesis include the
special form of the equations of motion which always appear under a
projector and the singularity structure of the wave and monopole
solutions in extended spaces. Some unpublished ideas and material on the
effects of localizing these solutions in winding space and corresponding
worldsheet instanton corrections to the geometry will also be discussed.

Solutions in exceptional field theory play a crucial role in [ 4 ] where
the @xmath EFT with @xmath is constructed and it is shown that it in
fact provides an action for F-theory. The relevant EFT is a
twelve-dimensional theory with manifest @xmath symmetry. To identify it
with F-theory [ 38 ] , amongst other steps the relations between brane
solutions in ten, eleven and twelve dimensions are analyzed. In some
sense the @xmath EFT is a minimal exceptional field theory since it
introduces only a single extra coordinate and the corresponding
exceptionally extended geometry is too small to include any effects of
geometrizing the gauge fields.

Nevertheless it provides the means to place F-theory together with
M-theory in a unified geometric framework. In future it will be
interesting to see how this minimal EFT can be included in the viewpoint
of the higher rank groups (with larger @xmath ). We will comment on a
potential hierarchy of EFTs and the inclusion of solution generating
transformations in higher dimensional symmetry groups towards the end of
this thesis.

### 1.1 Overview of Bibliography

So far many important references to the key results in the development
of double field theory and the exceptional field theories have been
given. Here we will give a more systematic overview of standard
references which will be referred to throughout this thesis.

Following the initial endeavours by Duff [ 5 ] on string dualities,
Tseytlin formulated a version of the string in a doubled space [ 6 , 7 ]
. The new geometry to describe a duality covariant version of
supergravity was introduced by Siegel [ 13 , 14 ] . With the insights of
generalized geometry [ 15 , 16 ] , Hull then constructed the double
sigma model in [ 10 ] and developed more of the ideas which eventually
led to the conception of double field theory which was established with
the seminal paper [ 12 ] by Hull and Zwiebach. Since DFT allows for
dynamics in all the doubled dimensions, it goes beyond the duality
covariant formulation of supergravity. There were two key groups that
have developed DFT further, one of Hohm, Hull and Zwiebach [ 39 , 40 ,
41 , 42 , 43 ] and the other of Jeon, Lee and Park [ 44 , 45 , 46 , 47 ,
48 ] . Extensions and further developments of DFT can be found in [ 49 ,
50 , 51 , 52 , 53 , 54 ] whereas a relaxation of the section conditon is
discussed in [ 55 , 56 , 57 , 58 , 59 , 60 ] and [ 61 ] . Three
excellent reviews of DFT and related developments are [ 62 , 63 , 64 ] .

In the duality manifest formulation of M-theory there was again initial
work by Duff [ 65 ] and then Hull [ 21 ] , Hillmann [ 23 ] and Waldram
et al. [ 22 , 25 , 26 ] , followed by Berman, Perry, et al. [ 24 , 66 ,
67 , 68 , 69 , 70 ] . Further contributions to the duality invariant
theories are [ 71 , 72 , 73 , 74 , 75 , 76 ] . The full non-truncated
form of exceptional field theory was provided by Hohm and Samtleben [ 27
] and spelled out for the various exceptional groups in [ 28 , 29 , 30 ,
31 , 32 , 33 ] and [ 4 ] . Extensions to EFT such as supersymmetry and
further developments can be found in [ 77 , 78 , 79 ] .

All of this is related to the long standing @xmath program of West and
collaborators which anticipated some of these developments, see for
example [ 80 , 81 , 82 , 83 , 84 , 85 , 86 ] . For quantum aspects of
the duality manifest string see [ 17 , 18 , 19 , 87 , 88 ] . In
addition, there have been a whole host of fascinating recent results,
for a representative but by no means complete sample one may start with
[ 50 , 49 , 89 , 90 , 91 , 92 , 93 , 94 , 95 , 96 , 97 , 98 , 99 ] .

More specifically, large (finite) gauge transformations are studied in [
100 , 101 , 102 , 103 , 104 ] (with caveats concerning global issues
discussed in [ 105 , 106 ] ), non-geometric fluxes are treated by [ 107
, 108 ] and non-commutativity and non-associativity aspects of the
geometry are discussed in [ 109 , 110 , 111 , 112 , 113 , 114 , 115 ,
116 ] .

The study of solutions of DFT and EFT which is the main topic of this
thesis began with [ 1 , 2 , 3 ] by the author, his supervisor and
collaborators. This is related to work on “exotic branes” [ 117 , 118 ,
119 , 120 , 121 , 122 , 123 , 124 ] . When studying classic supergravity
solutions such as the wave, the string, the membrane, the fivebrane and
the monopole, as well as reviewing concepts like T-duality, Kaluza-Klein
reductions and smearing, the book by Ortin [ 125 ] was an invaluable
reference.

### 1.2 Outline of Thesis

This thesis is structured in the following way. Chapters 2 and 3 are
devoted to double field theory. The first one gives a technical
introduction to the most important features of DFT while the second one
presents the wave and monopole solutions of the theory whose reduction
to supergravity shed some light on how T-duality is viewed in the
doubled formalism. Chapters 4 and 5 deal with exceptional field theories
in their truncated and full form. Again we first give an overview of the
formalism (which has a lot of parallels with DFT) to then construct
various solutions to the theory which are related to known supergravity
objects.

In Chapter 6 we look at some interesting aspects and extensions of the
DFT and EFT solutions presented, including their singularity structure
and localizing them in winding space. Chapter 7 outlines the
construction of another EFT, the one with duality group @xmath . Here
the emphasis is on the relation to F-theory for which it provides an
action. We will finish with some concluding remarks in Chapter 8 . The
appendices A , B , C , D and E contain various detailed calculations and
extra material while Appendix F provides a concise glossary of all the
standard supergravity solutions referred to in the main text.

### 1.3 Notation

Each piece of notation is introduced as required throughout the chapters
of this thesis. An attempt was made to keep the notation as consistent
as possible, but some sections use their own. Here we want to summarize
some of the notation which is standard throughout, especially those
objects which are common to double field theory and the exceptional
field theories.

The dimension of the underlying space which gets extended is denoted by
@xmath . In double field theory the ordinary spacetime is thus @xmath
-dimensional and the extended space has @xmath dimensions. In the
exceptional field theories @xmath is the dimension of the “internal”
space which gets extended to @xmath . Here @xmath is the dimension of
the coordinate representation @xmath in Table 1 . The “external” space
has dimension @xmath .

The generalized coordinate vectors of the doubled and exceptional
extended spaces are usually denoted by @xmath where @xmath . The
generalized coordinate is composed of a spacetime coordinate @xmath
where @xmath and one or more winding/wrapping coordinates. These are
denoted differently for each theory, e.g. in DFT we use @xmath or @xmath
for the winding coordinates whereas for the @xmath invariant theory we
use @xmath (the index pair is antisymmetric) corresponding to membrane
wrappings. Note that for the full non-truncated EFTs the generalized
coordinate is @xmath which is composed of @xmath or @xmath whereas the
external coordinate is @xmath .

The generalized metric is written as @xmath and @xmath for DFT and EFT
respectively. It is parametrized by the metric of the underlying
spacetime @xmath or @xmath and the @xmath -form fields @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath , depending on the framework. The generalized metric is
constrained to live in the coset G/H. In the exceptional theories, a
frequently occurring object is @xmath and similar for the inverse @xmath
. They are used to lower and raise antisymmetrized index pairs such as
@xmath .

## Chapter 2 Doubled Field Theory

In the introduction a first glimpse at double field theory was provided.
In this chapter we will give a more technical introduction to the basics
of DFT. We begin with an overview of the most important features and
elements of the doubled geometry with its @xmath structure. Then we take
a closer look at the global and local symmetries, the corresponding
algebra and the crucial constraints that need to be imposed. This is
followed by the presentation of the action of DFT together with its
equations of motion.

This chapter aims to cover just the basic ingredients of DFT which are
needed in the presentation of the solutions in the next chapter.
References to the original results in the literature are given
throughout and the interested reader should consult them for a more
detailed exposition. Recommended reviews of the wider field include [ 62
, 64 , 63 ] .

### 2.1 The Doubled Geometry with @xmath Structure

Two of the key achievements of double field theory are a manifestly
T-duality invariant formulation of supergravity and the geometric
unification of the fields and local symmetries of the bosonic sector,
that is the metric and the B-field (which usually mix under T-duality).
Both of these feats are accomplished by constructing an extended tangent
space which is the combination of the usual tangent space (for momentum
modes) plus the cotangent space (for winding modes), and then
supplementing the spacetime coordinates (conjugate to momentum) by novel
coordinates conjugate to the winding charges. Thereby the target space
is also doubled in dimension and one arrives at a truly doubled
geometry.

Note that a setup of an extended tangent bundle but without introducing
extra coordinates is called generalized geometry and was developed by
Hitchin [ 15 ] and Gualtieri [ 16 ] . Generalized geometry provides some
powerful tools to study the geometric unification of symmetries by
combining diffeomorphisms and gauge transformation into generalized
diffeomorphism of the extended tangent space. Only doubling the
underlying space though enables the formulation of a duality covariant
action and therefore this extra step is necessary to arrive at double
field theory [ 41 ] .

Throughout the DFT chapters of this thesis we will denote by @xmath the
number of dimensions of ordinary supergravity and hence the doubled
space of DFT has @xmath dimensions. Generally one can think of @xmath ,
the critical dimension of superstring theory, and thus the doubled space
being @xmath -dimensional. But everything holds for general @xmath and
indeed for certain toy models it helps to look at the simplest case of
@xmath with the structure group being @xmath .

The standard spacetime coordinates are denoted by @xmath with @xmath ,
they are conjugate to momentum and are associated with momentum modes.
We now introduce a dual set of coordinates ³ ³ 3 Occasionally it will be
useful to utilize the alternative notation @xmath for the winding
coordinates in order to differentiate between winding and inverse
components of tensors. , @xmath which are conjugate to winding and are
associated with winding modes. Hence they are called winding coordinates
. Vectors are sections of the tangent space @xmath of the spacetime
manifold @xmath while one-forms naturally live in the cotangent space
@xmath . The idea is now to have the space and the dual space present at
the same time, i.e. an extended tangent bundle is constructed as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

whose sections are the formal sum of a vector and a one-form.

The next step is to introduce coordinates for the doubled space which
are denoted by @xmath where @xmath . The doubled coordinates consist of
the spacetime coordinates and the winding coordinates

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

This doubled space is equipped with an invariant @xmath structure @xmath
. In the above coordinates it can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the off-diagonal blocks are @xmath identity matrices reflecting
the standard inner product between @xmath and @xmath . This structure
can be seen as an invariant metric to form an inner product for doubled
vectors and it provides a pairing between spacetime and winding
coordinates. Its inverse @xmath is given by the same matrix.

After setting the scene by introducing the coordinates of the doubled
space, we now turn to the fields in the theory. In its simplest
incarnation DFT is formulated for the bosonic NSNS sector of
supergravity, i.e. it contains the spacetime metric @xmath , the
Kalb-Ramond B-field @xmath and the dilaton @xmath . To construct a
theory which is manifestly T-duality invariant, these fields need to be
repackaged into tensor representations of @xmath , the T-duality group.
This leads to the metric and B-field to be treated on an equal footing
by combining them into a generalized metric @xmath on the doubled space

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the inverse of @xmath . This generalized metric
parametrizes the symmetric coset space @xmath and satisfies

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Therefore one can construct a generalized vielbein @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath are curved doubled spacetime indices and @xmath are flat
doubled tangent space indices. The tangent space metric @xmath can
conveniently be taken as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the diagonal blocks are @xmath identity matrices. Now if the
vielbein of the spacetime metric @xmath is taken to be @xmath then the
generalized vielbein can be parametrized as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

In choosing the lower-triangular form, the local @xmath -transformations
have partially been fixed.

Let us briefly comment on the signatures of the metrics involved here.
In the above exposition the Euclidean theory was presented, i.e. the
maximal compact subgroup @xmath is @xmath . The Lorentzian version of
the theory takes the same form with @xmath and the @xmath -dimensional
identity matrices in the tangent space metric @xmath replaced by the
@xmath -dimensional Minkowski metric.

The remaining field of string theory to be rewritten as an @xmath object
is the dilaton. It gets shifted or rescaled by the determinant @xmath of
the spacetime metric to form an @xmath scalar which we will call the DFT
dilaton

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

The form of the generalized metric and rescaled dilaton here essentially
encodes the Buscher rules for T-duality [ 126 , 127 ] which describe how
the fields @xmath , @xmath and @xmath change under T-duality. In the
language here, the objects @xmath and @xmath simply undergo an @xmath
transformation. This will be explained in more detail below.

In general the DFT fields @xmath and @xmath are functions of the doubled
space, i.e. @xmath and @xmath . We will see later how this coordinate
dependence needs to be restricted, but first let us turn to the
symmetries of the fields and the corresponding algebra.

### 2.2 Generalized Lie Derivative and Diffeomorphisms

This section follows the clear and concise exposition of [ 50 ] . In
general relativity we have the global symmetry group @xmath with maximal
compact subgroup @xmath (in the Euclidean case) for the local symmetry
transformations. The transformation of a vector @xmath under a
infinitesimal diffeomorphism generated by a vector field @xmath is
described by the Lie derivative which is given by the commutator – the
Lie bracket – of the two vectors @xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

The first term here is the transportation of the vector field itself
while the second term is a @xmath transformation of the vector @xmath .
This defines the algebra of diffeomorphisms

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

that is the commutator of two Lie derivatives is the Lie derivative with
respect to the Lie bracket of the two vector fields. This definition of
the Lie derivative can be extended to arbitrary tensors by requiring it
satisfies the Leibniz rule. For a scalar field @xmath one simply has the
transport term

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

A similar story can be told for generalized geometry where we now have
@xmath and the local symmetries are in @xmath . The generalized Lie
derivative of a generalized vector @xmath with weight @xmath is defined
as [ 12 , 39 , 70 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

As for the ordinary Lie derivative there is the transport term but now
the second term (the term in parenthesis) is an @xmath transformation.
For completeness the weight term has been included in the definition
here as it will be needed later. This definition can be extended to
arbitrary tensors by requiring it satisfies the Leibniz rule. For a
scalar @xmath with weight @xmath the generalized Lie derivative is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

An important property of the generalized Lie derivative is that it
preserves the @xmath structure @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

In generalized geometry, any object whose transformation under
infinitesimal generalized diffeomorphisms is given by the generalized
Lie derivative

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

is a proper generalized tensor (where @xmath is an arbitrary tensor).
Unlike in general relativity ( @xmath ), the partial derivative of a
scalar, @xmath is not a tensorial quantity since we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

The generalized Lie derivative defines the algebra of gauge symmetries.
The commutator of two generalized Lie derivatives acting on a
generalized vector @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we introduce the @xmath -bracket [ 39 ] of two generalized vectors
@xmath and @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Due to the presence of the extra term @xmath which is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (2.20)
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

the generalized Lie derivative does not produce a closed algebra for
arbitrary vectors @xmath and @xmath . Furthermore, the @xmath -bracket
does not satisfy the Jacobi identity.

In order to have a consistent theory with a closed algebra, a constraint
needs to be introduced. This takes the form of the so called physical
section condition which will be discussed in more detail in the next
section. It requires that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the differential operators act on any field or products of fields.
The extra term @xmath in ( 2.18 ) vanishes under the section condition
since each term contains two derivatives @xmath contracted with @xmath .
So if the constraint is imposed, the algebra of generalized
diffeomorphism closes.

The generalized Lie derivative has some interesting properties under the
section condition. For example, there are “trivial” gauge parameters of
the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is an arbitrary scalar. Such a parameter does not generate
a gauge transformation via ( 2.16 ) once the section condition is
imposed since the result is proportional to @xmath . The Jacobiator ⁴ ⁴
4 The Jacobiator for any bracket is defined as @xmath . If the
Jacobiator vanishes, the Jacobi identity is satisfied. of the @xmath
-bracket precisely takes such a form of a trivial parameter. To see
this, consider the @xmath -bracket [ 41 ] . In the same way the ordinary
Lie derivative can be defined in terms of the Lie bracket, the
generalized Lie derivative is given in terms of the @xmath -bracket

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

This bracket is not antisymmetric, but using the definition ( 2.19 ) one
can show that it differs from the @xmath -bracket by a term of the form
( 2.22 ) which is symmetric in the two arguments

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore under the section condition, @xmath and @xmath generate the
same generalized Lie derivative. Using this and the algebra ( 2.18 ) it
is straightforward to show that the @xmath -bracket satisfies the Jacobi
identity. So while the @xmath -bracket is antisymmetric but does not
satisfy the Jacobi identity, the @xmath -bracket does so but is not
antisymmetric.

Combining all this, it can be shown that the Jacobiator of the @xmath
-bracket is given by ⁵ ⁵ 5 The object inside the parenthesis is called
the Nijenhuis operator.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is a trivial parameter of the form ( 2.22 ). Therefore the algebra
of diffeomorphisms given by the @xmath -bracket closes and the Jacobi
identity is satisfied when the section condition is imposed. The @xmath
-bracket and @xmath -bracket reduce to the Courant bracket [ 128 ] and
Dorfmann bracket [ 129 ] respectively under the section condition.

To conclude, the section condition ( 2.21 ) is a crucial ingredient to
the doubled geometry of DFT to ensure a consistent theory with a
properly defined gauge algebra. We will now have a closer look at the
physical implications of the section condition.

### 2.3 The Physical Section Condition

In the introduction we have seen that the section condition has its
string theory origin in the level-matching condition of the closed
string ( 1.2 ). If the oscillator modes @xmath and @xmath are equal or
zero the product of momentum and winding has to vanish for each
direction. Expanding the section condition ( 2.21 ) in terms of ordinary
and winding coordinates by using @xmath as given in ( 2.3 ) leads to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath . Therefore this is equivalent to the expression
@xmath in the conjugate variables. The @xmath invariant structure @xmath
thus provides a pairing between a normal and a winding coordinate for
each value of the index @xmath .

In order to satisfy the section condition, the fields and gauge
parameters of the theory can only depend on either @xmath or @xmath ,
but not both. Therefore the simplest way of solving the section
condition is to only allow for a coordinate dependence on the spacetime
coordinates @xmath with everything independent of the winding
coordinates @xmath . The theory then reduces to a formulation of
supergravity along the lines of generalized geometry where the tangent
space is doubled but the underlying space itself is not. The opposite
choice where everything depends on the @xmath but not the @xmath gives a
description of the T-dual picture. One can also pick a mixture of normal
and winding coordinates, but for each pair matched by @xmath only one or
the other is allowed.

Therefore, imposing the section condition picks out a maximally
isotropic subspace of half-maximal dimension. One can think of this as a
@xmath -dimensional slice or section through the @xmath -dimensional
doubled space which forms the physical spacetime of supergravity. The
orientation of the subspace, i.e. which of the @xmath coordinates are
part of the section, can be rotated by an @xmath transformation with
different orientations (or polarizations) corresponding to different
T-duality frames. This perspective of T-duality and the identification
of spacetime as a null subspace determined by the @xmath structure
@xmath was described first in [ 10 ] .

At this point it is useful to clarify a slight ambiguity in the
statement of the section condition in ( 2.21 ) where @xmath means that
the differential operators act on any field or product of fields. It is
better to state these two conditions separately as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are any fields or gauge parameters of DFT. The
first form is called the weak constraint while the second form is the
strong constraint . The former is the one with its origin in the
level-matching condition as explained above while the latter one is
equivalent to the section condition, i.e. demanding that fields only
depend on half the number of coordinates. Together these two constraints
are sufficient for the closure of the gauge algebra and to render to
whole formulation of DFT gauge invariant (see below). However, they need
not to be necessary.

Since imposing both the weak and the strong constraint gives an elegant
formulation which makes T-duality a manifest symmetry but has no extra
physical content beyond supergravity, it would be interesting to
consider relaxations of the strong constraint and study theories for
backgrounds which depend on both the normal and dual coordinates.

Important developments in this direction [ 55 , 56 , 57 , 58 , 59 , 60 ]
consider compactifications of DFT with a Scherk-Schwarz reduction. In
such a scenario the reduction of DFT leads to gauged supergravities in
lower dimensions. This approach also provides higher dimensional origins
for gauged supergravities with non-geometric fluxes which become purely
geometric in the doubled space. These methods and results are reviewed
in great detail in [ 62 ] . A entirely different approach towards a
weakly constrained formulation of double field theory can be found in [
61 ] .

In this thesis we will always impose the strong form of the constraint
and in general use the terms (physical) “section condition” and “strong
constraint” synonymously. Only in Section 3.3 we will make a subtle
distinction between these two expressions when discussing how T-duality
emerges in double field theory.

### 2.4 The Action and Projected Equations of Motion

Having studied the generalized geometry of the doubled space and its
generalized gauge structure we are finally in a position to present one
of the key results of double field theory: a manifestly @xmath invariant
action for the bosonic NSNS-sector fields of supergravity. The action
integral [ 41 ] may be written in an Einstein-Hilbert-like form as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the scalar @xmath given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (2.29)
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

Recall that @xmath are curved doubled spacetime indices and @xmath are
flat doubled tangent space indices with the generalized vielbein defined
in ( 2.6 ). The object @xmath is expressed in a fully covariant manner
solely in terms of the @xmath tensor @xmath and scalar @xmath . It can
be shown [ 41 ] that @xmath is itself an @xmath scalar ⁶ ⁶ 6 Note that
due to the last line in ( 2.29 ) @xmath is only a weakly constrained
@xmath scalar. This last line is not present in the original formulation
of DFT [ 12 ] but is required when considering Scherk-Schwarz reduction
to reproduce the correct gauged supergravity actions [ 58 ] . .
Furthermore it is also a gauge scalar under generalized diffeomorphisms.

When imposing the strong constraint by setting @xmath the last line in (
2.29 ) drops out and this DFT action reduces (after integrating by
parts) to the standard action for the common NSNS-sector of supergravity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath is the usual Ricci scalar corresponding to the spacetime
metric @xmath with determinant @xmath , @xmath is the dilaton and @xmath
is the three-form field strength of the two-form B-field.

The DFT action ( 2.28 ) is a great success since it is manifestly @xmath
invariant and reduces to the correct low-energy action of supergravity.
However, it is not constructed in a geometric manner à la general
relativity, i.e. it is not expressed in terms of a curvature or a
generalization thereof. There has been a number of different approaches
[ 44 , 45 , 41 , 130 , 50 ] to construct an appropriate connection and
curvature tensor for the doubled geometry of DFT. These constructions
are all legitimate and each has its advantages, but all come with some
drawbacks (only being partially covariant, connection not completely
determined, no curvature but torsion). As of yet, there is no complete
and consistent picture of how to describe the doubled geometry and its
curvature.

We will now turn to the equations of motion of the DFT fields @xmath and
@xmath . The equation of motion for the dilaton is easily obtained by
varying the action

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

which has to vanish for any variation @xmath and thus gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

(Note that @xmath up to total derivatives.) To find the equation of
motion for the generalized metric we have to be a bit more careful.
Varying the action with the generalized metric gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (2.34)
                       @xmath   
                                
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

The last term uses the variation of the vielbein with respect to the
metric

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

The expression in ( 2.33 ) does not have to vanish for any @xmath since
the generalized metric is constrained to parametrize the coset space
@xmath (see 2.1 above). This means the generalized metric can be
parametrized by @xmath and @xmath as written in ( 2.4 ). Thus deriving
the equations of motion is a little more complicated. This was first
done in [ 41 ] . We will re-derive the equations of motion here using a
slightly different method because this method will be more readily
applicable to the cases of extended geometry with the exceptional groups
that we discuss later. The basic idea is that rather than varying with
respect to the generalized metric one varies with respect to the
spacetime metric and the B-field and then make the result @xmath
covariant.

By applying the chain rule, the action can be varied with respect to
@xmath and @xmath separately. Making use of

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.36)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

leads to

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.37)
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.38)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Now the @xmath ’s and @xmath ’s are re-expressed in terms of @xmath ,
the symmetrizing brackets are dropped and the antisymmetrizing ones are
expanded

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath               
              @xmath      (2.39)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The crucial step is to then re-covariantize the indices by using @xmath
given in ( 2.3 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (2.40)
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

which reproduces the previous line once the doubled indices are expanded
and summed over. In a final step the terms inside the brackets are
brought into a form corresponding to a projected set of equations as
follows

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.41)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where we have introduced the projector

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is symmetric in both @xmath and @xmath .

The variation of the action has to vanish for any @xmath and @xmath
independently, therefore the equations of motion are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

and not @xmath , the naive equations expected from setting ( 2.33 ) to
zero.

This equation of motion was derived in a slightly different way in [ 41
] by using the constraint equation @xmath which ensures @xmath is an
element of @xmath . The result is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

in agreement with ours. We wish to emphasize the point of re-deriving
these equations is just so that we can use this method in the
exceptional case later.

Also note that the expression for @xmath found in the literature,
especially in [ 41 ] , differs from the one given here. This difference
arises as one can use either the invariant @xmath metric @xmath or the
generalized metric @xmath to raise and lower indices in the derivation
of @xmath . Both methods are valid and the discrepancy disappears once
the projector acts. In a way, the projector enforces the constraint that
@xmath parametrizes a coset space. When using @xmath , this constraint
is taken into account automatically, but when using @xmath the
constraint needs to be imposed by the projector. Since @xmath appears in
the equations of motion only with the projector acting on it, it does
not matter which version is used.

The importance for the presence of the projector can be seen by counting
degrees of freedom. The symmetric spacetime metric has @xmath degrees of
freedom and the antisymmetric B-field contributes @xmath for a total of
@xmath independent components. The dimension of the doubled space is
@xmath , therefore @xmath has @xmath components. Of these, @xmath are in
the kernel of the projector and are therefore eliminated, leaving @xmath
degrees of freedom as desired. This can be shown by computing the
characteristic polynomial and all the eigenvalues of the projector
@xmath .

## Chapter 3 Solutions in DFT

Having set up the basics of double field theory and considered the
equations of motion for its constituent fields, we will now turn our
attention to constructing solutions to these equations and interpreting
them in terms of known supergravity objects. This will lead to a better
understanding of the novel coordinates – the winding directions
introduced – and some interesting insights into how T-duality emerges in
the doubled picture.

In the introduction the parallels between double field theory and
Kaluza-Klein theory were highlighted. In particular, a pure momentum
mode such as the wave solution gives rise to a fundamental charge in the
reduced picture of the KK-ansatz. A good example for this is the wave in
M-theory which gives the D0-brane in string theory. In other words, the
D0-brane is a momentum mode along the eleventh direction, the M-theory
circle. Its mass and charge are given by the wave momentum in that
direction and hence satisfy a BPS condition. It was this example which
led us to consider momentum modes in the dual space of DFT. We will
therefore begin by considering a null wave propagating in the dual
space.

Before we start, there is a caveat concerning the generalized metric. It
is an open question if the generalized metric is an actual metric tensor
on the doubled space or something different, in which case the term
“metric” is a misnomer. For the purpose of this thesis it is sufficient
that the generalized metric transforms under generalized diffeomorphisms
(generated by the generalized Lie derivative) and for a given solution
satisfies the DFT equations of motion. Nevertheless, for convenience we
will encode the matrix @xmath in terms of a “line element” @xmath which
provides a concise way of presenting the components of @xmath . It is
not necessary to us that this line element defines an actual metric
tensor in the doubled space.

### 3.1 DFT Wave

We seek a solution for the generalized metric corresponding to a null
wave whose momentum is pointing the @xmath direction. The ansatz will be
that of a pp-wave in usual general relativity [ 131 ] . This has no
compunction to be a solution of DFT. As we have seen the equations of
motion of the generalized metric in DFT are certainly not the same as
the equations of motion of the metric in relativity. Let us immediately
remove any source of confusion the reader may have, the pp-wave as a
solution for @xmath may of course, by construction, be embedded as a
solution in DFT by simply inserting the pp-wave solution for @xmath into
@xmath . Here we will consider a pp-wave (that is the usual pp-wave
ansatz [ 131 ] ) not for @xmath but for the doubled metric @xmath itself
and then determine its interpretation in terms of the usual metric
@xmath and two-form @xmath .

The following is a solution to DFT in @xmath dimensions given by a
constant DFT dilaton ( 2.9 ), @xmath , and the generalized metric @xmath
with line element

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath            (3.1)
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------

where the generalized coordinates are split as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

and a tilde denotes a dual coordinate as introduced above. This
generalized metric and rescaled dilaton solve the equations of motion of
the DFT derived in Section 2.1 . The appendix A.1 provides the details
demonstrating it is indeed a solution.

Since it is exactly of the same form as the usual pp-wave solution, the
natural interpretation is of a pp-wave in the doubled geometry. One
therefore imagines a massless mode which propagates and therefore
carries momentum in the @xmath direction. In [ 132 , 133 , 134 ] the
conserved charges of DFT were constructed (by defining an analogue to
the ADM-mass and setting up generalized Komar integrals respectively)
and it was indeed shown that the DFT wave is massless but has momentum
in the dual @xmath direction.

In this solution, @xmath is taken to be a harmonic function of the usual
transverse coordinates ⁷ ⁷ 7 The range of the transverse index is @xmath
. @xmath (but not of their duals @xmath ) and as such is annihilated (up
to delta function sources) by the Laplacian operator in these
directions, i.e. @xmath . In DFT language, it is required (at least
naively) that @xmath satisfies the strong constraint and therefore it is
not a function of any of the dual coordinates. The fact that the
harmonic function @xmath is taken to only depend on @xmath and not the
dual transverse directions implies that the wave solution is smeared in
these @xmath directions. One can think of it as a plane wave front
extending along the dual directions described by coordinates @xmath but
with momentum in the @xmath direction. An explicit form of @xmath is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a constant proportional to the momentum carried and
@xmath is the radial coordinate of the transverse space.

We will now use the form of the doubled metric @xmath in terms of @xmath
and @xmath to rewrite this solution in terms of @xmath -dimensional
quantities, effectively reducing the dual dimensions. This is like in
Kaluza-Klein theory, writing a solution of the full theory in terms of
the reduced metric and vector potential using the ansatz

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

By comparing ( 3.4 ) with ( 3.1 ), the fields of the reduced theory with
coordinates @xmath can be computed. We find the metric and its inverse
to be

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

whereas the only non-zero component of the B-field is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

From the definition @xmath of the rescaled dilaton @xmath (which is a
constant here) it follows that the dilaton @xmath is given by ( @xmath
is another constant)

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

since @xmath . The corresponding line element is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

which together with the B-field and the dilaton @xmath gives the
fundamental string solution extended along the @xmath direction [ 135 ]
. We have thus shown that the solution ( 3.1 ) which carries momentum in
the @xmath direction in the doubled space corresponds to the string
along the @xmath direction from a reduced point of view. In other words,
the fundamental string is a massless wave in the doubled space with
momentum in a dual direction.

As mentioned above, this follows the logic of usual Kaluza-Klein theory.
In the doubled formalism the solution is a massless wave with @xmath
(where the @xmath are some generalized momenta), but from a the reduced
normal spacetime point of view the string has a mass or rather tension
@xmath and charge @xmath which are obviously given by the momenta in the
dual directions with a resulting BPS equation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Of course this is no surprise from the point of view of T-duality.
Momentum and string winding exchange under T-duality. It is precisely as
expected that momentum in the dual direction corresponds to a string.
What is more surprising is when one views this from the true DFT
perspective. There are null wave solutions that can point in any
direction. When we analyze these null waves from the reduced theory we
see them as fundamental strings or as usual pp-waves. It is a simple
@xmath rotation of the direction of propagation that takes one solution
into the other. We will come back to this view on T-duality in DFT in
the last section of this chapter.

#### 3.1.1 Goldstone Modes of the Wave Solution

In the previous section we presented a solution to the equations of
motion of DFT which reduces to the fundamental string. It will be
interesting to analyze the Goldstone modes of this solution in double
field theory. Especially since the advent of M-theory, it was understood
that branes are dynamical objects and that when one finds a solution of
the low energy effective action one can learn about the theory by
examining the dynamics of the Goldstone modes. For D-branes in string
theory this was done in [ 136 ] and for the membrane and fivebrane in
M-theory, where such an analysis was really the only way of describing
brane dynamics, this was done in [ 137 , 136 ] . We will follow the
excellent exposition and the method described in [ 136 ] as closely as
possible.

In DFT, the diffeomorphisms and gauge transformations are combined into
generalized diffeomorphisms generated by a generalized Lie derivative.
We will consider small variations in the generalized metric, @xmath and
the dilaton, @xmath generated by such transformations as follows

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The generalized Lie derivative of DFT was introduced in ( 2.13 ). Acting
on the generalized metric which is a symmetric tensor, it gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

If the metric @xmath and the transformation parameter @xmath both
satisfy the section condition, then the vector part @xmath generates a
coordinate transformation while the one-form part @xmath gives a gauge
transformation of the B-field.

The generalized Lie derivative of the dilaton contains just the
transport term plus a term for @xmath being a tensor density

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

For the purpose of this analysis, the space spanned by the coordinates
@xmath of the wave solution is treated like the worldvolume of an
extended object. All remaining coordinates are treated as transverse in
the extended space. The solution clearly breaks translation symmetry and
so one naturally expects scalar zero-modes. One immediate puzzle would
be to ask about the number of degrees of freedom of the Goldstone modes.
Given that the space is now doubled one would naively image that any
solution which may be interpreted as a string would have @xmath degrees
of freedom rather than the expected @xmath . We will answer this
question and show how the Goldstone modes have the correct number of
degrees of freedom despite the solution living in a @xmath dimensional
space. The projected form of the equations of motion are crucial in
making this work out.

To carry out the analysis it will be useful to split up the space into
parts longitudinal and transverse to the wave. One collects the
worldvolume coordinates @xmath and @xmath into @xmath and similarly for
their duals ⁸ ⁸ 8 In what follows we will use the alternative notation
@xmath for the dual coordinates to avoid confusion between inverse and
dual parts of the metric. @xmath such that the generalized coordinates
are @xmath . This allows the non-zero components of the metric and its
inverse to be written as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.13)
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where the constant symmetric @xmath matrices @xmath and @xmath are
defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

For later use also define their (antisymmetric) product

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.15)
  -- -- -- --------

Following [ 136 ] , we now pick a transformation parameter @xmath with
non-zero components only in the transverse directions, but with no
transformation along the worldvolume directions (and the directions dual
to the worldvolume). This transformation may then be described by the
DFT vector field

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the constant vectors that later will become
the Goldstone modes once we allow them to have dependence on the
worldvolume coordinates, @xmath is the harmonic function given above and
@xmath are constants that are to be determined by demanding that the
Goldstone modes become normalizable. Using ( 3.11 ), we can compute the
components of @xmath in terms of @xmath . Recall that both the metric
and the transformation parameter only depend on @xmath through the
harmonic function @xmath . Therefore @xmath is the only derivative that
gives a non-zero contribution. We find

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.17)
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

and all terms with indices mixing @xmath with @xmath vanish. For the
dilaton there is no contribution from the transport term as @xmath is a
constant for our solution. This leaves the density term which gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Once we have these equations, the next step is to allow the moduli to
have dependence on the worldvolume coordinates,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the hats are removed. These are the zero-modes.

We now determine their equations of motion by inserting ( 3.19 ) into (
3.17 ) and ( 3.18 ) and then subsequently into the equations of motion
for DFT, ( 2.32 ) and ( 2.43 ). As usual we keep only terms with two
derivatives and first order in @xmath and @xmath themselves. (It would
certainly be interesting to move beyond this expansion and compare with
a Nambu-Goto type action but we will not do so here.) This gives

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.20)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

For convenience we will define @xmath and @xmath . Inserting @xmath from
( 3.17 ), we find

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath was defined in ( 3.15 ). Further, inserting @xmath from (
3.18 ) gives the dilaton equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is straight forward to see that the dilaton equation is solved by
@xmath . For the other equations we have to work a bit harder. The full
equations of motion for the generalized metric are the projected
equations ( 2.43 ) which contain @xmath linearly independent equations

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (3.24)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (3.25)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (3.26)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

Inserting for @xmath from above yields the equations of motion for the
zero modes. The first two read

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (3.27)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

and can be solved by @xmath and @xmath respectively. The next block of
equations ( 3.25 ) can be re-covariantized by using

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

which leads to

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (3.29)
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

Adding these two equations gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

where for @xmath we have @xmath . If @xmath we have the same object
@xmath on both sides which can be shown to be invertible. The equation
can thus be reduced to a duality relation between @xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

This equation implies both @xmath and @xmath as can be seen by acting
with a contracted derivative on the equation. If @xmath and @xmath are
placed in a generalized vector @xmath this can be written as a
self-duality relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

and precisely matches the result in [ 5 ] for the duality symmetric
string.

The final block of equations of motion ( 3.26 ) are either trivial or
are also of the form @xmath provided @xmath . If one was not concerned
by normalization of the modes then this also provides a way of
constraining the value of @xmath . The consistent choice of @xmath is
fortunately the choice that also leads to normalizable modes. This may
be seen by examining the case @xmath and integrating over the transverse
space. This exactly mirrors the situation described in [ 136 ] . The
Goldstone modes are really the normalizable modes corresponding to
broken gauge transformations. Where for gravity the gauge
transformations are ordinary diffeomorphisms, in the case of DFT it is
generated by the generalized Lie derivative.

One can now turn equation ( 3.31 ) into a (anti-)chiral equation for a
linear combination of @xmath and @xmath as follows. Introducing @xmath
to be given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

and inserting them into ( 3.31 ) and its Hodge dual gives the familiar
(anti-)self-dual left- and right-movers

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

of the Tseytlin-string [ 6 , 7 ] . Thus the dynamics of the Goldstone
modes of the wave solution reproduce the duality symmetric string in
doubled space. The number of physical degrees of freedom are not doubled
but just become rearranged in terms of chiral and anti-chiral modes on
the world-sheet.

### 3.2 DFT Monopole

In the previous section a null wave in the doubled space was shown to
reduce to a fundamental string or a pp-wave when viewed from the
ordinary supergravity point of view. The interpretation of the solution
in terms of the normal supergravity theory associated to the reduction
of DFT was determined by the direction the null wave was traveling in.
If the DFT solution carries momentum in a spacetime direction @xmath it
reduces to a wave. But if it carries momentum in a dual winding
direction @xmath it gives the string whose mass and charge are
determined by the momentum in that dual direction.

Instead of the wave we will now consider the Kaluza-Klein monopole
solution also known as the Sorkin-Gross-Perry monopole [ 35 , 36 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (3.35)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath is a harmonic function and @xmath a vector potential with
@xmath . This solution has the following non-trivial topology. The
@xmath -direction is taken to be compact, i.e. a circle @xmath . The
three @xmath -directions span @xmath which becomes @xmath when expressed
in polar coordinates. Locally, we can thus identify @xmath as the Hopf
fibration of @xmath where the first Chern class is proportional to the
magnetic charge.

If this solution is supplemented by some trivial world volume
directions, it can be turned into something known as a KK-brane. The low
energy limit of string theory is ten-dimensional supergravity. Thus,
embedding the monopole solution (which is four-dimensional) requires
adding six trivial dimensions (one of which is timelike) which would
then produce a KK6-brane solution as follows

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the same as above. ⁹ ⁹ 9 By adding seven
trivial dimensions, the monopole solution can be embedded in M-theory
(eleven-dimensional supergravity) where it takes the form of a
KK7-brane. Then from the point of view of Type IIA supergravity – which
is the theory that emerges upon Kaluza-Klein reduction of M-theory – the
KK7-brane becomes either the Type IIA D6- or KK6-brane, depending on
which direction is reduced. All of this is part of the usual
supergravity story relating solutions of eleven-dimensional supergravity
to those of the Type IIA theory [ 138 ] .

Now let us consider a monopole-type solution in double field theory
which we call the DFT monopole. Appendix A.2 shows that the following is
a solution and satisfies the DFT equations of motion. The monopole
solution is described by the generalized metric @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (3.37)
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

and the rescaled dilaton of DFT (defined as @xmath )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a constant. The generalized coordinates are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath . The last line in ( 3.37 ) uses the Minkowski
metric @xmath , i.e. @xmath and @xmath are timelike, the signature being
mostly plus.

Here @xmath is a harmonic function of the @xmath only; it is annihilated
(up to delta function sources) by the Laplacian in the @xmath
-directions and is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath an arbitrary constant that is related to the first Chern
class and hence the magnetic charge. The vector @xmath also obeys the
Laplace equation, is divergence-free and its curl is given by the
gradient of @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

This doubled solution is to be interpreted as a KK-brane of DFT. It can
be rewritten to extract the spacetime metric @xmath and the Kalb-Ramond
two-form @xmath in ordinary spacetime with coordinates @xmath . We will
show explicitly that the “reduced” solution is in fact an infinite
periodic array of NS5-branes smeared along the @xmath direction.

One can also show that if @xmath is treated as a normal coordinate and
@xmath as a dual coordinate the reduced solution is the string theory
monopole introduced above. This means the (smeared) NS5-brane is the
same as a KK-monopole with the KK-circle in a dual (winding) direction.

One might be concerned about the presence of @xmath in the generalized
metric since for the monopole picture to make sense, @xmath must
transform as a one-form gauge field. (Below we show how this one-form is
a component of the two-form @xmath ). Crucially, the generalized metric
transforms under the generalized Lie derivative. When the generating
double vector field of the generalized Lie derivative points in the dual
space directions it generates the gauge transformations of the B-field.
When we have an additional isometry, the @xmath direction of this
solution, then this generalized Lie derivative generates the correct
gauge transformations of a one-form field @xmath . (This requires the
gauge parameters to also be independent of @xmath ).

We will now use the same KK-ansatz ( 3.4 ) as for the DFT wave to
rewrite the DFT monopole solution ( 3.37 ) in terms of ten-dimensional
non-doubled quantities. By Comparing ( 3.4 ) with ( 3.37 ) the reduced
fields can be computed. The spacetime metric @xmath and the
non-vanishing components of the B-field @xmath are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (3.42)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

The determinant of this metric is @xmath and therefore the string theory
dilaton becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

This solution is the NS5-brane solution of string theory [ 125 ] , more
precisely it is the NS5-brane smeared along the @xmath direction.
Usually the harmonic function of the NS5-brane depends on all four
transverse directions, that is @xmath and @xmath . By smearing it over
the @xmath direction the brane is no longer localized in @xmath and so
the @xmath -dependence is removed from the harmonic function.

Smearing the solution along @xmath has also consequences for the field
strength @xmath . The NS5-brane comes with an H-flux whose only non-zero
components are in the transverse directions @xmath and @xmath . The
field strength is written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . We then note that the non-trivial part of the metric is
@xmath so that @xmath . This then allows us to write the field strength
as

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (3.45)
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

where the epsilon tensor has been converted to the permutation symbol (a
tensor density) in order to make contact with the epsilon in a lower
dimension. If the solution then is smeared along @xmath , @xmath no
longer depends on this coordinate. Therefore @xmath and

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (3.46)
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

Thus the only non-zero component of the B-field (up to a gauge choice)
of the smeared NS5-brane is @xmath . This then shows how the flux of the
smeared NS5-brane is just the same as the usual magnetic two-form flux
from a magnetic monopole for the electromagnetic field.

In conclusion, the smeared NS5-brane solution ( 3.42 ) can be extracted
from the DFT monopole ( 3.37 ) using ( 3.4 ). If @xmath and @xmath are
exchanged, the same procedure recovers the KK-monopole of string theory.
Since the monopole and the NS5-brane are T-dual to each other in string
theory and DFT makes T-duality manifest, this should not come as a
surprise.

In order to identify the NS5-brane with the KK-monopole, it needed to be
smeared along the @xmath direction. Any monopole type solution is
expected to need more than a single patch to describe it (and in fact
the topological charge may be viewed as the obstruction to a global
description). In [ 105 ] the problems of constructing a full global
solution containing NSNS magnetic flux, with patching between different
local descriptions in DFT, are discussed in detail. So have we resolved
those issues here?

Not really, in the case described above, because of the additional
isometry in the transverse directions, the three-form flux is completely
encoded in a two-form flux. (This is non-trivial and can be constructed
in the usual way, à la Dirac). In other words because of the additional
isometry @xmath , so that although the @xmath flux is an element of the
third cohomology it is really completely given by the second cohomology
of which @xmath is a non-trivial representative.

One can now ask the question if it is possible to localize the monopole
and remove this additional smearing. We will look at this in Section 6.2
where we consider solutions localized in winding space.

### 3.3 T-duality in DFT

In this chapter we have constructed and discussed two solutions to the
DFT equations of motion, the DFT wave and the DFT monopole. Both are
solutions in the doubled space which – depending on their orientation –
reduce to a pair of T-duality related objects in the supergravity
picture, i.e. after removing the dual directions. The DFT wave gives
either the F1-string or a pp-wave, the DFT monopole leads to the smeared
NS5-brane or a KK-monopole. By considering these solutions and their
relations, we can gain an interesting insight into how T-duality is
viewed in DFT. For this we will make a distinction between the strong
constraint and the section condition .

Naively speaking, the strong constraint ( 2.27 ) always needs to be
imposed as explained in Section 2.3 to have a consistent theory which
can be reduced to supergravity. Essentially it restricts the dependence
of fields on half of the coordinates. For each pair @xmath of a normal
and a winding coordinate one has to pick which coordinate the fields
depend on and impose either @xmath or @xmath for the other coordinate.

The usual spacetime manifold of supergravity is defined by picking out a
maximally isotropic subspace of the doubled space of DFT. It is the
section condition (via the @xmath structure @xmath which provides the
pairing of @xmath and @xmath ) which selects the set of coordinates that
form the physical spacetime slice or section within the doubled space.
So normally by imposing the strong constraint the dependence on half of
the coordinates is removed and the remaining coordinates are identified
with the coordinates of spacetime via the section condition. In the
absence of isometries the strong constraint and the section condition
are therefore the same and so far we have used the expressions
synonymously.

But what if there is an isometry? When there is an isometry then there
is indeed an ambiguity in how one identifies the physical spacetime
within the doubled space. In other words, due to the isometry fields can
depend on fewer coordinates than required by the strong constraint. Then
there is a choice of how to solve the section condition, i.e. how to
pick the coordinates for spacetime.

This can be illustrated with the two DFT solutions we have encountered
so far. The harmonic function and thus all fields of the DFT wave as
presented in ( 3.1 ) only depends on the @xmath transverse coordinates
@xmath . Therefore the strong constraint is satisfied since the solution
depends on only half (actually less than half) the coordinates of the
doubled space. But the section condition requires us to pick @xmath out
of the @xmath coordinates to form the physical spacetime. Obviously one
has to pick the @xmath @xmath and it is also natural to include @xmath ,
the time coordinate. But for the last coordinate there is a choice
between @xmath and @xmath . Since the solution depends on neither, the
strong constraint remains satisfied by either choice.

As we have seen, picking @xmath leads to the fundamental string solution
while the opposite choice gives the pp-wave. Therefore the T-duality
between these two supergravity solutions arises from the ambiguity in
picking the physical spacetime. It is this choice of selecting either
@xmath or @xmath which translates to the choice of (T-dual) frames in
the supergravity picture. Thus from the DFT perspective, traditional
T-duality comes from an isometry in the doubled space and hence an
ambiguity in how one defines the half-dimensional subspace corresponding
to a supergravity solution. The same holds for the DFT monopole ( 3.37 )
where again there is a choice between @xmath and @xmath in addition to
the @xmath and @xmath coordinates.

We will pick up this discussion again in Section 6.2 where solutions
localized in winding space which therefore have fewer isometries are
considered. For now we will ask a different question. We have seen how
T-duality related solutions descend from the same object in DFT. What
about an electric/magentic duality or S-duality relation between the
fundamental object, the F1-string, and the solitonic object, the
NS5-brane?

Double field theory only makes T-duality of string theory a manifest
symmetry. In order to incorporate S-duality, we have to move over to
exceptional field theory which makes the U-duality of M-theory manifest.
Since S-duality (together with T-duality) is part of U-duality, we will
see how the same results for the wave and monopole in an extended space
hold, but in addition they can also be directly related to each other.
Therefore we will study exceptional field theory and its solutions next.

## Chapter 4 Exceptional Field Theory

The primary idea behind exceptional field theory [ 23 , 24 , 68 , 69 ,
27 ] is to make the exceptional symmetries of eleven-dimensional
supergravity manifest. The appearance of the exceptional groups in
dimensionally reduced supergravity theories was first discussed in [ 9 ,
20 ] . In EFT one first performs a decomposition of eleven-dimensional
supergravity but with no reduction or truncation into an @xmath split.
That is one takes the eleven dimensions of supergravity to be

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then one supplements the @xmath so called “internal” directions of
@xmath with additional coordinates to linearly realize the exceptional
symmetries and form an extended space @xmath whose dimension is the
dimension of the relevant ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 For @xmath this is the fundamental
representation. For other groups a different representation might be
needed for the construction, e.g. for @xmath where @xmath it is the 10 (
cf. Table 1 in the Introduction and Table 11 below). representation
@xmath of the exceptional group @xmath . The introduction of novel extra
dimensions therefore leads to an extension of the eleven-dimensional
space to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a coset manifold that comes equipped with the coset
metric of @xmath (where @xmath is the maximally compact subgroup of
@xmath given in Table 1 ). This “exceptional extended geometry” has been
constructed for several U-duality groups but was originally restricted
to truncations of the eleven-dimensional theory [ 21 , 22 , 23 , 24 , 25
, 26 ] where the “external” metric was taken to be flat and off-diagonal
terms (the “gravi-photon”) were set to zero. Furthermore, coordinate
dependence was restricted to the internal extended coordinates.

The full, non-truncated exceptional field theory allows for a dependence
on all coordinates, external, internal and extended. This allows for
eleven-dimensional supergravity to be embedded into a theory that is
fully covariant under the exceptional groups @xmath . So far EFTs have
been developed for @xmath : @xmath [ 4 ] , @xmath [ 33 ] , @xmath [ 32 ]
, @xmath [ 31 ] , @xmath [ 28 ] , @xmath [ 29 ] and @xmath [ 30 ] ,
including the supersymmetrisation of the @xmath and @xmath cases [ 78 ,
77 ] . In addition, fairly complete constructions have been developed
for the general field content of these theories [ 73 , 79 ] .

It is worthwhile at this stage to describe how the U-duality groups
become related to the embedding of the eleven dimensions in the extended
space. The combination of p-form gauge transformations and
diffeomorphism give rise to a continuous local @xmath symmetry. This
however is not U-duality which is a global discrete symmetry that only
occurs in the presence of isometries. (See [ 102 ] for the equivalent
discussion for DFT). Crucially however there is also a physical section
condition that provides a constraint in EFT that restricts the
coordinate dependence of the fields to a subset of the dimensions and
thus there naturally appears a physical submanifold which we identify as
usual spacetime. When there are no isometries present this section
condition constraint produces a canonical choice of how spacetime is
embedded in the extended space. However, in the presence of isometries
there is an ambiguity in how one identifies the submanifold in the
extended space. This ambiguity is essentially the origin of U-duality
with different choices of spacetime associated to U-duality related
descriptions. (This is discussed in detail for the case of DFT in
Section 3.3 above and [ 2 ] ).

Another remark concerns the nature of the dimensionality @xmath .
Originally in double field theory only @xmath of the dimensions were
taken to be compact which gives rise to the group @xmath . By doubling
these @xmath coordinates, the T-duality in these directions could be
made manifest. The remaining “external” dimensions were not doubled.
Then @xmath was extended to include all dimensions of string theory,
i.e. everything was doubled. In EFT, the @xmath duality groups only
arise if the eleven dimensions are split and @xmath dimensions are
singled out. These @xmath directions are extended to form the
exceptionally extended space while the remaining external dimension are
not extended. The @xmath programme [ 80 , 81 , 82 , 83 , 84 , 85 , 86 ]
states that all the EFTs with a given @xmath are included in a theory
based on @xmath , i.e. by setting @xmath a split of the dimensions is
avoided and all directions become extended. The problem here is that
@xmath is of infinite dimension and thus the exceptionally extended
space would have to include infinitely many novel coordinates to realize
the symmetry.

In this thesis we will focus on @xmath and @xmath . We will first give
an overview of the exceptionally extended geometry, its structure and
algebra, with an emphasis on @xmath and @xmath . Then as a warm-up the
truncated theories for these two groups are presented. Only then do we
move on to look at the full, non-truncated theory for @xmath . The
@xmath EFT will be considered in Chapter 7 with a focus on its relation
to F-theory.

### 4.1 The Exceptional Extended Geometry of EFTs

All the defining features of double field theory such as an extended
tangent space, a generalized Lie derivative with corresponding gauge
algebra and bracket, and the section condition are also found in the
exceptional extended geometries of exceptional field theories. In what
follows, we will define these objects in a general manner, independent
of @xmath and thus the relevant exceptional group @xmath . To this end
we will introduce the Y-tensor @xmath [ 70 ] . It can be constructed for
each symmetry group G and captures the deviation of the extended
geometry from the usual Riemannian geometry of general relativity.

To illustrate this, we can cast some of the definitions for the doubled
geometry from Chapter 2 into this general form by using the Y-tensor for
DFT which is made from the @xmath invariant structure @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then the generalized Lie derivative of a doubled vector @xmath can be
written as ( cf. ( 2.13 ))

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath            (4.4)
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------

i.e. it is the ordinary Lie derivative @xmath plus a correction term for
the doubled geometry. Similarly the @xmath -bracket ( 2.19 ) can be
expressed in terms of the Y-tensor and the extra term in the commutator
of two generalized Lie derivatives is proportional to @xmath . Hence
when imposing the section condition ( 2.21 )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

the extra term vanishes and the algebra closes.

Therefore, by considering the Y-tensor for the various symmetry groups
G, the corresponding extended geometry can be constructed. The Y-tensor
for @xmath is given in Table 11 [ 70 ] . While the extended coordinates
@xmath are in the representation @xmath (usually the fundamental
representation of G) of Table 1 given in the introduction, the Y-tensor
can be thought of a projector onto @xmath (usually the adjoint).

The generalized diffeomorphism which is the relevant gauge
transformation with gauge parameter @xmath of a generalized vector
@xmath can now be defined for any of the exceptional groups as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The gauge algebra closes and the Jacobi identity is satisfied once the
section condition

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

is imposed. The algebra can be written in terms of the @xmath -bracket [
27 ] which is the analogue of the the @xmath -bracket of DFT

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the @xmath -bracket is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath is the ordinary Lie bracket and the extra term is
proportional to the Y-tensor. With this setup various further identities
can be shown to hold, e.g. that the Y-tensor is an invariant tensor

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

With these general definitions for the exceptional extended geometries
in mind, we can proceed to construct the theories for specific groups.
First we will consider the truncated theory where the external sector is
trivial and there are no cross-terms between external and internal
sector. This setting allows us to gain some understanding of the
extended geometries upon which the full theory can then be built.

### 4.2 The truncated Theory

The @xmath invariant theory [ 24 ] was the first theory constructed
which applied the ideas of generalized geometry and double field theory
to the exceptional groups that arise in M-theory truncations. We will
therefore start by giving an outline of this theory together with its
action and equations of motion. After a brief intermezzo on the general
form of the equations of motion of the truncated theories, we will move
on to present the truncated @xmath theory. This should be a good
preparation for the next section.

Note that the work on the truncated theories [ 21 , 22 , 23 , 24 , 25 ,
26 ] predates the inception of the full EFT formalism [ 27 , 28 , 29 ,
30 ] . Therefore certain formulations and calculations might seem
superfluous in hindsight.

#### 4.2.1 The @xmath Duality Invariant Theory

Let us start by examining the extended geometry of the @xmath duality
invariant theory. This arises from the full eleven-dimensional theory by
splitting the dimensions into @xmath . The U-duality group acts on the
four dimensions and can be made manifest by including the six dual
dimensions corresponding to membrane wrappings. There is then a
(4+6)-dimensional extended space with manifest @xmath invariance and no
dependence on the remaining seven dimensions.

The extended tangent bundle of the generalized geometry for @xmath
combines the tangent space with the space of two-forms

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the four-manifold in the @xmath split. This combines the
diffeomorphisms on the four-manifold with the two-form gauge
transformations of the three-form C-field. Therefore the two terms in
the extended tangent bundle correspond to momentum modes and membrane
wrapping modes respectively.

The next step is to introduce generalized coordinate vectors (sections
of @xmath ) for the extended tangent bundle. The four spacetime
coordinates @xmath are combined with the six wrapping coordinates @xmath
to form the extended coordinate @xmath in the @xmath of @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the spirit of DFT and going beyond generalized geometry, not only the
tangent bundle is extended but also the underlying space. The @xmath
theory is formulated on this (4+6)-dimensional extended space.

Referring to the @xmath decomposition into @xmath , schematically a
generalized metric of such an (10+7)-dimensional space can be written as
(see [ 139 ] )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the generalized metric on the extended space and @xmath
is the metric on the remaining seven dimensions. The conformal factor up
front is important as it relates these two otherwise independent
sectors, it is given in terms of the determinant of @xmath , the metric
of the full eleven-dimensional space.

This @xmath is the generalized metric as first given in [ 24 ] . It
parametrizes the coset @xmath in terms of the spacetime metric @xmath
and the form field @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

for coordinates @xmath in the @xmath of @xmath and with @xmath which is
used to raise an antisymmetric pair of indices. Note that there is no
overall factor in front, this metric has a determinant of @xmath where
@xmath is the determinant of the four-metric @xmath . Therefore in this
form it is actually an element of @xmath , not @xmath . This can be
remedied by considering the following.

The theory contains a scaling symmetry for the @xmath which can be used
to rescale @xmath by @xmath , e.g. @xmath (this particular rescaling
leads to a generalized metric with unit determinant, i.e. @xmath ).
Noting that @xmath and assuming a simple form ¹² ¹² 12 For example when
considering the compactification of the seven dimensions on a
seven-torus with equal radius @xmath this is just @xmath and thus @xmath
. for the seven-metric such that @xmath we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Under an @xmath transformation the seven-sector should remain unchanged,
therefore we have the following @xmath scalar density

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

which we will us to write down the correctly weighted action for the
extended theory. In terms of the generalized metric @xmath with unit
determinant and the volume factor @xmath the action reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the scalar @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (4.18)
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

The first two terms reproduce the Einstein-Hilbert and Maxwell term upon
imposing section condition. The last two terms are kinetic terms for
@xmath . The equations of motion for @xmath can be found by varying the
action and are given up to total derivatives by @xmath .

On the other hand, varying the action with respect to the generalized
metric and integrating by parts gives

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Note that there is no term for varying @xmath . This factor contains
information about the determinant of @xmath but does not change if the
metric is varied as it is fixed to have unit determinant. We will denote
everything inside the brackets by @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

As in the case of DFT, ( 4.20 ) does not have to vanish for any
variation @xmath since the generalized metric is constrained to
parametrize a coset space. This gives rise to a projector to eliminate
the additional degrees of freedom. To impose this constraint and find
this projector, one has to use the chain rule. In order to vary the
generalized metric with respect to the spacetime metric and the C-field,
it will be useful to use indices @xmath in the @xmath of @xmath . The
coordinates are then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the permutation symbol in four dimensions, a tensor
density. The generalized metric and its inverse take the form

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . Note the factor of @xmath up front since this is the
rescaled metric with unit determinant. Using the chain rule and varying
the metric in ( 4.20 ) with respect to @xmath and @xmath gives

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.23)
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where the term @xmath arises from varying the determinant factor. After
cleaning up and dropping the symmetrizing and antisymmetrizing brackets,
the @xmath ’s and @xmath ’s are re-expressed in terms of @xmath (factors
of @xmath have to be accounted for carefully)

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (4.25)
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

Now the indices can be re-covariantized to be expressed as

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (4.26)
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

which reproduces the previous line if the extended indices are expanded
and summed over. In a final step these expressions can be written in
terms of a projected set of equations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the projector is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is symmetric in both @xmath and @xmath as can be seen from the
contraction with the symmetric @xmath and @xmath respectively. Note that
the term containing @xmath does not impose any symmetry property on the
projector.

The variation of the action has to vanish for any @xmath and @xmath
independently, therefore the equations of motion are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath defined in ( 4.20 ).

#### 4.2.2 Divertimento: Equations of Motion with a Projector

In general, the dynamics of the extended geometry can be described using
a projected equation of motion. In the truncated theories, i.e. with
trivial external sector and vanishing cross-terms, the action of the
internal sector is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the Lagrangian @xmath includes the integration measure for the
extended space and @xmath is the dimension of the extended space (that
is @xmath for @xmath and @xmath for @xmath for example – see Table 11
where it is called dim @xmath ). Setting the variation of the action to
zero gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the variation of the Lagrangian with respect to the
generalized metric. The integrand does not have to vanish for any @xmath
since the generalized metric is constraint to parametrize the coset
space @xmath . This constraint gives rise to a projector in the
equations of motion

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

Following the method for @xmath in Section 2.4 and @xmath above where we
use a chain rule type argument, we see that the projector may be written
in a standard form using only the generalized metric and the @xmath
-tensor

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

together with the constants @xmath and @xmath which depend on the
dimension of the extended space @xmath and thus the U-duality group. In
[ 1 ] the projectors have been constructed for @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath and the constants @xmath where found to be @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath respectively.

Our @xmath is a genuine projector in the sense that @xmath and its
eigenvalues are either @xmath or @xmath . The eigenvectors with
eigenvalue @xmath span the kernel of the projector. Those parts of
@xmath proportional to these eigenvectors are projected out and
eliminated from the equations of motion.

The multiplicity of the eigenvalues @xmath and @xmath are called nullity
(dimension of the kernel) and rank of the projector respectively. They
add up to @xmath , the dimension of the vector space of eigenvectors. We
have not shown that this is true beyond the groups mentioned above since
the calculations have been done just by brute force. However, given the
structure of the exceptional geometric theories, in that the theories up
to @xmath are completely determined by the generalized metric and the
@xmath -tensor (along with a few dimensionally dependent constants),
then we expect this projector to be true at least up to @xmath with only
the constants @xmath and @xmath to be determined.

Note, the object @xmath is symmetric and thus has @xmath independent
components in a generalized space with @xmath dimensions. The bosonic
degrees of freedom of the theories under consideration are given by the
metric tensor @xmath and the form fields @xmath or @xmath (plus one for
the dilaton @xmath in DFT and the volume factor @xmath in the @xmath
theory). One equation of motion is needed for each of those degrees of
freedom. The projector reduces the components of the equation @xmath
such that the right number of independent equations remain.

#### 4.2.3 The @xmath Duality Invariant Theory

Let’s now turn to the extended geometry of th @xmath duality invariant
theory. We consider the case where the eleven-dimensional theory is a
direct product of @xmath , the U-duality group acting on the
seven-dimensional space @xmath is @xmath . We will truncate the theory
to ignore all dependence on the @xmath directions and will not allow any
excitations of fields with mixed indices such as the gravi-photon.

The exceptional extended geometry is constructed by extending the
tangent bundle from seven to 56 dimensions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the seven-space. The terms in the sum correspond to
brane charges: momentum, membrane, fivebrane and KK-monopole charge.
Details of this construction and the resulting theory are described in [
23 , 21 , 22 , 25 , 26 , 24 , 69 , 70 ] . The algebra is @xmath with the
@xmath acting along the seven spacetime dimensions of the extended
space. The generators of the associated motion group are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath . The first four generate the @xmath
representation of @xmath and the last one generates translations in the
remaining four directions, the @xmath . For convenience, the following
dualization of generators is used

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

For the @xmath generators we can now introduce generalized coordinates
¹³ ¹³ 13 For this subsection and Section 5.2 which are both concerned
with the truncated @xmath EFT we will use this alternative notation for
the extended coordinates.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

to form the extended 56-dimensional space. Note that an index pair
@xmath is antisymmetric and we thus have indeed @xmath coordinates.
These are the coordinates conjugate to the brane charges mentioned above
which can be seen as brane wrapping coordinates in analogy to the string
winding coordinates of DFT.

The generalized metric @xmath of this extended space can be constructed
from the vielbein given in [ 23 , 21 , 22 , 25 , 26 , 69 ] . The full
expression is quite an unwieldy structure, so we will introduce it in
several steps.

The underlying structure of @xmath can be seen clearly if the M-theory
potentials @xmath and @xmath are turned off. Then the only field present
is the spacetime metric @xmath and the line element of the extended
space ¹⁴ ¹⁴ 14 As for the generalized metric in DFT, we utilize a line
element to present the components of the matrix @xmath and the
coordinates of the extended space in a concise form. We do not wish to
imply that the generalized metric is an actual metric tensor on the
extended space. reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (4.38)
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

Here the determinant of the spacetime metric is denoted by @xmath and
the four-index objects are defined by @xmath and similarly for the
inverse.

The generalized metric has a scaling symmetry and can be rescaled by a
power of its determinant which in turn is just a power of @xmath . The
bare metric, i.e. without the factor of @xmath upfront, has @xmath . One
could choose to rescale by including a factor of @xmath which would then
lead to @xmath , an often useful and desirable property. Here the factor
@xmath is included. It arises completely naturally from the @xmath
programme, see [ 69 ] , and interestingly gives solutions in the
Einstein frame when rewritten by a KK-ansatz ( i.e. no further rescaling
is necessary).

If the gauge potentials are non-zero, there are additional terms for the
“diagonal” entries of ( 4.38 ) and also “cross-terms” mixing the
different types of coordinates. For what follows we will not need to use
the full generalized metric with both potentials present at the same
time. We will just need to consider the two special cases where either
the @xmath potential or the @xmath potential vanishes.

In the first case with no three-form, the six-form is dualized and
encoded as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

which allows the line element to be written as

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (4.40)
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

In the second case with no six-form, the three-form components are
encoded in @xmath and @xmath (see [ 69 ] ). We will concentrate on the
special case where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then the line element for the generalized metric is then given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (4.42)
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

The action for the @xmath theory can be constructed as in [ 23 , 21 , 22
, 25 , 26 , 69 ] . The corresponding equations of motion can be derived
as explained in the previous subsection and will appear under a
projector to take into account that the generalized metric is
constrained to be in the @xmath coset.

### 4.3 The full non-truncated Theory

By constructing the generalized metrics on the exceptional extended
spaces of @xmath and @xmath we have encountered some of the essential
parts of exceptional field theory. But so far the formalism was
restricted to the “extended internal” sector, the external space (with
@xmath dimensions) was taken to be trivial and cast aside together with
the cross-terms which would have mixed – external and internal –
indices. Also the coordinate dependence of the fields was restricted to
the extended internal sector.

The next step is therefore to find a formalism which includes all
sectors, is fully covariant and makes the @xmath duality group a
manifest symmetry. This allows for the embedding of full
eleven-dimensional supergravity without a truncation ¹⁵ ¹⁵ 15 Note that
when we speak of “non-truncated” theories, we simply mean that the
external sector and the cross-terms between the external and internal
extended sectors are included. This does not mean that there are no
other truncations of any kind to the theories. . Furthermore, there is
no restriction on the coordinate dependence of fields. We will
demonstrate this by studying the full EFT for the duality group @xmath [
29 ] .

The @xmath exceptional field theory lives in a @xmath -dimensional
spacetime. The four dimensional external space has coordinates @xmath
and metric @xmath which may be expressed in terms of a vierbein. The
56-dimensional extended internal space has coordinates @xmath which are
in the fundamental representation of @xmath . This exceptional extended
space is equipped with a generalized metric @xmath which parametrizes
the coset @xmath and takes the same form as the one constructed for the
truncated version of the theory. The 56-dimensional exceptional extended
geometry with the extended tangent bundle ( 4.34 ) was already given in
the previous section. Just note the different notation @xmath as opposed
to @xmath for the generalized coordinates.

In addition to the external metric @xmath and the generalized metric
@xmath , EFT also requires a generalized gauge connection @xmath and a
pair of two-forms @xmath and @xmath to describe all degrees of freedom
of eleven-dimensional supergravity (their corresponding field strengths
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath are described below). Here @xmath labels the
adjoint and @xmath the fundamental representation of @xmath . For more
on the nature of these two-forms see [ 29 ] . For the main part of this
chapter and the next they will both be zero and not play a role in what
follows though they are of course crucial for the consistency of the
theory.

Thus, the field content of the @xmath exceptional field theory is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

All these fields are then subjected to the physical section condition
which picks a subspace of the exceptional extended space. This section
condition can be formulated in terms of the @xmath generators @xmath and
the invariant symplectic form @xmath of @xmath as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.44)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath stand for any field and gauge parameter. This form of the
section condition is equivalent to the form given in ( 4.7 ) in terms of
the Y-tensor.

The equations of motion describing the dynamics of the fields can be
derived from the following action which now is an integral over the full
@xmath -dimensional spacetime

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (4.45)
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

The first term is a covariantized Einstein-Hilbert term given in terms
of the spin connection @xmath of the vierbein @xmath (with determinant
@xmath )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

The second term is a kinetic term for the generalized metric @xmath
which takes the form of a non-linear gauged sigma model with target
space @xmath . The third term is a Yang-Mills-type kinetic term for the
gauge vectors @xmath which are used to define the covariant derivatives
@xmath . The fourth term is the “potential” @xmath built from internal
extended derivatives @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (4.47)
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath . The last term is a topological Chern-Simons-like term
which is required for consistency.

All fields in the action depend on all the external and extended
internal coordinates. The derivatives @xmath appear in the non-abelian
gauge structure of the covariant derivative and together with the
two-forms @xmath in the field strengths @xmath . Note that this action
can be reduced to the action of the truncated theory presented in the
previous section by setting @xmath and the @xmath to zero and
restricting the coordinate dependence to @xmath , i.e. @xmath . Then
only the potential term containing the generalized metric remains.

The gauge connection @xmath allows for the theory to be formulated in a
manifestly invariant way under generalized Lie derivatives. The
covariant derivative for a vector of weight @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (4.48)
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

The associated non-abelian field strength of the gauge connection,
defined as

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (4.49)
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

is not covariant with respect to vector gauge transformations. In order
to form a properly covariant object we extend the field strength with
Stückelberg-type couplings to the compensating two-forms @xmath and
@xmath as follows

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

For a detailed derivation and explanation of this we refer to [ 29 ] .
The Bianchi identity for this generalized field strength is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

which also defines the three-form field strengths @xmath and @xmath .
The final ingredient of the theory are the twisted self-duality
equations for the 56 EFT gauge vectors @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

which relate the 28 “electric” vectors to the 28 “magnetic” ones. This
self-duality relation is a crucial property of the @xmath EFT and is
essential for the results presented here. In fact this sort of twisted
self-duality equation has been described many years ago in the seminal
work of [ 20 ] .

To conclude this brief overview of the full exceptional field theory, we
note that the bosonic gauge symmetries uniquely determine the theory.
They are given by the generalized diffeomorphisms of the external and
extended internal coordinates. For more on the novel features of the
generalized diffeomorphisms in exceptional field theory see [ 29 ] .

An immediate simplification to the above equations presents itself when
the coordinate dependence of fields and gauge parameters is restricted.
In Chapter 5 we will consider a solution of EFT which only depends on
external coordinates. Thus any derivative of the internal extended
coordinates, @xmath , vanishes trivially. Furthermore, our solution
comes with zero two-form fields @xmath and @xmath , thus simplifying the
gauge structure further. The upshot of this is a drastic simplification
of the theory: covariant derivatives @xmath reduce to ordinary partials
@xmath , the generalized field strength @xmath is simply given by @xmath
, the covariantized Einstein-Hilbert term reduces to the ordinary one
and the potential @xmath of the generalized metric vanishes. Finally the
Bianchi identity reduces to the usual @xmath .

#### 4.3.1 Embedding Supergravity into EFT

Having outlined the main features of the @xmath EFT, we proceed by
showing how eleven-dimensional supergravity can be embedded in it (again
following [ 29 ] closely). Applying a specific solution of the section
condition ( 4.44 ) to the EFT produces the dynamics of supergravity with
its fields rearranged according to a @xmath Kaluza-Klein coordinate
split.

The appropriate solution to the section condition is related to a
decomposition of the fundamental representation of @xmath under its
maximal subgroup @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

which translates to the following splitting of the extended internal
coordinates

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and the pair @xmath is antisymmetric. We thus have indeed
@xmath coordinates. The section condition is solved by restricting the
coordinate dependence of fields and gauge parameters to the @xmath
coordinates. We thus have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.55)
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where the second line is the necessary consequence for the compensating
two-form @xmath .

The complete procedure to embed supergravity into EFT can be found in [
28 , 29 ] , here we will focus on those aspects relevant to our results.
The Kaluza-Klein decomposition of the eleven-dimensional spacetime
metric takes the following form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

where hatted quantities and indices are eleven-dimensional. The
four-dimensional external sector with its metric @xmath is carried over
to the EFT. The seven-dimensional internal sector is extended to the
56-dimensional exceptional space and the internal metric @xmath becomes
a building block of the generalized metric @xmath . The KK-vector @xmath
becomes the @xmath -component of the EFT vector @xmath .

The gauge potentials @xmath and @xmath of supergravity are also
decomposed under the @xmath coordinate split. Starting with the
three-form, there is the purely external three-form part @xmath which
lives in the external sector. The purely internal scalar part @xmath is
included in @xmath . The one-form part @xmath is the @xmath -component
of @xmath . The remaining two-form part @xmath gets encoded in the
compensating two-form @xmath . Similarly for the six-form, the purely
internal scalar @xmath is part of @xmath . The one-form @xmath is
dualized on the internal space and forms the @xmath -component of @xmath
. The remaining components of @xmath with a mixed index structure (some
of which need to be dualized properly) are again encoded in the two-form
@xmath .

In the next chapter we will work with supergravity solutions where the
gauge potentials only have a single non-zero component which will be of
the one-form type under the above coordinate split. There will not be
any internal scalar parts or other mixed index components. The above
embedding of supergravity fields into EFT can therefore be simply
summarized as follows. The spacetime metric @xmath of the external
sector is carried over; the generalized metric @xmath of the extended
internal sector is given in terms of the internal metric @xmath by ( cf.
( 4.38 ))

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the determinant of the internal metric is denoted by @xmath , the
four-index objects are defined by @xmath and similarly for the inverse;
and the components of the EFT vector potential @xmath are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.58)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The final component, @xmath , is related to the dual graviton and has no
appearance in the supergravity picture, see [ 29 ] .

It is also possible to embed the Type II theories in ten dimensions into
EFT. The Type IIA embedding follows from the above solution to the
section condition by a simple reduction on a circle. In contrast, the
Type IIB embedding requires a different, inequivalent solution to the
section condition [ 29 ] . Both Type II embeddings are presented in
Appendix C

We are now equipped with the tools to relate exceptional field theory to
eleven-dimensional supergravity and the Type IIA and Type IIB theory in
ten dimensions. This will be useful when analyzing the EFT solution we
are presenting next.

## Chapter 5 Solutions in EFT

In this chapter we look at solutions such as the wave and the monopole
for the exceptional field theories introduced in the previous chapter.
First the wave solution in the truncated @xmath theory is considered
which gives the membrane. By working in the larger extended space of the
truncated @xmath theory, one can construct a monopole solution which
corresponds to the fivebrane in the reduced picture. These two results
mirror the DFT wave and monopole discussions. Then we move on the the
full, non-truncated @xmath theory to present a single, self-dual
solution which gives all 1/2 BPS branes in ten- and eleven-dimensional
supergravity.

### 5.1 The Wave in the truncated @xmath Eft

In double field theory we have seen how a null wave, i.e. a momentum
mode, in a dual direction of the doubled space gives a fundamental
string. Now we want to demonstrate the same holds for the membrane in
M-theory. It will be given by a null wave along one of the “wrapping”
directions of an extended geometry. A simple scenario to start with is
the truncated @xmath exceptional field theory where the extended space
consists of four ordinary and six dual directions (here @xmath )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

The wave solution for this case is given by a generalized metric @xmath
with line element

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath            (5.2)
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------

This generalized metric solves the equations of motion of the @xmath
theory derived in Section 4.2.1 (see Appendix A.3 ). It can be
interpreted as a pp-wave in the extended geometry which carries momentum
in the directions dual to @xmath and @xmath i.e. combinations of @xmath
and @xmath . Since it is a pp-wave it has no mass or charge and the
solution is pure metric, there is no form field it couples to. As
before, @xmath is a harmonic function of the transverse coordinate
@xmath : @xmath . It is smeared in the remaining dual directions.

A Kaluza-Klein ansatz suitable for the extended geometry here that
allows us to rewrite the solution in terms of four-dimensional
quantities and reducing the dual directions is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath            (5.3)
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------

The factor @xmath is a scale factor and needs to be included for
consistency. This decomposition of the generalized metric into the usual
metric and C-field resembles the form of the generalized metric ( 4.14 )
as in the DFT case.

By comparing ( 5.3 ) with ( 5.2 ), the fields of the reduced system with
coordinates @xmath can be computed. From the diagonal terms we find

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

and since @xmath is given by @xmath , the inverse of @xmath , we need
@xmath for consistency. The corresponding line element is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

The off-diagonal terms give the antisymmetric C-field whose only
non-zero component is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

This metric and C-field look like the membrane in M-theory. To complete
this identification, ( 5.5 ) has to be rescaled to be expressed in the
Einstein frame.

The standard rescaling procedure (in four dimensions) gives

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Therefore the rescaled metric reads @xmath and the full solution in the
Einstein frame is ¹⁶ ¹⁶ 16 The C-field is unaffected by the rescaling,
only its field strength obtains a different factor in the action.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is indeed the M2-brane in four dimensions in the Einstein frame.
The membrane is extended in the @xmath plane. We have thus shown that
the solution ( 5.2 ) which carries momentum in the directions dual to
@xmath and @xmath in the extended geometry corresponds to a membrane
stretched along these directions from a reduced point of view. By
similar arguments as in the string case, the mass and charge of the
M2-brane are given by the momenta in the dual directions.

### 5.2 The Monopole in the truncated @xmath Eft

So far it was not only shown how the wave in DFT gives rise to the
fundamental string but also that a null wave in the truncated @xmath EFT
reduces to the membrane in ordinary spacetime. The same is true for the
truncated @xmath EFT. A null wave propagating along a membrane wrapping
direction gives rise to the M2-brane.

Furthermore, due to the larger extended space, it is now also possible
to consider a wave traveling in a fivebrane wrapping direction.
Unsurprisingly, this reduces to the M5-brane in ordinary spacetime. We
will demonstrate this explicitly and for completeness reproduce the
membrane result.

In DFT, the section condition is easily solved by reducing the
coordinate dependence to half the doubled space. Thus each pair of
solutions related by an @xmath transformation, such as the wave and
string or the monopole and fivebrane, can be presented in a
straightforward fashion. In contrast in the exceptional extended
geometry, the solutions to the section condition are more complex since
a much larger extended space has to be dealt with. In the case of @xmath
, the section condition takes one from 56 to seven dimensions. We thus
present the solutions step by step and relate them “by hand” rather than
constructing the different solutions to the section condition
explicitly.

#### 5.2.1 The M2- and M5-brane as a Wave

Consider the following solution for an extended @xmath theory built from
a seven-dimensio-nal spacetime with coordinates @xmath with @xmath (in
the coordinate system of the classic supergravity solutions given in
Appendix F.1 , reduce on @xmath and @xmath and collect the remaining
transverse directions @xmath and @xmath into @xmath ). The generalized
metric is given by ¹⁷ ¹⁷ 17 The delta with four indices is defined as
@xmath and similarly for the inverse.

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (5.10)
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

This is a massless, uncharged null wave carrying momentum in the @xmath
direction and @xmath is a harmonic function of the transverse
coordinates @xmath . The solution is smeared over all other directions
and thus there is no coordinate dependence on them. If the extra
wrapping dimensions are reduced by using a Kaluza-Klein ansatz based on
( 4.38 ), one recovers the pp-wave in M-theory in seven dimensions.

If the wave is rotated to travel in a different direction, the momentum
it carries becomes the mass and charge of an extended object in the
reduced picture. The different M-theory solutions obtained upon a
KK-reduction of the extended wave solution pointing in various
directions are summarized in Table 3 .

The rotation that points the wave in the @xmath direction is achieved by
the following swap of coordinate pairs in the above solution

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.11)
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The rotated wave solution can now be rewritten by using a KK-ansatz
based on the line element given in ( 4.40 ) to remove the extra
dimensions. This gives the M5-brane solution ( F.4 ) reduced to seven
dimensions (and smeared over the reduced directions)

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath                     (5.12)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

The details of this calculation can be found in Appendix B.1 .

It can also be shown that the wave in the @xmath extended theory
pointing along one of the @xmath -directions gives the membrane from a
reduced point of view. The key steps of this calculation are given here.

Start by splitting the transverse coordinates @xmath into @xmath and
@xmath with @xmath and @xmath as before so that the extended space is
given by @xmath . Then the wave can be rotated to point in the @xmath
direction. This is achieved by the mapping

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.13)
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

while leaving the remaining coordinates unaltered. The extended solution
( 5.10 ) then reads (recall that @xmath and @xmath )

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (5.14)
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The KK-ansatz to reduce this metric is based on the line element given
in ( 4.42 ) and is spelled out explicitly in the appendix in ( B.16 ).
The procedure is the same as in the reduction calculation that yielded
the fivebrane and gives

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (5.15)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

which is the M2-brane solution reduced to seven dimensions (with the
harmonic function smeared accordingly).

Hence, both the M2 and the M5 can be obtained from the same wave
solution in the exceptional extended geometry and all branes in M-theory
are just momentum modes of a null wave in the extended theory. The
direction of the wave determines the type of brane (from the reduced
perspective) or indeed gives a normal spacetime wave solution. From this
point of view the duality transformations between the various solutions
are just rotations in the extended space.

#### 5.2.2 The M5-brane as a Monopole

In Section 3.2 we showed that the NS5-brane of string theory was the
monopole solution of DFT. In this section we want to show something
similar for the M5-brane in exceptional extended geometry.

If the KK-circle of the monopole in the @xmath extended theory is not
along a usual spacetime direction but instead along one of the novel
@xmath -directions, then this produces a smeared fivebrane solution.

First, a slightly different extended space has to be constructed.
Starting from eleven dimensions and reducing on @xmath and @xmath allows
for a construction of the monopole solution in the extended space with
coordinates @xmath (where @xmath ) and potential @xmath . The
generalized metric is given by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
                          
              @xmath      
                          
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (5.16)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . The ellipsis denotes the same terms as in the line above,
with the obvious cycling through the @xmath index. The harmonic function
@xmath is a function of the three @xmath ’s and is given by @xmath . The
relation between the harmonic function and the vector potential are the
same as before given in ( 3.41 ).

This is a monopole with the KK-circle in the @xmath direction. The
solution as before may be rotated such that this “special” direction is
of a different kind. If the KK-circle is along @xmath , a membrane
wrapping direction, the solution reduces to a M5-brane smeared along
@xmath . This rotation is achieved by the following map (recall that
@xmath and @xmath )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.17)
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Using ( 4.40 ) to read off the fields, the exceptional extended geometry
monopole reduces to the M5-brane solution

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath                     (5.18)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

The fivebrane is given in terms of its magnetic potential, i.e. to the
dual gauge potential @xmath given in ( F.4 ). The full calculation is
shown explicitly in Appendix B.2 .

We have thus demonstrated how a monopole with its KK-circle along a
membrane wrapping direction is identified with a (smeared) fivebrane.
This is the analogous result to the KK-monopole/NS5-brane identification
in DFT shown in Section 3.2 .

#### 5.2.3 The Situation for the M2-brane

In theory the same story should be true for the membrane. In the
previous sections the wave was shown not only to give the membrane but
also the fivebrane. From the same reasoning the monopole should not only
give the fivebrane, but also the membrane.

The problem is that this cannot be shown as simply as for the fivebrane
in the @xmath truncated theory. To obtain the membrane from the monopole
one has to consider its magnetic potential @xmath given in ( F.3 ). But
this six-form has non-zero components with indices @xmath , i.e. in
directions which are truncated in order to construct the exceptional
extended geometry.

More technically, if the electric @xmath of the membrane is dualized in
seven dimensions, this gives a two-form. This means that only some part
of the above six-form lives in the seven-space that gets extended, the
remainder lives in the other four directions. Thus it is not possible to
describe the membrane this way and stay in the truncated space. This is
simply a problem with the tools at our disposal, i.e. the truncated
version of the @xmath exceptional field theory. By looking at all the
relations we have built between the solutions in the extended space, it
seems natural that a monopole with its KK-circle in a fivebrane wrapping
direction gives a membrane. This problem then is demanding the full
non-truncated EFT [ 29 ] and we will turn to this next.

### 5.3 A Self-dual Solution in the full @xmath Eft

In order to construct a solution which has both wave and monopole
aspects and thus can be simultaneously related to the membrane and the
fivebrane requires the full non-truncated EFT outlined in 4.3 . The
coordinates of the @xmath -dimensional theory are @xmath , the field
content was given in ( 4.43 ) and the crucial twisted self-duality
relation is equation ( 4.52 ).

Now consider the following set of fields. We take the external sector
with coordinates @xmath to be four-dimensional spacetime with one
timelike direction @xmath and three spacelike directions @xmath with
@xmath . The external metric is that of a point-like object, given in
terms of a harmonic function of the transverse coordinates by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath is some constant (which will be interpreted
later).

The 56-dimensional extended internal sector uses the coordinates @xmath
given in ( 4.54 ). The EFT vector potential @xmath of our solution has
“electric” and “magnetic” components (from the four-dimensional
spacetime perspective) that are given respectively by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a potential of the magnetic field. The magnetic
potential obeys a BPS-like condition where its curl is given by the
gradient of the harmonic function that appears in the metric

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

The index @xmath in @xmath labels the 56 vectors, only two of which are
non-zero for our solution. The vector @xmath in the extended space (a
scalar form a spacetime point of view) points in one of the 56 extended
directions. Later we will interpret this direction as the direction of
propagation of a wave or momentum mode. The dual vector @xmath denotes
the direction dual to @xmath given approximately by @xmath . This sense
of duality between directions of the extended space will be formalized
in Section 5.3.2 .

Using the relation between @xmath and @xmath , one can immediately check
that @xmath satisfies the twisted self-duality equation ( 4.52 ).
Loosely speaking, the duality on the external spacetime via @xmath
exchanges electric @xmath and magnetic @xmath components of the
potential. The symplectic form @xmath acts on the extended internal
space and swaps @xmath with its dual @xmath . If one goes through the
calculation carefully, one sees that minus signs and factors of powers
of @xmath only work out if both actions on the external and extended
internal sector are carried out simultaneously. We will show this
explicitly in Section 5.3.2 .

The generalized metric of the extended internal sector, @xmath , is a
diagonal matrix with just four different entries, @xmath . The first and
last one appear once each, the other two appear 27 times each. The
precise order of the 56 entries of course depends on a coordinate
choice, but once this is fixed it characterizes the solution together
with the choice of direction for @xmath .

For definiteness, let’s fix the coordinate system and pick a direction
for @xmath which we call @xmath , i.e. @xmath . The dual direction is
denoted by @xmath and we have @xmath . Then @xmath and @xmath . For
completeness, the full expression for the generalized metric for the
coordinates in ( 4.54 ) is ¹⁸ ¹⁸ 18 Here @xmath denotes an @xmath
-dimensional Kronecker delta.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

The second 28 components are the inverse of the first 28 components,
reflecting the split of the EFT vector @xmath into 28 “electric” and 28
“magnetic” components.

To get the fields for any other direction, one simply has to perform a
rotation in the extended space which is a duality transformation. The
rotation matrix @xmath rotates @xmath in the desired direction @xmath
and at the same time transforms @xmath according to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.23)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Since the action and the self-duality equation is invariant under such a
transformation, the fields can freely be rotated in the extended space.

The remaining fields of the theory, namely the two-form gauge fields
@xmath and @xmath , are trivial. Also the external part of the
three-form potential, @xmath , vanishes for our solution. This will
eventually restrict somewhat the possible supergravity solutions
obtained from this EFT solution. Dropping these restrictions would be
interesting and it would provide a technical challenge to repeat this
section and include other fluxes such as those on the external space.

To recap, the fields @xmath , @xmath and @xmath as given in equations (
5.19 ), ( 5.20 ) and ( 5.22 ) (together with ( 5.21 )) form our solution
to EFT. They satisfy the self-duality equation and their respective
equations of motion.

Note that all fields directly or indirectly depend on the harmonic
function @xmath which in turn only depends on the external transverse
coordinates @xmath . There is thus no coordinate dependence on any of
the internal or extended coordinates. This solution therefore is
de-localized and smeared over all the internal extended directions. It
is an interesting open question to look at solutions localized in the
extended space. In theory, EFT allows for coordinate dependencies on all
coordinates, even the extended ones. We leave this for future work.

#### 5.3.1 Interpreting the Solution

How do we interpret this solution in exceptional field theory? Before we
do this let us return to how solutions in the truncated theory may be
interpreted. A wave whose momentum is in a winding direction describes a
brane associated with that winding direction, e.g. a wave with momentum
along @xmath describes a membrane extended over the @xmath directions. A
monopole-like solution — by which we mean a Hopf fibration — where the
@xmath fibre is a winding direction describes the S-dual brane to that
winding direction, e.g. if the fibre of the monopole is @xmath then the
solution describes a fivebrane. Thus in the extended (but truncated)
theory branes can have either a description as monopole or as a wave.
These statements were the conclusions of [ 1 , 2 ] and presented in the
chapters so far.

Now because of the truncation it was not possible to describe a given
solution in both ways within the same description of spacetime. The key
point of EFT is that there is no truncation and so such things are
possible. The self-duality relation is simply the Kaluza-Klein
description of a solution that has both momentum and non-trivial Hopf
fibration, i.e. it is simultaneously electric and magnetic from the
point of view of the KK-gravi-photon. These are not just solutions to
some linear abelian theory but full solutions to the gravitational
theory (or in fact EFT). As such they are exact self-dual solutions to
the non-linear theory though are charged with respect to some @xmath
symmetry that is given by the existence of the @xmath in extended space.
Our intuition should be shaped by this experience with Kaluza-Klein
theory and the solution thought of as simultaneously a wave and a
monopole whose charge is equal to the wave’s momentum.

Let us look at the moduli of the solution. The solution is specified by
two pieces of data, the vector @xmath and the constant @xmath that
appears in the harmonic function. The vector specifies the direction the
wave is propagating in. That is, it gives the direction along which
there is momentum. The constant @xmath in the harmonic function of the
solution is then proportional to the amount of momentum carried.

In addition, the solution comes with a monopole-like structure, whose
fibre is in the direction dual to the direction of propagation of the
wave and whose base is in the external spacetime. In the case of the
smeared solution studied in this chapter this fibration may be
classified by its first Chern class which is @xmath . (See Section 6.2
for a discussion of the localized non-smeared solution.)

To give a non-trivial first Chern class the fibre must be an @xmath and
then the magnetic charge @xmath is integral. This is essentially Dirac
quantization but now our theory also requires self-duality which in turn
implies that the momentum in the dual direction to the fibre is
quantized. The presence of quantized momentum in this direction then
implies that this direction itself must also be an @xmath . Let us
examine this quantitatively.

The electric charge of the solution is related to the radius of the
circle by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the magnetic charge is related to the radius of the fibre by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now the twisted self-duality relation implies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

From examining the norms of the @xmath vectors that specify the solution
we can determine @xmath and @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

Calculating these norms using the metric of the solution (see the next
section) then reveals

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

So the @xmath related radii are duals and the electric and magnetic
quantum numbers are equal. Note that the harmonic function @xmath (and
thus the radii) is a function of @xmath , the radial coordinate of the
external spacetime. This will lead to interesting insights when we
analyze the solution close to its core or far away from it in Section
6.1 .

The actual direction @xmath that one chooses determines how one
interprets the solution in terms of the various usual supergravity
descriptions. That is we can interpret this single solution in terms of
the brane solutions in eleven dimensions or the Type IIA and Type IIB
brane solutions in ten dimensions. We will show this in detail in
Section 5.3.3 .

Finally let us a add a comment about the topological nature of these
solutions. The more mathematically minded reader will note that brane
solutions like the NS5-brane are not classified by the first Chern class
which in cohomology terms is given by @xmath but instead by the
Dixmier-Douady class, i.e. @xmath . For the smeared solution these two
are related since @xmath . Thus for the smeared branes there is no
issue. The question of the global structure of the localized solutions
where one has a genuine @xmath is however an important open question
that has recently received some attention [ 105 , 106 , 92 ] .

#### 5.3.2 Twisted Self-duality

The EFT gauge potential @xmath presented above satisfies the twisted
self-duality equation ( 4.52 ). This can be checked explicitly by
looking at the components of the equation and making use of the relation
between the harmonic function @xmath and the spacetime vector potential
@xmath given in ( 5.21 ).

First though, we will look at the relation between the two vectors
@xmath and @xmath that define the directions of @xmath and @xmath . The
duality relation between them can be made precise by normalizing the
vectors using the generalized metric @xmath . The unit vectors

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

are related via the symplectic form @xmath by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

If the vectors are not normalized the metric in the duality relation
introduces extra factors. For the specific directions given above we
have @xmath and @xmath which indeed satisfy ( 5.30 ) for the @xmath
given in ( 5.22 ).

Let’s now turn to the self-duality of the field strength. We begin by
computing the field strength @xmath of @xmath as given in ( 4.50 ),
recalling the simplifications our solution provides. There are two
components which read

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (5.31)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

The spacetime metric @xmath is given in ( 5.19 ) and has determinant
@xmath . This can be used to rewrite the self-duality equation ( 4.52 )
as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.32)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where the spacetime metric is used to lower the indices on @xmath . Now
we can look at the components of the equation. Starting with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

and inserting for the spacetime metric and the field strength gives

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (5.34)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where the extra minus sign in the first line comes from permuting the
indices on the four-dimensional epsilon which is then turned into a
three-dimensional one. In the next step we make use of ( 5.21 ) and the
components of @xmath and @xmath that are picked out by the summation
over indices are substituted

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (5.35)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

and we obtained the expected result. Similarly, the other component of
the self-duality equation reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

Going through the same steps as before leads to

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (5.37)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Again substituting for @xmath and @xmath gives the expected result

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (5.38)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

to match with ( 5.31 ).

Thus the components of the field strength of the EFT vector @xmath given
in ( 5.31 ) satisfy the self-duality condition. It is also possible to
satisfy an anti-self-duality equation. If the magnetic charge of our
solution is taken to be minus the electric charge, this has the effect
of modifying the magnetic component of the EFT vector by an extra minus
sign, @xmath . The above calculation then works exactly the same but the
extra minus sign ensures that the field strength is anti-self-dual. This
choice would then be consistent with the original EFT paper [ 29 ] (of
course the choice of self-dual or anti-self-dual is ultimately related
to how supersymmetry is represented).

#### 5.3.3 Reductions to Supergravity Solutions

The self-dual EFT solution presented in the previous section gives rise
to the full spectrum of 1/2 BPS branes in eleven-dimensional
supergravity and the Type IIA and Type IIB theories in ten dimensions.
We will now show how applying the appropriate solution to the section
condition and rotating our solution in a specific direction of the
exceptional extended space leads to the wave solution, the fundamental,
solitonic and Dirichlet p-branes, the KK-branes which are extended
monopoles, and an example of an intersecting brane solution. All these
extracted solutions together with their Kaluza-Klein decomposition can
be found in Appendix F for easy referral.

##### Supergravity Solutions in Eleven Dimensions

We start by looking at the EFT solution from an eleven-dimensional
supergravity point of view. Using the results of Section 4.3.1 in
reverse, the supergravity fields can be extracted from the EFT solution.
Recall that the resulting supergravity fields will be rearranged
according to a @xmath Kaluza-Klein coordinate split.

First, the extended coordinates @xmath are decomposed into @xmath ,
@xmath and so on as given in ( 4.54 ). Then by comparing the expression
for the generalized metric of the internal extended space, @xmath , of
our solution in ( 5.22 ) to ( 4.57 ), one can work out the
seven-dimensional internal metric @xmath . The components of the EFT
vector potential @xmath given in ( 5.20 ) can be related to the
KK-vector of the decomposition and the @xmath and @xmath form fields
respectively according to ( 4.58 ). Finally, the external spacetime
metric @xmath in ( 5.19 ) is simply carried over to the 4-sector of the
KK-decomposition.

As mentioned before, the EFT solution is characterized by the direction
of the vector @xmath and a corresponding ordering in the diagonal
entries of @xmath . If the procedure of extracting a supergravity
solution just described is applied to the EFT solution as presented in
Section 5.3 , i.e. with the direction of the @xmath -type, @xmath where
we now identify @xmath with @xmath , the first of the ordinary @xmath
directions, the pp-wave solution of supergravity can be extracted. From
@xmath , the internal metric is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a Kronecker delta of dimension six. These are the
remaining six directions of @xmath . The “electric” part of the EFT
vector, @xmath , becomes the cross-term in the supergravity metric. The
“magnetic” part @xmath is like a dual graviton and does not appear in
the supergravity picture. Note that the dual direction to @xmath is
@xmath . See Appendix F.2.1 for the supergravity wave decomposed under a
@xmath split. Since our self-dual EFT solution is interpreted as a wave
now propagating in the ordinary direction @xmath , it is not too
surprising to recover the supergravity wave once the extra exceptional
aspects are removed.

As shown in previous chapters and [ 1 , 2 ] , we know that a wave in an
exceptional extended geometry can also propagate along the novel
dimensions such as @xmath or @xmath . If our solution is rotated to
propagate in those directions, e.g. @xmath or @xmath , the membrane and
fivebrane solutions of supergravity are recovered. For the former, the
membrane is stretched along @xmath and @xmath , for the latter, the
fivebrane is stretched along the complimentary directions to @xmath and
@xmath , i.e. @xmath and @xmath . This result is obtained by an
accompanying rotation of the generalized metric according to ( 5.23 )
and extracting the internal metrics for the M2 and the M5 ( cf. Appendix
F.2.1 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.40)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The masses and charges of the branes are provided by the momentum in the
extended directions. The electric potential is given by @xmath which
encodes the @xmath for the M2 and the @xmath for the M5. The magnetic
potential is given by @xmath which gives their duals, i.e. the @xmath
for the M2 and the @xmath for the M5. We will explain this procedure of
obtaining the membrane and fivebrane from the EFT solution in more
detail below.

In Section 5.2 we have previously hinted at the idea that the wave in
EFT along @xmath , the fourth possible direction, should correspond to a
monopole-like solution in supergravity. Since we are now working with a
self-dual solution, we can show that this is indeed the case. If the
direction of @xmath is of the @xmath -type, e.g. @xmath , and thus
@xmath along @xmath (essentially swapping @xmath and @xmath of the
pp-wave), the KK-monopole is obtained. Again performing the
corresponding rotation of the generalized metric, the internal metric
can be extracted

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

The “magnetic” part of the EFT vector, @xmath , becomes part of the
KK-monopole metric in supergravity. The “electric” part @xmath now has
the nature of a dual graviton and does not contribute in the
supergravity picture. This is the opposite scenario to the pp-wave
described above, underlining the electric-magnetic duality of these two
solutions.

The four supergravity solutions we have extracted from our EFT solution
all have the same external spacetime metric @xmath under the
KK-decomposition,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

which has the character of a point-like object (in four dimensions). The
four solutions only differ in the internal metric @xmath , the KK-vector
of the decomposition and of course the C-fields. But these elements are
just rearranged in @xmath and @xmath and are all the same in EFT, up to
an @xmath rotation of the direction @xmath of the solution.

##### From Wave to Membrane

Let’s pause here briefly and take a closer look at a specific example of
such a rotation. The EFT solution presented in Section 5.3 with the
choice for the vector @xmath given there and the generalized metric
@xmath in ( 5.22 ) for a fixed coordinate system directly reduces to the
pp-wave in eleven dimensions.

We now want to demonstrate how this can also give the M2-brane at the
same time by simply picking a different duality frame, that is choosing
a different section of the extended space to give the physical
spacetime. This new duality frame is obtained by rotating the fields of
the solution according to ( 5.23 ).

As explained above, if the EFT solution is propagating along a @xmath
direction, say @xmath , it gives the membrane. Thus the vector @xmath
has to be rotated into @xmath . This has the effect of exchanging @xmath
with @xmath and their corresponding components in the metric, i.e.
@xmath . This should not come as a surprise since here momentum and
winding directions are exchanged which is exactly what is expected in
relating the wave and the membrane via duality.

Besides @xmath , the frame change also swaps the following pairs of
coordinates and the corresponding components of the metric (here the
index @xmath takes the values 3 to 7)

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.43)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

These are simple exchanges between dual pairs of coordinates that
reflect the new duality frame.

After the rotation, the generalized metric reads (still in the
coordinate system given by ( 4.54 ))

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (5.44)
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

This can now be compared to ( 4.57 ) to read off the internal metric in
the reduced, eleven-dimensional picture as described above, and gives (
5.40 ), the M2-brane stretched along @xmath and @xmath . Similar
rotation procedures can be applied to relate the pp-wave or the membrane
to the fivebrane and the monopole.

Our self-dual EFT wave solution with attached monopole-structure thus
unifies the four classic eleven-dimensional supergravity solutions and
provides the so-far missing link in the duality web of exceptionally
extended solutions.

##### The Membrane / Fivebrane Bound State

The self-dual EFT solution does not only give the standard 1/2 BPS
branes of supergravity but also bound states. Such solutions were first
mentioned in [ 140 ] and then interpreted by Papadopoulos and Townsend
in [ 141 ] . As an illustrative example we will show how the dyonic
M2/M5-brane solution of [ 142 ] can be obtained from our EFT solution.

Before we find this bound state of a membrane and a fivebrane, it is
useful to see how to pick a duality frame such that the EFT solution
reduces to the (pure) fivebrane. Above we have just seen how to rotate
the frame to get the (pure) membrane instead of the wave. If we rotate
further to have the solution propagate in the @xmath direction, i.e.
@xmath , then we get the fivebrane.

Starting from the membrane frame of the previous subsection with @xmath
and the generalized metric in ( 5.44 ), the new frame rotation exchanges
the membrane direction @xmath with the fivebrane direction @xmath and
their corresponding components in the metric, @xmath . Again it is very
natural to exchange a membrane coordinate @xmath with a fivebrane
coordinate @xmath in this kind of duality transformation.

In what follows, it will be useful to split the index of the coordinate
@xmath into @xmath . Here @xmath with @xmath are the two worldvolume
directions of the membrane or two of the worldvolume directions of the
fivebrane. The @xmath with @xmath are the remaining three worldvolume
directions of the fivebrane, they are transverse directions for the
membrane. And finally the @xmath with @xmath are transverse directions
to both the membrane and fivebrane. Table 4 shows the worldvolume (a
circle @xmath ) and transverse (a dash @xmath ) directions of the
membrane and fivebrane together with the coordinate labels and sector
under the KK-decomposition.

Besides @xmath , the frame change also swaps some other pairs of
coordinates. This can now be neatly written as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.45)
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The first line contains further exchanges between membrane directions
and fivebrane directions. The second line is a result of going from the
membrane frame to the fivebrane frame. Once the corresponding components
of the metric have been exchanged as well, it reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (5.46)
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

which can be reduced to give the internal fivebrane metric ( 5.40 ).
Inserting the rotated vector @xmath into ( 5.20 ) then gives the
corresponding C-form field as explained above.

Now that it is clear how to obtain both the M2-brane and the M5-brane
from our self-dual EFT solution, we can attempt to obtain the dyonic
M2/M5 bound state of [ 142 ] . To achieve this, we will again start from
the membrane duality frame. This time though, we do not rotate the frame
all the way into the fivebrane frame but introduce a parameter @xmath
which interpolates between a purely electric M2-brane and a purely
magnetic M5-brane. For @xmath the transformation gives the fivebrane
whereas for @xmath the membrane is recovered ¹⁹ ¹⁹ 19 This choice of
@xmath – and not one shifted by @xmath – might be counter-intuitive but
has been made to match the @xmath in [ 142 ] . . Therefore a vector of
the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

points the EFT solution in the direction which gives the M2/M5-brane
(here @xmath and @xmath from above). If this vector is inserted into the
EFT vector potential, one obtains both the @xmath and the @xmath
(together with their duals) of the membrane and fivebrane, each
modulated by @xmath or @xmath . Since we are dealing with a dyonic
solution, both an electric and a magnetic potential are expected.

Having found the new EFT vector, the above rotation now needs to be
applied to the generalized metric. Comparing the metric for the M2 in (
5.44 ) and the M5 in ( 5.46 ), one finds that the components which get
exchanged in ( 5.45 ) differ by a factor of @xmath . In most cases
@xmath becomes @xmath or vice versa, e.g. @xmath and @xmath are
exchanged. The only exceptions are for the @xmath and @xmath components
where @xmath becomes @xmath . The partial, @xmath -dependent rotation
now introduces factors of @xmath and @xmath into the metric components
and generates off-diagonal entries. To see how they arise, one has to
consider the effect of the rotation on the coordinates.

The coordinate pairs which get rotated into each other are the same as
in ( 5.45 ), but now superpositions are formed instead of exchanging
them completely. One can think of each pair as a 2-vector acted on by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is the @xmath submatrix of the full rotation matrix @xmath in (
5.23 ). Then the new coordinate pair is schematically ²⁰ ²⁰ 20 More
formally, one can introduce epsilon symbols so that the index structure
works out, e.g. @xmath . given by, for example

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

The other coordinate pairs which are acted on by copies of @xmath are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

These rotations have quite non-trivial consequences for the
corresponding components of the generalized metric. Conjugating the
@xmath blocks of the metric with @xmath gives for our example

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

and similarly for all the other metric components which are rotated into
each other. The essential action of this rotation becomes clearest when
the indices are suppressed. The result, which is the same for all the
blocks, is

  -- -- -- --------
           (5.52)
  -- -- -- --------

This transformation produces additional off-diagonal terms in the
generalized metric. In the ordinary supergravity picture these extra
terms reduce to components of the C-field in the internal sector of the
KK-decomposition which are of the form @xmath . These terms are not
present for the pure membrane and fivebrane, they only occur in the
bound state solution. The @xmath generalized metric with cross-terms due
to non-vanishing internal C-field was constructed in general form in [
69 ] and the appropriate reduction ansatz (which has the same form as
the metric) for our concrete scenario was spelled out in [ 2 ] and can
be found in Section 4.2.3 .

The next step is thus to bring the above matrix into the standard coset
form of a generalized metric or a KK-reduction ansatz which can be done
by using some trigonometric identities and introducing the shorthand

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then the new metric components read

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is of the desired form. It is interesting to see that it is
actually possible to rewrite the transformed metric in a coset form. The
underlying reason for this is that the original matrix was already in
coset form, just without any off-diagonal terms, i.e. without a C-field.

Now this matrix can be compared to a suitable reduction ansatz to
extract the (components of) the metric and the C-field in supergravity.
Such an ansatz – adapted to our coordinates here – takes the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the determinant of the internal metric. Comparing these
two matrices leads to the following components (note that of course to
find the determinant all blocks have to be taken into account, not just
those corresponding to @xmath and @xmath )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.56)
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The same procedure also works for the other pairs of indices that need
to be transformed and their corresponding metric components. The only
difference is for @xmath where the metric has an extra factor of @xmath
, i.e. @xmath and @xmath . But this factor is just carried through and
does not affect the calculation presented above. Similarly, for @xmath
there is an extra factor of @xmath in the metric.

Also note that for some cross-terms in the reduction ansatz one needs to
define @xmath , see Section 4.2.3 for more details. Since the only
non-zero component (in the internal sector) of @xmath is @xmath , the
only component of this @xmath that does not vanish is @xmath .

Once the transformation of each index pair and the corresponding metric
component together with the reduction to supergravity is performed, the
dyonic M2/M5-brane solution is obtained in the usual 4+7 Kaluza-Klein
split. Its internal metric @xmath (and its determinant @xmath )
recovered form the generalized metric together with the external metric
@xmath which is just carried over from the external sector of the EFT
solution are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.57)
              @xmath   @xmath               
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with @xmath as defined in ( 5.53 ). Reversing the KK-decomposition,
finally gives the eleven-dimensional spacetime metric of the solution as
in [ 142 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (5.58)
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

The harmonic function @xmath here only depends on the three @xmath where
@xmath . It is smeared over the remaining transverse coordinates @xmath
and @xmath . In [ 142 ] the solution is only delocalized in the three
@xmath since it is constructed in eight dimensions and then lifted to
eleven dimensions by including the @xmath . Simply delocalizing it in
@xmath allows for a complete identification with the solution here.
Furthermore, in the reference a multi-brane solution is constructed
whereas here only a single source is considered. The result can of
course be extended to take several identical brane sources into account.

It can be checked that setting @xmath to @xmath or @xmath and thus
either @xmath or @xmath reproduces the pure M5-brane ( F.11 ) and the
pure M2-brane ( F.9 ) respectively.

The components of the three-form gauge potential which have one external
and two internal indices, i.e. @xmath were obtained from the EFT vector
potential @xmath . The component @xmath which is entirely in the
internal sector was extracted from the generalized metric @xmath .
Together they read

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (5.59)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath is defined as before. These are exactly the C-field
components of the bound state solution (in [ 142 ] they are given in
terms of their field strengths). Again one can check that in the pure
cases where either @xmath or @xmath , the three-form potential only has
a single component as given in ( F.9 ) and ( F.11 ) respectively. The
third component above vanishes in the two pure cases.

An interesting observation is that @xmath goes to @xmath far away from
the brane solution since @xmath for @xmath while near the core where
@xmath the fivebrane geometry prevails.

In summary, it has been shown that the self-dual EFT solution contains
the dyonic M2/M5-brane solution. Therefore, the EFT solution does not
only give the standard supergravity branes but in fact also the brane
bound states. The standard ones are the objects obtained by pointing the
vector along one of the axes of our 56-dimensional exceptional extended
coordinate space. But any combination of directions is possible, thus
giving rise to dyonic bound states of branes. Furthermore, the solutions
of the Type II theories in ten dimensions are also included. We will
look at this aspect next.

##### Type IIA Solutions

In Appendix C it is shown how the ten-dimensional Type IIA theory can
directly be embedded into EFT without an intermediate step to the
eleven-dimensional theory. Applying this procedure in reverse, the EFT
solution can be viewed from a Type IIA point of view.

In the case of extracting the eleven-dimensional solutions, the internal
extended coordinate @xmath was decomposed into four distinct subsets (
4.54 ) such as @xmath or @xmath . Having the EFT wave propagating along
those four kinds of directions gave rise to the four different solutions
in supergravity with the four components of the EFT vector potential (
4.58 ) providing the KK-vector and C-fields. Now in the ten-dimensional
Type IIA case, the generalized coordinate splits into eight separate
sets of directions ( C.1 ) and we can thus expect to get eight different
solutions, one for each possible orientation of the EFT solution
(together with the eight types of components of the EFT vector ( C.4 )).

Let us first obtain the WA-solution, the pp-wave spacetime in Type IIA.
The generalized metric has to be slightly reshuffled to accommodate our
new choice of coordinates, its precise form can be found in the
appendix. To obtain the wave, the EFT solution is made to propagate
along one of the ordinary directions @xmath , say @xmath . Using the
ansatz ( C.3 ) for @xmath in Type IIA and comparing it to the (rotated)
generalized metric of the EFT solution gives the dilaton @xmath and the
internal 6-metric @xmath of the WA-solution under the @xmath
KK-decomposition. The corresponding EFT vector component is @xmath which
provides the KK-vector of the decomposition and combines with the
internal and external metrics to form the ten-dimensional metric of the
wave. The other component of the vector potential, @xmath is related to
the dual graviton which does not appear in the ten-dimensional picture.
The KK-decomposition of the wave and other Type II solutions can be
found in Appendix F.2.2 .

If instead the EFT solution is chosen to propagate along the compact
circle @xmath , the same procedure as above leads to the D0-brane. The
RR-one-form @xmath it couples to can be extracted from the EFT vector
@xmath . The dual seven-form @xmath is derived from the other component,
@xmath .

The picture should be clear by now. The EFT solution, that is the
generalized metric @xmath and the vector potential @xmath , are rotated
in a specific direction. Depending on the nature of that direction,
different solution in the ten-dimensional theory arise. The F1-string
and NS5-brane solution can be extracted if the EFT solution propagates
along one of the @xmath and @xmath directions respectively. The
corresponding EFT vector provides the NSNS-two-form @xmath and dual
NSNS-six-form @xmath for the string and vice versa for the fivebrane.
Similarly, if the directions are @xmath and @xmath , the D2- and
D4-branes with the corresponding set of dual RR-three-form @xmath and
RR-five-form @xmath are obtained.

The last two directions the EFT solution can be along are @xmath and
@xmath . These are the dual directions to @xmath and @xmath and hence
provide the solutions dual to WA and D0, that is the KK6A-brane and the
D6-brane. For the KK6A-brane, essentially the KK-monopole of the Type
IIA theory, if we choose @xmath as the direction, the EFT vector @xmath
gives the KK-vector for the ten-dimensional metric and the dual @xmath
is the dual graviton for that solution. For the D6-brane, the EFT vector
provides the RR-seven-form @xmath it couples to together with the dual
one-form @xmath .

We have thus outlined how eight different Type IIA solutions can all be
extracted from a single self-dual solution in EFT. The fundamental wave
and string, the solitonic monopole and fivebrane, and the four @xmath
-even D-branes all arise naturally by applying the Type IIA solution to
the section condition to the EFT wave rotated in the appropriate
direction. A summery of all the possible orientations and corresponding
solutions can be found in Table 5 at the end of this section.

##### Type IIB Solutions

Along the same lines as above, using the ansatz for embedding the Type
IIB theory into EFT allows for further solutions to be extracted from
the EFT wave. The generalized coordinate @xmath is now split into five
distinct sets according to ( C.6 ) which gives five possible directions
to align the EFT solution (together with five types of components in the
EFT vector ( C.9 )).

As before, the entries of the generalized metric @xmath have to be
rearranged to accommodate the choice of coordinates (see Appendix C ).
Comparing the Type IIB ansatz for @xmath in ( C.7 ) to the (rotated)
generalized metric leads to the six-dimensional internal metric @xmath
together with the @xmath matrix @xmath . If the direction of choice is
of the @xmath type, the WB-solution can be extracted. This is the
pp-spacetime of the Type IIB theory which is identical to the
WA-solution. The procedure is exactly the same as before with the @xmath
providing the KK-vector for the ten-dimensional metric (and the dual
graviton which plays no role).

The dual choice of direction, i.e. @xmath , gives the dual solution,
that is the KK6B-brane, the KK-monopole of the Type IIB theory. Again
the EFT vector contributes the KK-vector and dual graviton. The
KK6B-brane is identical to the KK6A-brane.

A more interesting choice of direction is to rotate the EFT solution
along one of the @xmath . This produces the Type IIB S-duality doublet
of the F1-string and D1-brane. They couple to a two-form which carries
an additional @xmath index @xmath to distinguish between the NSNS-field
@xmath and the RR-field @xmath . From the generalized metric @xmath the
internal metric @xmath and the @xmath matrix @xmath containing the
dilaton @xmath ( @xmath vanishes for this solution) can be extracted.
The EFT vector @xmath provides the two-form (and also the dual
six-form).

Similarly, the EFT solution along one of the @xmath gives rise to the
other S-duality doublet of the Type IIB theory, the NS5-brane and the
D5-brane. They couple to a six-form which also carries an @xmath index
to distinguish the NSNS- and RR-part, @xmath and @xmath respectively.
The six-form is encoded in the electric part of the EFT vector @xmath
(and the dual two-form is encoded in the magnetic part @xmath ) upon
dualization on the internal coordinate.

Finally, having the EFT solution along the fifth direction from a Type
IIB point of view, @xmath , leads to the self-dual D3-brane together
with its self-dual four-form @xmath encoded in @xmath .

As in the Type IIA theory, the fundamental wave and string, the
solitonic monopole and fivebrane, and three @xmath -odd D-branes, can
all be extracted from the EFT solution by applying the Type IIB solution
to the section condition and rotating the fields appropriately. All the
obtained solutions are summarized in Table 5 , together with the
orientation the EFT solution, i.e. its direction of propagation.

In theory it should also be possible to obtain the D-instanton (the
D(-1)-brane) and its dual, the D7-brane, from the EFT solution. The
reason why this is not as straightforward as for all the other D-branes
is that the instanton, as the name implies, does not have a time
direction, it is a ten-dimensional Euclidean solution. Therefore the EFT
solution has to be set up in such a way that the time coordinate is not
in the external sector but in the internal sector of the
KK-decomposition. Then being part of the exceptional extended space it
can be rotated and “removed” when taking the section back to the
physical space, leaving a solution without a time direction.

The issue for the D7-brane is that it only has two transverse
directions, so it cannot fully be accommodated by our KK-decomposition
which places time plus three transverse direction in the external sector
and the the world volume (with the remaining transverse bits, if there
are any) in the internal sector. This clearly does not work for the
D7-brane.

Both of these reasons are not fundamental shortcomings of the EFT
solution, they are just technical issues arising from the way we have
set everything up in this chapter. In Chapter 7 where the EFT for the
duality group @xmath is constructed we will revisit some of the above
solutions and also look at D7-branes. Before doing this we will discuss
some more properties and aspects of the DFT solutions of Chapter 3 and
the EFT solutions of this chapter next.

## Chapter 6 Aspects and Discussion of Solutions

In this chapter we will look at some aspects of the DFT and EFT
solutions presented so far in more detail and analyze them further.
Specifically we want to study the presence or absence of singularities
at the core of the solutions and see if there is a naturally preferred
frame choice to avoid the encounter with a singularity. Furthermore we
want to extend some of the solutions we have found by localizing them in
the dual space, i.e. give them a dependence on a winding coordinate.
This leads to some interesting insights into worldsheet instanton
corrections. To some extend this has been done before [ 143 , 144 ] ,
but it is much more natural to formulate such a setup in the language of
double field theory.

### 6.1 Singularities and Preferred Frame Choices

In this section we wish to enter into some speculation that has
motivated some of the work at the heart of this thesis. In particular we
want to comment on the issue of the singularity structure of
supergravity solutions ²¹ ²¹ 21 We are grateful to Michael Duff for
discussions on this issue. .

Having constructed the self-dual wave solution with monopole-structure
in EFT (Section 5.3 ) and shown how it relates to the known solutions of
supergravity, we can analyze it further. The fields of the solution,
that is the metrics @xmath and @xmath and the vector potential @xmath ,
are all expressed in terms of the harmonic function @xmath with @xmath
where @xmath is the radial coordinate of the transverse directions in
the external sector. This leads to the immediate question of what
happens to the solution when @xmath goes to zero or infinity, i.e. what
happens close to the core of the solution or far away from it?

As is well known from the works of Duff and others [ 145 , 146 ] , the
nature of singularities at the core of brane solutions depends on the
duality frame that one uses. Given that EFT provides a formalism
unifying different duality frames then one would imagine that solutions
in EFT maybe be singularity free at the core. Since the solution lives
in an extended space, the additional dimensions help to smooth the
singularity at the core. This is not the case for the fundamental
string, for example.

A good way to think about DFT or EFT is as a Kaluza-Klein-type theory.
The space is extended and the reduction of the theory through use of the
section condition gives supergravity. Let’s recall some basic properties
of ordinary Kaluza-Klein theory that will be useful for our intuition.
The reduced theory is gravity plus electromagnetism (and a scalar field
which will not be relevant here). One typically allows various singular
solutions such as electric sources which have delta function-type
singularities and magnetic sources which also are singular. Then the
Kaluza-Klein lift of these solutions smooths out the singularities. The
electric charges are just waves propagating around the KK-circle and the
magnetic charges come from fibering the KK-circle to produce a total
space describing an @xmath . Thus the singularities inherent from the
abelian charges become removed when one considers the full theory and
the @xmath is just a subgroup of some bigger non-abelian group, in this
case five-dimensional diffeomorphisms.

A similar process happens when one considers the ’t Hooft-Polyakov
monopole where in the low energy effective field theory the gauge group
is broken to @xmath and the monopole is a normal Dirac monopole (with a
singularity at the origin). Near the core of the monopole however, the
low energy effective description breaks down, and the full non-abelian
theory becomes relevant. The non-abelian interactions smooth out the
core of the monopole and the singularity is removed. This intuition is
exactly what we wish to evoke when thinking about DFT and EFT. Solutions
become smoothed out by the embedding in a bigger theory, @xmath charges
in particular are simply the result of some reduction and the
singularities are non-existent in the full theory [ 147 ] .

So can one show that the EFT solutions described here are free of
singularities at their core? To see how this works, we will first return
to a simpler example, the DFT wave of Section 3.1 which gives the
fundamental string when the direction of propagation is a winding
direction. After this short digression we will return to the EFT
solution and find a similar result.

#### 6.1.1 The Core of the DFT Wave

It is well known that the fundamental string of string theory has a
singularity at its core (essentially there are delta function sources
required by the solution). The existence of this singularity can easily
be inferred from looking at the Ricci scalar or sending a probe towards
the core of the string and looking at the proper time it takes the probe
to do so [ 145 , 146 ] .

The other fundamental object in string theory, the T-dual of the string,
is the wave. The wave is clearly non-singular as a straightforward
calculation of the Riemann curvature shows. If one takes a closer look
at the string and the wave, it is the cross-terms in the wave metric
that ensure that the curvature remains finite and does not develop a
singularity. The T-duality (essentially the Buscher rules) that turns
the wave into the string moves these cross-terms into the B-field of the
string. The curvature of the string then becomes singular as @xmath goes
to zero.

In double field theory T-duality simply is a rotation in the doubled
space. In DFT there is a single fundamental solution, the DFT wave.
Depending on its orientation in the doubled space, either the string or
the wave solution of string theory can be extracted when seen from an
un-doubled point of view.

The DFT solution is non-singular everywhere. The notion of curvature in
DFT is a slightly ambiguous concept. By non-singular we mean that the
generalized Ricci tensor defined by varying the DFT action with respect
to the generalized metric vanishes everywhere for the DFT wave. Of
course the equations of motion for DFT dictate that this must vanish in
the absence of any RR or fermionic sources since the NSNS sector is
contained in the generalized geometry. What is significant is that one
might have allowed delta function sources as one does for the
Schwarzschild solution in ordinary relativity. None are required by the
wave solution in DFT. The lack of a singularity at the core may also be
argued from analogy with ordinary relativity. The solution in question
is the wave solution for DFT and the wave solution in ordinary GR is
free from singularities therefore we expect the DFT wave to also be
singularity free. Thus looking at the solution from the perspective of
the doubled space eliminates the singularity at the core of the
fundamental string.

One can ask further how the solution behaves closes to the core or far
away, i.e. what happens when @xmath is small or large? Is there is a
natural choice of picking the coordinates that form the physical
spacetime? To answer this question we have to take a closer look at the
DFT wave. Recall the generalized metric of the DFT wave solution ( 3.1 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath            (6.1)
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------

where the doubled coordinates are @xmath . The doubled space has
dimension @xmath and the transverse coordinates are labeled by @xmath .
The harmonic function here (for @xmath ) is given by @xmath with @xmath
. In order to study the behaviour of this solution we will take all the
relevant doubled coordinates to be compact such that @xmath are periodic
coordinates.

In order to use our Kaluza-Klein inspired intuition we will first
examine the behaviour of DFT on a simple @xmath -dimensional torus. The
@xmath DFT torus is decomposed into a @xmath -torus with volume @xmath
and a dual torus with volume @xmath . This decomposition is always
possible due to the presence of the invariant @xmath structure @xmath
that provides the doubled space with a polarization. Double field theory
comes equipped with a coupling

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the DFT dilaton and acts as a dimensionless coupling for
DFT in the same way as the usual dilaton does for supergravity. The DFT
coupling @xmath is to be compared with the usual Newton’s constant in
@xmath -dimensional supergravity given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is known (almost by construction) that reducing DFT on the dual
@xmath -torus à la Kaluza-Klein gives supergravity in @xmath dimensions
and thus we can relate the coupling for the reduced theory to the DFT
coupling, @xmath , to get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Equivalently, we may instead reduce on the @xmath -torus, to give the
T-dual supergravity picture via @xmath which gives the relation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

These three couplings then potentially provide a hierarchy that is
governed by @xmath , the volume of the torus. This analysis gives the
completely intuitive result that for @xmath much larger than the string
scale, the appropriate description is DFT reduced on the dual torus
since its coupling, @xmath , is greatest. For small @xmath the
appropriate description is for the theory reduced on the torus itself,
as its coupling, @xmath , is greatest. For a circle whose radius is of
order @xmath there is no preferred reduction and the hierarchy breaks
down. Thus the total doubled space should be taken into account without
reduction. This is as it should be, for tori near the string scale we
need to include both ordinary modes and the winding modes
simultaneously. This somewhat pedestrian analysis is just slightly
formalizing the notion that on a compact space there is a natural
T-duality frame that is picked out by the one where the volume is
largest. ²² ²² 22 The reader may prefer that this argument should be
expressed in terms of energy scales in which case simply convert the
hierarchy of gravitational couplings to effective Planck masses and
examine the theory that dominates the low energy effective action ( cf.
the discussion in the Introduction).

We now wish to apply this lesson to our DFT wave solution and determine
which dimensions become large and thus pick the T-duality frame. These
large dimensions will be those that then become identified with the
spacetime of supergravity. This is non-trivial in the sense that the
volume of the compact space will be a function of @xmath , the distance
from the core of the solution. One should think of the solution as a
toroidal fibration with a one-dimensional base space with coordinate
@xmath and the toroidal fibre being given by the generalized metric. For
the solution at hand this is space described by the @xmath generalized
metric for the coordinates @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The function @xmath completely determines the geometry and is solely a
function of @xmath , the radial distance to the solution’s core. In
these coordinates there is no notion of one dimension being larger than
another since the metric has off-diagonal components. In order to see
which dimensions become large it is necessary to go to a choice of
coordinates where the generalized metric is diagonal. To simplify the
notation we set @xmath . Then the four eigenvalues of @xmath are @xmath
. They are given together with their limits by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . The corresponding (normalized) eigenvectors can be used
to construct the diagonalizing matrix which in turn is utilized to find
the new basis where @xmath is diagonal with entries @xmath . This new
basis is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

If we now take the limit where @xmath either goes to zero or infinity
(and thus @xmath goes to @xmath or infinity), the diagonalized
coordinate basis looks like (recall that the original basis was @xmath )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.9)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

This can be interpreted as follows. The DFT wave is asymptotically flat,
thus for large @xmath there is no preferred set of coordinates, i.e. it
does not matter which pair, @xmath or @xmath , we call “dual” and which
we take as being our usual spacetime. Different choices will just give
T-duality related solutions. However, as one approaches the core of the
solution and @xmath gets smaller, the space diagonalizes and takes the
form of a sort of twisted light-cone. It is twisted in the sense that
the light cone mixes the coordinates that at asymptotic infinity
describe both the space and its dual. That is we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

There is a clear hierarchy in the volumes between the two sets. One set,
@xmath and @xmath , comes with a large volume associated to those
dimensions as can be seen from the eigenvalues @xmath and @xmath which
diverge. On the other hand, the other set of coordinates, @xmath and
@xmath , is associated with a small volume as the eigenvalues @xmath and
@xmath tend to zero. Thus one set is picked out and we must think of the
core of the solution as being given by the space described by @xmath and
@xmath . Following these coordinates out of the core to asymptotic
infinity these coordinates become just @xmath and @xmath . This fits in
with the intuition that the dual description is suitable for describing
the spacetime near the singular core. What may not have been apparent
before DFT is that actually as one approaches the core these dual
coordinates twist with the normal spacetime coordinates to give a
twisted light-cone at the core of the fundamental string.

#### 6.1.2 Wave vs Monopole

Now we return to the self-dual solution of EFT. To carry out the
analysis, the solution is not treated as living in 4+56 dimensions but
as a truly 60-dimensional solution. Thus the three constituents of the
solution, the external metric @xmath , the extended internal metric
@xmath and the EFT vector potential @xmath are combined in the usual
Kaluza-Klein fashion to form a 60-dimensional metric

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is given in ( 5.19 ), @xmath in ( 5.20 ) and @xmath is
taken from ( 4.38 ) to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

We then insert the EFT monopole/wave solution to find ²³ ²³ 23 The
resulting object has dimension 60 whereas the two blocks have dimension
29 and 31 respectively as indicated by the indices @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where to top left block is simply the metric of a wave with 27
transverse dimensions and the bottom right block is the metric of a
monopole, also with 27 transverse dimensions

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.14)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.15)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

In ( 6.13 ) it is interesting to see that there is a natural split into
a block diagonal form simply by composing the fields à la Kaluza-Klein.
These two blocks come with prefactors of @xmath with opposite power, so
the geometry will change distinctly between large and small @xmath .

Close to the core of the solution, where @xmath is small, @xmath becomes
large and the wave geometry dominates. Far away for large @xmath ,
@xmath will be close to one (and thus @xmath vanishes) and neither the
monopole nor wave dominates. Thus one would imagine asymptotically
either description is valid and the different choices related through a
duality transformation. However what is curious is the dominance of the
wave solution in the small @xmath region. It appears according to this
analysis that all branes in string and M-theory when thought of as
solutions in EFT are wave solutions in the core. It is hoped to explore
these questions in a more rigorous fashion in future work.

### 6.2 Localization in Winding Space

The supergravity solutions we have considered so far to construct DFT
and EFT solutions were de-localized and heavily smeared over many
dimensions, especially the dual ones. This was not only done to keep
things simple but also to relate the various solutions to each other via
dualities which, at least in a first step, is easier done when there are
isometries.

In this section we want to study solutions which have a dependence on a
winding coordinate, i.e. they are localized in winding space. To put
this scenario into context, it will be useful to recall the discussion
on T-duality in Section 3.3 which we will pick up here. There it was
argued that the presence of an isometry in the doubled space leads to an
ambiguity of how to pick the section which forms the physical spacetime.
The different choices give rise to the different T-duality frames from
the supergravity point of view. The crucial point was that either choice
satisfies the strong constraint.

Now we want to ask the question what happens when the solution depends
on one of those coordinates, say @xmath . Note that the solution is
still independent of the dual coordinate @xmath . In such a scenario the
strong constraint is still satisfied since overall the solution only
depends on half (or less than half) the coordinates. But now there is a
canonical choice to take the @xmath coordinate as part of the physical
spacetime. The reduction still gives a good supergravity solution, this
time it is not smeared but localized in @xmath .

However, what happens if a non-canonical choice is made for the
spacetime, i.e. what if @xmath is chosen in order to end up with a
solution in the T-dual frame? One obtains a supergravity solution with a
dependence on the “parameter” @xmath which is not a spacetime coordinate
anymore. To see this in more detail, it helps to look at a concrete
example.

#### 6.2.1 The Monopole Solution Localized in Winding Space

In order to appreciate the existence of a monopole solution localized in
winding space, some background material is required which we will
briefly review here. Superstring theory compactified on a circle
contains Kaluza-Klein monopole solutions [ 35 , 36 ] which have an
isometry on the circle. T-duality along the circle transforms them into
H-monopoles [ 148 , 149 ] which can be seen as the NS5-branes [ 150 ,
151 ] of string theory. The KK-monopole is charged under the @xmath
arising from the KK-reduction ansatz for the spacetime metric while the
H-monopole is charged under the @xmath originating from the KK-reduction
of the two-form B-field (whose field strength is the three-form H-flux,
hence the name).

The NS5-brane naturally corresponds to a localized H-monopole geometry
while the solution obtained by T-duality from the KK-monopole is smeared
over the circle. This breaking of the isometry around the circle leads
to a throat behaviour when probed by scattering strings at short
distances. It was shown by Tong [ 152 ] that the smeared and localized
versions of the NS5-brane can be reconciled by considering string
worldsheet instantons. In the smeared background there are instanton
corrections to the geometry to reproduce the localized solution.

The presence of a duality means that the physics of the dual solutions
is the same. The problem now is that the throat behaviour of the
NS5-brane is qualitatively different to the T-dual KK-monopole solution.
It was therefore argued by Gregory, Harvey and Moore [ 143 ] that a
proper KK-monopole solution in string theory should be modified to have
a throat behaviour near its core when being probed by scattering string
winding states (as opposed to string momentum states as we are now in
the T-dual picture).

This was confirmed by Harvey and Jensen [ 144 ] who used the same gauged
linear sigma model techniques as Tong [ 152 ] to demonstrate that
instanton effects give corrections to the low energy effective action
which can be interpreted as changes to the effective geometry of the
solution. In the same way the smeared H-monopole was turned into the
localized NS5-brane, we should now think of the KK-monopole as becoming
localized in winding space. The problem with such a result is to
accommodate both the normal and winding coordinates such a solution
requires in a single framework. This is where the doubled geometry of
DFT comes into play.

Double field theory is a natural formalism to consider these background
geometries since by doubling the target space and thus making T-duality
manifest, solutions which depend on a dual coordinate can be analyzed [
153 ] . In [ 154 ] Jensen used the gauged linear sigma model for a
doubled target space background to study the KK-monopole in winding
space and clarify some aspects of the worldsheet instanton calculation.
Here we now want to complement this picture by giving the DFT solution
which corresponds to the localized KK-monopole (from a target space as
opposed to sigma model point of view).

To construct a monopole solution which is not smeared but localized in
the @xmath direction, the harmonic function @xmath needs an explicit
dependence on @xmath . For now we will just denote this by @xmath using
the coordinates of the DFT monopole solution given in ( 3.39 ). We will
discuss the exact form of the localized harmonic function below. A first
immediate effect of this extra coordinate dependence is that the field
strength @xmath in ( 3.44 ) of the NS5-brane has now two non-zero
components

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (6.16)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

The first one can be expressed in terms of the magnetic potential @xmath
as before in the smeared case. The second one is new, as the @xmath
derivative now does not vanish. The localized monopole solution of DFT
then reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (6.17)
                       @xmath   
                                
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

where extra terms for @xmath and @xmath involving @xmath arise as
compared to ( 3.37 ).

Upon rewriting this solution by using the ansatz ( 3.4 ), one obtains
the localized NS5-brane with its full field strength. If we carry out
the simple operation of swapping the roles of @xmath and @xmath in the
reduction, then this gives the following result

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (6.18)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

This solution is the localized KK-monopole. The spacetime coordinates in
this duality frame now include @xmath , crucially though the harmonic
function @xmath still depends on @xmath , which is a dual coordinate in
this frame. Since the monopole can be thought of as a purely
gravitational solution, the field strength @xmath can be re-interpreted
as torsion of the geometry. One thus concludes that this is the monopole
solution localized in the dual winding space. This property is discussed
in detail in [ 154 ] . This is exactly the same result as blindly
applying the Buscher rules [ 126 , 127 ] (which would require an
isometry) to the localized NS5-brane along the @xmath direction. It
produces the monopole (which is indeed the T-dual of the fivebrane) but
the solution is localized in the dual winding direction.

The alert reader will be aware that obviously one should not be allowed
to use the Buscher rules to carry out a T-duality in the @xmath
direction in the case where the NS5-brane is localized. The @xmath
direction is not an isometry of the localized solution. This shows how
the @xmath symmetry in DFT (which is a local continuous symmetry) goes
beyond the usual notion of T-duality (à la Buscher) since it is
applicable to any background without any assumptions about the existence
of isometries. This perspective was discussed for example in [ 102 , 98
] amongst other places.

The usual spacetime manifold is defined by picking out a maximally
isotropic subspace of the doubled space. Normally this is done by
solving the strong constraint which removes the dependence of fields on
half of the coordinates. We then identify the remaining coordinates with
the coordinates of spacetime.

The DFT monopole is a single DFT solution which obeys the strong
constraint; how we identify spacetime is essentially a choice of the
duality frame. When the half-dimensional subspace which we call
spacetime matches that of the reduction through the section condition,
then we have a normal supergravity solution which, in the case described
above, is the NS5-brane. Alternatively, one can pick the identification
of spacetime not to be determined by the section condition, this then
gives an alternative duality frame. Generically this will not have a
supergravity description even though it is part of a good DFT solution.
This is precisely the case described in this section. There is a
localization in winding space and so this solution cannot be described
through supergravity alone – even though it maybe a good string
background. In DFT it is just described by picking a spacetime
submanifold that is not determined by the solution of the section
condition.

With this in mind, we come to the following conclusion. There are two
different DFT solutions of the form ( 6.17 ), one with @xmath and the
other with @xmath as harmonic function. Here by @xmath and @xmath we do
not mean spacetime and winding coordinates a priori , but just the
coordinates as expressed in ( 6.17 ). For each of these two DFT
solutions there is a choice of duality frames which are of course
related by @xmath rotations. In one frame, for clarity call it frame A,
@xmath is a spacetime coordinate and @xmath is a dual winding
coordinate. In another frame, say frame B, the role of @xmath and @xmath
is exchanged, i.e. @xmath is a spacetime coordinate and @xmath is dual.
See Table 6 for an overview.

In the case where @xmath is a function of @xmath , the DFT solution
rewritten in the duality frame A is the NS5-brane localized in
spacetime. Its T-dual, found by going to frame B, is the KK-monopole
localized in winding space which has no supergravity description as
explained above. In the other case where @xmath is a function of @xmath
, the DFT solution rewritten in frame B gives the KK-monopole localized
in spacetime while frame A gives the NS5-brane localized in winding
space. Again this is a solution with no supergravity description but
valid from a string theory point of view.

The DFT solution listed in the first column of Table 6 containing the
winding localized monopole and spacetime localized NS5-brane was first
given in the work by Jensen [ 154 ] . The DFT solution described in the
second column extend Jensen’s ideas but are of course a natural
consequence of the structure of DFT. We would also like to emphasize
that one may interpret Jensen’s solution as a DFT monopole as described
here (this interpretation has not been made before). Thus DFT allows us
to pick subspaces that do not match the section condition. This choice
does not allow a spacetime interpretation but does have an
interpretation from a string theory point of view.

As explained at the beginning of this section, in Tong’s paper [ 152 ]
and more recently in related works by Harvey and Jensen [ 144 , 154 ]
and Kimura [ 119 , 120 , 121 , 122 , 123 , 124 ] a gauged linear sigma
model was used to describe the NS5-brane and related solutions. By
“related solutions” we mean the KK-monopole and in fact also the exotic
@xmath brane [ 117 , 118 ] . These are all solutions in the same @xmath
duality orbit. The advantage of the gauged linear sigma model
description is that one may examine the inclusion of world sheet
instanton effects. As first shown in [ 152 ] , the inclusion of such
world sheet instantons gives rise exactly to the localization in dual
winding space we are describing above. Thus in some sense DFT knows
about world sheet instantons. We will discuss this in the next section.

In terms of the topological questions raised by [ 105 ] , the localized
solution (which does not have the additional isometry) requires an
appropriate patching to form a globally defined solution. Thus for this
thesis we restrict ourselves to giving only descriptions in a local
patch. What is hopeful is that the solution described here has very
specific topology of the dual space since it is itself a monopole. It is
hoped to carry out a detailed analysis of the global properties in the
future.

#### 6.2.2 Worldsheet Instanton Corrections

Let us now return to the harmonic function @xmath of the localized
solution above. First, consider the harmonic function of the NS5-brane
in string theory. Since the fivebrane in ten dimensions has four
transverse directions, it is expressed in terms of a harmonic function
@xmath . By smearing the solution over one of these directions, it
becomes de-localized (called the H-monopole above) and can be related to
the KK-monopole via T-duality which requires an isometry. Schematically
we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are constants. Below we will set @xmath with @xmath and
@xmath .

When working with localized solutions, we want to retain the coordinate
dependence on all four transverse directions. But the monopole solution
requires a compact direction for consistency (recall how it is given in
terms of the Hopf fibration of @xmath which in a local patch is @xmath
where the @xmath – the “monopole circle” – is the compact direction),
therefore the localization is performed on a circle of radius @xmath and
the harmonic function on @xmath (as opposed to @xmath above) is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the limit of @xmath , this reduces to the original function for the
fivebrane on @xmath where the circle is decompactified. On the other
hand, for @xmath this gives the smeared solution in @xmath , i.e.
without a dependence on @xmath . Note that @xmath is the radial
coordinate of @xmath expressed in polar coordinates.

The Hopf fibration of @xmath has vanishing first homotopy @xmath and so
there is no conserved string winding number. Therefore strings may
dynamically unwind which was shown by Gregory, Harvey and Moore in [ 143
] . This means that a string in the background of the localized monopole
which carries winding charge can unwind itself. A zeromode can be
identified which transfers the winding charge to the monopole background
²⁴ ²⁴ 24 Note that of course the winding charge can always be transfered
by the string “falling into” the monopole. The observation here is that
the string can unwind at an arbitrary distance away from the core. . So
in the same way a string momentum mode scattering off the NS5-brane sees
a throat behaviour at short distances, a string winding mode scattering
off the localized KK-monopole also experiences the throat behaviour and
T-duality indeed relates dual solutions with the same physics.

This zeromode can be interpreted as an worldsheet instanton effect which
correct the smeared geometry to give the localized solutions. This can
be seen by expanding this localized harmonic function in Fourier modes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where now @xmath can be related to the instanton number. This expression
was used in the above cited works to find the corrective contribution to
the low energy effective action of the instanton effect which can be
labelled “winding mode corrections”

#### 6.2.3 Localization on a Torus

With the above discussion in mind, we now want to try something similar
for M-theory backgrounds localized in the extended space. The equivalent
solution in EFT to the DFT monopole is the self-dual solution presented
in Section 5.3 which contains both the M5-brane and the KK-monopole.
These solutions have five transverse directions in eleven-dimensional
supergravity. The harmonic function used for the EFT solution was
smeared to only depend on three of them. Therefore we want to localize
the fivebrane on two more directions, say @xmath and @xmath . These need
to be compact directions to relate to the monopole and thus have the
topology of a torus @xmath . This will introduce the complex modulus
@xmath which together with the volume @xmath encodes all the information
about the torus. Both are given in terms of the two radii @xmath and
@xmath and the angle between the circles. The hope is that once a
harmonic function on @xmath is found, it can be expanded (in terms of
modular forms) and might provide some insights into membrane “wrapping
mode corrections”.

It is still an open question how this can be achieved due to the lack of
a membrane sigma model. Here we would like to provide a stepping stone
by presenting the harmonic function localized on @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (6.22)
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath is a constant (see Appendix D for a detailed derivation).
The two coordinates @xmath have been turned into the complex coordinate
@xmath where @xmath is the complex modulus of the torus. The torus can
be seen as a doubly periodic lattice, each point is identified with
@xmath where @xmath are integers.

Although we currently lack a closed-form expression for this harmonic
function, it can be used in the EFT solution of Section 5.3 to provide a
background which is localized on two of the 56 exceptionally extended
internal directions. This geometry can now be probed by a membrane. In
analogy to the expansion in ( 6.21 ), it might be possible to identify
extra modes and find additional terms to the low energy effective action
which correct the geometry. This remains to be seen.

## Chapter 7 @xmath EFT – An Action for F-theory

Now we will slightly shift focus from the extended solutions and their
properties back to exceptional field theory in its own right and what it
can be used for. This chapter provides a shortened version of [ 4 ]
where the EFT for @xmath with duality group @xmath was constructed and
it was shown how this provides an action for F-theory. We begin by
placing this achievement in a historical context.

It is 20 years since the study of non-perturbative string dynamics [ 155
] and U-duality [ 156 ] led to the idea of M-theory. From its inception
the low energy effective description of M-theory was known to be
eleven-dimensional supergravity with the coupling of the Type IIA string
promoted to the radius of the eleventh dimension.

The natural extension of this idea to the Type IIB string gave rise to
F-theory [ 38 ] where the complex coupling in the Type IIB theory is
taken to have its origin in the complex modulus of a torus fibred over
the usual ten dimensions of the Type IIB string theory. Thus by
definition, F-theory is the twelve-dimensional lift of the Type IIB
string theory. The status of this twelve-dimensional theory has been
somewhat different to that of its Type IIA spouse with no direct
twelve-dimensional description in terms of an action and fields that
reduce to the Type IIB theory. Indeed, there is no twelve-dimensional
supergravity and thus no limit in which the twelve-dimensions can be
taken to be “large”, unlike in the M-theory case. The emphasis has thus
largely been on using algebraic geometry to describe F-theory
compactifications [ 157 , 158 ] such that now F-theory is synonymous
with the study of elliptically fibred Calabi-Yau manifolds.

The complex coupling of the Type IIB theory is naturally acted on by an
@xmath S-duality, which is a symmetry of the theory. F-theory provides a
geometric interpretation of this duality. An idea which was raised
swiftly after the introduction of F-theory was whether there exist
similar geometrizations of the U-duality symmetries which one finds
after descending in dimension [ 159 ] . Here, one would hope to be able
to associate the scalars of compactified supergravity with the moduli of
some auxiliary geometric space. However, the scope for doing so turns
out to be somewhat limited.

More recently, the idea of re-imagining duality in a geometric origin
has resurfaced in the form of double field theory and exceptional field
theory. Perhaps the key development that allows for the construction of
these theories is that the new geometry is not a conventional one, but
an “extended geometry” based on the idea of “generalized geometry” [ 15
, 16 ] . For instance, a key role is played by a “generalized metric”,
in place of the torus modulus, and one introduces an extended space with
a novel “generalized diffeomorphism” symmetry. We aim to use these
innovations to construct a twelve-dimensional theory which provides a
local action for F-theory.

Let us briefly recap the key steps in construction an exceptional field
theory for general @xmath following the original line of thinking on the
subject adapted to the notation of this chapter:

-   Let us consider ourselves as starting with eleven-dimensional
    supergravity.

-   We decompose the eleven-dimensional diffeomorphism group

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

-   We promote the @xmath symmetry to @xmath by rewriting the bosonic
    degrees of freedom in terms of objects which fall naturally into
    representations of @xmath (in order to do so, we may need to perform
    various dualizations).

-   We now take the step of introducing @xmath new coordinates such that
    the @xmath original coordinates and the @xmath extra (or “dual”)
    coordinates fit into a certain representation of @xmath : @xmath .

-   Our fields - which are already in representations of @xmath - are
    now taken to depend on all the coordinates.

-   The local symmetries of the theory are likewise rewritten in such a
    manner that diffeomorphisms and gauge transformations unify into
    “generalized diffeomorphisms”.

-   Invariance under these local symmetries may be used to fix the EFT
    action in the total @xmath -dimensional space.

-   For consistency the theory must be supplemented with a constraint,
    quadratic in derivatives, known as the section condition.
    Inequivalent solutions (in the sense that they cannot be mapped into
    each other by an @xmath transformation) of this constraint will
    impose a dimensional reduction of the @xmath -dimensional theory
    down to eleven or ten dimensions. The reduction down to eleven we
    call the M-theory section and the reduction down to ten the IIB
    section for reasons that will become obvious. Note that although one
    may motivate and begin the construction by starting in either eleven
    dimensions, or ten, the full theory will automatically contain both
    M-theory and IIB subsectors [ 28 , 89 ]

Here we give the result of following this procedure to construct the EFT
relevant to F-theory. The result will be a twelve-dimensional theory
which may be reduced either to the maximal supergravity in eleven
dimensions or Type IIB supergravity in ten. This theory is manifestly
invariant under a @xmath symmetry. The @xmath part of this is easily
identified with the S-duality of Type IIB and after imposing the section
condition one can see the emergence of a fibration structure as
considered in F-theory.

We note that the construction is a little different to the cases
considered before in that the extended space that is introduced is too
small to include any effects from geometrizing gauge field potentials
such as the three-form of eleven-dimensional supergravity. In some
sense, one may think of it as the minimal EFT. As such, it provides the
easiest way of seeing exactly how F-theory fits in to the general EFT
framework. By constructing the theory our goal is to bring into sharp
focus the points of comparison between the EFT construction and what is
normally thought of as F-theory. It will be of interest to embed this
viewpoint into the higher rank groups already studied.

In this chapter, after describing the action and symmetries of the
@xmath EFT in section 7.1 , we begin the process of analyzing how it
relates to F-theory. We can precisely show the identification of the
fields of the @xmath EFT with those of eleven-dimensional supergravity
and ten-dimensional Type IIB supergravity, which we do in section 7.2 .
After this, in section 7.3 we discuss in general terms how one may view
the IIB section - where there is no dependence on two coordinates - as
an F-theory description. The dynamics of the extended space are encoded
in a generalized metric whose degrees of freedom are precisely such as
to allow us to recover the usual sort of torus fibration familiar in
F-theory.

We also discuss in detail how one sees M-theory/F-theory duality in the
EFT framework. One can work out the precise maps between the M-theory
and F-theory pictures by comparing the identifications of the EFT fields
in the different sections. In this way one recovers the usual
relationships relating eleven-dimensional supergravity on a torus to
Type IIB string theory on a circle in nine dimensions [ 160 ] . We carry
this out for a selection of familiar brane solutions in section 7.4 ,
paying attention to the different features that are seen in EFT
depending on whether the brane wraps part of the extended space or not.
For instance, 1/2 BPS brane solutions may be seen as simple
wave/monopole type solutions in the EFT [ 3 ] as was shown for the
@xmath case in Chapter 4 .

At the same time, we stress that the EFT construction is an extension of
the usual duality relationships. From the point of view of the M-theory
section, we introduce one additional dual coordinate @xmath , which can
be thought of as being conjugate to a membrane wrapping mode when we
have a background of the form @xmath . Alternatively, the IIB section
sees two dual coordinates @xmath related to winding modes of the F1 and
D1 in the direction @xmath . In EFT we treat all these modes on an equal
footing - they are related by the symmetry @xmath . ²⁵ ²⁵ 25 Actually,
in this case @xmath is a singlet of the @xmath part of the group while
@xmath is a doublet.

We hope that by presenting the twelve-dimensional @xmath exceptional
field theory we can begin to properly connect the EFT constructions to
F-theory.

### 7.1 The Theory and its Action

In this section, we describe the general features of the theory. First,
we describe the setup in terms of an extended space and the field
content. Then we shall give the form of the action. After this, we will
briefly discuss the symmetries of the theory, which can be used to
determine the action. Our goal is to provide an introduction to the main
features. Thus, we refer to the original work for the technical details
of the construction, some of which can be found in Appendix E . Note
that here we will restrict ourselves to only the bosonic sector of the
theory. We expect that supersymmetrization will follow the form of other
supersymmetrized EFTs [ 77 , 78 ] .

The theory we will describe may be thought of as a twelve-dimensional
theory with a @xmath split of the coordinates, so that we have

-   nine “external” coordinates, @xmath ,

-   three “extended” coordinates, @xmath that live in the @xmath
    reducible representation of @xmath (where the subscripts denote the
    weights under the @xmath factor). To reflect the reducibility of the
    representation we further decompose the coordinates @xmath where
    @xmath transforms in the fundamental of @xmath , and @xmath stands,
    appropriately as we will see, for ‘‘singlet’’ or ‘‘string’’ ²⁶ ²⁶ 26
    The reducibility of the coordinate representation is not a feature
    of higher rank duality groups. .

The fields and symmetry transformation parameters of the theory can in
principle depend on all of these coordinates. However, as always happens
in exceptional field theory and double field theory, there is a
consistency condition which reduces the dependence on the extended
coordinates. This condition is usually implemented as the section
condition, which directly imposes that that the fields cannot depend on
all extended coordinates. In our case, it takes the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

with the derivatives to be thought of as acting on any field or pair of
fields, so that we require both @xmath and @xmath . The origin of the
section condition is the requirement that the algebra of symmetries
closes, which we will review in the next subsection.

The field content of the theory is as follows. The metric-like degrees
of freedom are

-   an “external” metric, @xmath ,

-   a generalized metric, @xmath which parametrizes the coset @xmath .
    (From the perspective of the “external” nine dimensions, this metric
    will correspond to the scalar degrees of freedom.) The reducibility
    of the @xmath coordinates implies that the generalized metric is
    reducible and thus may be decomposed as,

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (7.2)
      -- -------- -- -------

The coset @xmath implies we have just three degrees of freedom described
by the generalized metric. This means that @xmath must be related to
@xmath . One can thus define @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

has unit determinant. The rescaled metric @xmath and @xmath can then be
used as the independent degrees of freedom when constructing the theory.
This unit determinant matrix @xmath will then appear naturally in the
IIB/F-theory description.

In addition, we have a hierarchy of gauge fields, similar to the tensor
hierarchy of gauged supergravities [ 161 , 34 ] . These are form fields
with respect to the external directions, and also transform in different
representations of the duality group:

  -- -- -- -------
           (7.4)
  -- -- -- -------

These fields also transform under “generalized diffeomorphisms” and
“external diffeomorphisms” which we describe in the next subsection, as
well as various gauge symmetries of the tensor hierarchy which we
describe in Appendix E.2 . The field strengths are defined such that the
fields transform covariantly under generalized diffeomorphisms, i.e.
according to their index structure and the rules given in the following
subsection, and are gauge invariant under a hierarchy of interrelated
gauge transformations given in detail in E.2 . The expressions for the
field strengths are schematically

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath            (7.5)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------

where for the @xmath -form field strengths the terms indicated by dots
involve quadratic and higher order of field strengths. We also see that
there is always a linear term, shown, of the gauge field at next order,
under a particular nilpotent derivative @xmath defined in E.1 . The
derivative, @xmath that appears is a covariant derivative for the
generalized diffeomorphisms, as described in the next section. The
detailed definitions of the field strengths are also in E.2 .

Crucially, the presence of the two kinds of diffeomorphism symmetries
may be used to fix the action up to total derivatives. For the details
of this calculation we refer to the original work [ 4 ] . The resulting
general form of the action, which is common to all exceptional field
theories is given schematically as follows,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The constituent parts are (omitting total derivatives ²⁷ ²⁷ 27 In the
quantum theory the total derivatives are important and EFT will have a
natural boundary term given by an @xmath covariantization of the
Gibbons-Hawking term [ 67 ] . ):

-   the “covariantized” external Ricci scalar, @xmath , which is

      -- -------- -------- -------- -------
         @xmath   @xmath            (7.7)
                           @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- -------

-   a kinetic term for the generalized metric (containing the scalar
    degrees of freedom)

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (7.8)
      -- -------- -- -------

-   kinetic terms for the gauge fields

      -- -------- -------- -------- -------
         @xmath   @xmath            (7.9)
                           @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- -------

    We do not include kinetic terms for all the form fields appearing in
    ( 7.4 ). As a result, not all the forms are dynamical. We will
    discuss the consequences of this below.

-   a topological or Chern-Simons like term which is not manifestly
    gauge invariant in 9+3 dimensions. In a standard manner however we
    may write this term in a manifestly gauge invariant manner in 10+3
    dimensions as

      -- -------- -------- -------- --------
         @xmath   @xmath            (7.10)
                           @xmath   
                           @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- -------- --------

    The index @xmath is treated to an abuse of notation where it is
    simultaneously ten- and nine-dimensional. (This extra dimension is
    purely a notational convenience and is unrelated to the extra
    coordinates present in @xmath .) The above term is such that its
    variation is a total derivative and so can be written again in the
    correct number of dimensions. For further discussion of this term,
    including an “index-free” description, see Appendix E.3 . The
    overall coefficient @xmath is found to be @xmath .

-   a scalar potential

      -- -------- -------- -- --------
         @xmath   @xmath      
                  @xmath      
                  @xmath      (7.11)
                  @xmath      
                  @xmath      
      -- -------- -------- -- --------

This theory expresses the dynamics of eleven-dimensional supergravity
and ten-di-mensional Type IIB supergravity in a duality covariant way.
In order to do so, we have actually increased the numbers of degrees of
freedom by simultaneously treating fields and their electromagnetic
duals on the same footing. This can be seen in the collection of form
fields in ( 7.4 ). For instance, although eleven-dimensional
supergravity contains only a three-form, here we have additional higher
rank forms which can be thought of as corresponding to the six-form
field dual to the three-form.

The action for the theory deals with this by not including kinetic terms
for all the gauge fields. The field strength @xmath of the gauge field
@xmath only appears in the topological term ( 7.10 ). The field @xmath
in fact also appears in the definition of the gauge field @xmath , under
a @xmath derivative. One can show that the equation of motion for this
field is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

The expression in the brackets should be imposed as a duality relation
relating the field strength @xmath to @xmath , and hence removing
seemingly extra degrees of freedom carried in the gauge fields which are
actually just the dualizations of physical degrees of freedom. The above
relation is quite important – for instance the proof that the EFT action
is invariant under diffeomorphisms is only obeyed if it is satisfied.

As for the remaining two gauge fields, the equation of motion following
from varying with respect to @xmath is trivially satisfied (it only
appears in the field strength @xmath ), while @xmath is entirely absent
from the action.

#### 7.1.1 Local and Global Symmetries

It is clear that the above action has a manifest invariance under a
global @xmath symmetry, acting on the indices @xmath in an obvious way.
In addition, the exceptional field theory is invariant under a set of
local symmetries.

Alongside the introduction of the extended coordinates @xmath one
constructs so called “generalized diffeomorphisms”. In the higher rank
groups, these give a unified description of ordinary diffeomorphisms
together with the @xmath -form gauge transformations. Although the group
@xmath is too small for the @xmath -form gauge transformations to play a
role here, the generalized diffeomorphisms provide a combined
description of part of the ordinary local symmetries of Type IIB and
eleven-dimensional supergravity.

The generalized diffeomorphisms, generated by a generalized vector
@xmath , act as a local @xmath action, called the generalized Lie
derivative @xmath . These act on a vector, @xmath of weight @xmath in a
form which looks like the usual Lie derivative plus a modification
involving the Y-tensor ( cf. Section 4.1 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

This modification is universal for all exceptional field theory
generalized Lie derivatives [ 70 ] and is built from the invariant
tensors of the duality group. In the case of @xmath [ 79 ] , it is
symmetric on both upper and lower indices and has the only non-vanishing
components

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

There is also a universal weight term, @xmath . The constant @xmath
depends on the number @xmath of external dimensions as @xmath and for us
@xmath . The gauge parameters themselves are chosen to have specific
weight @xmath , which cancels that arising from the @xmath term.

In conventional geometry, diffeomorphisms are generated by the Lie
derivative and form a closed algebra under the Lie bracket. The algebra
of generalized diffeomorphisms involves the @xmath -bracket,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

The condition for closure of the algebra is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

which does not happen automatically. A universal feature in all
exceptional field theories is that we need to impose the section
condition [ 70 ] so the algebra closes. This is the following constraint
determined by the Y-tensor

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

which implies the form ( 7.1 ) given before.

From the definition of the generalized Lie derivative ( 7.13 ) and the
Y-tensor ( 7.14 ), we can write down the transformation rules for the
components @xmath and @xmath , which are

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (7.18)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

Then by requiring the Leibniz property for the generalized Lie
derivative, we can derive the transformation rules for tensors in other
representations of @xmath , such as the generalized metric @xmath . (The
form fields must be treated separately, see Appendix E.2 .)

In doing so, we also need to specify the weight @xmath of each object.
It is conventional to choose the generalized metric to have weight zero
under generalized diffeomorphisms. Meanwhile, the sequence of form
fields @xmath are chosen to have weights @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and so
on. Finally, we take the external metric @xmath to be a scalar of weight
@xmath .

In the above we have only treated the infinitesimal, local @xmath
symmetry. This should be related to finite @xmath transformations by
exponentiation. The relation between the exponentiated generalized Lie
derivative and the finite transformations are quite nontrivial due to
the presence of the section condition. For double field theory there are
now are series of works dealing with this issue [ 100 , 101 , 102 , 92 ,
162 , 103 ] and recently the EFT case has been studied in [ 104 ] .

The other diffeomorphism symmetry of the action consists of external
diffeomorphisms, parametrized by vectors @xmath . These are given by the
usual Lie derivative

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

with partial derivatives replaced by the derivative @xmath which is
covariant under internal diffeomorphisms, and explicitly defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

The weight @xmath of a vector under external diffeomorphisms is
independent of that under generalized diffeomorphisms.

For this to work, the gauge vector @xmath must transform under
generalized diffeomorphisms as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

The external metrics and form fields then transform under external
diffeomorphisms in the usual manner given by the Leibniz rule, while the
generalized metric is taken to be a scalar, @xmath .

In addition, we need to consider the gauge transformations of the
remaining form fields ( 7.4 ). Deriving the correct gauge
transformations and field strengths is a non-trivial exercise, and we
defer the presentation to Appendix E.2 .

Each individual term in the general form of the action ( 7.6 ) is
separately invariant under generalized diffeomorphisms and gauge
transformations. The external diffeomorphisms though mix the various
terms and so by requiring invariance under these transformations one may
then fix the coefficients of the action.

An alternative derivation of the generalized Lie derivative is the
following. We consider a general ansatz for the generalized Lie
derivative acting on elements in the two-dimensional and singlet
representation

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (7.22)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

We can fix the coefficients @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath as
follows. We require a singlet @xmath and @xmath to define an invariant,
i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

This property allows us to define the unit-determinant generalized
metric ( 7.3 ). Furthermore, we require that the algebra of generalized
Lie derivatives closes subject to a section condition. Requiring this to
allow for two inequivalent solutions then fixes the coefficients @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath above and – up to a redefinition – reproduces
( 7.18 ). This definition of the generalized Lie derivative fits in the
usual pattern of generalized diffeomorphism in EFT described by the
Y-tensor [ 70 ] deformation of the Lie derivative.

### 7.2 Relationship to Supergravity

Our @xmath exceptional field theory is equivalent to eleven-dimensional
and ten-dimensional Type IIB supergravity, in a particular splitting
inspired by Kaluza-Klein reductions. In this section, we present the
details of this split and give the precise relationships between the
fields of the exceptional field theory and those of supergravity. ²⁸ ²⁸
28 In general, our actions will have the same relative normalizations as
that in the book [ 125 ] although we use the opposite signature. The
procedure that we use is essentially the same as carried out in the
exceptional field theory literature, see for instance [ 28 , 163 ] for
detailed descriptions of the M-theory and Type IIB cases.

#### 7.2.1 Metric Terms

Let us consider first the @xmath -dimensional Einstein-Hilbert term

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

This discussion applies equally to eleven-dimensional supergravity and
Type IIB supergravity. In both cases, @xmath is the number of “external”
dimensions and @xmath the number of internal. So @xmath always but
@xmath in the eleven-dimensional case and @xmath in the IIB case.

The @xmath -dimensional coordinates @xmath are split into @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath , @xmath . After splitting the @xmath -dimensional
flat coordinates @xmath into @xmath -dimensional flat coordinates @xmath
and @xmath -dimensional flat coordinates @xmath , we write the @xmath
-dimensional vielbein as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Fixing this form of the vielbein breaks the @xmath Lorentz symmetry to
@xmath . Note however that we continue to allow the fields of the theory
to depend on all the coordinates, so at no point do we carry out a
dimensional reduction.

Here we treat @xmath as the vielbein for the external metric @xmath and
can think of @xmath as the vielbein for the internal metric @xmath . We
have also defined @xmath . The corresponding form of the metric is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

The constant @xmath is fixed in order to obtain the Einstein-Hilbert
term for the metric @xmath and is the same as in Section 7.1 : @xmath .

Diffeomorphisms @xmath split into internal @xmath and external @xmath
transformations. We define covariant derivatives @xmath which are
covariant with respect to internal diffeomorphisms

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (7.27)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

The use of the letter @xmath here and also for the covariant derivatives
( 7.20 ) appearing in the EFT is no accident. Indeed, on solving the
section condition, those in EFT reduce exactly to the expressions here.

One can think of @xmath as carrying density weight @xmath under internal
diffeomorphisms. The Kaluza-Klein vector appears as a connection for
internal diffeomorphisms, the field strength is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

To obtain external diffeomorphisms one must add a compensating Lorentz
transformation of the vielbein. The resulting expressions are not
covariant with respect to internal diffeomorphisms, but can be improved
by adding a field dependent internal transformation (with parameter
@xmath ) to each transformation rule. This leads to the definition of
external diffeomorphisms in our split theory

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (7.29)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

It is convenient to also define a derivative

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

One can then show that the Einstein-Hilbert term @xmath becomes

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (7.31)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath is the object given by the usual formula for the Ricci
scalar applied to the internal metric @xmath , using only the @xmath
derivatives (and not involving any determinant @xmath factors). Note
that this vanishes when @xmath i.e. for the IIB splitting. Meanwhile,
@xmath is the improved Ricci scalar in which all derivatives that appear
are @xmath rather than @xmath .

#### 7.2.2 Splitting of eleven-dimensional Supergravity

Now, we come to eleven-dimensional supergravity. We write the (bosonic)
action as

  -- -- -- --------
           (7.32)
  -- -- -- --------

We will slightly adapt our notation here. The index @xmath is used to
denote internal indices, while we denote the internal components of the
metric by @xmath , i.e. with respect to the previous section @xmath .

The four-form field strength is as usual

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

The degrees of freedom arising from the metric are then the external
metric @xmath , the Kaluza-Klein vector @xmath with field strength

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the internal metric @xmath .

The three-form field gives @xmath -dimensional forms @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath . In order to obtain fields which have better transformation
properties under the symmetries in the split (both diffeomorphisms and
gauge transformations), one redefines the form field components by
flattening indices with @xmath and then curving them with @xmath , so
that for instance @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

The fields defined in this way are such that they transform according to
their index structure under internal diffeomorphisms @xmath acting as
the Lie derivative. The field strengths may be similarly redefined

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here we have the covariant derivative @xmath introduced above.

The kinetic terms for the gauge fields may be easily decomposed by going
to flat indices and then using the above redefinitions. Including the
Kaluza-Klein vector, one finds the total gauge kinetic terms

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally, consider the Chern-Simons term. A very convenient way of
treating this reduction is to use the trick of rewriting the
Chern-Simons term as a manifestly gauge invariant term in one dimension
higher (note this fictitious extra dimension has nothing to do with the
extra coordinate introduced in EFT). Thus one writes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

The variation of this is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is a total derivative as expected. This term can be decomposed
according to the above splitting. One obtains

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 7.2.3 The EFT/M-theory Dictionary

Now, we take our @xmath EFT described in section 7.1 and impose the
M-theory section condition, @xmath . Thus, the fields of our theory
depend on the coordinates @xmath and @xmath , which are taken to be the
coordinates of eleven-dimensional supergravity in the @xmath splitting
described above.

The metric-like degrees of freedom are easily identified. The external
metric @xmath used in the @xmath EFT is simply that appearing in the
splitting of eleven-dimensional supergravity. Meanwhile, the generalized
Lie derivative tells us how the generalized metric should be
parametrized in spacetime, by interpreting the transformation rules it
gives in the M-theory section in terms of internal diffeomorphisms. For
instance, one sees from ( 7.18 ) that with @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

which tells us that @xmath transforms as a rank two tensor of weight
@xmath under internal diffeomorphisms while @xmath is a scalar of weight
@xmath , so that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.42)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

It is straightforward to check that after inserting this into the EFT
action that one obtains the correct action resulting from the
eleven-dimensional Einstein-Hilbert term, given by ( 7.31 ). This
verification involves the scalar potential, the scalar kinetic terms and
the external Ricci scalar. The part of this calculation involving the
external derivatives @xmath works almost automatically after identifying
the Kaluza-Klein vector @xmath with the @xmath component of the vector
@xmath , such that the derivatives @xmath used in the EFT become those
defined above in the splitting of supergravity.

Now we come to the form fields of EFT. The ones that appear with kinetic
terms in the action are @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . These are related to
the Kaluza-Klein vector @xmath and the redefined fields ( 7.35 ) by the
following

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

These definitions are such that the field strength components are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can then straightforwardly write down the gauge kinetic terms of the
EFT action, which in this section and with the parametrization ( 7.42 )
of the generalized metric are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

and show that this automatically reduces to those of eleven-dimensional
supergravity, ( 7.37 ).

Similarly, one can show that we obtain the correct Chern-Simons term (
7.40 ). The remaining gauge fields that appear in EFT, which are a
four-form, five-form and six-form are not dynamical. The action must
always be complemented by a self-duality relation that relates @xmath
-form field strengths to their magnetic duals. This is a natural
consequence of the formalism where we have included both electric and
magnetic descriptions in the action simultaneously.

#### 7.2.4 Splitting of ten-dimensional Type IIB Supergravity

The (bosonic) (pseudo-)action of Type IIB can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

This action must be accompanied by the duality relation for the
self-dual five-form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

The field strengths themselves are written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

We carry out a @xmath split of the coordinates. In this section, we will
denote the internal index by @xmath (for singlet), and the single
internal metric component by @xmath . The metric then gives the external
metric, @xmath and the Kaluza-Klein vector, @xmath with field strength

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

The scalars @xmath are trivially reduced using the decomposition of the
metric to give

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

From the two-form, using the standard trick involving contracting with
@xmath to obtain appropriate decompositions of the forms, we find the
components

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that the field strengths are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that the two-form doublet @xmath consists of the NSNS-two-form
@xmath as its first component and the RR-two-form @xmath as its second
component. For the four-form one has similarly

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

with field strengths

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

In terms of these objects, the duality relation becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

These definitions lead to the following kinetic terms in the Lagrangian

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally, consider the Chern-Simons term which can be written in one
dimension higher as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

Under the split, this becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 7.2.5 The EFT/Type IIB Dictionary

Now, we take our @xmath EFT and impose the IIB section, @xmath . The
fields then depend on the coordinates @xmath and @xmath , which become
the coordinates of ten-dimensional Type IIB supergravity in the @xmath
split we have described above.

The external metric can be immediately identified. The components of the
generalized metric are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.60)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The Kaluza-Klein vector @xmath can be identified as the @xmath component
of the gauge field @xmath . One can then verify the reduction of the
scalar potential, scalar kinetic terms and external Ricci scalar, and
verify that they give the expected reduction of the Einstein-Hilbert
term, ( 7.31 ) and scalar kinetic terms ( 7.51 ). For completeness let
us give here the parametrization of @xmath in terms of @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

For the remaining forms, we need the following definitions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

The duality relation that one obtains from the EFT action by varying
with respect to @xmath is (equation ( 7.12 ))

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath is the overall coefficient of the topological term ( 7.10 ).
After some manipulation one sees that this is consistent with the
duality relation imposed in supergravity, given in ( 7.56 ), if

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is satisfied by our coefficients.

The kinetic terms of the EFT action are in this parametrization given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the above definitions, we find that the first line of this
(involving just the Kaluza-Klein vector and the components of the
two-form) matches exactly the first line of ( 7.57 ). Before discussing
the remaining term, we first consider the Chern-Simons term. It is
convenient in the IIB section to rewrite this using the Bianchi
identities ( E.22 ) given in the appendix. Then the topological term as
given in the form ( E.23 ) can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

The last two lines here give exactly the Chern-Simons term ( 7.59 ).

The remaining terms give kinetic terms for the field strength. The terms
that one obtains differ from those that one obtains from a decomposition
of the Type IIB pseudo-action by a multiplicative factor of @xmath ,
that is the EFT gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

to be compared with the coefficients of @xmath and @xmath in ( 7.57 ).
This is as expected due to the use of the self-duality relation which is
an equation of motion for the gauge field @xmath . In ten dimensions one
has the normalization @xmath for the five-form field strength instead of
the standard @xmath due to the fact that there are unphysical degrees of
freedom which are eliminated by the self-duality relation after varying
the Type IIB action. Here we see only the physical half after using the
self-duality relation in the EFT action. The upshot is that strictly
speaking the EFT is only equivalent to Type IIB at the level of the
equations of motion, as would be expected given that the Type IIB action
is only a pseudo-action.

#### 7.2.6 Summary

The above results display the mapping between the fields of the @xmath
EFT and those of supergravity in a certain Kaluza-Klein-esque split. It
is straightforward to relate this back directly to the fields in eleven-
and ten-dimensions themselves.

For M-theory, one has for the degrees of freedom coming from the
spacetime metric, with the Kaluza-Klein vector @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

The inverse relationships, giving the eleven-dimensional fields in terms
of those in our EFT are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

Similarly, for IIB we have, with @xmath and the Kaluza-Klein vector
@xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

### 7.3 Relationship to F-theory

In the previous section, we have given the detailed rules for showing
the equivalence of the @xmath EFT to both eleven-dimensional
supergravity and ten-dimensional Type IIB supergravity. Let us now
elaborate on the connection to F-theory, rather than just Type IIB
supergravity.

What is F-theory? Primarily we will take F-theory to be a
twelve-dimensional lift of Type IIB supergravity that provides a
geometric perspective on the @xmath duality symmetry ²⁹ ²⁹ 29 We thank
Cumrun Vafa for discussions on how one should think of F-theory. . It
provides a framework for describing (non-perturbative) IIB vacua with
varying @xmath , in particular it is natural to think of sevenbrane
backgrounds as monodromies of @xmath under the action of @xmath .
Equivalently, there is a process for deriving non-perturbative IIB vacua
from M-theory compactifications to a dimension lower. Crucially,
singularities of the twelve-dimensional space are related to D7-branes.
We take this duality with M-theory to be the second key property of
F-theory.

Let us now briefly comment on how these two properties are realized here
before expanding in detail. We usually view the twelve-dimensional space
of F-theory as consisting of a torus fibration of ten-dimensional IIB.
The group of large diffeomorphisms on the torus is then viewed as a
geometric realization of the @xmath S-duality of IIB.

In the @xmath EFT a similar picture arises. This is because we take the
group of large generalized diffeomorphisms acting on the extended space
to give the @xmath duality group. See [ 100 , 101 , 102 , 92 , 162 , 103
, 104 ] for progress on understanding the geometry of these large
generalized diffeomorphisms.

The EFT is subject to a single constraint equation, the section
condition, with two inequivalent solutions. One solution of the
constraint leads to M-theory or at least eleven-dimensional
supergravity, and one leads to F-theory. Thus @xmath EFT is a single
twelve-dimensional theory containing both eleven-dimensional
supergravity and F-theory, allowing us to naturally realize the M-theory
/ F-theory duality.

If we choose the IIB section, we can interpret any solution as being
twelve-dimen-sional but with at least two isometries in the
twelve-dimensional space. These two isometries lead to the
two-dimensional fibration which in F-theory consists of a torus.

Finally, the fact that the generalized diffeomorphisms, not ordinary
diffeomorphisms, play the key role here also allows one to use the
section condition to “dimensionally reduce” the twelve-dimensional
@xmath to ten-dimensional IIB (as well as eleven-dimensional
supergravity) as explained in Section 7.2 . This explicitly shows how
F-theory, interpreted as the @xmath EFT, can be a twelve-dimensional
theory, yet reduce to the correct eleven-dimensional and IIB
supergravity fields. The relation between the twelve-dimensional theory
and the supergravities in elven, ten and nine dimensions is depicted in
Figure 1 .

#### 7.3.1 M-theory/F-theory Duality

Before looking at the specifics of the @xmath EFT, let us discuss in
general how duality works in exceptional field theories or indeed double
field theory. First consider the most familiar case of T-duality and how
it comes about in DFT. The origin of T-duality is the ambiguity in
identifying the @xmath -dimensional spacetime embedded in the @xmath
-dimensional doubled space. For the most generic DFT background that
obeys the section condition constraint there is no T-duality. The
section condition eliminates the dependence of the generalized metric on
half the coordinates and so there is unique choice of how one identifies
the @xmath -dimensional spacetime embedding in the @xmath -doubled
space.

However if there is an isometry then there is only a dependence on
@xmath coordinates. Thus what we identify as the @xmath -dimensional
spacetime is ambiguous. This ambiguity is T-duality. This was discussed
in detail in Section 3.3 . (Note, even though DFT has a manifest @xmath
local symmetry this should not be confused with the global @xmath
T-duality which only occurs when compactifying on a @xmath .)

One has a similar situation in EFT but with some differences. In DFT a
solution to the section condition will always provide a @xmath
-dimensional space. In EFT a solution to the @xmath section condition
will provide either a @xmath -dimensional space or a @xmath -dimensional
space (where crucially the @xmath solution is not a subspace of the
@xmath -dimensional space). The two solutions are distinct (and not
related by any element of @xmath ). The @xmath -dimensional solution is
associated to the M-theory description and the @xmath -dimensional
solution is associated to the type IIB description.

A completely generic solution that solves the section condition will be
in one set or the other and one will be able to label it as an M or IIB
solution. However, if there are two isometries in the M-theory solution
then again we have an ambiguity and one will be able interpret the
solution in terms of the IIB section with one isometry. This ambiguity
gives the F-theory/M-theory duality. It is the origin of how M-theory on
a torus is equivalent to Type IIB on a circle [ 160 ] . Thus in summary
the F/M-duality is an ambiguity in the identification of spacetime that
occurs when there are two isometries in an M-theory solution.

So the simplest case is where the eleven dimensional space is a @xmath
and we take the two-torus to have complex structure @xmath and volume
@xmath . The reinterpretation in terms of a IIB section solution (which
requires a single circle isometry) is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the radius of the IIB circle. This exactly recovers the
well known M/IIB duality relations [ 160 ] .

Let us now further study the M-theory/F-theory duality with the
following simple ansatz. Consider the nine-dimensional space to be of
the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the metric on some internal six-dimensional manifold
@xmath and @xmath is the metric of an effective three-dimensional
theory. We will consider the case where @xmath parameterise a torus, as
in F-theory. If for simplicity we ignore the one-form gauge potential
@xmath , then using ( 7.70 ) we see that the M-theory section has the
following metric

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

The internal manifold takes the form of a @xmath -fibration over @xmath
. In the IIB section we instead have the Einstein-frame metric

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is precisely the four-dimensional effective theory with
six-dimensional internal space that we expect from F-theory, with the
fourth direction @xmath becoming “large” in the small-volume limit, here
given by @xmath . The dilaton and @xmath profile are given by @xmath and
are at this point arbitrary.

Let us mention another example of this M/IIB relationship which will be
important to us later. Consider M-theory with a three-form @xmath . It
is easy to show from the dictionary ( 7.69 ) – ( 7.72 ) that in IIB this
leads to a four-form tangential to the four-dimensional spacetime @xmath
.

#### 7.3.2 Sevenbranes

In F-theory, a vital role is played by backgrounds containing
sevenbranes. In this subsection we discuss some features of how one may
view sevenbranes and their singularities in the context of the @xmath
EFT.

Sevenbrane solutions of type IIB supergravity have non-trivial metric
and scalar fields @xmath . From the point of view of EFT, all of these
degrees of freedom are contained within the metric @xmath and the
generalized metric @xmath . Thus we may specify entirely a sevenbrane
background by giving these objects. In the below, we will use the
notation

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.77)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

to specify the solutions. It is not obvious that one should view the
generalised metric as providing a notion of line element on the extended
space, so in a sense this is primarily a convenient shorthand for
expression the solutions.

We consider a sevenbrane which is extended along six of the “external
directions”, denoted @xmath , and along @xmath which appears in the
extended space. The remaining coordinates are time and the coordinates
transverse to the brane which we take to be polar coordinates @xmath .
In this language, the harmonic function of the brane is @xmath . ³⁰ ³⁰
30 In the EFT point of view, one can consider the sevenbrane as having
the form of a generalised monopole solution of the form given in section
7.4.2 , after smearing on one of the transverse directions. In this case
@xmath is a cut-off that is introduced in this process and is related to
the codimension-2 nature of the solution, i.e. we expect it to be valid
only up to some @xmath as the solution is not asymptotically flat. The
solution can be specified by

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (7.78)
              @xmath            
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

If one goes around this solution in the transverse space changing @xmath
to @xmath the @xmath block @xmath goes to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the monodromy @xmath is an element of @xmath and is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

Reducing this solution to the IIB section gives the D7-brane. By using (
7.72 ) one can extract the torus metric @xmath and the scalar @xmath of
the @xmath split. From @xmath one then obtains the axio-dilaton, i.e.
@xmath and @xmath . The external metric is composed with @xmath to give
the ten-dimensional solution

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (7.81)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

which is the D7-brane. Exchanging @xmath and @xmath and flipping the
sign of the off-diagonal term (this is an @xmath transformation of the
@xmath block) leads to a solution which reduces to the S7-brane. On the
M-theory section the solution ( 7.78 ) corresponds to a smeared
KK-monopole which can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

To see this more clearly, consider the usual KK-monopole in M-theory,
which has three transverse and one isometric direction, the Hopf fibre.
If this solution is smeared over one of the transverse directions to
give another isometric direction one arrives at the above solution
(where @xmath are transverse and @xmath are isometric). Therefore the
M/IIB-duality between smeared monopole and sevenbrane relates the first
Chern class of the Hopf fibration to the monodromy of the codimension-2
object.

We have now seen how the @xmath doublet of D7 and S7 is a smeared
monopole with its two isometric direction along the @xmath in the
extended space. This can be generalized to give @xmath -sevenbranes in
the IIB picture where the isometric directions of the smeared monopole
correspond to the @xmath - and @xmath -cycles. The external metric is
the same as above, the generalized metric now reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (7.83)
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

The two extrema are @xmath which gives the D7 and @xmath which gives the
S7.

As for all codimension-2 objects, a single D7-brane should not be
considered on its own. To get a finite energy density, a configuration
of multiple sevenbranes needs to be considered. Introducing the complex
coordinate @xmath on the two-dimensional transverse space, such a
multi-sevenbrane solution in EFT reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (7.84)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

where all the tensor fields still vanish. Instead of specifying a
harmonic function on the transverse space, we now have the holomorphic
functions @xmath and @xmath . Their poles on the @xmath -plane
correspond to the location of the sevenbranes [ 164 , 165 ] . One
usually takes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are polynomials in @xmath and @xmath is the
invariant @xmath -function. The roots of @xmath will give singularities,
which in the IIB section give the locations of the sevenbranes. The
configuration in this case consists of the metric

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

together with the scalar fields encoded by @xmath . Meanwhile in the
M-theory section, one finds a purely metric background,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

This retains the singularities at the roots of @xmath , at which @xmath
.

A crucial point about singularities in F-theory is that they are seen as
an origin for nonabelian gauge symmetries. These arise from branes
wrapping vanishing cycles at the singularities. At this point we will
not examine the details of this for our @xmath EFT but instead we can
point to interesting recent work in DFT. The authors of [ 166 ]
construct the full non-abelian gauge enhanced theory in DFT
corresponding to the bosonic string at the self-dual point. One would
hope that one could apply a simlar construction to produce a gauge
enhanced EFT with non-abelian massless degrees of freedom coming from
wrapped states on vanishing cycles.

### 7.4 Solutions

In this section, we discuss the embedding of supergravity solutions into
the @xmath EFT, in particular showing how one can use the EFT form of a
configuration to relate eleven- and ten-dimensional solutions.

#### 7.4.1 Membranes, Strings and Waves

In higher rank EFT constructions, and double field theory, the
fundamental string and the M2 solutions appear as generalized wave
solutions in the extended space [ 1 ] as presented in Chapters 3 and 5 .
This applies in the case when all worldvolume spatial directions of
these branes lie in the extended space. In this subsection, we will
describe first the form of such solutions in the @xmath EFT, and then
also look at the case where the extended space is transverse to an M2.

##### Waves in extended space

The first family of solutions we are considering can be thought of as a
null wave in EFT. ³¹ ³¹ 31 To properly think of a given solution as
being a wave carrying momentum in a particular direction of the extended
space, one should construct the conserved charges associated to
generalized diffeomorphism invariance, as has been done in the DFT case
[ 132 , 133 , 134 ] . This can be reinterpreted on a solution of the
section condition as branes whose worldvolume spatial directions are
wholly contained in the extended space. We denote the spatial
coordinates of the external space by @xmath , which become the
transverse directions of the supergravity solutions. The harmonic
function that appears is @xmath , @xmath a constant. As the fields only
depend on @xmath the section condition ( 7.1 ) is automatically
satisfied. The external metric and the one-form field for this set of
solutions are

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (7.88)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

Here @xmath is a unit vector in the extended space which – depending on
its orientation – distinguishes between the different solutions in this
family. For @xmath , i.e. a wave propagating along @xmath , the
generalized metric is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.89)
  -- -------- -- --------

Upon a reduction to the M-theory section this corresponds to a membrane
(M2) stretched along @xmath and @xmath . On the IIB section one obtains
a pp-wave propagating along @xmath . In other words, a membrane wrapping
the two internal directions is a wave from a IIB point of view.

Explicitly, one sees that the internal two-metric @xmath of the @xmath
split of M-theory together with its determinant can be extracted from
the above line element with the help of ( 7.42 ) as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.90)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Using the dictionary ( 7.70 ) we obtain the membrane solution

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (7.91)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

A similar procedure on the IIB section using ( 7.60 ) and ( 7.72 ) leads
to the pp-wave. This time the EFT vector @xmath yields the KK-vector in
the @xmath split, and one gets the pp-wave metric

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (7.92)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

If on the other hand the solution ( 7.89 ) is oriented along one of the
@xmath , say @xmath and thus @xmath , the corresponding generalized
metric is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.93)
  -- -------- -- --------

This now corresponds to a fundamental string on the IIB section. The
opposite orientation, i.e. @xmath and swapping @xmath and @xmath in
@xmath , gives the D1-brane. The reduction is performed as explained
above, resulting in the 10-dimensional solutions

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (7.94)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

Here @xmath is the string theory dilaton. The fundamental string comes
with the minus sign in the dilaton and couples to the NSNS-two-form
@xmath . The D-string has the plus sign in the dilaton and couples to
the RR-two-form @xmath .

On the M-theory section the solution ( 7.93 ) corresponds to a pp-wave
propagating along @xmath or @xmath . Thus the @xmath doublet of F1 and
D1 is a wave along the @xmath directions in the extended space. This can
be generalized to give the @xmath -string in the IIB picture by
orienting the wave in a superposition of the two @xmath directions like
@xmath . Then the direction vector is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.95)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the generalized metric for this configuration is

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (7.96)
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

which reduces to the F1 for @xmath and the D1 for @xmath . On the
M-theory section this now corresponds to a wave propagating in a
superposition of the two internal directions.

The solutions ( 7.89 ), ( 7.93 ) and ( 7.96 ) form a family which all
look the same from the external point of view and only differ in the
generalised metric (and the corresponding orientation in the extended
space via @xmath ). The EFT wave solutions therefore nicely combines the
membrane solution of M-theory and the F1, D1 and @xmath -string
solutions of IIB into a single mode propagating in the extended space.

##### M2 and D3

We have now seen an M2-brane wrapping the @xmath space maps to a pp-wave
in the IIB theory. In this case, as we mentioned, the worldvolume
directions were aligned within the extended space and in particular this
meant that we automatically had isometries in these directions.

Now instead consider an M2-brane extending on two of the external
directions plus time, so that its worldvolume extends along @xmath and
@xmath . From the general considerations of the previous section, we
expect this to get mapped to a D3-brane along the @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath directions. Let’s see this explicitly. In these coordinates, the
supergravity solution of the M2-brane is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath                     (7.97)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

The harmonic function is a function of the transverse coordinates @xmath
. We take the @xmath to be compact so that the harmonic function must be
periodic in @xmath and @xmath . With respect to the nine-dimensional
theory, the dependence on the @xmath coordinates gives rise to massive
fields with masses inversely proportional to the volume of the @xmath
space. In the usual “F-theory limit” where this volume is taken to zero,
we can thus ignore the dependence on @xmath and @xmath and smear the
solution over the @xmath space. Using the dictionary ( 7.69 ), we see
that as an EFT solution this would correspond to

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (7.98)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

We find that on the IIB section this corresponds to a D3-brane wrapped
on the four-dimensional spacetime @xmath , as one would expect. In
particular, we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (7.99)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

#### 7.4.2 Fivebranes and Monopoles

Similar to the relation between generalized null waves, strings and
membranes above, the solitonic fivebrane and the M5 solutions can be
seen to appear as generalized monopole solutions in the extended space
(see [ 2 ] and Chapters 3 and 5 above), in the case where the special
isometry direction of the monopole lies in the extended space. We will
first review this case, and then give the other solutions in which one
obtains M5 branes (partially) wrapping the internal space.

##### Monopole in extended space

The first set of solutions we consider takes the form of a monopole
structure (Hopf fibration) in the extended space, so as stated above the
special isometric direction of the monopole is one of the @xmath . The
coordinates on the external space are denoted @xmath . The harmonic
function is @xmath (satisfying the section condition) and the field
configuration of the common sector is

  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath            (7.100)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------

Here @xmath is the magnetic potential obtained by dualizing the six-form
@xmath @xmath (and @xmath with @xmath are the transverse coordinates).
As for the EFT wave, the unit vector @xmath distinguishes between the
solutions in this family by specifying the isometric direction. If the
monopole is oriented along @xmath and therefore @xmath , the generalized
metric is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.101)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This corresponds to a fivebrane (M5) on the M-theory section. Note that
the fivebrane is smeared over two of its transverse directions. Using
the dictionary ( 7.70 ), the internal two-metric extracted from this
generalized metric combines with the external metric to give an
eleven-dimensional solution with the @xmath component of the M-theory
three-form provided by @xmath . This can be dualized to give the
six-form the fivebrane couples to electrically. The full solution reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath            (7.102)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------

If on the other hand ( 7.101 ) is considered on the IIB section, one
obtains the KK-monopole in ten dimensions via ( 7.72 ) where the
KK-vector for the @xmath split is encoded in @xmath . The
ten-dimensional solution is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.103)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The alternative choice for the isometric direction of the EFT monopole
is one of the @xmath , say @xmath and thus @xmath , the corresponding
generalized metric is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.104)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This is the solitonic fivebrane (NS5) in the IIB picture. Note again
that the resulting fivebrane is smeared over one of its transverse
directions which corresponds to the isometric direction of the monopole.
One can also pick the opposite choice for @xmath , i.e. @xmath , which
gives the D5-brane. The reduction procedure should be clear by now, the
ten-dimensional solution is

  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath            (7.105)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------

where the NS5 couples to the NSNS-B-fields and takes the positive sign
in the dilaton while the D5 couples to the RR-C-fields and takes the
negative sign in the dilaton. So the @xmath doublet of NS5 and D5 is a
monopole with its isometric direction along the @xmath in the extended
space. On the M-theory section the solution ( 7.104 ) is a KK-monopole
with its isometric direction along one of the two internal dimensions.

As for the EFT wave, this can be generalized to give the @xmath
-fivebrane of the IIB picture by having the isometric direction in a
superposition of the two @xmath directions like @xmath . Then the @xmath
is given again by ( 7.95 ) and the generalized metric for this
configuration is

  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath            (7.106)
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------

For @xmath this is the NS5 and for @xmath this gives the D5 (both
smeared). On the M-theory section this now corresponds to a KK-monopole
with its isometric direction in a superposition of the two internal
directions.

The EFT monopole combines the fivebrane solution of M-theory and the
NS5, D5 and @xmath -fivebrane solutions of IIB into a single monopole
structure with isometric direction in the extended space.

##### M5 wrapped on internal space

In the above we saw that M5-branes oriented completely along the
external nine directions lead to KK-monopoles in the IIB picture. Let us
now also study M5-branes (partially) wrapping the @xmath space. We
consider the setup in Section 7.3.1 where our external spacetime
consists of a three-dimensional part containing time and with spatial
coordinates @xmath and a six-dimensional part denoted @xmath .

Let us begin with an M5-brane wrapping both @xmath and @xmath , as well
as wrapping a two-cycle @xmath in @xmath (along the two directions
@xmath ) and being extended along @xmath and @xmath . This gives a
D3-brane extended along @xmath , @xmath and wrapping the two-cycle
@xmath , as expected. The twelve-dimensional EFT solution to which this
corresponds is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.107)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with non-trivial gauge field @xmath . On the M-theory section this gives
rise to the solution

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (7.108)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

with three-form @xmath which couples magnetically to the M5. In the IIB
section we find the expected D4-brane

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.109)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with the magnetic four-form @xmath given by @xmath and all other fields
vanishing.

We can also consider an M5-brane which wraps a closed three-cycle @xmath
of @xmath as well as one of the @xmath . In the IIB picture this should
correspond to a NS5-brane or D5-brane, for @xmath or @xmath . Let us
denote the coordinates on @xmath as @xmath for the @xmath and @xmath for
the other three coordinates. The explicit EFT solution is given by

  -- -- -- ---------
           (7.110)
  -- -- -- ---------

and gauge field @xmath where @xmath will be specified shortly. As for
the M2/D3 case, we can in the zero-volume limit take the harmonic
functions to be smeared across the @xmath direction. On the M-theory
section this gives the expected M5-brane

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.111)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The gauge field has only non-zero components @xmath , where @xmath . On
the other hand, on the IIB section we obtain a D5-brane along @xmath ,
@xmath and wrapping @xmath as well as @xmath

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.112)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The six-form gauge field is then the dual to @xmath and we find a
D5-brane. By an @xmath transformations we can also obtain NS5-branes
this way.

### 7.5 Comments

We saw above that the solutions described in Section 7.4.1 in which one
had waves in the extended space (corresponding to F1, D1 and M2 totally
wrapping the internal space) essentially split into two categories,
depending on whether the vector @xmath giving the wave’s direction
pointed in the @xmath or @xmath directions. These different solutions
were not related by duality. ³² ³² 32 However they can be related by a
@xmath transformation on the generalized metric and the extended
coordinates as in [ 167 ] . This transformation maps the common NS-NS
sector of Type IIA / IIB into each other and would thus allow us to map
the generalized metric containing the membrane into the F1-string in
IIB. However, as seen in previous chapters, in higher rank duality
groups one finds that all branes whose worldvolumes are only spatially
extended in the internal space are unified into a single solution of the
EFT [ 3 , 2 ] . Similarly, as one increases the rank of the duality
group considered, various of the M2 and M5 brane solutions will be
unified as more of the worldvolume directions fall into the internal
space. Thus, families of these solutions appear in a unified manner.
With this lesson learned, one may hope that studying F-theory
compactifications in bigger EFTs may allow one to more easily consider
complicated set-ups.

We are aware that the approach of most practitioners in F-theory that
has yielded so much success over a number of years has been through
algebraic geometry. It is doubtful if the presence of this action can
help in those areas where the algebraic geometry has been so powerful.
We do hope though that it may provide some complementary techniques
given that we now have a description in terms of twelve-dimensional
degrees of freedom equipped with an action to determine their dynamics.

One question people have tried to answer is to find the theory on a
D3-brane when @xmath varies. This might be computable in this formalism
using a Goldstone mode-type analysis similar to that in [ 1 ] where a
Goldstone mode analysis was used to determine string and brane effective
actions in DFT and EFT ( cf. Section 3.1.1 ). A useful result from this
formalism would be to show why elliptic Calabi-Yau are good solutions to
the twelve-dimensional theory. This would likely involve the
construction of the supersymmetric version of the @xmath EFT in order to
study the generalised Killing spinor equation. Another interesting area
of investigation would be the Type II / heterotic duality, where we
should then consider EFT on a K3 background and relate this to heterotic
DFT [ 168 , 58 ] .

An interesting consequence of this work is that it shows how F-theory
fits into a general picture of EFT with various @xmath groups. One might
then be inspired to consider far more general backgrounds with higher
dimensional fibres and with monodromies in @xmath and so one would not
just have sevenbranes but more exotic objects (of the type described in
[ 118 ] ). In fact this idea appeared early in the F-theory literature [
159 ] . More recent work in this direction has appeared where one takes
the fibre to be @xmath and then one has a U-duality group act on the
@xmath [ 169 , 170 , 171 ] in a theory sometimes called G-theory.
Further, the dimensional reduction of EFTs has now been examined in some
detail and in particular one can make use of Scherk-Schwarz-type
reductions that yield gauged supergravities [ 55 , 56 , 58 , 172 , 173 ,
174 , 59 , 60 , 175 , 75 , 90 , 176 , 177 ] . This shows that one should
perhaps consider a more general type of reduction than the simple
fibrations described here. This means one could consider
Scherk-Schwarz-type reductions on the F-theory torus. This makes no
sense from the Type IIB perspective but it does from the point of view
of the @xmath EFT.

A further quite radical notion would be the EFT version of a T-fold
where we only have a local choice of section so that the space is not
globally described by Type IIB or M-theory. One could have a monodromy
such that as one goes round a one-cycle in nine dimensions and then
flips between the IIB section and M-theory section. This would exchange
a wrapped membrane in the M-theory section with a momentum mode in the
IIB section just as a T-fold swaps a wrapped string with a momentum
mode. Note, this is not part of the @xmath duality group and thus is not
a U-fold. This is simply because with two isometries one has a @xmath
choice of section that one can then twist.

## Chapter 8 Conclusion

Dualities lie at the heart of string theory. They relate seemingly
different supergravity backgrounds and provide a unifying link to the
various types of string theories. The presence of a duality or hidden
symmetry often highlights a possible extension of the underlying theory.
One is therefore led to find a formalism where the duality can be
elevated to a manifest symmetry of the theory. Double field theory and
exceptional field theory provide such a formalism for T-duality and
U-duality respectively by recasting supergravity in a duality manifest
way.

In this thesis an outline of the basic features and underlying concepts
of DFT and EFT was presented. The core idea is to extend the space by
including dual coordinates which correspond to winding modes of the
fundamental objects of string theory and M-theory. This leads to an
doubled or exceptionally extended geometry which unifies the metric and
the gauge field(s) in a geometric manner. Also their local symmetries
are combined into general diffeomorphisms generated by a generalized Lie
derivative. This provides an elegant reformulation of supergravity with
the dualities turned into manifest symmetries of the action.

The main topic of this thesis was the study of solutions to the
equations of motion of DFT and EFT. It was shown how supergravity
objects related by a duality transformation have a common origin in a
single solution in the extended theory. The simplest example is a null
wave – a pure momentum mode – in the doubled space which gives the
F1-string and pp-wave of string theory depending on its direction of
propagation. Essentially the momentum carried in a dual direction gives
a fundamental object with mass and charge in the reduced picture.
Similarly we have seen how the DFT monopole leads to both the NS5-brane
and the KK-monopole in string theory, i.e. the monopole circle (the
@xmath of the Hopf fibration) in a dual direction gives a solitonic
object with magnetic charge.

These two results can be combined in EFT where a single, self-dual
solution was found which has both wave-like and monopole-like aspects.
Depending on its orientation in the exceptionally extended space of the
@xmath theory, it gives rise to the full spectrum of 1/2 BPS branes in
both ten- and eleven-dimensional supergravity. It is the crucial feature
of a twisted self-duality the @xmath EFT is equipped with which allows
for this neat combination of electric and magnetic components into a
single object ³³ ³³ 33 Note that strictly speaking we are not dealing
with a dyonic solution since the electric and magnetic charges arise
from KK-reductions in different directions (although the directions are
paired by the duality structure).

Besides the EFTs for the symmetry groups @xmath and @xmath , we have
also constructed the theory for @xmath which subsequently was related to
F-theory. It is a twelve-dimensional theory with manifest @xmath
symmetry. The two inequivalent ways of imposing the section condition
reproduce M-theory and F-theory respectively. By a dimensional reduction
to ten dimensions one arrives at Type IIA and Type IIB string theory.
This EFT not only promotes the @xmath S-duality of the Type IIB sector
to a symmetry, it also incorporates the M/F-theory duality via the two
different solutions to the section condition. Furthermore, it provides
an action for F-theory which can be reduced to the appropriate
supergravity action in ten dimensions.

By considering solutions in these extended field theories, it was
established how the presence of isometries in the extended space gives
rise to the dualities from a reduced point of view. Due to the
isometries there is an ambiguity in how to pick the physical spacetime
after imposing the section condition. It is this ambiguity which
manifests itself as a duality between backgrounds arising from possible
choices of section. For example, the isometry of the DFT wave solution
leads to the T-duality relation between the F1-string and the pp-wave.
The same can be said for other T-duality and S-duality relations of
supergravity objects, in fact all the 1/2 BPS branes listed in Table 5
are connected by U-dualities which come from the isometries in the
56-dimensional exceptionally extended space of the @xmath EFT. This idea
can also be extended to the duality between M-theory and F-theory where
now two isometries are required.

The fields of DFT and EFT are rapidly expanding and developing. Progress
is made on a huge variety of fronts such as the study of large gauge
transformations [ 100 , 101 , 102 , 103 , 104 ] and @xmath -corrections
[ 87 , 93 , 178 , 179 , 180 , 181 , 182 , 183 , 184 , 185 , 186 ] . On
the solution side the extended theories provide a natural framework to
deal with non-geometric backgrounds, exotic branes and their fluxes. The
extended spaces virtually render everything geometric, albeit in a
generalized sense.

One idea the author would like to pursue in future concerns the relation
between the various EFTs and to study the difference between symmetry
transformations and solution generating transformations. The former is a
subset of the latter, but this depends on the “size” of the symmetry
group @xmath . For example, the action of T-duality and the @xmath group
is a solution generating transformation in ordinary string theory. Via
the Buscher rules one can relate e.g. the string and the wave. But by
going to DFT this duality transformation is lifted to a symmetry
transformation of the whole theory.

Similarly the relation between the membrane and the wave in the @xmath
EFT ( @xmath ) takes the form of a solution generating transformation
since it is not part of the symmetry group. But we have seen that this
is indeed the case in the @xmath EFT ( @xmath ) where we do have a
symmetry group large enough to include the transformation from wave to
membrane. The @xmath group and its EFT though are not big enough to
include the relation between monopole and fivebrane. To capture this as
a symmetry transformation we have to go to the @xmath EFT ( @xmath )
where all the relations between wave, monopole and the branes are part
of a symmetry transformation. One can think of this transformation as an
@xmath rotation in the exceptionally extended space. But one can also
perform an @xmath transformation which is a group bigger than @xmath (in
fact @xmath ). This is then a solution generating transformation but not
a symmetry transformation. It is speculated that by going to even larger
symmetry groups @xmath with @xmath these transformations might become a
symmetry transformation again.

A big challenge that remains is the relaxing of the physical section
condition. As long as it is imposed in its strong form, the extended
field theories provide very powerful and symmetric reformulations of the
known theories but do not contain any extra physics beyond supergravity.
Only by demanding a weaker version of the constraint can new insights
such as providing a higher dimensional origin for certain gauged
supergravities be obtained. It is therefore a highly desirable goal to
find formulations of DFT and EFT with less stringent constraints in the
hope to discover new physics.

## Appendix A Solutions satisfying EoMs

In this appendix we will proof that the DFT wave and DFT monopole
solutions are indeed solutions of the theory, i.e. satisfy the equations
of motion ( 2.32 ) and ( 2.43 ) derived from the DFT action ( 2.28 ).
Recall the equations of motion were

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we had the scalar @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath            (A.2)
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------

the tensor @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath            (A.3)
                       @xmath   
                                
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------

and the projector

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

### a.1 DFT Wave

We start by checking the wave solution. For the wave we can actually
show that the stronger equation @xmath instead of the projected equation
is satisfied. Both @xmath and @xmath have three kind of terms: those
just containing the generalized metric @xmath , those containing the
dilaton @xmath and those with the generalized vielbein @xmath . The
derivatives in the vielbein terms are always contracted with @xmath and
thus vanish since our solution satisfies the section condition. In our
solution @xmath is constant so all the dilaton terms vanish as well as
they are always acted on by a derivative operator. This leaves us to
check the metric terms. Recall that the harmonic function @xmath is a
funtion of the transverse @xmath only, so the only derivatives acting on
@xmath that give a non-vanishing contribution are the @xmath .

We will split this task into several steps. First consider the term that
is proportional to @xmath . Using the notation of Section 3.1.1 where a
winding coordinate is denoted by @xmath , we can expand the indices to
get

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath            (A.5)
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------

Next consider the term in @xmath proportional to @xmath . It vanishes as
well

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Similarly the terms in @xmath and @xmath where the derivatives are
contracted with the generalized metric (in any combination) vanish since
the only derivative we need to consider is @xmath , but upon contraction
this forces both indices on @xmath to be of @xmath type and @xmath so
its derivative vanishes.

This leaves us with two more terms in @xmath to check

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath            (A.7)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------

The first one vanishes since @xmath is a linear function of @xmath which
is harmonic and thus annihilated by the Laplacian. The second expression
has to be expanded for all possible values @xmath can take. In each case
it vanishes either trivially or the terms sum to zero along the lines of
( A.5 ).

Thus we have shown that all terms in @xmath and @xmath are zero and
therefore the equations of motion is satisfied by our solution.

### a.2 DFT Monopole

Let us now turn to the DFT monopole solution presented in ( 3.37 ).
Again we will prove that it satisfies the equations of motion ( 2.32 )
and ( 2.43 ). The components of the generalized metric and its inverse
(again using the notation @xmath for winding coordinates) can be written
as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.8)
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

and the DFT dilaton is simply

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

The harmonic function @xmath is a function of @xmath only, independent
of @xmath and any dual coordinate. Therefore the only relevant
derivatives will be @xmath . Furthermore, @xmath obeys the section
condition and the Laplace equation. The vector @xmath (whose index can
be freely raised by @xmath ) is a function of @xmath and obeys the same
constraints. In addition its divergence vanishes. The relation between
@xmath and @xmath given in ( 5.21 ) will be used frequently.

Since @xmath and @xmath obey the section condition, the last line in
both @xmath and @xmath can be dropped as it vanishes under section. With
these simplifications in mind, we can proceed to check the equations of
motion.

Start with @xmath . Inserting the components of @xmath , the first line
reduces to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

while the second line gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

and we thus have @xmath .

Next we compute the components of @xmath . By inspection it can be seen
that @xmath and @xmath vanish for any index @xmath . Also @xmath and
@xmath vanish trivially. The non-zero components are

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (A.12)
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

Now expand the projected equations of motion component-wise. For
example, the @xmath component of the equation reads

  -- -- -- --------
           (A.13)
  -- -- -- --------

Inserting the components of @xmath computed above into this expression
yields zero once all terms are summed up properly. The same holds for
all the other components of the equations of motion. They are thus
satisfied by our solution.

It is interesting to note the action of the projector here. Whereas the
general significance of the projector in the equations of motion was
pointed out in [ 1 ] , it turned out that its presence was not strictly
needed to show that the DFT wave was a solution as all the components of
@xmath vanished for it independently as seen in the previous section.

In contrast here for the DFT monopole, not all components of @xmath are
zero and only once the projector acts are the equations of motion
satisfied. This might be due to different properties of the wave and
monopole solution, the former being conformally invariant while the
latter is not.

### a.3 @xmath Wave

For completeness, we also demonstrate how the wave solution of the
@xmath invariant theory presented in ( 5.2 ) is actually a solution to
the relevant equations of motion ( 4.29 ) and @xmath . To do this we
will use the five-dimensional coordinate representation @xmath with
@xmath (the index pair is antisymmetric) given in ( 4.21 ) and split the
coordinates into worldvolume and transverse parts. Note that the
membrane in four dimensions only has one transverse direction. By
introducing @xmath , the coordinates read

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this notation the non-zero components of the generalized metric for
the @xmath wave given in ( 5.2 ) can be written as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.15)
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where the harmonic function @xmath is a function of the transverse
coordinate @xmath only and for convenience these two matrices are
introduced

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.16)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Before we insert the metric into @xmath and @xmath , we note some
simplifications. Since @xmath only depends on @xmath , the only
derivative that yields a non-zero result is @xmath which we will simply
denote by @xmath . Thus, just as in the DFT case, terms like

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

that is terms where a derivative acts on a metric which is contracted
with a derivative, vanish since @xmath .

The volume factor @xmath is a constant for our solution, so all terms
with @xmath also vanish. Furthermore, since @xmath is a harmonic
function, it is annihilated by the Laplacian and therefore

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

since all the components of @xmath are linear functions of @xmath .

With these simplifications in mind, most of the terms in @xmath and
@xmath vanish trivially. We only need to check two terms explicitly,
namely

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

We start with the first expression and expand the indices to get

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (A.20)
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

Similarly we can show that the other expression in ( A.19 ) vanishes

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (A.21)
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

We have thus shown that all the terms in @xmath and @xmath vanish and
the equations of motion are therefore satisfied by our solution.

## Appendix B Relating Solutions in @xmath

In this appendix we fill in the details of how the extended solutions of
the @xmath duality invariant theory can be rewritten by using a
Kaluza-Klein ansatz to obtain solutions in ordinary spacetime.

### b.1 From Wave to Fivebrane

In Section 5.2.1 it is explained how the extended wave solution can be
rotated to carry momentum along a fivebrane wrapping direction. From a
ordinary spacetime point of view, this is then the M5-brane solution of
supergravity. Here this calculation is presented in detail.

After the rotation ( 5.11 ), the wave solution ( 5.10 ) reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath            (B.1)
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------

The KK-reduction ansatz to reduce the extended dimensions is based on
the line element given in ( 4.40 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath            (B.2)
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------

where the scale factors @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are undetermined.
They arise naturally in such a reduction ansatz which attempts to reduce
49 dimensions at once and will be determined by consistency.

By comparing ( B.2 ) to ( B.1 ) term by term, one can step by step work
out the fields of the reduced solution. The term with @xmath gives

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

while the @xmath term gives

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.4)
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Using ( B.3 ), the cross-term @xmath gives an expression for @xmath
which encodes the six-form potential

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Next consider the @xmath term which gives

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.6)
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

and using ( B.3 ) and ( B.5 ) one can extract

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath            (B.7)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------

if the factor @xmath is equal to 1. The penultimate step is to look at
the @xmath term

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

and the @xmath term which gives

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath            (B.9)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------

They can all be combined to determine the two remaining components of
the metric

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (B.10)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

provided that @xmath . Collecting all the above results, we have ³⁴ ³⁴
34 The order of the entries in the diagonal matrices have indices @xmath
for @xmath and @xmath . For @xmath and @xmath the order is @xmath .

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (B.11)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

From the first line the determinant of the spacetime metric can be
computed as @xmath and thus @xmath is finally determined. The three
objects in the other lines, the inverse metric @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath , are all related to the metric. For this to be consistent and
the constraints mentioned above to be satisfied, the factors @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath have to be

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.12)
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath                                       
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

With this the factor in front of @xmath in ( B.5 ) now also vanishes and
the six-form potential can be worked out from ( 4.39 ) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus the result of reducing the full solution ( B.1 ) down to seven
dimensions is

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath                     (B.14)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

where the harmonic function has to be smeared over the reduced
directions. This is precisely the fivebrane solution in seven
dimensions, obtained from reducing ( F.4 ) on @xmath and @xmath (and
smearing @xmath ).

### b.2 From Monopole to Fivebrane

In Section 5.2.2 the extended monopole solution with its KK-circle in a
membrane wrapping direction was shown to give the fivebrane coupled to
its magnetic potential in ordinary spacetime. The details of this
calculation are given here.

The monopole solution ( 5.16 ) is transformed by ( 5.17 ) to have its
KK-circle along @xmath . The extended line element then reads

  -- -------- -- -------- --------
     @xmath               (B.15)
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
                          
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- --------

A suitable KK-ansatz to extract the spacetime metric and three-form
potential is based on ( 4.42 )

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (B.16)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where again the a priori undetermined scale factors @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath have to be included. We now proceed in the usual way, comparing (
B.16 ) to ( B.15 ) term by term to determine all the fields. The scale
factors are then picked to ensure a consistent solution. Start with the
@xmath term

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.17)
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

which can be used in the @xmath term to find an expression for the
three-form potential

  -- -- -- --------
           (B.18)
  -- -- -- --------

Once this is established, it can be used in the @xmath terms

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (B.19)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

together with ( B.17 ) to find

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (B.20)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

provided that @xmath is equal to 1. The remaining components of @xmath
are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.21)
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath                     
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

We continue with the @xmath terms containing the object @xmath . They
are all of the same form (up to a sign), for example

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where ( B.21 ) was used. Looking at all the terms with the relevant sign
and taking the order of the @xmath -type index into account, the general
expression is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

This can in turn be used in the @xmath terms

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (B.24)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

together with ( B.21 ) to find

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (B.25)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

provided that @xmath is equal to 1. The same holds for other values of
the @xmath -type index. The remaining components of @xmath are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.26)
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath                     
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The final cross-term to consider is the @xmath term which together with
( B.26 ) yields another expression for the three-form potential

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

In a last step, the @xmath terms

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (B.28)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

are combined with previous statements to to determine the spacetime
metric

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (B.29)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

provided that @xmath is equal to 1. Collecting all the above results, we
have ³⁵ ³⁵ 35 The order of the entries in the diagonal matrices have
indices @xmath for @xmath and @xmath . For @xmath and @xmath the order
is @xmath .

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (B.30)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

From the first line the determinant of the spacetime metric can be
computed as @xmath and thus @xmath is finally determined. The three
objects in the other lines, the inverse metric @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath , are all related to the metric. For this to be consistent and
the constraints mentioned above to be satisfied, the factors @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath have to be

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.31)
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Having set the scale factors, the prefactors in ( B.18 ), ( B.23 ) and (
B.27 ) vanish and @xmath can be converted into @xmath via ( 4.41 ) which
all boils down to @xmath . Thus the result of reducing the full solution
( B.15 ) down to seven dimensions is

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath                     (B.32)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

where the harmonic function is smeared over the reduced directions. This
is precisely the fivebrane solution in seven dimensions, obtained from
reducing ( F.4 ) on @xmath and @xmath (and smearing @xmath ) with its
magnetic potential.

## Appendix C Embedding the Type II Theories into EFT

In this appendix we show how the Type II theories can be embedded into
EFT. The difference between Type IIA and Type IIB arises from applying
different solutions of the section condition to the EFT equations.

### c.1 The Type IIA Theory

The ten-dimensional Type IIA theory is a simple reduction of
eleven-dimensional supergravity on a circle. It is thus possible to
embed it into EFT as well using the same solution to the section
condition given in Section 4.3.1 . Instead of a @xmath coordinate split
in the KK-decomposition we now have a @xmath split. The dictionary for
embedding the Type IIA fields into EFT can be obtained from the results
of Section 4.3.1 by simply splitting the internal seven-dimensional
sector into @xmath by doing another KK-decomposition.

Under the split @xmath with @xmath and @xmath the coordinate of the
circle, the corresponding generalized coordinates read

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Noting that the internal metric @xmath of our solution is diagonal, no
KK-vector will arise from this decomposition. We thus simply have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the string theory dilaton of the Type IIA theory and the
precise numerical powers have been chosen to be in the Einstein frame.
Inserting this ansatz into the generalized metric for embedding
supergravity into EFT ( 4.57 ) gives

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (C.3)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are defined in terms of @xmath as
before (barred quantities are six-dimensional). As in the
eleven-dimensional case, we are not considering any internal components
of the RR or NSNS gauge potentials. The only non-zero components are the
one-form parts which are in the EFT vector potential @xmath as before.
The vector is also split under the above decomposition resulting in a
component for each of the directions given in ( C.1 )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

All these parts of @xmath encode a component of a field from the Type
IIA theory except @xmath which relates to the dual graviton. The first
one, @xmath is just the KK-vector of the original @xmath decomposition.
The RR-fields @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are encoded in @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath and @xmath respectively where the latter two have to
be dualized on the internal six-dimensional space. The remaining two,
@xmath and @xmath contain the NSNS-fields @xmath and @xmath , where
again the second one has to be dualized. It is nice to see how the
self-duality of the EFT vector contains all the known dualities between
the form fields in the Type IIA theory.

### c.2 The Type IIB Theory

Unlike the Type IIA theory, the Type IIB theory does not follow from the
solution to the section condition that gives eleven-dimensional
supergravity. There is another, inequivalent solution [ 29 ] which is
related to a different decomposition of the fundamental representation
of @xmath . The relevant maximal subgroup is @xmath and we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

which translates to the following splitting of the extended internal
coordinates

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where again @xmath and @xmath is an @xmath index. The middle component
is totally antisymmetric in all three indices. Note that the
six-dimensional index is not the same as in the @xmath Type IIA
decomposition above. Here we rather have a @xmath split where the @xmath
(a single component) is reinterpreted as the sixth component of @xmath .
Loosely speaking this comes from the fact that Type IIB on a circle is
related to M-theory on a torus. This is made precise at the end of this
section.

From [ 29 ] , the generalized metric (again without any contribution
from the internal components of the form fields) for this case is given
by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath (in analogy to @xmath above) and @xmath is the metric on
the torus

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

with the complex torus parameter @xmath (the “axio-dilaton”) given in
terms of the RR-scalar @xmath and the string theory dilaton @xmath . We
will come back to this setup at the end of this section.

The EFT vector is also decomposed and has a component for each direction
in ( C.6 )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

As before, these parts each encode a component of a field from the Type
IIB theory except @xmath which relates to the dual graviton. As always,
@xmath is the KK-vector of the original @xmath decomposition. The
components @xmath and @xmath contain the @xmath doublets @xmath and
@xmath where the latter one needs to be dualized on the internal space.
Here @xmath denotes a NSNS-field and @xmath the dual RR-field. The
component @xmath corresponds to the self-dual four-form @xmath . Again
it can be seen that the self-duality of the EFT vector gives the duality
relations between the form fields in the Type IIB theory.

Let us conclude by checking how the Type IIB theory on a circle is
related to the eleven-dimensional theory on a torus. Since both theories
have the external four-dimensional spacetime in common, we will only
look at the internal sector. The seven dimensions are split into @xmath
such that the coordinates are @xmath where @xmath and @xmath . Starting
from ( 4.54 ), the generalized coordinates then decompose as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

By noting that @xmath has only a single component (by antisymmetry),
@xmath , these coordinates can be repackaged into @xmath and similar for
the dual coordinates to make contact with ( C.6 ). We thus have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

justifying the presence of the six-dimensional index @xmath above. Now
turn to the seven-dimensional metric @xmath . Again omitting a KK-vector
for cross-terms, the ansatz for the decomposition is (a dot denotes a
five-dimensional quantity)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath as given in ( C.8 ). There the torus metric is conformal and
has unit determinant. For completeness, we include a volume factor for
the torus in the discussion here, such that the determinant of the
@xmath sector @xmath is @xmath . This ansatz can be inserted into the
generalized metric for embedding supergravity into EFT ( 4.57 ) to give

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (C.13)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

It is easy to check that the object @xmath has only one component @xmath
which evaluates to @xmath (and similarly for the inverse @xmath ). With
this in mind, the components of the generalized metric can be repackaged
in terms of a six-dimensional metric @xmath and determinant @xmath just
like the coordinates. The five parts of the generalized metric thus read

  -- -- -- --------
           (C.14)
  -- -- -- --------

which is in agreement with ( C.6 ). These identifications here are not
obvious, but can be checked by an explicit calculation of individual
components.

## Appendix D Harmonic Function on @xmath

In this appendix we give the derivation of the harmonic function
localized on @xmath that is presented at the end of Section 6.2 . Since
the precise form of the function is – as far as we know – a novel
result, we want to give some details of how it has been obtained.

Solutions @xmath to the Laplace equation @xmath are called harmonic
functions. In a general space with metric @xmath and arbitrary
coordinates @xmath the Laplacian @xmath (or Laplace-Beltrami operator in
general) is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is its determinant of the metric. The harmonic functions of
supergravity solutions are usually of the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath solves the Laplacian up additive and multiplicative
constants such as @xmath and is a function of the radial coordinate
@xmath only. We will keep working with @xmath without worrying about the
constants.

The fivebrane in eleven dimensions has five transverse directions and is
therefore described by a harmonic function on @xmath of the form @xmath
. The monopole on the other hand only depends on three of those
coordinates, essentially it is given by a harmonic function on @xmath
(which in polars reads @xmath where the @xmath is part of the Hopf
fibration of @xmath ) and takes the form @xmath . Since the self-dual
EFT solution of Section 5.3 is smeared, it is also given in terms of the
harmonic function on @xmath . We now want to extend the coordinate
dependence to the remaining two directions to fully localize the
solution. For consistency these two dimensions have to be compact, their
topology is taken to be that of a torus @xmath where @xmath and @xmath
are the radii of the two circles. Hence we are looking for a solution to
the Laplace operator on the space @xmath .

If the two-torus is treated as a one-dimensional complex manifold, it is
a Riemann surface of genus one. It can be defined as the quotient of the
complex plane @xmath with a lattice @xmath , i.e. @xmath . The lattice
is spanned by two complex periods @xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Instead of the complex periods the information of the shape and size of
a cell in the lattice can be encoded in

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the area of the cell which gives the volume of the
torus. It is important that @xmath so that the two complex periods are
not parallel. Two lattices @xmath and @xmath give rise to the same torus
if @xmath with @xmath . Therefore any lattice with @xmath is equivalent
to a lattice with @xmath since

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

is of the form @xmath . This simplification of the lattice in terms of
@xmath can be seen as the freedom to pick a coordinate system such that
@xmath is aligned with the real axis of the complex plane. To
incorporate the proper periodicity of the lattice, we set the lengths of
the complex periods equal to the radii of the torus. Therefore

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the angle between the two circles. In this setup we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

The complex coordinate @xmath on the torus is doubly periodic which can
be described by @xmath for @xmath . The real circle coordinates @xmath
with @xmath and whose periods of course are @xmath and @xmath
respectively, are related to the complex coordinate via

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

For the real coordinates @xmath on the complex surface, the metric on
the torus can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

which has determinant @xmath . This metric contains all the information
of the shape of the torus via @xmath and its size since the volume is
given by @xmath . In terms of the complex coordinate @xmath the only
non-zero component of the metric is @xmath , i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the determinant is @xmath . This metric for the complex coordinate
can be rescaled by the square root of its determinant which is just a
conformal rescaling to retain a unimodular metric. It then reads @xmath
with @xmath (see [ 187 ] for this form of the torus metric).

With this setup in mind, the Laplace equation on @xmath can be written
as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where for the @xmath part the flat metric in polar coordinates is used
(and @xmath does not depend on the angular coordinates). This is the
equation we want to solve and find the corresponding harmonic function.
We will separate the variables by introducing the functions @xmath and
@xmath . Set @xmath and divide the equation by @xmath to get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Each term is equal to a constant @xmath giving the two separate
equations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

which can be solved. For @xmath and @xmath respectively, the radial
solution is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where as usual @xmath and @xmath are complex constants.

The second equation is the eigenvalue problem for the Laplacian on the
torus. The eigenfunctions and eigenvalues are labeled by two integers
@xmath and depend on the complex modulus @xmath and volume @xmath of the
torus. This then gives the correct double periodicity of the harmonic
function on the torus. It can be checked that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

is satisfied by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (D.16)
     @xmath   @xmath      (D.17)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

This includes the case @xmath by setting @xmath which just gives a
constant term in the solution. There cannot be a linear term in @xmath
or @xmath or actually not even a separated term of the form @xmath for
any functions @xmath since these do not respect the double periodicity.

The @xmath in the radial function @xmath is of course given by the
eigenvalue @xmath of the torus function @xmath . Putting everything back
together and summing over all possible solutions (principle of
superposition), we obtain via @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (D.18)
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are constants of integration. This is the
desired harmonic function on the space @xmath which is doubly periodic
in @xmath and @xmath on the torus ( @xmath and @xmath where @xmath ).

Note that the factor of @xmath here is like the @xmath in the harmonic
function on the circle ( 6.20 ). It is the volume of the space and if we
take it to infinity (but at the same time keeping the shape of the
torus, i.e. @xmath , fixed) the compact space is decompactified.

## Appendix E @xmath EFT Appendices

The field content of exceptional field theories include in addition to
the external metric and generalized metric a sequence of forms
transforming under various representations of @xmath . These constitute
the tensor hierarchy of EFT (similar to that of gauged supergravity [
161 , 34 ] ). As well as being forms with respect to the “external”
directions @xmath , one may think of these fields as providing an
analogue of forms from the point of view of the extended space. In this
appendix we discuss the definitions and properties of these fields.

### e.1 Cartan Calculus

Here we summarize the “Cartan calculus” relevant for the @xmath EFT,
discussed in [ 33 , 79 ] , in order to introduce our conventions. The
form fields that we consider are valued in various representations,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath of @xmath . We list these in Table 7 . The
value @xmath in brackets is the weight under generalized Lie
derivatives.

Given these representations, the key ingredients of the Cartan calculus
are then a nilpotent derivative @xmath and an “outer product” @xmath
which act to map between the various modules listed in Table 7 . As
first discussed in [ 73 ] , the chain complex

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

formed from these modules together with the nilpotent derivative can be
seen as a generalisation of the deRham-complex and thus of differential
forms. The bilinear product @xmath is defined between certain modules
such that it maps as follows:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The nilpotent derivative @xmath and the product @xmath satisfy the
following “magic identity” [ 33 , 79 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

for all @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Here @xmath
denotes the generalized Lie derivative ( 7.13 ). Explicitly, the product
is defined as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath                        (E.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

and is symmetric when acting on two different modules. The nilpotent
derivative is defined as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (E.5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Nilpotency follows from the section condition ( 7.1 ).

Let us finally discuss some properties of the generalized Lie derivative
which will be important in the construction of the tensor hierarchy in
the next section. From now onwards we will often omit the @xmath indices
on elements of the modules. First, note that for any @xmath , @xmath ,
the symmetric part of the Lie derivative is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using the explicit formulas, one can see that this generates a vanishing
generalized Lie derivative, i.e.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

It will also be useful to write the generalized Lie derivative in terms
of its symmetric and antisymmetric parts

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the @xmath -bracket is the antisymmetric part of the generalized
Lie derivative

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Finally, the Jacobiator of the @xmath -bracket is proportional to terms
that generate vanishing generalized Lie derivatives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that the Jacobiator of generalized Lie derivatives does not vanish
but lies in the kernel of the generalized Lie derivative when viewed as
a map from generalized vectors to generalized tensors.

### e.2 Tensor Hierarchy

The EFT is invariant under generalized diffeomorphisms, generated by a
generalized vector field @xmath . From the perspective of the “extended
space” it induces gauge transformations and diffeomorphisms, while from
the nine-dimensional perspective, it induces non-abelian gauge
transformations of the scalar sector. Correspondingly, one introduces a
gauge field @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the nine-dimensional covariant derivative. The naive
form of the field strength would resemble the Yang-Mills field strength

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

which involves the @xmath -bracket in order to be a two-form. However,
this fails to be gauge invariant

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

using ( E.8 ). In order to define a gauge-invariant field strength we
are led to modify the usual Yang-Mills definition as follows

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a two-form. The modified field strength is now
gauge-invariant if we define the variation of @xmath to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

The definition of both the naive field strength @xmath and the covariant
field strength @xmath is compatible with the commutator of covariant
derivatives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

since their difference is of the form ( E.6 ) and thus generates
vanishing generalized Lie derivative. Mirroring the tensor hierarchy of
gauged supergravities [ 161 , 34 ] , one can introduce a gauge
transformation and field strength for @xmath , which in turn requires a
new three-form potential. This way one obtains a hierarchy of @xmath
-form fields up to a five-form gauge potential and its six-form field
strength. The six-form potential does not appear in the action and so we
do not define its field strength. Here we give this construction
explicitly for the @xmath EFT for the first time. In the following, the
expressions for the five-form potential and six-form field strengths are
new while the lower form potentials are also given in [ 33 ] . Let us
begin with the definition of the field strengths

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath               
              @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (E.18)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Their variations are given by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (E.19)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where have we defined the “covariant” gauge field variations as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
                          
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (E.20)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

It is now easy to check that the field strengths ( E.18 ) are invariant
under the following gauge transformations

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath               
              @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (E.21)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Finally, the field strengths ( E.18 ) satisfy the following Bianchi
identities, as can be seen from their definitions.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

While the first three equations have appeared before, the final identity
is new.

### e.3 Topological Term

Maximal supergravity theories contain a topological term, which is
mirrored in the corresponding EFT. Armed with the Cartan calculus and
the tensor hierarchy we can now construct a topological term for the
action. It is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have abused the notation to also denote the ten-dimensional
indices by @xmath , and @xmath is the ten-dimensional alternating
symbol. This term is a manifestly gauge-invariant boundary term in ten
dimensions and has weight one under generalized diffeomorphisms, as
required. Instead of explicitly showing that it is a boundary term
itself, we will just show that its variation is a boundary term. Using
the variations of the field strengths ( E.19 ) and the Bianchi
identities ( E.22 ), one finds

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Throughout we assume that the “extended space” parametrized by the
@xmath ’s does not have a boundary. One can easily check using ( E.20 )
that the term is invariant under gauge transformations. One can now use
( E.24 ) to fix the overall coefficient relative to the other terms in
the action by requiring invariance under external diffeomorphisms [ 4 ]
.

## Appendix F Glossary of Supergravity Solutions

The purpose of this appendix is not only to collect all the fundamental,
solitonic and Dirichlet solutions of ten- and eleven-dimensional
supergravities as they can be found in any standard text book (for us
Ortin’s book [ 125 ] was an invaluable source), but also to present them
with their fields rearranged according to a @xmath Kaluza-Klein
coordinate split relevant for the EFT solutions in Chapter 5 since it is
the decomposed fields that are extracted from the EFT solutions in the
main text. It also highlights some interesting similarities between
these solutions, such as that they all have the same four-dimensional
external spacetime under the decomposition.

### f.1 Classic Supergravity Solutions

In eleven-dimensional supergravity there are four classic solutions: the
wave, the membrane, the fivebrane and the monopole. They are all related
by T- and S-duality and upon reduction on a circle they give rise to the
spectrum of string theory solutions in ten dimensions.

Here we will briefly present these four solutions in terms of the
bosonic fields @xmath and @xmath which in turn are given terms of an
harmonic function @xmath . To begin with we will give them in a
standardized coordinate system where the time direction is denoted by
@xmath , the spatial worldvolme directions are @xmath and the transverse
directions are @xmath . If there is a “special” coordinate to be singled
out such as the direction of propagation of the wave or the isometry of
the monopole, it will be labeled as @xmath . Later we will break these
coordinates down for the various KK-splits needed for the EFT solutions.

Let’s start with the “pure gravity” solutions, the pp-wave and the
KK-monopole. They do not come with a gauge potential and are given just
in terms of the metric. The pp-wave consists of parallel rays carrying
momentum in the @xmath direction with transverse plane wavefronts
spanned by @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath            (F.1)
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------

where @xmath is some constant proportional to the momentum carried.

The KK-monopole solution has a non-trivial topology which is given by
the Hopf fibration of @xmath (in a local patch this becomes @xmath ).
Whereas the momentum of the wave solution can be seen as gravito-static
charge, the monopole carries topological or gravito-magnetic charge
which is given by the first Chern class, hence the name “monopole”. This
solution is expressed in terms of a vector potential @xmath whose curl
is the gradient of the harmonic function. The @xmath is an isometry of
the solution and we will refer to it as the “monopole circle” or
“KK-circle”. It is labeled by the coordinate @xmath . The three
transverse coordinates @xmath are supplemented by six worldvolume
coordinates @xmath to form a KK-brane. The full monopole solution is
thus given by

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (F.2)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Again @xmath is a constant, here it is proportional to the magnetic
charge.

Now turn to the extended solutions, the M2-brane and the M5-brane. These
branes naturally couple to the @xmath and @xmath gauge potentials
respectively. This can be seen as the natural electric coupling. The
harmonic function @xmath in each case is a function of the transverse
directions. The membrane solution is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath            (F.3)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------

and the fivebrane solution reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath            (F.4)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------

In both cases both the electric and magnetic potentials are shown. The
latter ones can be found by dualizing the corresponding field strengths.
The field strength of the electric potential is proportional to @xmath
which is dualized into @xmath where we use the expression in ( F.2 ) to
relate @xmath and @xmath . Therefore the vector potential @xmath appears
in the components of the magnetic potentials ( @xmath as before).

The four solutions recapped above are all related to each other by
M-theory dualities. The wave and the membrane are T-dual to each other,
in the same way the wave and the fundamental string are related by
T-duality in string theory. Similarly the monopole and the fivebrane are
T-duals, again as for the monopole and NS5-brane in string theory ( cf.
Chapter 3 ). Furthermore, the membrane and fivebrane are related by
S-duality, they are electromagnetic duals of each other. To complete the
picture, there is a S-duality relation between the wave and the
monopole. This can only be made manifest in the full non-truncated
exceptional field theory.

In Section 5.2 solutions to the truncated @xmath EFT are constructed. If
the classic solutions are carried over from eleven-dimensional
supergravity to EFT, the underlying spacetime has to be reduced from
eleven to seven dimensions in order to build the 56-dimensional extended
space. There are various ways of picking the seven and four out of the
eleven. The notation used in that particular section is as follows. For
all four solutions mentioned above, we now have the time coordinate
@xmath and the “special” coordinate @xmath . There are three transverse
coordinates @xmath and the remaining six coordinates @xmath are partly
worldvolume, partly transverse, depending on the solution. In Table 8
the character of each of the eleven dimensions for each of the four
solutions is illustrated.

Note that in order to keep the notation simple the following conventions
are used. If the directions @xmath and @xmath are reduced, we retain
@xmath with @xmath for the first two @xmath ’s or alternatively label
them as @xmath and @xmath . Similarly @xmath is used where necessary.
The order of these coordinates is important for the extended coordinates
with an antisymmetric pair of indices since for example @xmath . It is
fixed by defining the permutation symbol @xmath . This order is kept
also after reductions when some of the coordinates drop out.

### f.2 Kaluza-Klein Decomposition of Solutions

Now we turn to the KK-decomposition of the supergravity solution which
is relevant for the self-dual EFT solution of Section 5.3 . Let us
briefly outline what exactly we mean by Kaluza-Klein decomposition.

The coordinates @xmath are either split into @xmath or @xmath and the
corresponding KK-decomposition takes the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (F.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where hatted quantities are ten- or eleven-dimensional and the internal
sector is six- or seven-dimensional. The off-diagonal or cross-term
@xmath is called the KK-vector and will mostly be zero except for the
wave and the monopole. The four-dimensional external metric @xmath has
to be rescaled by the determinant of the internal metric @xmath to
remain in the Einstein frame. This is crucial for comparing solutions
and takes the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (F.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The power of the determinant in the rescaling depends on the number of
external dimensions and is @xmath in our case.

The eleven-dimensional supergravity solutions are specified in terms of
the metric @xmath and the three-form and the six-form potentials @xmath
and @xmath which are duals of each other. In the NSNS-sector, the fields
of the ten-dimensional Type II solutions are the metric @xmath , the
string theory dilaton ³⁶ ³⁶ 36 The constant part of the dilaton is
denoted by @xmath where @xmath is a constant which can be set to zero if
convenient. @xmath and the two-form and six-form Kalb-Ramond potentials
@xmath and @xmath which again are duals. In the RR-sector we have the
@xmath potentials with @xmath in this thesis. The odd ones belong to the
Type IIA theory and the even ones to the Type IIB theory.

From an EFT point of view, the external metric is simply the rescaled
@xmath . The form fields and the KK-vector @xmath constitute the
components of the EFT vector @xmath . The generalized metric @xmath is
constructed from the internal metric @xmath according to ( 4.57 ). The
dilaton @xmath in Type IIA or the axio-dilaton @xmath in Type IIB also
enter the generalized metric as in ( C.3 ) and ( 7.60 ) respectively.

Each solution is presented with its full field content in terms of the
harmonic function @xmath which has a functional dependence on the
transverse directions of each solution. Then we perform the explained
KK-decomposition by picking time and three of the transverse directions
to be in the four-dimensional external sector and the world volume
directions together with the remaining transverse ones to be in the six-
or seven-dimensional internal sector. As part of the decomposition the
solution is smeared over those transverse directions in the internal
sector so that it is only localized in the three transverse directions
in the external sector, i.e. @xmath with @xmath and the @xmath ’s denote
these three directions.

A final note on the notation: @xmath is the time coordinate, @xmath is
the “special” direction of the wave and the monopole, @xmath denotes the
@xmath world volume directions of a p-brane and @xmath the remaining
@xmath transverse directions, the first three of which are usually taken
to be in the external sector as explained above, i.e. @xmath for @xmath
.

All the ten- and eleven-dimensional solutions listed in the following
originate from the single self-dual solution of Section 5.3 and are
listed in Table 5 .

#### f.2.1 Wave, Membrane, Fivebrane and Monopole in @xmath

##### The Wave - WM

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath            (F.7)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------

KK-decomposition: @xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (F.8)
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

##### The Membrane - M2

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath            (F.9)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------

KK-decomposition: @xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.10)
              @xmath   @xmath               
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

##### The Fivebrane - M5

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (F.11)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

KK-decomposition: @xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.12)
              @xmath   @xmath               
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

##### The Monopole - KK7

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (F.13)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

KK-decomposition: @xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (F.14)
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

##### The M2/M5 Bound State

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (F.15)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

KK-decomposition: @xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.16)
              @xmath   @xmath               
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

#### f.2.2 Wave, String, Fivebrane and Monopole in @xmath

##### The Wave - WA/B

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (F.17)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

KK-decomposition: @xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (F.18)
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

##### The Fundamental String - F1

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (F.19)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

KK-decomposition: @xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.20)
              @xmath   @xmath               
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

##### The Solitonic Fivebrane - NS5

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (F.21)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

KK-decomposition: @xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.22)
              @xmath   @xmath               
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

##### The Monopole - KK6A/B

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (F.23)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

KK-decomposition: @xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (F.24)
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

#### f.2.3 D-Branes in @xmath

##### The Dp-Brane for @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (F.25)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

KK-decomposition: @xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (F.26)
              @xmath   @xmath               
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Note: In Type IIB the D1-brane forms an S-duality doublet with the
F1-string. This means they are identical solutions up to an @xmath
transformation and their dilatons are inverses of each other. The same
applies for the D5-brane and the NS5-brane.