This thesis explores two avenues into understanding the physics of black
holes and horizons beyond general relativity, via analogue models and
Lorentz violating theories. Analogue spacetimes have wildly different
dynamics to general relativity; this means time-independent black hole
solutions have fewer symmetries, allowing the possibility of non-Killing
horizons in stationary solutions. Surface gravity is one of the most
important quantities characterizing black holes, with many physically
distinct definitions. In the case of non-Killing horizons these
different definitions of surface gravity are truly different quantities.
This also has application to modified theories of gravity, where there
is no reason to expect all horizons to be Killing horizons. In Lorentz
violating theories, the situation becomes even stranger, as Killing
horizons are at best low energy barriers, but for superluminal
dispersion relations a true causal barrier, the universal horizon, may
be present. Universal horizons are extremely interesting as they seem to
be linked to the thermodynamic consistency of Lorentz-violating
theories. Hence, we investigate the nature of these universal horizons
via a ray tracing study, and delve into what happens near both the
universal and Killing horizons. From this study we determine the surface
gravity of universal horizons by the peeling properties of rays near the
horizon. As the surface gravity is strongly linked to the properties of
Hawking radiation, we investigate whether, and at what temperature these
horizons radiate. Finally, we combine our investigations of universal
horizons and analogue spacetimes, and ask why we have not seen a
universal horizon in studies of analogue gravity. We examine some
possibilities to include an æther distinct from the velocity flow
characterizing analogue spacetimes, laying the groundwork for an
analogue universal horizon.

\subject

Astroparticle Physics

\phd
