## 0.1 Abstract

This thesis constitutes a first attempt to derive aspects of standard
model particle physics from little more than an algebra. Here, we argue
that physical concepts such as particles, causality, and irreversible
time may result from the algebra acting on itself.

We then focus on a special case by considering the algebra @xmath , the
tensor product of the only four normed division algebras over the real
numbers. Using nothing more than @xmath acting on itself, we set out to
find standard model particle representations: a task which occupies the
remainder of this text.

From the @xmath portion of the algebra, we find generalized ideals, and
show that they describe concisely all of the Lorentz representations of
the standard model.

From just the @xmath portion of the algebra, we find minimal left
ideals, and show that they mirror the behaviour of a generation of
quarks and leptons under @xmath and @xmath . These unbroken symmetries,
@xmath and @xmath , appear uniquely in this model as particular
symmetries of the algebra’s ladder operators. Electric charge, here, is
seen to be simply a number operator for the system.

We then combine the @xmath and @xmath portions of @xmath , and focus on
a leptonic subspace, so as to demonstrate a rudimentary electroweak
model. Here, the underlying ladder operators are found to have a
symmetry generated uniquely by @xmath and @xmath . Furthermore, we find
that this model yields a straightforward explanation as to why @xmath
acts only on left-handed states.

We then make progress towards a three-generation model. The action of
@xmath on itself can be seen to generate a 64-complex-dimensional
algebra, wherein we are able to identify two sets of generators for
@xmath . We apply these generators to the rest of the space, and find
that it breaks down into the @xmath representations of exactly three
generations of quarks and leptons. Furthermore, we show that these
three-generation results can be extended, so as to include all 48
fermionic @xmath charges.

### 0.2 Acknowledgements

This research was supported by NSERC, the University of Waterloo, the
Templeton Foundation, and by the Perimeter Institute for Theoretical
Physics. Research at Perimeter Institute is supported by the Government
of Canada through Industry Canada and by the Province of Ontario through
the Ministry of Research and Innovation.

A special thanks to my committee members: L. Boyle, F. Cachazo, F.
Girelli, A. Kempf, R. Mann, and P. Ramond. I am especially grateful to
L. Boyle, A. Kempf, and R. Mann for giving me a hand when I needed one,
and feel very fortunate to have had A. Kempf as a supervisor during
these final stages of my degree. He has been an outstanding mentor.

My time in Waterloo has been both wonderful and trying, and I will be
forever indebted to those who were there with me through the days that
were difficult. Alex, Carey, Calida, Deb, Steve, Luke, Sheri, Hilary,
Gaetano, George, Vito, Steph, Josh, and of course, Mike, Dianna, Shona,
and Kelly: please know how much I value your friendship.

And I want to know the same thing. We all want to know, how’s it going
to end?

- Brennan and Waits

###### Table of Contents

-    0.1 Abstract
-    0.2 Acknowledgements
-    1 Introduction
    -    1.1 Towards conceptual parsimony
    -    1.2 Outline
-    2 What lies in an algebra?
    -    2.1 Causality
    -    2.2 Irreversible time
    -    2.3 Particles
    -    2.4 Summary and outlook
-    3 Complex quaternions
    -    3.1 Preamble
    -    3.2 Introduction to @xmath
    -    3.3 Conjugation
    -    3.4 Generalized ideals
    -    3.5 Complex invariant-action, @xmath
        -    3.5.1 Preliminaries
        -    3.5.2 Weyl and Dirac spinors as generalized ideals
        -    3.5.3 A seamless new way to conjugate Weyl spinors
        -    3.5.4 Majorana spinors as generalized ideals
    -    3.6 Hermitian invariant-action, @xmath
    -    3.7 Quaternionic invariant-action, @xmath
    -    3.8 Bilinears
    -    3.9 Summary
    -    3.10 Outlook
-    4 Clifford algebras
    -    4.1 Motivation
    -    4.2 Definition
    -    4.3 Examples of Clifford algebras from @xmath
    -    4.4 Minimal left ideals
    -    4.5 How to identify minimal left ideals
        -    4.5.1 Some definitions
        -    4.5.2 Procedure
    -    4.6 Minimal left ideals in @xmath
        -    4.6.1 Fock space structure
    -    4.7 The Dirac algebra
    -    4.8 Right action required
    -    4.9 Parity and the field strength tensor
-    5 Standard model of particle physics
    -    5.1 What it is
    -    5.2 What it is not
    -    5.3 What it should be
-    6 One generation of quarks and leptons from @xmath
    -    6.1 A summary of the results to come
    -    6.2 Introduction to @xmath
    -    6.3 Octonionic chain algebra
    -    6.4 A system of ladder operators
    -    6.5 Complex conjugation’s analogue
    -    6.6 Minimal left ideals
    -    6.7 MTIS symmetries: @xmath and @xmath
    -    6.8 Ladders to @xmath and @xmath
    -    6.9 Towards the weak force
    -    6.10 Summary
-    7 Why does @xmath act on only left-handed fermions?
    -    7.1 A spotlight on right multiplication
    -    7.2 Leptonic subspace of @xmath
    -    7.3 MTIS symmetries: @xmath and @xmath
    -    7.4 Summary and outlook
-    8 Group representation structure of some grand unified theories
    -    8.1 @xmath unification
        -    8.1.1 Introduction
        -    8.1.2 @xmath inside @xmath
        -    8.1.3 Some notes on symmetry breaking
    -    8.2 A fermionic binary code
    -    8.3 @xmath unification
    -    8.4 Pati-Salam model
-    9 Towards a three-generation model
    -    9.1 Introduction
    -    9.2 Generators of @xmath
    -    9.3 Three generations under @xmath
    -    9.4 A sample calculation
    -    9.5 Summary for @xmath
    -    9.6 Three generations under @xmath and @xmath
    -    9.7 Outlook: From one generation to three
-    10 Conclusion

## Chapter 1 Introduction

### 1.1 Towards conceptual parsimony

The safest conceivable theory is one which implements the fewest initial
assumptions possible. That is, any model based on elaborate input will
by definition specify more detail than would a simple one, and hence
will be more likely to be in conflict with reality.

Our current theories of fundamental physics are often described in terms
of an assortment of objects such as manifolds, metric tensor fields,
matter fields, gauge fields, Fock spaces, etc. One might wonder if it
could be possible to choose our starting point more conservatively.

This thesis may be thought of as an experiment of sorts. It is a first
attempt to see just how close one can get to standard model predictions,
while using as little theoretical input as possible. The original
proposal of this idea was put forward in a Part III research essay for a
Master’s degree in 2006, [ 33 ] , [ 32 ] . Certainly, this project can
be seen to be far from complete. However, it does demonstrate how
certain carefully-chosen, low-dimensional, mathematical objects can
parallel a considerable amount of the standard model’s structure.

Over the next 85 pages, we will work towards developing a model which is
based on the same principles of unification and simplification, which
have driven much of theoretical physics since the 1970s. All objects in
our model will be pieced together from the same algebra, although, we
will not unify the gauge groups of the standard model in the same sense
as do grand unified theories. We will find that both fermions and bosons
should arise together from the same algebra. Having said that, we will
not implement supersymmetry at this stage. Although the road to
unification has been an arduous one, we maintain that it is an idea
worthy of staying the course.

### 1.2 Outline

In Chapter 2 of this thesis, we give a brief sketch of our experiment,
which motivates the algebraic model being proposed. In Chapter 3 , we
introduce the algebra of the complex quaternions, @xmath , and with
them, demonstrate all of the Lorentz representations necessary to
describe the standard model. Then, in Chapter 4 , we review some basic
characteristics of Clifford algebras, while in Chapter 5 , we review
some basic characteristics of the standard model. In Chapter 6 we
introduce the complex octonions, @xmath , and show how they can provide
a direct route to the unbroken internal symmetries, generated by @xmath
and @xmath , for one generation of quarks and leptons. These symmetries
appear as unitary MTIS symmetries, which are first introduced in this
chapter. In Chapter 7 , we then combine the @xmath and @xmath results to
show a rudimentary leptonic model. The unitary MTIS symmetries, found
here, happen to be none other than @xmath and @xmath on these states.
Furthermore, we find that this model can offer an explanation as to why
@xmath acts on states of only one chirality (left). In Chapter 8 , we
review some of the algebraic structure of @xmath and @xmath grand
unified theories, as well as the Pati-Salam model. Finally, in Chapter 9
, we go on to demonstrate how the @xmath and @xmath representations for
exactly three generations of standard model fermions can be found, using
(paradoxically) nothing more than the eight-complex dimensional algebra,
@xmath .

## Chapter 2 What lies in an algebra?

In this first chapter, we introduce an attempt to describe established
results in particle physics, while working from the fewest initial
assumptions possible. Our only input will be an algebra, @xmath .

The ideas outlined here originate from a Cambridge Part III research
essay, [ 33 ] , [ 32 ] and have provided the underlying intuition for
three papers published during these PhD years, [ 36 ] , [ 35 ] , and [
34 ] . With this being said, the results from those three publications
may be considered independently from the ideas sketched here in this
chapter, which are still at an early stage of development.

Much of the material in this chapter was submitted in 2014 to FQXi’s
annual call for essays in fundamental physics, [ 30 ] .

### 2.1 Causality

Suppose for a moment that nature were represented by an algebra, @xmath
. We will start, then, simply with an unevaluated algebraic expression.
Consider for example

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath are elements
of @xmath . Taking multiplication to be the propagation along an edge,
and addition to be the joining of two edges at a vertex, it can be seen
that this unevaluated algebraic expression gives a causal set. Please
see Figure ( 2.1 ).

A causal set is a set @xmath together with the relation, @xmath , such
that

1. if @xmath and @xmath , then @xmath @xmath (transitive),

2. if @xmath and @xmath , then @xmath @xmath (non-circular),

3. for any given @xmath the set of elements @xmath is finite @xmath
(locally finite).

In Figure ( 2.1 ), @xmath is given by the set of vertices, and the
relations @xmath are indicated by the arrows between those vertices.

It is at this early stage only a conjecture that any (associative)
algebraic expression gives a causal set. For an introduction to causal
sets, please see [ 28 ] , [ 10 ] and [ 55 ] .

So it seems to be possible that causality, of all things, could already
appear at the level of an algebra.

Now, we would like to propose an unorthodox interpretation for these
causal sets. That is, a causal set is not meant to represent discrete
space-time, but is instead meant to represent particle worldlines. In
other words, matter exhibits its own causal structure, and there is no
such thing as a space-time point. This picture has particles with no
underlying space-time whatsoever, neither continuous, nor discrete.

The question we are then asking here is whether or not space-time can be
seen to be as surprisingly unnecessary as was the luminiferous aether
from one hundred years ago. Can particles exist independently, without
the crutch of a fundamental space-time to support them?

Similar in spirit is an earlier spaceless graph model, proposed by Kribs
and Markopoulou in [ 47 ] , where particles emerge at low energies as
noiseless subsystems of quantum information processing structures. These
models differ from the popular causal set models of Dowker, Sorkin, and
Surya, whose vertices represent space-time points. In Dowker, Sorkin,
and Surya’s models, the vertices specify a position and a time. In the
model presented in this thesis, however, the vertices instead specify
the internal degrees of freedom of particles, such as spin, colour and
electric charge, etc.

Over the past ten years, a number of authors have come forward with a
variety models, which each call into question the necessity of a
fundamental space-time. In 2005, Piazza did so by proposing to replace
localized regions of space with quantum subsystems in [ 59 ] , [ 58 ] ,
an idea which was later developed in 2007 by Piazza and Costa, [ 60 ] .
In 2010, Van Raamsdonk, [ 61 ] , proposed building up space-time with
quantum entanglement using gauge theory/gravity duality. More recently
in 2014, Wieland proposed a model of simplicial gravity, constructed
from spinors, [ 67 ] . In the same year, W. Edwards described
non-embeddable relational configurations, [ 29 ] . Also related to these
concepts are works by Kempf in 2013, [ 45 ] , and Saravani, Aslanbeigi,
and Kempf in 2015, [ 52 ] , which discuss how space-time curvature can
be encoded in the vacuum entanglement structure of fields.

In 2013, Cortês and Smolin published work on Energetic Causal Sets, [ 24
] , [ 25 ] , which describes a spaceless causal set, constructed out of
particles at the fundamental level. This basic concept overlaps
significantly with [ 32 ] : ideas of L. Smolin’s PhD student at the time
(the present author). The notes, [ 32 ] , were written up for L. Smolin
in 2011 upon his request, and subsequently emailed to him. (He later
innocently forgot about the notes when [ 24 ] and [ 25 ] were published
two years later.) We also point out the relevant earlier work of [ 47 ]
, who proposed a spaceless causal set of quantum information processing
systems, with particles emerging in the low energy limit.

### 2.2 Irreversible time

Recently, it has been emphasized in the fundamental physics community, [
30 ] , that theories like general relativity do a poor job of
encapsulating our experience of events unfolding. For example, there is
nothing in the theory to explain why events happen, but do not
‘unhappen’.

It seems, however, that an algebra might well provide such a notion of
irreversible time. In the case of an algebra, an event is a calculation.
Taking our algebra @xmath , for example, an event is the evaluation of
6+3 to give 9, or the evaluation of 5 @xmath 2 to give 10.

Addition and multiplication are examples of uninvertible binary
operations. Therefore, an event can be seen to be irreversible, it
cannot ‘unhappen’. For example, if we are given only the output of 9, it
is impossible to tell if 9 came from the inputs of 6+3, or 8+1, or 4+5,
etc.

Time, then, is simply a sequence of calculations, and is clearly
irreversible. The related notion of ‘now’ can be seen to be an entirely
local concept within the causal set.

### 2.3 Particles

Some carefully chosen algebras, such as the complex Clifford algebra,
@xmath , naturally contain subspaces called ideals. Intuitively
speaking, an ideal is a special subspace of an algebra because it can
survive multiplication by any element in @xmath .

Ideals persisting under multiplication bear a striking resemblance to
particles persisting under propagation. The proposal, then, is that
particles could be singled out in the algebra, thanks to a mathematical
incarnation of Darwin’s natural selection.

Ideals @xmath particles.

Given an algebra, @xmath , a left ideal, @xmath , is a subalgebra of
@xmath whereby @xmath is in @xmath for all @xmath in @xmath , and for
any @xmath in @xmath . That is, no matter which @xmath we multiply onto
@xmath , the new product, @xmath , must be in the subspace @xmath (i.e.
the ideal @xmath survives). It is easy to see how @xmath could easily
describe, for example, a particle @xmath undergoing propagation along
@xmath .

These concepts have a strong connection to well-known physics. In this
text, we will first introduce the notion of generalized ideals. Taking
@xmath to be the complex quaternions, @xmath , we will then see how
generalized ideals lead to left- and right-handed Weyl spinors, [ 34 ] .
In an analogous construction, starting from the complex octonions,
@xmath , generalized ideals will be seen to lead to a set of states
behaving like a full generation of quarks and leptons, [ 36 ] .

Ultimately, we intend to merge @xmath and @xmath together, via a tensor
product over @xmath , resulting in the algebra @xmath . Loosely
speaking, we will associate @xmath with Lorentzian degrees of freedom:
spin and chirality, while the octonionic part of the algebra will give
rise to the other internal degrees of freedom, such as colour, weak
isospin, and charge.

@xmath @xmath Lorentz @xmath @xmath Other internal: colour, charge, etc.

The Dixon algebra, @xmath , is the tensor product of the only four
normed division algebras over the real numbers: the real numbers, @xmath
, the complex numbers, @xmath , the quaternions, @xmath , and the
octonions, @xmath . Its connection to particle physics was studied
indirectly by Casalbuoni et al., [ 8 ] , [ 13 ] , [ 14 ] , and later
much more extensively by Dixon, [ 26 ] . Our goal of identifying
standard model structure from @xmath aligns with that of these earlier
authors, however, our implementation of this algebra differs
significantly, particularly with respect to chirality and weak isospin,
and in our treatment of antiparticles.

### 2.4 Summary and outlook

We come from sketching a model, whose only fundamental input is an
algebra, @xmath . From the algebraic expressions of @xmath , we argue
that multiple physical concepts can materialize. Such resulting physical
concepts may include causality, particles, and irreversible time.
Notably, particles may be seen to arise as the algebra’s most stable
subspaces.

The algebra, @xmath , will be taken to be @xmath for reasons that will
become clear throughout this thesis. In the future, however, it would be
worth investigating whether or not even @xmath could be simplified.
Explicitly, @xmath could be replaced with another mathematical object,
which approximates it in some limit, but which lacks any occurrence of
uncountable infinities, which are inherent to the real number system.

With this rough draft of a model, we would like to now develop the idea.
But where to begin? Perhaps the most straightforward way to see if the
algebra @xmath could stand a chance of eventually producing standard
model scattering amplitudes, is to see if it can first produce standard
model group representations. This task will occupy the rest of the
thesis.

## Chapter 3 Complex quaternions

### 3.1 Preamble

A significant challenge within causal set programs has been to explain
the existence of 3+1 dimensions. That is, any causal set chosen at
random is highly unlikely to have this particular dimension of our
choosing.

It is for this reason that we propose here causal sets originating from
an algebra, @xmath . The idea then is that a careful choice of algebra
will impart on the causal set the desired 3+1 Lorentzian structure. In
this section, we will consider @xmath the complex quaternions. Between
the left and right action of @xmath on itself, we will now introduce an
unusually compact way of describing all of the (3+1) Lorentz
representations of the standard model of particle physics.

### 3.2 Introduction to @xmath

Any element of the complex quaternions can be described as the complex
linear combination,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the @xmath . The element @xmath is the usual complex imaginary
unit, with @xmath , that commutes with all of the elements in the
algebra. The quaternionic imaginary units, @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath
follow the multiplication rules

  -- -- -- -------
           (3.2)
  -- -- -- -------

which lead to the identities @xmath The complex quaternions form an
associative algebra, meaning that @xmath @xmath @xmath , @xmath @xmath
@xmath . (Note that all tensor products will be assumed to be over
@xmath in this text, unless otherwise stated.)

From their behaviour under multiplication, one may associate @xmath with
the more familiar Pauli matrix @xmath , @xmath with @xmath , and @xmath
with @xmath . Note, however, that the set @xmath transforms more
symmetrically under complex conjugation than does @xmath ,

  -- -- -- -------
           (3.3)
  -- -- -- -------

Elements of the form @xmath for @xmath can easily be seen to give a
representation of the Lie algebra @xmath , using the usual commutator,
@xmath .

Later in Section 3.5 , we will find that @xmath represents an element of
@xmath , which acts on left-handed Weyl spinors. These Weyl spinors also
reside in @xmath , and in fact, all of the results obtained throughout
this thesis will follow simply from having an algebra @xmath act on
itself.

### 3.3 Conjugation

In this text, the complex conjugate of an element @xmath will be denoted
@xmath . The conjugate @xmath maps the complex @xmath , in the usual
way.

The quaternion conjugate of @xmath will be denoted @xmath , and @xmath
maps the quaternionic @xmath @xmath and @xmath .

That which we call the hermitian conjugate of @xmath will be denoted
@xmath , and @xmath is the result of performing both the complex and
quaternion conjugates simultaneously: @xmath , @xmath @xmath and @xmath
.

It is important to note that both the quaternion and hermitian
conjugates reverse the order of multiplication, as is familiar from
matrix multiplication. For example, @xmath .

### 3.4 Generalized ideals

We define a subalgebra @xmath of an algebra @xmath to be a generalized
ideal if @xmath and for any @xmath , where @xmath is (generalized)
multiplication. The notion of a generalized ideal was introduced by this
author in [ 34 ] , and differs from the definition of left ideals by
generalizing what is meant by ‘multiplication’. Directly from the
definition, it can be seen that ideals make up the algebra’s most robust
subspaces, which persist no matter what @xmath is multiplied onto them.

Starting from the algebra @xmath , we will find generalized ideals under
three separate notions of generalized multiplication:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here, @xmath is a projector in @xmath , to be defined shortly. It should
be noted that each of these multiplication rules is constructed so as to
preserve conjugation-invariant objects. For example, elements, @xmath in
@xmath with the property @xmath will maintain this property under @xmath
, no matter which @xmath is multiplied onto them.

Taking @xmath to be @xmath , we will first show how the complex
invariant-action leads to left- and right-handed Weyl spinors, Majorana
spinors, and Dirac spinors. Then we will show how the hermitian
invariant-action leads to four-vectors. Finally, we will show how the
quaternionic invariant action leads to scalars and the field strength
tensor.

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Readers should note that scalars, spinors, four-vectors, and the field
strength tensor, mentioned above, account for all of the Lorentz
representations of the standard model.

### 3.5 Complex invariant-action, @xmath

#### 3.5.1 Preliminaries

We will now find that left- and right-handed Weyl spinors, Majorana
spinors, and Dirac spinors are all generalized ideals under the same
complex invariant-action,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

For concreteness, we define @xmath to be the projector @xmath , although
it is clear that a continuum of other possibilities exist. @xmath and
its complex conjugate, @xmath , exhibit the properties

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Before we begin, though, it will be useful to carry out a change of
basis from @xmath to a new, suggestively named basis, @xmath . This new
basis will be linked to the operator, @xmath , in that these basis
elements will be defined so as to have the properties:

  -- -- -- -------
           (3.7)
  -- -- -- -------

In terms of the old basis, we define these new basis vectors to be

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

For convenience, we also include here the old basis in terms of the new
one,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

#### 3.5.2 Weyl and Dirac spinors as generalized ideals

Let us now identify two subspaces, which partition the algebra @xmath .
These subspaces will be given the suggestive nomenclature @xmath and
@xmath , and be defined as

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.10)
  -- -- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath @xmath . Readers may notice that
spin and chirality are analogues of each other in this formalism, as
transitions between spin states occur via left multiplication, and
transitions between and occur via right multiplication.

Straightforward calculation shows that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now, the reader may confirm that @xmath and @xmath are left ideals, as
defined in Chapter 2 . That is, no matter which @xmath and @xmath are
left multiplied onto them, there exists some @xmath and @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

In other words, the L and R subspaces are each stable under left
multiplication.

With this knowledge in hand, it is now almost trivial to see that @xmath
and @xmath are each generalized ideals under the complex
invariant-action, @xmath . That is, for any @xmath , there exists a
@xmath such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Likewise, for any @xmath , there exists a @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is furthermore easily seen that the set of elements of the form
@xmath spans all of @xmath , and hence trivially qualifies as a
generalized ideal under @xmath .

Taking now @xmath to be @xmath from Section 3.2 gives the transformation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

The reader is encouraged to confirm that indeed @xmath transforms as a
Dirac spinor, @xmath transforms as a left-handed Weyl spinor, and @xmath
transforms as a right-handed Weyl spinor under @xmath . In other words,
the complex coefficients within @xmath transform exactly as would the
complex components of a four-dimensional column vector, representing a
Dirac spinor, from standard quantum field theory. It is for this reason
that the names @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath were given to these
generalized ideals early on.

#### 3.5.3 A seamless new way to conjugate Weyl spinors

In quantum field theory textbooks, it is typically explained that a left
handed Weyl spinor, @xmath , can be conjugated so as to give a
right-handed Weyl spinor. The procedure necessary to do so, in the usual
matrix-and-column-vector formalism, entails (1) complex conjugating the
left-handed spinor’s two components, and (2) multiplying this column
vector by the matrix @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Notice what happens, though, if we write these Weyl spinors instead in
terms of the @xmath algebra:

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.17)
  -- -- -- --------

That is, we arrive at the exact same result using nothing more than the
complex conjugate: @xmath .

Now, in order to return back to the original left-handed Weyl spinor, in
the usual matrix-and-column-vector formalism, we must again @xmath
complex conjugate the spinor’s components, but this time, @xmath
multiply by the new matrix @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

In comparison, the same result is achieved in @xmath more simply by
taking the complex conjugate twice,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Readers should note that @xmath is a basis-independent statement in our
formalism. It holds, regardless of whether @xmath is written in the
Weyl, Dirac, or Majorana basis of the Dirac algebra. To the best of this
author’s knowledge, [ 34 ] was the first instance where this more
streamlined method of conjugating spinors has been proposed.

In considering these two formalisms, one comes to notice that no @xmath
-type object was needed in the @xmath case. Somehow, the complex
conjugate @xmath automatically encoded the information given by @xmath .
It is natural to ask, then, why @xmath is necessary in the
matrix-and-column-vector formalism.

After comparing equations ( 3.16 ) and ( 3.17 ), one sees that @xmath
was what was needed so as to account for the complex conjugation of
basis vectors. In the @xmath formalism, we naturally take the complex
conjugate of both the coefficients, and the basis vectors. On the other
hand, there is no notion of complex conjugating basis vectors in the
matrix-and-column-vector formalism. The matrix @xmath needs to be
introduced so as to account for this. The conjugation of Weyl spinors,
as explained here, then exposes a naturalness to the purely algebraic
formalism.

#### 3.5.4 Majorana spinors as generalized ideals

Given our description above of Dirac spinors, it is now easy to build
Majorana spinors. Any Dirac spinor splits into two Majorana spinors,
given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Clearly, @xmath is invariant under complex conjugation, @xmath , while
@xmath acquires a minus sign, @xmath . The reader is encouraged to
confirm that @xmath and @xmath both constitute generalized ideals, and
that @xmath gives their transformation under @xmath .

To summarize, we have just found that left- and right-handed Weyl
spinors, Dirac spinors, and Majorana spinors are all simply generalized
ideals of the same complex invariant-action, @xmath . Furthermore, in
every case, their transformation under @xmath can be described
succinctly as @xmath .

### 3.6 Hermitian invariant-action, @xmath

We will now find that the hermitian invariant-action, @xmath , leads to
new generalized ideals, which behave like four-vectors,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Any element of @xmath can be written as a sum of hermitian @xmath and
anti-hermitian @xmath parts, where the @xmath and @xmath @xmath . As
@xmath is hermitian and @xmath is antihermitian for any @xmath , it is
clear that these two subspaces form generalized ideals under the
multiplication @xmath .

Just as was done in the case for spinors, we may now set @xmath , where
@xmath represents elements of @xmath . The hermitian element, @xmath ,
transforms as @xmath . Matching components, one finds that under this
transformation law, @xmath transforms as a contravariant four-vector
under the Lorentz group, [ 40 ] . Taking the complex conjugate of @xmath
describes the transformation a covariant four-vector, @xmath . It can be
seen that the antihermitian case for @xmath follows analogously.

As an example, let us consider the momentum @xmath under a rotation
about the @xmath axis by an angle @xmath . This rotated momentum is
given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

as expected.

From this example, readers may note that even though the object @xmath
looks to have indices which are all tied off, it does not represent a
Lorentz scalar. It transforms as a four-vector. Furthermore, even though
the coefficients @xmath have space-time indices, they do not transform
directly on their own. This is in contrast to objects in the formalism
of standard QFT, which would have real numbers, @xmath , transforming
under the Lorentz group. Here, we have only the complete @xmath
transforming under the Lorentz group.

As shown in [ 40 ] , scalars can be constructed between a covariant
vector @xmath and contravariant vector @xmath , as @xmath , which is
simply the real part of @xmath . Indeed, when @xmath , this gives @xmath
.

In brief, we have just seen that four-vectors can be represented simply
by generalized ideals under the hermitian multiplicative action, @xmath
. For the hermitian case, contravariant four vectors transform as @xmath
, and covariant four-vectors transform as @xmath , where @xmath
represents and element of @xmath .

### 3.7 Quaternionic invariant-action, @xmath

Finally, we will now consider the quaternionic invariant-action, @xmath
. This new action leads to generalized ideals, which are more commonly
known as Lorentz scalars, @xmath , and the field strength tensor, @xmath
,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath can be partitioned once again, this time into subspaces of the
form @xmath and @xmath , with @xmath . As @xmath , and @xmath , it is
clear that each of these two subspaces is closed under the
multiplication @xmath from any element @xmath of the algebra. Hence,
they each constitute generalized ideals under @xmath .

Lorentz transformations on these two generalized ideals can be found,
again, by replacing @xmath with @xmath . For our scalar, @xmath , we
have @xmath . Since @xmath , it commutes with every element in @xmath ,
and so @xmath . It is then easily confirmed that @xmath @xmath , so that
@xmath is indeed a Lorentz scalar, @xmath .

In [ 40 ] it is shown that the usual field strength tensor is
represented by @xmath , which transforms as @xmath under the Lorentz
group. @xmath gives the field strength @xmath , while @xmath gives
@xmath .

Readers are referred to the upcoming Section 4.9 , where the description
of @xmath will be extended so as to satisfy parity transformations,
defined there.

In summary, we have just seen that the Lorentz scalar, @xmath , and the
field strength tensor, @xmath , are simply generalized ideals under the
quaternionic invariant-action, @xmath . These generalized ideals
transform as @xmath and @xmath under the Lorentz group, where @xmath
represents an element of @xmath .

### 3.8 Bilinears

Bilinears and other scalars can now be built by combining the various
ideal representations, whose @xmath factors, @xmath , fit together like
lock and key. Noting that @xmath , let us consider for example the real
part of @xmath , where @xmath . Under a Lorentz transformation,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath means to take the real part.

This scalar is the same as the scalar between Dirac spinors of quantum
field theory, at a fixed space-time point, @xmath , in the usual
matrix-and-column-vector formalism.

### 3.9 Summary

We have just found a set of generalized ideals, originating from three
generalized notions of multiplication, @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath .
These generalized ideals led directly to left- and right-handed Weyl
spinors, Dirac spinors, and Majorana spinors, four-vectors, scalars, and
the field strength tensor. This accounts for all of the Lorentz
representations of the standard model.

Furthermore, we found that Lorentz transformations can be described
concisely by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

(or by @xmath ). These results were obtained using nothing but the
algebra @xmath acting on itself.

In contrast to the usual matrix-and-column-vector formalism of QFT, we
point out a number of advantages offered by the @xmath formalism:

* A compact way: @xmath , to describe all of the Lorentz representations
of the standard model

* A seamless new way of conjugating Weyl spinors, using only the complex
conjugate, @xmath

* A minimalistic formalism, making use of just a single algebra acting
on itself

* A conceptually new description of Lorentz representations as stable
subspaces (generalized ideals) of an algebra.

* A possible explanation as to why higher spin states are not seen
experimentally in fundamental particle physics. Higher spin
representations of the Lorentz group should be naturally excluded here,
if the representation exceeds the number of dimensions describable by
@xmath .

### 3.10 Outlook

It is plain to see that @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath each correspond to
an involution of the @xmath algebra. That is, @xmath corresponds to
@xmath , @xmath corresponds to @xmath , and @xmath corresponds to @xmath
. The complex quaternions, though, have more discrete symmetries
available than is shown here, and it would be interesting to see what
could come from the corresponding constructions of generalized ideals.

Another proposal is to take the concept of generalized multiplication
further by considering generalized automorphisms. Just as automorphisms
preserve the multiplicative structure of an algebra, generalized
automorphisms are defined to preserve the generalized multiplicative
structure of an algebra. These generalized automorphisms might then
qualify as valid candidates for gauge symmetries, in the context of
@xmath .

Another interesting lead to consider is whether or not this work has a
connection to Connes’ non-commutative geometry, [ 22 ] , [ 11 ] , [ 9 ]
. That is, the complex and/or hermitian invariant-actions, @xmath and
@xmath , introduced here seem to bear some resemblance to the Dirac
operators found there. Could the results presented here fit into that
formalism? If not, could this work suggest admissible alterations to
Connes’ axioms?

Yet another line of questioning, currently under investigation, is to
see how these @xmath representations (and later, @xmath representations)
relate to Jordan algebras.

## Chapter 4 Clifford algebras

### 4.1 Motivation

It is difficult to ignore the presence of Clifford algebras within
elementary particle physics. Clifford algebras inevitably appear
whenever spinors do, and ultimately underlie the algebra of some
well-known grand unified theories, [ 7 ] . It was in fact argued in [ 8
] , [ 13 ] , and [ 14 ] that Clifford algebras alone are the source of
internal structure for quarks and leptons.

But one may ask, where do these Clifford algebras come from? Certainly,
there is an infinite number of Clifford algebras available, and nature
appears to choose only some of them. How does she make that choice?

The connection between the division algebras, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , and Clifford algebras is unmistakable. In fact, Clifford
algebras were introduced in 1878 by William Kingdon Clifford as an
extension of the quaternions, [ 15 ] .

Later, in Section 6.3 , we will show how the action of @xmath on itself
leads to the Clifford algebra @xmath . From this Clifford algebra we
will ultimately extract a one-generation description of quarks and
leptons, followed by some further indications of a three-generation
model.

### 4.2 Definition

In [ 39 ] , [ 66 ] , a Clifford algebra over @xmath is defined to be an
associative algebra, which is generated by @xmath elements, @xmath .
These @xmath generators exhibit the properties

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the entries @xmath for @xmath , and @xmath @xmath . The symbol
@xmath represents the identity. A Clifford algebra over @xmath with
@xmath generators having the property @xmath , and @xmath generators
having the property @xmath , is referred to as @xmath .

In this text, we will be interested mostly in Clifford algebras over
@xmath , referred to as @xmath . Clearly, taking the algebra’s field to
be @xmath , instead of @xmath , erases the Clifford algebra’s signature,
@xmath .

Complex Clifford algebras, @xmath , with even @xmath , each have only
one irreducible representation. This irreducible representation has
@xmath complex dimensions. For @xmath with @xmath odd, there are two
inequivalent irreducible representations, each with @xmath complex
dimensions. In this thesis, we will be concerned mostly with @xmath for
@xmath even.

Below, we include a couple of helpful tables from [ 51 ] , detailing how
Clifford algebras may be faithfully represented by matrices over the
rings @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , or @xmath . Here, the notation
@xmath refers to @xmath matrices over the ring @xmath .

Real Clifford algebras @xmath for @xmath

@xmath

Furthermore, for Clifford algebras of larger @xmath , we have the
isomorphisms

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

and similarly,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

On the other hand, for the case of complex Clifford algebras, we have
@xmath for @xmath even, and @xmath for @xmath odd.

Complex Clifford algebras @xmath for @xmath

  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath

### 4.3 Examples of Clifford algebras from @xmath

Given the multiplication properties from equation ( 3.2 ), it is
straightforward to see that @xmath gives a representation of the real
Clifford algebra, @xmath . Please see Figure ( 4.1 ).

Alternately, @xmath also gives a representation of @xmath , as shown in
Figure ( 4.2 ).

It was mentioned above that complex Clifford algebras, @xmath , each
have just a single irreducible representation when @xmath is even, and
have two inequivalent irreducible representations when @xmath is odd. In
the even case, that irreducible representation is @xmath
-complex-dimensional, whereas, in the odd case, each of the two
irreducible representations are @xmath -complex-dimensional. These
irreducible representations are commonly known as spinors.

Consider the example of the complex quaternions acting on themselves
from the left. This action gives a representation of @xmath , so that
@xmath in this case. We would then expect a single @xmath
-complex-dimensional irreducible representation for that Clifford
algebra. This irreducible representation is none other than the familiar
2-complex-dimensional Weyl spinor.

### 4.4 Minimal left ideals

For the remainder of this text, we will be interested only in Clifford
algebras over @xmath , where @xmath is even. The most common way to
model these algebras is to represent them as @xmath complex matrices, as
mentioned above. These complex matrices then act on spinors in the form
of @xmath -complex-dimensional column vectors.

We would like, however, to avoid resorting to this
matrix-and-column-vector formalism, which posits two separate entities:
matrices, and column vectors. Instead, we will opt for a more
streamlined formalism, based simply on a single algebra acting on
itself. The motivation for such a formalism originates from the
algebraic model sketched in Chapter 2 .

It should not be surprising that this goal is an obtainable one. That
is, there exist @xmath -complex-dimensional subalgebras within these
Clifford algebras, which serve as irreducible representations. These
subalgebras are called minimal left ideals, and provide one way of
defining spinors, [ 1 ] .

Given an algebra, @xmath , a left ideal, @xmath , is a subalgebra of
@xmath whereby @xmath is in @xmath for all @xmath in @xmath , and for
any @xmath in @xmath . That is, no matter which @xmath we multiply onto
@xmath , the new product, @xmath , must be in the subspace @xmath (i.e.
the ideal @xmath survives).

Now, a minimal left ideal is a left ideal which contains no other left
ideals other than @xmath and itself.

### 4.5 How to identify minimal left ideals

We will now summarize for the reader a procedure for finding minimal
left ideals in complex Clifford algebras, where @xmath is even. This
procedure is described in [ 1 ] , which also accommodates other types of
Clifford algebra.

In the special case of @xmath , this procedure will allow us to recover
the Weyl spinors @xmath or @xmath , which we found earlier via the
complex multiplicative action, @xmath . We will then move on to the
algebra of @xmath , which can be seen to generate @xmath . This leads us
to minimal left ideals behaving as a full generation of quarks and
leptons.

#### 4.5.1 Some definitions

Let @xmath be the vector space over a field @xmath . A quadratic form,
@xmath , is a map @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

and such that the map @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

is linear in both @xmath and @xmath . This @xmath together with its
quadratic form, is called a quadratic vector space.

We will be especially interested in the quadratic vector space given by
@xmath and @xmath , where @xmath is the @xmath -dimensional vector space
spanned by the generating elements @xmath of definition ( 4.1 ). Here,
the quadratic form will be given by @xmath , and the corresponding
bilinear form is then @xmath Note that @xmath here is only the
generating subspace of our Clifford algebra, it does not represent the
entire Clifford algebra.

A subspace @xmath of @xmath is said to be totally isotropic if @xmath
@xmath @xmath In the following construction, we will be interested in
maximal totally isotropic subspaces of @xmath , which are defined to be
totally isotropic subspaces of @xmath with maximal dimension. As
explained in [ 1 ] , for Clifford algebras over @xmath with @xmath even,
the dimension of any maximal totally isotropic subspace will be @xmath .
In fact, we find that the generating space splits into exactly two
maximal totally isotropic subspaces, each with the dimension @xmath .

It is interesting to note that our maximal totally isotropic subspace,
@xmath of @xmath generates a Grassmann algebra, seeing as how @xmath
@xmath @xmath This fact merits notice, especially in consideration of
recent work by László, [ 49 ] .

#### 4.5.2 Procedure

With these definitions in hand, the procedure for constructing minimal
left ideals is straightforward:

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

It should be noted that the above is not the only way in which minimal
left ideals may be constructed; for details, please see [ 1 ] .

The projector, @xmath , is an example of a primitive idempotent. A
primitive idempotent, @xmath , is defined in [ 51 ] to be an idempotent
( @xmath ), which is not the sum of two annihilating idempotents, @xmath
, where @xmath .

### 4.6 Minimal left ideals in @xmath

As a specific example, let us now build a minimal left ideal in @xmath ,
as per Figure ( 4.2 ). Following the procedure from Section ( 4.5.2 ),

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Readers will notice that this minimal left ideal matches @xmath , found
as a generalized ideal in Section ( 3.5 ). Furthermore, redoing this
procedure by taking the maximal totally isotropic subspace to be instead
spanned by @xmath yields the familiar @xmath from before.

So, we have just shown that we can use this procedure to build a left-
or right-handed Weyl spinor from the left action of @xmath on itself.

#### 4.6.1 Fock space structure

With a little relabelling, it becomes obvious that these minimal left
ideals naturally exhibit Fock space structure. Taking @xmath , it then
follows that @xmath , which have the anticommutation relations,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Defining the (formal) vacuum states to be @xmath and @xmath for @xmath
and @xmath , respectively, we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

That is, @xmath acts as a raising operator from the vacuum @xmath within
@xmath , and @xmath acts as a raising operator from the vacuum @xmath
within @xmath . It should be clear to the reader that @xmath and @xmath
represent vacua only in an algebraic sense, and are not meant to
represent the zero-particle state.

Such Fock space structure will reappear in other constructions, for
example, when we build minimal left ideals from the algebra @xmath .
Moreover, it comes up again in the work of László, [ 49 ] .

### 4.7 The Dirac algebra

It is not enough for us here to consider minimal left ideals for just
@xmath or for just @xmath , separately. We would like also to combine
these two objects together into a single four-complex-dimensional Dirac
spinor, as shown in Section 3.5.2 .

It had been mentioned earlier that chirality, L and R, is the analogue
of spin, @xmath and @xmath , in this formalism. One can confirm that
left multiplying @xmath and @xmath by @xmath causes rotation between
their spin states, @xmath and @xmath , whereas right multiplying @xmath
and @xmath by @xmath causes rotation between L and R.

The left action and right action of @xmath on itself each give a
representation of @xmath . Furthermore, taking @xmath @xmath , @xmath
@xmath , one can easily show that @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath .
That is, the left action of @xmath on itself cannot be re-expressed as
the right action of @xmath on itself, and vice versa. It is a property
of @xmath that these two actions are distinct, a feature which does not
appear in the case of @xmath . Furthermore, the associativity of @xmath
ensures that the left and right action commute with each other. Hence,
the underlying Clifford algebraic structure when considering both left
and right multiplication of @xmath on itself is @xmath , where the
tensor product is over @xmath .

As @xmath for @xmath we then find that @xmath . Furthermore, as the
complexification of a real Clifford algebra, @xmath acts to erase its
signature, @xmath , we then find that @xmath .

In other words, the left and right action of @xmath on itself gives a
representation of the Dirac algebra.

It is straightforward for readers to confirm this fact. Explicitly, the
gamma matrices @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath , written in the
Weyl basis, have the following correspondences in @xmath :

  -- -- -- -------
           (4.9)
  -- -- -- -------

These findings are likely to appear in future joint work with G. Fiore
from INFN.

Here, we make use of the bar notation from earlier authors, [ 50 ] . By
definition, the operator @xmath acting on some element @xmath , for
@xmath , is given simply by @xmath . As an example, consider the object
corresponding to @xmath acting on @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

This flips chirality, as one would expect.

From these operators, an object corresponding to @xmath can be found to
be

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.11)
  -- -- -- --------

This thereby confirms the role of @xmath and @xmath as @xmath ,
introduced early on in equation ( 3.5 ).

More generally, it can now be seen that @xmath introduced previously,
does in fact behave as a Dirac spinor, acted upon by a complex
quaternionic representation of the Dirac algebra, @xmath .

### 4.8 Right action required

Readers may have noticed that the left action of @xmath on itself was
not enough to describe @xmath together as a single irreducible
representation. That is, the left action alone has only @xmath (or
@xmath ) as an irrep. However, the combined Dirac spinor, @xmath , does
become an irreducible representation of a Clifford algebra when the
right action of @xmath is also included. Readers will find this theme
coming up again in future chapters.

### 4.9 Parity and the field strength tensor

The work in this section is to appear in a joint paper, together with G.
Fiore from INFN.

In Section 3.6 , we introduced four-vectors, @xmath , as generalized
ideals under the hermitian invariant-action, @xmath . These can be
described as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

which transform under the Lorentz group as @xmath , for @xmath .

Furthermore, in Section 3.7 , we introduced the field strength tensor,
@xmath , as a generalized ideal under the quaternionic invariant-action,
@xmath . Explicitly, we had

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

which transforms under the Lorentz group as @xmath . Of course, we also
studied spinors and scalars in previous sections, but these will not be
relevant for us at the moment.

Given these two Lorentz representations, we might wonder how parity
transformations are to be carried out. Under a parity transformation, we
would expect

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now, it might be tempting to consider the quaternionic conjugate as the
parity conjugate, since @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . However, the
quaternionic conjugate sends @xmath , which does not give the desired
result: @xmath , and @xmath . So how might we define a parity
transformation?

In Section 4.7 , we demonstrated a representation of the Dirac algebra,
@xmath , using both left and right multiplication of @xmath on itself.
From this Clifford algebra, it is then possible to define a parity
transformation:

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.15)
  -- -- -- --------

for @xmath

So, the question is now: how do we use this parity transformation on the
@xmath to induce a parity transformation on @xmath and @xmath ?

The resolution to this question is not obvious, because @xmath and
@xmath are objects which are derived from @xmath structure, while the
@xmath belong in @xmath . One solution, which we will now show, is to
generalize the @xmath objects, @xmath and @xmath , to two new @xmath
operators, @xmath and @xmath . We might hope, then, that under the right
conditions, @xmath and @xmath would reduce to @xmath and @xmath . In
summary, we would like to see the parity transformations on @xmath and
@xmath , given by equation 4.15 , automatically induce parity
transformations on @xmath and @xmath .

Let us then define @xmath to be

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.16)
  -- -- -- --------

for @xmath , for @xmath , and @xmath This is none other than the usual
@xmath of quantum field theory.

Making use of the Clifford algebraic description of [ 51 ] , let us
define @xmath to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

for @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath .

It is then trivial to see that under a parity transformation given by

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.18)
  -- -- -- --------

for @xmath the operator, @xmath transforms as

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.19)
  -- -- -- --------

and the operator, @xmath transforms as

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.20)
  -- -- -- --------

as we would expect.

So, we have a new description for four-momenta, @xmath , and the field
strength tensor, @xmath , which transform as they should under parity.
We would now like to know how these relate to the generalized ideals,
@xmath and @xmath that we found earlier in Sections 3.6 and 3.7 .

We find that the operators @xmath and @xmath reduce to the generalized
ideals @xmath and @xmath , when @xmath and @xmath are taken to be
operators, acting on spinors in @xmath . Incorporating the object @xmath
, we find that @xmath reduces to @xmath , or @xmath , on Weyl spinors,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Similarly, we find that @xmath reduces to @xmath , or @xmath , on Weyl
spinors as

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.22)
  -- -- -- --------

Readers may note that a parity transformation on @xmath and @xmath now
automatically induces the correct parity transformation on @xmath and
@xmath , when these objects are taken to be operators on spinors.

Finally, we point out that this definition of parity,

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.23)
  -- -- -- --------

sends @xmath , so that left- and right-handed Weyl spinors are swapped
under this transformation, as we would expect.

In summary, we have shown that the parity conjugate of the @xmath
algebra may be used to induce a parity conjugate on our generalized
ideals in @xmath .

Note that we have also demonstrated a way to write down four-vectors,
and the field strength tensor, in the Dirac algebra formalism, which
makes use of the generalized ideals found in Sections 3.6 and 3.7 .
Namely,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

## Chapter 5 Standard model of particle physics

### 5.1 What it is

The standard model of particle physics is the result of decades of
collaboration, which began roughly in the 1930s, and converged finally
on its current state in 1979, [ 62 ] . It is a mosaic of our best
efforts in particle physics over that half century. In the decades since
1979, the standard model has seen little in the way of alterations, and
yet has survived rigorous experimental testing, nearly completely
unscathed.

A brief history: In 1928, P.A.M. Dirac set up the foundations for
quantum electrodynamics (QED), which was later generalized to
incorporate the neutrino by E. Fermi, [ 62 ] . Feynman, Schwinger, and
Tomonaga subsequently developed renormalization theory for QED, [ 46 ] .
In the mid-1950s, M. Gell-Mann proposed strangeness as a new quantum
number, while T.D. Lee and C. N. Yang suggested methods for detecting
parity violation of the weak force. In that same decade, the W boson was
suggested as a mediator of the weak force, following the work of C.N.
Yang and R.L. Mills, [ 62 ] .

In the 1960s, G. Zweig, and independently, M. Gell-Mann, proposed that
subatomic particles (now known as quarks) were the constituents of
baryonic matter. Electroweak theory was developed by S. Glashow, A.
Salam, J.C. Ward, and S. Weinberg, in that same decade, [ 62 ] . A
mechanism to impart mass on gauge bosons was then proposed by three
groups independently: first of all, R. Brout and F. Englert, then, P.W.
Higgs, and finally G. Guralnik, C. R. Hagen, and T. Kibble, all in 1964,
[ 46 ] . In 1971, G. ’t Hooft showed that the
Glashow-Salam-Ward-Weinberg electroweak model was renormalizable, [ 65 ]
. M. Gell-Mann, H. Fritzsch, and H. Leutwyler’s work in the 1970s
resulted in what we know as quantum chromodynamics (QCD). For a more
detailed history of the standard model, readers are encouraged to
consult [ 62 ] .

The particle content of the standard model can be characterized by
labelling particles according to how they transform under the standard
model’s gauge group, @xmath . (More accurately, the standard model’s
gauge group is @xmath , which will be discussed in Chapter 8 .) Here,
@xmath stands for weak hypercharge, and we will be using the weak
hypercharge conventions found in [ 12 ] . Readers may note the rather
arbitrary-looking collection of hypercharges displayed below.

Fermionic (matter) content of the standard model

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Each of the particles above has an anti-particle partner, which
transforms as the representation conjugate to that of the original
particle. For example, @xmath transforms as @xmath under @xmath , as a
@xmath under @xmath , and has weak hypercharge @xmath .

The standard model also has 12 gauge bosons, whose charges can be
summarized by the following table.

Gauge bosonic content of the standard model (prior to electroweak
symmetry breaking)

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Finally, we also have the Higgs boson, which is a scalar particle under
the Lorentz group, and transforms under the gauge groups according to
the following table.

Higgs field

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

The standard model is believed to be largely valid over a vast range of
scales, from the Hubble radius, @xmath , down to subatomic scales of
@xmath , [ 62 ] . It has successfully predicted the existence of a
number of particles, including for example, the @xmath and @xmath
bosons, [ 48 ] , the top quark, tau-neutrino, [ 62 ] , and most
recently, the Higgs boson, [ 19 ] , [ 18 ] , [ 17 ] , [ 16 ] .

Given the striking complexity of our known universe, it is hard to
believe that so much of it can be described by such a short list of
elementary particles. Beyond its particle content, the standard model
also has a relatively concise list of free parameters, 19 of them,
whereby 13 come from the Yukawa sector, 2 from the Higgs sector, 3 from
gauge couplings, and 1 from an apparently absent QCD term, [ 53 ] , [ 64
] .

### 5.2 What it is not

If the standard model is to be faulted for anything, that fault would
lie almost exclusively in its incompleteness. The first legitimate
fracture in the standard model came with the discovery of neutrino
oscillations, which imply that neutrinos do indeed have mass, [ 53 ] .
Having said that, the standard model is easily amended to accommodate
massive neutrinos, albeit, at the expense of having to accept a number
of additional free parameters in the theory.

In the absence of any major conflict with experiment, much criticism of
the standard model is based in the theory’s apparent inability to go
beyond. The standard model does not explain dark matter, nor dark
energy. Nor, does it describe baryon asymmetry. Furthermore, the
standard model has consistently defied unification with gravity.

### 5.3 What it should be

One might not criticize the standard model too harshly, for simply
remaining silent about many of the open problems in physics. However,
what is less benign is that the standard model does at times account for
various aspects of nature, and yet fails to explain them.

For example, the standard model singles out a particular gauge group,
@xmath , yet does not explain where this group came from. It further
specifies a list of particle representations for this group, Section 5.1
, without explaining why these representations were chosen over any
other possible set. The standard model does not explain why those
representations are organized into three generations. It does not
explain why @xmath acts on left-handed spinors, but not on right-handed
spinors. It does not explain the apparently ad hoc arrangement of
hypercharges. Furthermore, the standard model does not explain the
values of its 19 parameters.

Perhaps the gaps in our understanding could be attributed to the
patchwork way in which the standard model came to be. One might argue
that what is needed is some form of unifying principles to smooth over
the seams. These unifying principles might come in the form of grand
unified theories, supersymmetry, M-theory, or perhaps something else.

## Chapter 6 One generation of quarks and leptons from @xmath

In Chapter 3 , we saw how a four-complex-dimensional algebra, @xmath ,
supplies an unusually compact description of all the Lorentz
representations of the standard model. However, there is more to the
standard model than just the Lorentz group. Beyond spin and chirality,
standard model fermions also exhibit colour, weak isospin, and charge.
Could these physical features also be the result of some algebra acting
on itself? If so, which one?

In our work with @xmath , the reader may have noticed the trivial
identity,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

That is, the algebra we have dealt with up until now is the tensor
product of three of the four division algebras. It is then only natural
to ask, what about @xmath ? The octonionic algebra, @xmath possesses
eight degrees of freedom, and it is difficult not to notice: so does a
generation of quarks and leptons. (Neutrino, charged lepton, three
up-type quarks and three down-type quarks).

Despite its counter-culture status, the octonions have long drawn the
curiosity of generations of physicists. The algebra is known to appear
without warning in apparently disparate areas of mathematics, within
algebra, geometry, and topology. However, despite its ubiquity, its
practical uses in physics have remained elusive, due to the algebra’s
non-associativity, which must be handled with care. In the following
chapters, we aim to demonstrate to the reader that the octonions’
non-associativity is not a impediment, but instead a gift, and that this
misunderstood algebra is really at the heart of the standard model of
particle physics.

The findings which we will now describe make a case in support of those
who have been long advocating for the existence of a connection between
non-associative algebras and particle theory, [ 41 ] , [ 42 ] , [ 63 ] ,
[ 56 ] , [ 26 ] , [ 27 ] , [ 34 ] , [ 35 ] , [ 36 ] , [ 11 ] , [ 3 ] , [
2 ] [ 5 ] , [ 6 ] , [ 43 ] , [ 44 ] , [ 54 ] , [ 8 ] , [ 13 ] .

One of the earliest breakthroughs along these lines belong to Günaydin
and Gürsey, [ 41 ] , who showed @xmath quark structure in the split
octonions. Later, in [ 42 ] , they showed anti-commuting ladder
operators within that model. Our new results stem from the octonionic
chromodynamic quark model of [ 42 ] , and are meant to replace the
provisional charges of [ 34 ] .

In the following pages, we will extend Günaydin and Gürsey’s findings of
quark structure under @xmath by further demonstrating

1. lepton structure and

2. a natural @xmath symmetry.

In other words, using only the complex octonions, we will complete the
particle content of the model to include a full generation of quarks and
leptons, under not only @xmath , but under both of the standard model’s
two unbroken gauge symmetries.

### 6.1 A summary of the results to come

Using only the algebra of the complex octonions, which we will
introduce, we expose an intrinsic structure to a generation of quarks
and leptons. This algebraic structure mimics familiar quantum systems,
which have a vacuum state acted upon by raising and lowering operators.
In this case, the neutrino poses as the vacuum state, and electrons and
quarks pose as the excited states. These results are simply the analogue
of the Fock space we found earlier in Section 4.6.1 .

With these raising and lowering operators in hand, we are then able to
construct a number operator in the usual way,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

It will be seen that @xmath has eigenvalues given by @xmath . At first
sight, these eigenvalues might not look familiar, that is, until they
are divided by 3. @xmath has eigenvalues @xmath , which can now be
recognized as the electric charges of a neutrino (or anti-neutrino), a
triplet of anti-down quarks, a triplet of up quarks, and a positron. We
will then define our electric charge, @xmath , as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

As @xmath must take on integer values, @xmath must be quantized. Hence,
the model offers at this early stage a straightforward explanation for
the quantization of electric charge.

As we will show, the remaining states within a generation are related to
these particles by complex conjugation, and hence are acted upon by
@xmath in the usual way.

The anti-commuting ladder operators, mentioned above, can be seen to
possess a certain symmetry generated uniquely by @xmath and @xmath , the
two unbroken symmetries of the standard model. These generators of
@xmath do indeed match those of [ 41 ] , and fit in perfectly with
@xmath , the @xmath generator mentioned above. Under these symmetries,
we find that our Fock space, and its complex conjugate, together
transform as would a full generation of quarks and leptons.

Ours is certainly not the first instance where Günaydin and Gürsey’s
model has been adapted. As an extension of their model, [ 26 ] , [ 27 ]
, Dixon describes electric charge as a mix of quaternionic and
octonionic objects. It would be interesting to see if a ladder system
could be found, which alternately gives Dixon’s @xmath as a number
operator. Readers are encouraged to see [ 26 ] , [ 27 ] , or other
examples of his extensive work.

Since the time of first writing, more octonionic chromo-electrodynamic
models have been found. Most noteworthy of all were three papers written
in the late 1970s, [ 8 ] , [ 13 ] , and [ 14 ] , which could also be
considered as extensions of Günaydin and Gürsey’s model, [ 42 ] . In
these papers, the authors use two separate ladder systems: system (a)
fits with the octonionic ladder operators of [ 42 ] , and system (b) is
introduced as quaternionic. By combining the two systems, they describe
the electric charge generator not as a number operator, but as the
difference between the number operators of the two systems. References [
8 ] , [ 13 ] , and [ 14 ] are important papers, worth careful
reconsideration by the community.

Our results differ from earlier versions in that we will be constructing
a generation of quarks and leptons explicitly as minimal left ideals of
a Clifford algebra, generated only by the complex octonions. In doing
so, we will use just a single octonionic ladder system, with its complex
conjugate. This in turn allows us to define electric charge more simply
as Q = N/3, thereby exposing a more direct route to the two unbroken
gauge symmetries of the standard model. Furthermore, our formalism
naturally relates particles and anti-particles using only the complex
conjugate, @xmath , which is not a feature of these earlier models.
Finally, as our generation of quarks and leptons will be constructed
from Clifford algebra elements, not column vectors, we will then be free
to model weak isospin, using right multiplication of this same Clifford
algebra onto these minimal left ideals.

### 6.2 Introduction to @xmath

The complex octonions are not a tool commonly used in physics, so we
introduce them here.

The generic element of @xmath is written @xmath , where the @xmath are
complex coefficients. The @xmath are octonionic imaginary units @xmath ,
apart from @xmath , which multiply according to Figure 6.1 . The complex
imaginary unit @xmath commutes with the octonionic @xmath .

Any three imaginary units on a directed line segment in Figure 6.1 act
as if they were a triplet of Pauli matrices, @xmath . (More precisely,
they behave as @xmath .) For example, @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath , etc.

The multiplication rules for these imaginary units can be defined by
setting @xmath , and then applying the following rules, as shown in [ 4
] .

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is indeed true that the octonions form a non-associative algebra,
meaning that the relation @xmath does not always hold. The reader can
check this by finding three imaginary units, which are not all on the
same line segment, and substituting them as in @xmath , @xmath , and
@xmath .

The octonionic automorphism group is @xmath , which is a 14-dimensional
exceptional Lie group. Its Lie algebra may be represented by the
generators

  -- -- -- -------
           (6.5)
  -- -- -- -------

acting on the octonions. Here, the nested brackets indicate that the
generators are constructed from chains of octonions, multiplying from
right to left.

The eight objects, @xmath , generate @xmath . This @xmath may be defined
as the subgroup of @xmath which leaves the octonionic unit @xmath
invariant. Of course, alternate @xmath subgroups of @xmath may be found,
which correspond to other imaginary units. For a more thorough
introduction of @xmath see [ 4 ] , [ 23 ] , [ 56 ] .

Finally, we define three notions of conjugation on an element @xmath in
@xmath . The complex conjugate of @xmath , denoted @xmath , maps the
complex @xmath , as would be expected. The octonionic conjugate of
@xmath , denoted @xmath , takes each of the octonionic imaginary units
@xmath for @xmath . That which we will call the hermitian conjugate of
@xmath , denoted @xmath , performs both of these maps simultaneously,
@xmath and @xmath for @xmath . The conjugate and the hermitian conjugate
each reverse the order of multiplication, as is familiar from the
hermitian conjugate of a product of matrices.

### 6.3 Octonionic chain algebra

As a non-associative algebra, the octonions can at times seem
temperamental. Equations involving this algebra can quickly become
unwieldy, due to the need to repeatedly specify the order of
multiplication, by use of brackets. The assumptions we are accustomed to
making in associative algebras now do not always apply, and one might be
led to wonder how (associative) groups can be described with the
(non-associative) octonions.

In this section, however, we explain how this is not the conundrum that
it might seem to be. Every multiplication between two octonions can be
considered as a linear map of one octonion on the other. As maps are
associative by definition, this gives a way of re-describing the action
of octonions as an associative algebra.

It is plain to see that left-multiplying one complex octonion, @xmath ,
onto another, @xmath , provides a map from @xmath to @xmath .
Subsequently left-multiplying by another complex octonion, @xmath ,
provides another map: @xmath . We will call this map @xmath , where the
arrow is in place so as to indicate the order in which multiplication
occurs. We may extend the chain further by left-multiplying by @xmath ,
giving @xmath , and so on.

In an associative algebra, @xmath , the exercise of building up chains
in order to make new maps would be futile. That is, for @xmath in an
associative algebra, @xmath can always be summarized as @xmath , where
@xmath . However, as the complex octonions form a non-associative
algebra, building chains does in fact lead to new maps. For example,
consider the map @xmath acting on @xmath .

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

This is not the same as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

and in fact there exists no @xmath such that @xmath .

Addition and multiplication are easy to define on this set of chains; we
will refer to the resulting algebra as the complex octonionic chain
algebra, @xmath , or simply the chain algebra for short. Addition of two
maps @xmath and @xmath @xmath on @xmath is given by @xmath where the
@xmath and @xmath @xmath . Multiplication, @xmath , is given simply by
the composition of maps,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

As the composition of maps is always associative, @xmath is an
associative algebra. Unconvinced readers are encouraged to check
explicitly that @xmath @xmath @xmath and @xmath @xmath .

In analogy with the @xmath case, three notions of conjugation can be
defined on @xmath . Here, the complex conjugate is the same as before:
@xmath . For the octonionic and hermitian conjugates, the definition is
also the same as for the @xmath case, bearing in mind that these
conjugates now reverse the order of the chain algebra’s multiplication,
@xmath .

Looking more closely at the chains, we notice quickly that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

for @xmath , when @xmath . Furthermore,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

when @xmath and @xmath . With these properties, the chains acting on
@xmath provide a representation of the Clifford algebra @xmath , where
@xmath , acting on @xmath , forms the generating set of vectors, [ 4 ] .

It turns out, though, that @xmath does not give a faithful
representation of @xmath . There exists an additional symmetry, which
identifies two monomial chains with the same map. For example, @xmath
@xmath @xmath , etc. These 64 equations (duality relations) are readily
found by making use of equations ( 6.9 ) and ( 6.10 ), and also the
following form of the identity: @xmath . We then see that any element of
@xmath may be represented as a complex linear combination of chains, of
no more than three @xmath s in length.

The reader is encouraged to check that @xmath faithfully represents the
64-complex-dimensional Clifford algebra @xmath , generated by the set
@xmath , acting on @xmath . Figure ( 6.2 ) depicts the complex
octonionic chain algebra, organized so as to demonstrate its @xmath
structure. Starting from the bottom, we have the zero-vector, @xmath
acting on @xmath , the generating vectors, @xmath acting on @xmath , the
bivectors, @xmath acting on @xmath , and so on. Note that we make
regular use the identity @xmath so as to avoid writing long chains of
multivectors involving only the generators @xmath .

For readers more comfortable with matrices and column vectors, one may
loosely think of @xmath as a space of @xmath complex matrices, whereas
the elements, @xmath , would be represented by 8-complex-dimensional
column vectors.

Now that we have described octonionic left multiplication, by making use
of an associative algebra, one might wonder if we have lost something by
neglecting right multiplication. It turns out, though, that unlike in
the @xmath case, every complex octonion multiplied from the right may be
re-expressed as a sum of chains of octonions, multiplying from the left,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

for @xmath , @xmath @xmath , and for some @xmath . In other words, these
right-multiplication maps are already accounted for by @xmath .

Finally, one might ask, if we are moving to a Clifford algebraic
description of octonionic multiplication via @xmath anyway, why not just
start with @xmath in the first place? The answer to this question is
two-fold. First of all, in starting only from Clifford algebras, one
would be hard-pressed to know which Clifford algebras to choose. That
is, an infinite number of Clifford algebras exist, and there appears to
be no reason to choose one over any other. Secondly, with an octonionic
description of @xmath , we will be able to map particles into
ant-particles, and vice versa, using only the complex conjugate, @xmath
. This is typically not the case when Clifford algebras are expressed as
matrices with complex components, as was already shown in the @xmath
case of Section 3.5.3 for left- and right- handed Weyl spinors.

### 6.4 A system of ladder operators

With the algebra @xmath in hand, we can now set out to find a system of
ladder operators within the octonionic chain algebra. Consider @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath , similar to that defined in [ 41 ] . For all @xmath
in @xmath , and assuming right-to-left multiplication, these three
lowering operators obey the anticommutation relations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

for all @xmath The above can be seen as a generalization of the system
in [ 42 ] . That is, [ 42 ] is recovered by restricting the general
@xmath in @xmath to @xmath .

In another slight deviation from [ 42 ] , we define raising operators as
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath , which obey

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

We finally also have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

With the purpose simplifying notation, we will now implicitly assume all
multiplication to be carried out starting at the right, and moving to
the left, as was shown in equation ( 6.12 ). That is, we will now not
write these brackets in explicitly, nor will we include an arrow going
from right to left, specifying the direction of multiplication.

Furthermore, we will now be concerned only with operators, such as the
@xmath , as opposed to the object @xmath . This being the case, it will
now be understood that all equations will hold over all @xmath in @xmath
, even though @xmath will not be mentioned explicitly. For example, we
will now write equation ( 6.12 ) simply as

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.15)
  -- -- -- --------

As mentioned earlier, these operators acting on @xmath may be viewed as
@xmath complex matrices acting on @xmath an eight-complex-dimensional
column vector. Taking into account the above paragraph, our equations
from here on in can be considered as relations only between the
matrices.

Another way of restating the above is to say that the operators are
simply elements of @xmath , and we will be considering only the elements
of @xmath from here on in.

### 6.5 Complex conjugation’s analogue

Under complex conjugation, we find an analogous ladder system. Consider
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath . These three lowering operators obey the
anticommutation relations

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.16)
  -- -- -- --------

We define raising operators as @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , which obey

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally, we have also

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using these ladder operators, we will now build minimal left ideals,
which can be seen to mimic the set of quarks and leptons of the standard
model.

### 6.6 Minimal left ideals

We are now proposing to represent quarks and leptons using minimal left
ideals within our space of octonionic operators, @xmath . That is,
within the space of the @xmath , @xmath , and their products. A pair of
these ideals, @xmath and @xmath , will be constructed using our
procedure from Section 4.5.2 :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The eight-complex-dimensional minimal left ideal for the first ladder
system is given by

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.19)
  -- -- -- --------

where @xmath @xmath are 8 suggestively named complex coefficients.

As

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath plays the role of the vacuum state, where the term vacuum is used
loosely. Again, it is not to be interpreted as a zero-particle state.
However, readers may recognize the similarity between @xmath and a Fock
space.

The conjugate system of Section 6.5 analogously leads to

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.21)
  -- -- -- --------

where @xmath @xmath are eight complex coefficients.

This new ideal, ( 6.21 ), is linearly independent from the first, ( 6.19
), in the space of octonionic operators. Clearly, the two are related
via the complex conjugate, @xmath . In fact, the complex conjugate is
all that is needed in order to map particles into anti-particles, and
vice versa. This was a feature in the models of [ 42 ] , [ 35 ] , and
also in the context of left- and right-handed Weyl spinors in [ 34 ] and
Section 3.5.3 of this thesis. It was not a feature in [ 8 ] , [ 13 ] , [
14 ] , [ 26 ] , or [ 27 ] , where an additional quaternionic algebra was
implemented in order to obtain @xmath .

The Clifford algebra, @xmath , is known to have just a single
8-complex-dimensional irreducible representation, as in @xmath , above.
In this text, we will none-the-less be including the conjugate ideal,
@xmath , in analogy to our inclusion of both left- and right-handed Weyl
spinors in Section 4.8 . Just as in the case with Weyl spinors,
rotations between @xmath and @xmath are enacted via right multiplication
onto these ideals. @xmath and @xmath can then be combined into a single
irreducible representation under @xmath , where the factor of @xmath
accounts for the right action that mixes these two spinors with each
other. Unlike in the earlier literature, this additional factor of
@xmath will originate from right multiplication of our original
octonionic operators on these ideals, instead of having to introduce an
entirely new Clifford algebra, @xmath . This topic of doubling the
spinor space will come up again in Chapter 9 .

As a final note, we point out that another interesting way to obtain
anti-particles could be to use the conjugate @xmath , instead of @xmath
. In that case, the two minimal left ideals would not be entirely
linearly independent from each other. That is, we would find a special
Majorana-like property unique to the neutrino: @xmath .

### 6.7 MTIS symmetries: @xmath and @xmath

Having obtained these minimal left ideals, we would now like to know how
they transform, so as to justify the labels we gave to their
coefficients in equations ( 6.19 ) and ( 6.21 ). Up until now, however,
we have not specified under which groups these spinors transform.

A popular choice in the literature for this symmetry group is take the
Clifford algebra’s spin group. For example, the well-known “SO(10)”
grand unified theory is built from the @xmath group acting on
16-dimensional spinors. (Here, spinors are defined as irreducible
representations of @xmath .) We point out, though, that @xmath is a
45-dimensional group, meaning that 33 generators will need to be
explained away in order to arrive finally at @xmath . Could there
(alternately, or additionally) be another type of symmetry, which leads
directly to @xmath ? Or to the surviving unbroken symmetries, @xmath ?

We would now like to point out some symmetries in the construction of
our minimal left ideals. These symmetries will be called unitary MTIS
symmetries, or simply MTIS symmetries. (Readers may wish to refer back
to Section 4.5.1 , where maximal totally isotropic subspaces were first
defined.) We propose here to consider MTIS symmetries when building
covariant derivatives in gauge theories.

In the case of complex Clifford algebras, @xmath , with even @xmath ,
the generating space can always be partitioned into two maximal totally
isotropic subspaces, [ 1 ] , each of dimension @xmath . For @xmath which
we have here, the generating space spanned by @xmath is partitioned into
an MTIS spanned by @xmath , and another MTIS spanned by @xmath . Loosely
speaking, MTIS symmetries will preserve this structure.

Unitary MTIS symmetries. We are interested in operator transformations
of the form @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath . Already, with this
constraint, we find that the anti-commutation relations of equations (
6.12 ), ( 6.13 ), and ( 6.14 ) are preserved. Furthermore, as the name
indicates, we will restrict our attention to those transformations under
which each MTIS is closed. That is, to first order, the @xmath rotate
only into themselves, and the @xmath rotate only into themselves,

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.22)
  -- -- -- --------

for some complex coefficients, @xmath . Here, @xmath are some given
complex coefficients, and @xmath is a generator of the MTIS symmetry.

Finally, we demand that the group transformation on @xmath commute with
hermitian conjugation, @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

Under these conditions, in the case of @xmath , our unitary MTIS
symmetries are then found to be generated uniquely by @xmath and @xmath
. Explicitly, the @xmath generators are given by the @xmath of
equation ( 6.5 ), and the @xmath generator is found to be given by
@xmath of equation ( 6.3 ).

### 6.8 Ladders to @xmath and @xmath

We will now find a compact way of describing the generators of the MTIS
symmetries, @xmath and @xmath , and apply them to our minimal left
ideals.

Consider @xmath and @xmath , where the @xmath and @xmath are complex
coefficients. We can then build hermitian operators, @xmath , of the
form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Taking the most general sum of these objects results in nine hermitian
operators:

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.25)
  -- -- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are real coefficients. @xmath is our
electromagnetic generator from equation ( 6.3 ), and the eight @xmath
can be seen to generate @xmath . Indeed, these @xmath coincide with
those described in equation ( 6.5 ), which generate a subgroup of the
octonionic automorphism group, @xmath . It should be noted that earlier
authors, [ 8 ] , [ 13 ] , [ 14 ] , were quite close to these results,
but required a second ladder system in order to build @xmath (and
incidentally also all of the isospin down type states).

In terms of ladder operators, the @xmath generators take the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

all eight of which can be seen to commute with @xmath , and its
conjugate.

We take the operators @xmath and @xmath to transform according to

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.27)
  -- -- -- --------

respectively. The reader may confirm that @xmath transforms as a @xmath
and @xmath transforms as a @xmath under @xmath , consistent with the
results of [ 42 ] .

Now, the minimal left ideal, @xmath , transforms as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the equality holds because @xmath for all @xmath .

We now identify the subspaces of @xmath by specifying their electric
charges with respect to @xmath , and also which irreducible
representation they belong to under @xmath . Clearly, @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath are meant to be distinct from each other in any given row.

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.29)
  -- -- -- --------

So, here we identify a neutrino, @xmath , (or antineutrino, @xmath ),
three anti-down type quarks, @xmath , three up-type quarks, @xmath , and
a positron, @xmath .

As the minimal left ideal, @xmath , is related to @xmath by complex
conjugation, we then see that it transforms as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the equality holds because @xmath for all @xmath . This leads to
the table below.

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.31)
  -- -- -- --------

Here, we identify an antineutrino, @xmath , (or a neutrino, @xmath ),
three down-type quarks, @xmath , three anti-up type quarks, @xmath , and
the electron, @xmath .

We have now shown a pair of conjugate ideals, which behave under @xmath
and @xmath as does a full generation of standard model fermions. These
are summarized in Figure ( 6.3 ).

### 6.9 Towards the weak force

Perhaps unexpectedly, it turns out that @xmath packages all of the
isospin up-type states together, and @xmath packages all of the
down-type states together. This is of course, if one goes ahead and
makes an assumption about the placement of @xmath into @xmath and @xmath
into @xmath .

We point out that @xmath is (automatically) negatively charged, and
converts isospin up particles into isospin down, via right
multiplication on @xmath . It thereby exhibits features of the @xmath
boson. Similarly, @xmath is positively charged, and converts isospin
down particles into isospin up, via right multiplication on @xmath . In
doing so, it exhibits features of the @xmath boson.

Other characteristics of the W bosons do not appear at the level of this
chapter. For example, there is nothing to specify that these candidate
bosons act only on left-handed particles. We also have no description
here for the polarization states of these would-be bosons.

Readers may notice that right multiplication by @xmath and @xmath
generate a representation of @xmath , so that their inclusion would mean
that we are then interested in a representation of @xmath . This is
clearly the analogue of the extra @xmath which came from right
multiplication of @xmath , which related left- and right-handed Weyl
spinors with each other. Please see Section 4.8 .

### 6.10 Summary

Using only the complex octonions acting on themselves, we were able to
recover a number of aspects of the standard model’s structure.

First of all, we introduced unitary MTIS symmetries, which led uniquely
to the two unbroken gauge symmetries of the standard model, @xmath and
@xmath . This new @xmath generator, @xmath , happens to be proportional
to a number operator, thereby suggesting an unexpected resolution to the
question: Why is electric charge quantized?

Then, using octonionic ladder operators, we have built a pair of minimal
left ideals, which is found to transform under these unbroken symmetries
as does a full generation of quarks and leptons.

If the algebra of the complex octonions is not behind the structure of
the standard model, it is then a striking coincidence that @xmath and
@xmath both follow readily from its ladder operators.

## Chapter 7 Why does @xmath act on only left-handed fermions?

### 7.1 A spotlight on right multiplication

In Section 4.7 , we found a four-complex-dimensional Dirac spinor,
@xmath , as an irreducible representation of @xmath . Here, the second
factor of @xmath came from right-multiplying @xmath on itself, and it
effected transitions between L and R states.

Likewise, in Section 6.6 , we found a 16-complex-dimensional spinor,
@xmath , as an irreducible representation of @xmath . Again, we see that
the factor of @xmath came from right multiplication, but this time it
effected transitions between isospin up-type and isospin down-type
states.

We can now combine these spinors by taking the tensor product of the
spaces @xmath and @xmath , as in @xmath , resulting in a
64-complex-dimensional spinor space. The Clifford algebra associated
with spinors in @xmath can easily be seen to be @xmath .

In this chapter, we will be interested in only the @xmath sector of this
Clifford algebra, which comes exclusively from right multiplication.
This sector encodes transitions between L and R states, and also between
isospin up-type and down-type states.

In doing so, we will be able to catch a glimpse of how @xmath symmetries
are expected to come about in this model. Focussing on the leptonic
sector, we will again make use of MTIS symmetries, which were already
introduced in Section 6.7 .

It turns out that the MTIS symmetries for @xmath are generated by @xmath
and @xmath . This @xmath , applied to the minimal right ideal which we
will now construct, automatically acts on only one of the fermions’
chiralities. In other words, MTIS symmetries seem to be able to offer an
explanation for the curious favouritism exhibited by particle physics,
for fermions of a particular handedness. Such an explanation is absent
in the standard model.

### 7.2 Leptonic subspace of @xmath

We will now build a minimal right ideal, using the procedure laid out in
Section 4.5.2 . Readers should note that when multiplying elements
constructed from @xmath , the quaternionic and octonionic imaginary
units always commute with each other.

1. Let us consider a Clifford algebra, @xmath , generated by the
vectors, @xmath , where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Notice, that these four generators involve the right-multiplied
octonionic object, @xmath , of Section 6.9 , and also the
right-multiplied quaternionic objects of Section 4.7 .

2. Within this generating space, we may now identify an MTIS spanned by
the objects @xmath and @xmath over @xmath , and another MTIS spanned by
the objects @xmath and @xmath over @xmath . Here, the conjugate, @xmath
, maps the complex @xmath , the quaternionic @xmath and the octonionic
@xmath . It also reverses the order of multiplication. The lowering
operators, @xmath , will be defined here as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Readers may confirm that @xmath , and that @xmath , on the leptonic
subspace.

3. The nilpotent object, @xmath , may now be constructed as @xmath .

4. The projector, @xmath , is then found to be @xmath . This idempotent
will act as our vacuum state, and can be identified with the spin-down
right-handed neutrino, in keeping with the vacua of previous chapters.

5. Finally, right-multiplying @xmath onto our projector, we obtain the
minimal right ideal,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the basis elements have been labelled consistently with previous
chapters.

The above minimal right ideal clearly corresponds to spin-down leptons;
the spin-up states can easily be found by acting with a @xmath raising
operator, as was shown in Section 4.6.1 .

### 7.3 MTIS symmetries: @xmath and @xmath

Now that we have constructed a minimal right ideal, we would like to see
how it transforms under the MTIS symmetries for this Clifford algebra,
as defined in Section 6.7 .

Again, MTIS symmetries are those which act on the generating space as
@xmath , which map non-trivially the lowering operators to themselves,
and the raising operators to themselves, and which commute with
hermitian conjugation, here, @xmath . The generators @xmath this time
will be elements of @xmath .

Readers may confirm that there are four solutions to these constraints,
given by

  -- -- -- -------
           (7.4)
  -- -- -- -------

The three @xmath can be seen to generate @xmath , whereas @xmath
commutes with the @xmath , and itself generates @xmath . @xmath may be
viewed as a number operator for the @xmath system; it is nothing more
than the weak isospin operator, @xmath , on this leptonic subspace. Or,
more accurately, @xmath . On the other hand, the @xmath can be seen to
annihilate the right-handed neutrino and right-handed electron states,
while transforming the left-handed leptons together as a doublet. Please
see Figure 7.1 .

### 7.4 Summary and outlook

In this chapter, we have focussed our attention on @xmath structure,
coming from the right action on our previously constructed minimal left
ideals. From this Clifford algebra, @xmath , we have then constructed a
4-complex-dimensional minimal right ideal, corresponding to a leptonic
subspace of a generation of standard model particles. We then found the
unitary MTIS symmetries corresponding to this Clifford algebra. It turns
out that the four MTIS symmetry generators correspond to @xmath and
@xmath on this leptonic subspace, and furthermore provide an explanation
as to why left-handed particles in this model interact via @xmath ,
whereas right-handed particles do not.

As a final note, we point out that the dimensions of the spinors
introduced in this thesis suggest a possible connection to triality.

## Chapter 8 Group representation structure of some grand unified
theories

We mentioned in the previous chapter, that combing our results for
@xmath and @xmath will bring us to consider the Clifford algebra @xmath
. That is, our Dirac spinor, @xmath was found to be an irreducible
representation of @xmath , and our generation of quarks and leptons of
Chapter 6 was found to be an irreducible representation of @xmath .
Taking the tensor product of the two Clifford algebras gives @xmath .

Now, the Clifford algebra, @xmath , can be rewritten as @xmath , where
we have separated out a factor of @xmath , corresponding to spin. The
remaining @xmath algebra is tied in closely with some well-known grand
unified theories, which we will now introduce.

### 8.1 @xmath unification

#### 8.1.1 Introduction

The @xmath grand unified theory offers a classic example of what it
means to be a grand unified theory. It was proposed in 1974 by H. Georgi
and S. Glashow, [ 38 ] , and can be seen to successfully unify the gauge
groups of the standard model. However, the @xmath model only partially
unifies a generation of quarks and leptons.

The group @xmath has rank 4, as with the standard model’s gauge group,
@xmath ; that is, its Lie algebra has a 4-dimensional Cartan subalgebra,
[ 48 ] . The Lie algebra of @xmath essentially doubles the gauge
symmetry of the standard model by subsuming the standard model’s 12
symmetry generators, and then incorporating another 12, for a total of
24.

Irreducible representations for @xmath are listed as

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Most descriptions of the @xmath model give a generation of quarks and
leptons, which stretches across the @xmath and the @xmath , and
optionally, the singlet, @xmath . This singlet can be included so as to
represent the right-handed neutrino. In contrast, gauge bosons lie in
the @xmath , while the Higgs fields typically are represented by the
@xmath and the @xmath .

Despite its anticipated candidacy as a suitable fit to nature, the
@xmath grand unified theory has run into trouble with experiment. For
example, the theory predicts proton decay, with a lifetime of @xmath
years, depending on the details and source of the calculation, [ 53 ] ,
[ 48 ] . This is generally seen to be at odds with the findings of the
Super-kamiokande experiment, [ 20 ] , [ 21 ] , which gives a proton
lifetime of @xmath years at the @xmath confidence level.

#### 8.1.2 @xmath inside @xmath

Here, we detail the embedding of the standard model’s gauge group into
@xmath , as given in [ 7 ] .

Elements of @xmath can be written down as @xmath complex matrices,
wherein we may embed the standard model’s gauge group, [ 7 ] , [ 48 ] .
Starting with @xmath and @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a @xmath matrix representing elements of @xmath , and
@xmath is a @xmath matrix, representing elements of @xmath . Written in
this way, the @xmath and @xmath subgroups clearly commute with each
other. We might then ask, what groups remain in @xmath , which commute
with both of these @xmath and @xmath subgroups?

It is straightforward to see, [ 7 ] , [ 64 ] , that any @xmath matrix
commuting with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

must be of the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

for @xmath . Furthermore, for @xmath to be an element of @xmath , it
must have a determinant of one, so that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath .

Putting these all together, we see that it is possible to map any
element of @xmath into @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath .

Now, it turns out that after considering the action of the @xmath and
@xmath subgroups on the @xmath and the @xmath , we see that this @xmath
of equation ( 8.3 ) is none other than @xmath , weak hypercharge. That
is, @xmath theory is able to elegantly explain the strikingly inelegant
arrangement of hypercharges asserted by the standard model.

A question now arises, as to whether or not every element of @xmath is
mapped to a unique element of @xmath ’s subgroup. That is, we might ask,
is this mapping invertible? It turns out that the answer is no, [ 7 ] ,
as it is possible to find distinct elements of @xmath , given by

  -- -- -- -------
           (8.5)
  -- -- -- -------

which each map to the same identity element of our @xmath subgroup,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The above elements, @xmath , are restricted to be sixth roots of unity,
@xmath , since @xmath and @xmath must each have a determinant of one.
This generates the finite group @xmath .

So it turns out that our subgroup of @xmath is not @xmath , but rather,
@xmath . This could be problematic for @xmath theory, if the standard
model representations were indeed able to distinguish between these six
values of @xmath .

However, by checking explicitly one can show that the standard model
representations are insensitive to these distinct values of @xmath .
Furthermore, @xmath is said, [ 7 ] , to constitute the entire kernel of
this representation. This leaves us with the conclusion that the
standard model’s gauge group is not @xmath , but rather, @xmath .

#### 8.1.3 Some notes on symmetry breaking

The adjoint Higgs field is responsible for breaking @xmath symmetry down
to @xmath , [ 64 ] . In the process, the fermionic @xmath and @xmath
break into @xmath irreps as

  -- -- -- -------
           (8.7)
  -- -- -- -------

On the other hand, gauge generators break down as

  -- -- -- -------
           (8.8)
  -- -- -- -------

where the @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath generate @xmath , @xmath , and
@xmath , respectively, and the @xmath and @xmath generators give rise to
12 new gauge bosons which can be seen to mediate proton decay.

The familiar Higgs doublet, @xmath , can be seen to emerge from the
@xmath as

  -- -- -- -------
           (8.9)
  -- -- -- -------

where the @xmath describes a new triplet Higgs field, @xmath .

The Higgs sector, mentioned here, is commonly thought to be the source
of two additional outstanding problems for @xmath theory, [ 48 ] .
Namely, there is no clear explanation for the large differences between
the GUT scale, where @xmath breaks, and the weak scale, where @xmath
breaks (GUT hierarchy problem). Secondly, as the Higgs @xmath breaks
into a doublet under @xmath and a triplet under @xmath , both pieces
must be accounted for. The Higgs boson, as we now know, has a relatively
small mass of about 125 GeV. However, in order to evade proton decay,
the remaining triplet must acquire a large mass @xmath GeV, and there is
no obvious reason for these two mass scales to be so far apart (doublet
triplet splitting problem) [ 48 ] .

### 8.2 A fermionic binary code

It turns out that there is a very efficient way of describing the
standard model’s fermions, which is helpful in understanding @xmath ,
@xmath , Pati-Salam theories, and incidentally, also upcoming @xmath
models based on @xmath . This is in terms of a binary code, [ 7 ] , [ 64
] . For a thorough explanation of this topic, the reader is encouraged
to consult [ 7 ] .

This fermionic binary code can be thought of as a sequence of answers to
five different yes or no questions:

Is the fermion red?

Is the fermion green?

Is the fermion blue?

Does the fermion have isospin up?

Does the fermion have isospin down?

The set of answers to these five questions can be represented by an
exterior algebra, @xmath , which is @xmath -complex dimensional. For
example, a fermion which is red, @xmath , and has isospin up, @xmath ,
would be represented by @xmath . A fermion which is said to be both red,
@xmath , and blue, @xmath , and has both isospin up, @xmath , and
isospin down, @xmath , would be represented by @xmath , and so on. (It
may seem odd for a particle to be both red and blue, or to have both
isospin up and isospin down, but this should become clear shortly.)
Please see Figure 8.1 .

Now, complex linear combinations of the basis vectors, @xmath may be
acted upon by @xmath , where they form the irreducible representation,
@xmath . By extension, the bivectors of @xmath form the @xmath , the
three-vectors form the @xmath , the four-vectors form the @xmath ,
whereas both the unit, 1, and the five-vector form singlets. We then see
that we have exactly the right @xmath representations to describe one
generation of standard model particles, together with the right-handed
neutrino, including all corresponding antiparticles. Please see Figure
8.2 .

Upon spontaneous symmetry breaking, the @xmath breaks into @xmath and
@xmath , and the rest of @xmath can then be seen to follow suit. This
then allows us to identify each element of @xmath with one of the
standard model’s fermions, as shown in Figure 8.3 .

Readers may notice that @xmath respects the grading of @xmath , and that
all left-handed particles reside in the even grades, while all
right-handed particles reside in the odd grades.

### 8.3 @xmath unification

Although the @xmath model was able to draw together the three gauge
groups of the standard model into a single group, it only partially
unified the standard model’s fermions into the @xmath and the @xmath .
One might wonder if an alternate Lie group might exist, which could
fully unify not only the standard model’s gauge bosons, but also its
fermions.

One Lie group which does hit the mark is @xmath . The @xmath grand
unified theory is more commonly known in the literature as the “ @xmath
” model, and was proposed by H. Georgi in 1974/1975, [ 37 ] , and
independently by H. Fritzsch and P. Minkowski in 1975, [ 31 ] .

@xmath is the double cover of the group @xmath , and is of rank 5, [ 48
] . It unifies the standard model’s gauge group, and extends it from 12
dimensions to 45. A generation of quarks and leptons in this model is
unified into a 16-dimensional spinor, with a conjugate spinor accounting
for the required anti-particles. This spinor representation can be seen
to naturally account for a right-handed neutrino, [ 7 ] .

The group, @xmath , is associated with the Clifford algebra @xmath ,
which has an irreducible representation given by a 32-dimensional Dirac
spinor. Under @xmath , this Dirac spinor breaks down into two
irreducible representations, known as Weyl spinors, which are each
16-dimensional. Now, it can be shown, [ 7 ] , that Dirac spinors of the
group @xmath can be represented by the exterior algebra, @xmath . Hence,
we see that the exterior algebra, @xmath , which we just described in
the previous section, is capable of acting not only as a representation
of @xmath , but also as a representation of @xmath . Please see Figure
8.4 .

Readers may recognize that this same pattern has appeared more than once
in this thesis. That is, minimal left ideals, such as @xmath and @xmath
, have been built using raising operators of the Clifford algebras
@xmath and @xmath , respectively. These raising operators may be viewed
as generating exterior algebras. For example, by looking at equation (
6.19 ) of Section 6.4 , it is easy to see how the Dirac spinor, @xmath ,
is built from the exterior algebra, @xmath , generated by @xmath ,
@xmath , and @xmath .

Now, it can be shown that our representation of @xmath resides inside
that of @xmath , [ 7 ] . As with @xmath , the group @xmath can be seen
to respect the chirality of particles; it does not mix left- and
right-handed species. However, it does not respect the grading of @xmath
, as do @xmath and @xmath .

### 8.4 Pati-Salam model

Before the introduction of @xmath - and @xmath -theories came an
extension to the standard model, now known as the Pati-Salam model. The
model is named after its inventors, J. Pati and A. Salam, who published
the proposal in 1974, [ 57 ] .

The Pati-Salam model may be considered to be a more conservative
approach to unification. It does not unify the gauge groups of the
standard model into a simple Lie group, as with @xmath and @xmath .
Instead, it is based on the gauge group, @xmath , [ 7 ] , which extends
the dimension of @xmath from 12 to @xmath .

One main goal of the Pati-Salam model is to capitalize on the fact that
the standard model treats quarks and leptons similarly under weak
isospin. Hence, the authors proposed that leptons might be considered as
just another type of quark, which happen to be of a fourth colour,
beyond the usual red, green and blue of @xmath . This fourth colour
would then be identified with lepton number, thereby extending @xmath to
@xmath , [ 57 ] .

Perhaps perplexed by the standard model’s apparent preference for
left-handed particles, Pati and Salam further extended @xmath by
incorporating an extra factor of @xmath , meant for right-handed
particles. With @xmath extended to @xmath and @xmath extended to @xmath
, we then arrive at @xmath . It turns out that the standard model’s
@xmath stretches across the right-handed @xmath , and also the @xmath
factor, [ 7 ] .

The standard model’s gauge group may be mapped into @xmath as shown in [
7 ] ,

  -- -- -- --------
           (8.10)
  -- -- -- --------

for @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath .

With the gauge groups in hand, it is now fairly straightforward to build
up the fermionic vector spaces proposed in this model. The group @xmath
can be made to act on a four-complex-dimensional vector, @xmath , and
its conjugate, @xmath . For the @xmath sector, we choose a left-handed
doublet, @xmath , and a right-handed doublet, @xmath . Putting these all
together gives the Pati-Salam representation, [ 7 ] ,

  -- -- -- --------
           (8.11)
  -- -- -- --------

which is 32-complex dimensional.

In keeping with the fact that @xmath , it turns out that there is
another way to describe the fermionic space, @xmath . This is in terms
of the Dirac spinors, which form representations of @xmath and @xmath .
These Dirac spinors may be expressed as the exterior algebras, @xmath
and @xmath , respectively, so that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us now consider @xmath to be generated by @xmath and @xmath , and
@xmath to be generated by @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath , which are
familiar from Section 8.2 . We can now take the tensor product between
these two exterior algebras, and arrange them so as to see the
similarity between @xmath and @xmath from Section 8.2 . Please see
Figure 8.5 . Clearly, going from the @xmath fermionic space to the
@xmath fermionic space, requires simply replacing the tensor product in
objects such as @xmath with the wedge product, giving @xmath , [ 7 ] .

## Chapter 9 Towards a three-generation model

### 9.1 Introduction

Despite the wide range of proposals to simplify the standard model, most
schemes tend to share the same impedances. Few unified models naturally
offer more than a single generation of particles, and few are able to
evade proton decay without repercussion.

In previous chapters, we were also concerned with finding just a
one-generation model of particle physics, based on @xmath . However,
this begs the question: could @xmath provide room for three?

In this chapter, we point out a somewhat mysterious appearance of @xmath
representations, which exhibit the behaviour of three full generations
of standard model particles. These representations are found in the
Clifford algebra @xmath , arising from the complex octonions. Back in
Section 6.3 , we explained how this 64-complex-dimensional space came
about. With the algebra in place, we will now identify new generators of
@xmath within it. These @xmath generators then act to partition the
remaining part of the 64-dimensional Clifford algebra into six triplets,
six singlets, and their antiparticles. That is, the algebra mirrors the
chromodynamic structure of exactly three generations of the standard
model’s quarks and leptons.

Passing from particle to antiparticle, or vice versa, requires nothing
more than effecting the complex conjugate, @xmath : @xmath . The entire
result is achieved using only the eight-dimensional complex octonions as
a single ingredient.

The purpose of this chapter is not to offer a completed unified gauge
theory, or even a completed description of QCD. Instead, we propose a
gateway from which such a theory might be found.

To the best of this author’s knowledge, [ 35 ] was the first account of
these three-generation results found either within the octonions, or
@xmath .

### 9.2 Generators of @xmath

As mentioned earlier, the automorphism group of the octonions is @xmath
, which is a 14-dimensional exceptional Lie group. Within @xmath , we
may find a subgroup, @xmath , which is defined as that subgroup of
@xmath which keeps the imaginary unit, @xmath , invariant. The Lie
algebra of this @xmath , acting on @xmath may be expressed as

  -- -- -- -------
           (9.1)
  -- -- -- -------

The Lie algebra’s commutation relations take the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath , with the usual @xmath structure constants, @xmath .

Clearly, the @xmath , as expressed above, constitute elements of @xmath
. In earlier references, [ 41 ] , [ 42 ] , [ 26 ] , these @xmath are
shown to act on quark and lepton representations in the
eight-dimensional @xmath , or multiple copies thereof. In contrast, here
we introduce the @xmath acting on quark and lepton representations
within the 64-dimensional @xmath .

Taking a hint from [ 34 ] , let us now introduce a related
representation of @xmath , which will draw out structure in @xmath ,
familiar from the behaviour of quarks and leptons.

Consider a resolution of the identity in @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . Both @xmath and @xmath act as projectors, whereby @xmath
, @xmath , and @xmath .

As

  -- -- -- -------
           (9.4)
  -- -- -- -------

equation ( 9.2 ) then leads to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

That is, the eight @xmath form a representation of su(3). Taking the
complex conjugate of ( 9.5 ) gives

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

so that the @xmath give a further representation.

### 9.3 Three generations under @xmath

Knowing that the @xmath behave as an eight dimensional representation
under the action of @xmath , one might wonder how objects of the more
general form @xmath behave under @xmath .

Obeying @xmath @xmath , we find six @xmath singlets, whose basis vectors
are given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the left-pointing arrows were dropped throughout for notational
simplicity, and right-to-left multiplication is still meant to occur.
The notation @xmath is meant here to be shorthand for @xmath , etc.

The set of basis vectors

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

acts as a triplet under commutation with the @xmath . Next, we find five
anti-triplets given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Taking the complex conjugate, @xmath : @xmath , of these 32 basis
vectors gives 32 new linearly independent basis vectors. Under
commutation with @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

transform as @xmath singlets,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

behaves as an anti-triplet,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

behaves as a triplet, and so on.

That is, unlike the standard model, we are able to pass back and forth
between particle and anti-particle using only the complex conjugate
@xmath . This feature appeared early on in the work of [ 41 ] for some
internal degrees of freedom, and also in [ 34 ] and Section 3.5.3 when
passing between left- and right-handed Weyl spinors.

### 9.4 A sample calculation

We introduce to the reader how calculations are carried out in @xmath by
working through an example. Let us find the action of the first @xmath
generator of the form @xmath , which we will define as @xmath , in
accordance with equation ( 6.26 ). Let @xmath act on @xmath , as defined
in equations ( 9.8 ):

  -- -- -- --------
           (9.17)
  -- -- -- --------

This is the result we would expect for the first of the @xmath Gell-Mann
matrices, @xmath , from the standard model, acting to convert a red
basis vector, @xmath , into a green basis vector, @xmath .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

### 9.5 Summary for @xmath

Finally, we conclude by summarizing the main result of this chapter in
Figure 9.1 : the breakdown of the 64-dimensional @xmath into irreducible
representations of @xmath .

Using only the eight-dimensional complex octonions, @xmath , we have
explained how to build up a 64-complex-dimensional associative algebra.
The @xmath generators identified within this algebra then break down the
remaining space into six singlets, six triplets, and their
antiparticles, with no extra particles beyond these.

These representations are a curious finding. They effortlessly suggest
the existence of exactly three generations, they relate particles to
antiparticles by using only the complex conjugate @xmath , and finally,
they fill these tall orders while working from but a modest
eight-complex-dimensional algebra.

### 9.6 Three generations under @xmath and @xmath

Since the time that these irreducible representations of @xmath were
identified within @xmath , more standard model structure has been
uncovered in the algebra. It turns out that we can extend our
three-generation results for @xmath to include @xmath as well (presented
for the first time here).

That is, our @xmath action on @xmath given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

can be generalized, so as to include electric charges. Furthermore, we
will be able to incorporate @xmath by making use of the @xmath we had
already introduced in our one-generation model of Section 6.8 ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Consider the following action for the @xmath generators,

  -- -- -- --------
           (9.21)
  -- -- -- --------

where @xmath is the projector given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Clearly, @xmath , so that we see that this new action ( 9.21 ) is no
different from the original action ( 9.19 ). Although it has not been
mentioned before, @xmath is a projector which has come up frequently in
complex-octonionic work; it is nothing more than the
right-multiplication analogue of @xmath . Or in other words,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

It so happens that @xmath @xmath , so that the action ( 9.21 ) may be
rewritten as

  -- -- -- --------
           (9.24)
  -- -- -- --------

Now, an action for electric charge may be found, which matches the
@xmath action of ( 9.24 ). Namely,

  -- -- -- --------
           (9.25)
  -- -- -- --------

Under these actions ( 9.24 ) and ( 9.25 ), we find @xmath and @xmath
charge assignments, which are consistent with three generations of
standard model particles. Below, we relabel the states given earlier in
equations ( 9.7 )-( 9.16 ), so as to now specify their electric charges.

At this level, we are not specifying which generation each state belongs
to, so for @xmath , the three states with electric charge of -1 will be
labelled @xmath ; the three states with electric charge of +1 will be
labelled @xmath ; the three states with electric charge of @xmath will
be labelled @xmath ; the three states with electric charge of @xmath
will be labelled @xmath ; the three states with electric charge @xmath
will be labelled @xmath , and the three states with electric charge
@xmath will be labelled @xmath . Since @xmath and @xmath do not
distinguish between neutrinos, @xmath and anti-neutrinos, @xmath , we
will then label the six states with electric charge of zero as @xmath
and @xmath , where the symbol @xmath could represent either a neutrino
or anti-neutrino.

  -- -- -- --------
           (9.26)
  -- -- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -- -- --------
           (9.28)
  -- -- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -- -- --------
           (9.30)
  -- -- -- --------

  -- -- -- --------
           (9.31)
  -- -- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

Taking the complex conjugate, @xmath : @xmath , of these 32 basis
vectors gives 32 new linearly independent basis vectors:

  -- -- -- --------
           (9.33)
  -- -- -- --------

  -- -- -- --------
           (9.34)
  -- -- -- --------

  -- -- -- --------
           (9.35)
  -- -- -- --------

and so on.

### 9.7 Outlook: From one generation to three

In Section 6.8 , we described a one-generation model in @xmath ,
transforming under the symmetry generators @xmath and @xmath . In
Section 9 we described a three-generation model in @xmath , transforming
under the symmetry generators @xmath and @xmath . Given that they make
use of the same algebras, and very similar symmetry generators, one
might wonder if the one-generation and three-generation models could be
connected.

Direct verification shows that the one-generation representation and its
symmetries do not fit directly into the three-generation model in any
obvious way. However, we suspect that the similarity between these two
models is no coincidence and there could be a way to go from one to the
other. ¹ ¹ 1 For example, one might consider sums of objects of the form
@xmath and @xmath in order to move from states @xmath and @xmath in the
one-generation model to states in the three-generation model. .

## Chapter 10 Conclusion

As a non-associative algebra, one might have naturally expected that
@xmath would not be fit to describe the action of groups. And with no
more than 32 complex dimensions, one might have further anticipated that
@xmath would not have the capacity to describe much of the standard
model, whose particle content spans hundreds of degrees of freedom.

Upon closer inspection, though, this algebra can be seen to exhibit a
surprising amount of the standard model’s structure. Over the years,
numerous authors have pointed out various Lorentz representations,
within @xmath . In this thesis, we have then gone on to consolidate all
of the standard model’s Lorentz representations in terms of generalized
ideals of @xmath .

In the early seventies, Günaydin and Gürsey showed @xmath quark
structure within the octonions, [ 41 ] . This thesis then subsequently
provided a way to extend this octonionic quark model so as to include
leptons and the electromagnetic charge operator. This completes one full
generation of quarks and leptons, and describes their behaviour under
the unbroken gauge symmetries of the standard model. Our use of minimal
left ideals from only @xmath allowed us to provide a straightforward
explanation for the quantization of electric charge.

We also demonstrated a rudimentary leptonic model with this @xmath
algebra, whereby @xmath acts automatically on only left-handed states.
We have repeatedly shown the generators of standard model gauge
symmetries appearing, uniquely, as particular symmetries of the
algebra’s ladder operators.

Finally, within the octonionic sector of @xmath , we found the @xmath
and @xmath representations corresponding to three full generations of
quarks and leptons. Given that most unified theories are based on a
single generation, this may be viewed as an unusual finding.

Although evidence is accumulating in support of a connection between the
standard model and @xmath , we certainly do not have a complete model,
at the moment. However, with every new discovery, it becomes a little
more clear that this unlikely algebra is not going away.