# Acknowledgments

First and foremost, I wish to thank my supervisor, Stefano Liberati, for
his patient guidance, advice, lively interest and helpful suggestions.

I am much indebted to my other wonderful collaborators: Matt Visser,
Arif Mohd, and Rodrigo Turcati. You who have been a great pleasure to
work with, and a wealth of knowledge.

For other useful advice and fruitful discussions I wish to thank Thomas
Sotiriou, David Mattingly, Ted Jacobson, Ian Vega, and Jishnu
Bhattacharrya.

The rest of the gravity group of SISSA, past and present: Eolo Di
Casola, Dario Bettoni, Alessio Belenchia, Ramit Dey, Marco Letizia, and
Dionigi Benincasa I wish to thank for the cheerful and friendly
atmosphere.

Finally, to all the friends and family who have supported me through
this adventure. I thank you staying in touch from the other side of the
world, or attempting to make me feel at home through cultural and
language barriers, and putting up with me chattering about research.

###### Contents

-    Acknowledgments
-    1 Introduction
    -    1.1 Black holes — the hydrogen atom of quantum gravity
        -    1.1.1 Penrose process and superradiance
        -    1.1.2 Surface gravity
        -    1.1.3 Four laws of black hole thermodynamics
    -    1.2 The Einstein Equation as a Thermodynamic Relation
        -    1.2.1 The Rindler horizon
        -    1.2.2 Deriving the Einstein Equations
    -    1.3 Emergent Gravity
    -    1.4 Analogue Gravity
        -    1.4.1 The Basic Picture
        -    1.4.2 Bose Einstein Condensates
        -    1.4.3 Dispersion relation
    -    1.5 Einstein-Æther and Hořava –Lifshitz Gravity
        -    1.5.1 Einstein–Æther gravity
        -    1.5.2 Hořava –Lifshitz Gravity
        -    1.5.3 Relation between Æ and HL gravity
        -    1.5.4 Dispersion relations
    -    1.6 Lorentz Violation and Thermodynamics
    -    1.7 Æ and HL Black Holes and Universal Horizons
    -    1.8 Final Remarks
-    2 Surface Gravities for Non-Killing Horizons
    -    2.1 Introduction
    -    2.2 Standard general relativity — stationary case
    -    2.3 Analogue spacetimes
        -    2.3.1 Horizons
        -    2.3.2 ZAMOs
        -    2.3.3 The on-horizon Lie derivative
        -    2.3.4 Surface gravities
    -    2.4 Modified gravity
        -    2.4.1 Universal horizons and their surface gravities
    -    2.5 Discussion
-    3 Ray tracing Einstein–Æther black holes
    -    3.1 Introduction
    -    3.2 Physical trajectories in an Einstein–Æther black hole
        -    3.2.1 Ray tracing and peeling in purely metric black holes
        -    3.2.2 Rays of constant æther time
        -    3.2.3 Modified dispersion relations
        -    3.2.4 A notion of conserved energy
        -    3.2.5 Physical ray trajectories
    -    3.3 Near-horizon physics
        -    3.3.1 Near the Universal horizon
        -    3.3.2 Near the Killing horizon
        -    3.3.3 Lingering near the Killing horizon
    -    3.4 Discussion
-    4 Hints of Hawking Radiation
    -    4.1 Hawking Radiation – The standard picture
        -    4.1.1 Which infalling observer?
    -    4.2 The Transplanckian Problem
    -    4.3 Hawking Radiation Calculations with Dispersion
    -    4.4 Hawking Radiation with a Universal Horizon
    -    4.5 Adiabaticity
    -    4.6 Euclidean continuation
    -    4.7 Ansatzë for Hawking radiation calculations
    -    4.8 Ways Forward
-    5 Relativistic Bose–Einstein condensates for mimicking Killing and
    Universal horizons
    -    5.1 Introduction
    -    5.2 Modelling Universal horizons in standard acoustic
        geometries
    -    5.3 Relativistic BECs: a new system for analogue black holes
    -    5.4 Analogue Black holes for rBECs
        -    5.4.1 Schwarzschild black hole
        -    5.4.2 Canonical acoustic metric
        -    5.4.3 Killing Horizon in Relativistic Acoustic Metrics
        -    5.4.4 Surface Gravity
    -    5.5 Coupling an External Field to the rBEC
        -    5.5.1 Modified Dispersion Relation
        -    5.5.2 Coupled Relativistic Acoustic Metric
        -    5.5.3 Vorticity
    -    5.6 Coupling a Proca Field
        -    5.6.1 Metric and Dispersion Relation
    -    5.7 Analogue Universal horizons
        -    5.7.1 Coupled canonical acoustic metric
        -    5.7.2 Universal Horizon
    -    5.8 Discussion
-    6 Conclusions and future directions
-    A Some relations for spherically symmetric, static æther black
    holes

## Preface

  If the semi-diameter of a sphere of the same density as the Sun were
  to exceed that of the Sun in the proportion of 500 to 1, a body
  falling from an infinite height towards it would have acquired at its
  surface greater velocity than that of light, and consequently…all
  light emitted from such a body would be made to return towards it by
  its own proper gravity

  John Michell (1724 - 1793)

Black holes, while generally considered as objects predicted by general
relativity (GR), also exist in many other theories of gravity. The key
aspect of a black hole is that it is enclosed by a surface, the horizon,
beyond which there may be no communication with the outside world. Due
to this lack of visible structure, black holes are some of the simplest
objects in our universe and, in many theories, are describable by just a
handful of parameters.

This thesis is about black holes beyond the well-explored world of
general relativity. In particular, it will consider two particular
aspects; black holes in analogue gravity, and those in Lorentz violating
theories of gravity.

Analogue gravity emerged out of the realization that, at low energies,
perturbations moving in condensed matter systems feel an effective
curved metric, and thus can model the kinematics of gravity. Black hole
geometries can be set up in such systems, and important effects such as
Hawking radiation can be probed both theoretically and experimentally
within this framework.

Importantly, the dynamics of such systems differs wildly from dynamics
of gravitational theories, meaning the analogue black holes typically do
not have to obey the symmetries of stationary black holes in GR. This in
turn can lead to novel features which are worth exploring both in their
own right from the perspective of an experimental realization of these
analogue black holes, and as a warm up to possible extended theories

The first part of this thesis is concerned with these more general black
hole solutions, in particular studying the surface gravities of these
systems. While in general relativity symmetries imposed on stationary
solutions by the dynamics enforce strict equivalence of all possible
definitions of surface gravity, in analogue systems the possibility that
event horizons are no longer Killing allows for a plethora of possibly
inequivalent definitions of the surface gravity. While these quantities
are explicitly spelt out for analogue systems, this has wilder
applicability for studying black holes in alternative theories of
gravity, which may also lack the on-horizon symmetries of general
relativity.

In the case of alternative theories of gravity, it is illuminating to
look at Lorentz-violating theories, which may admit superluminal
dispersion relations. This necessarily alters the notion of a black hole
is , and hence what a horizon is. In particular we will examine black
holes in Einstein-Æther  gravity and Hořava -Lifshitz Gravity.
Surprisingly, in these theories a notion of black hole remains,
separated from the outside world by a “universal horizon”.

The new degrees of freedom present in the theories make it unclear how
to apply some of the standard purely geometrical notions for these
horizons to extract physical information about these black holes. One
way to bypass this is to use ray tracing, giving a clear physical
picture of these black holes. From this picture we can obtain a peeling
notion of surface gravity, which is expected to relate closely to the
temperature of Hawking radiation. In turn we shall show that this
quantity appears to correspond to a suitable generalization to universal
horizons of one of the standard definitions of surface gravity.

Hawking radiation in this context is of particular interest because of
potential problems with black hole thermodynamics in these theories,
allowing processes that violate the Generalized Second Law of
thermodynamics. At the time of writing, there are two calculations of
Hawking radiation with opposite conclusions. These issues are also
explored herein, and some new insight is provided albeit inconclusive so
far.

Finally, as noted above, analogue models of gravitational systems have
proved very useful in gaining an understanding of classical and
semi-classical aspects of spacetimes. Therefore an analogue model of
Einstein–Æther black holes would be invaluable. Such a construction
poses new difficulties with respect to standard general relativity,
precisely because coupling to the extra degrees of freedom is essential
to the physical relevance of the universal horizon. Here, we work on
developing such an analogue model, using the little-explored system of
relativistic Bose-Einstein condensates. In doing so we have accidentally
solve a long-standing problem of how to create an analogue model for a
system that includes vorticity. We further provide a candidate system
for simulating universal horizons.

### Arrangement of this thesis

This thesis is arranged into six chapters. The first is a general
introduction to the subjects of black hole thermodynamics, analogue
gravity, and Lorentz violating theories which is necessary background to
the research presented later.

The other chapters are primarily composed of original research. The
second chapter considers black hole solutions in analogue gravity, and
the surface gravities of these black holes. This chapter is based on [
56 ] , work done in collaboration with Stefano Liberati and Matt Visser.
The third chapter is based on [ 55 ] , and is concerned exploring
universal horizons via ray-tracing, research with was carried out with
Arif Mohd, Stefano Liberati and Matt Visser.

Chapters four and five are based on currently unpublished research.
Chapter four discusses numerous forays into deciding whether, and at
what temperature universal horizons radiate. Though ultimately
inconclusive, these investigations shed light on which approaches might
work for shedding light on Hawking radiation in Lorentz-violating black
holes. This is based on ongoing research with Arif Mohd and Stefano
Liberati.

Chapter five presents ongoing work with Stefano Liberati and Rodrigo
Turcati, and discusses analogue black holes using relativistic
Bose-Einstein condensates. Firstly, presenting black holes in these
systems, which have not been investigated in detail, before going on to
discuss how to create and analogue æther field.

The final chapter draws some conclusions and discusses further possible
avenues of research.

## Chapter 1 Introduction

  Gravity is a habit that is hard to shake off

  Terry Pratchett, Small Gods

### 1.1 Black holes — the hydrogen atom of quantum gravity

It is clear the general relativity, though a wildly successful theory,
and passing all experimental tests to date (see, for instance [ 165 ] ),
cannot be valid at all energies. Fundamentally, the problem is that is
it unclear how to combine gravity with quantum mechanics. From the QFT
point of view, general relativity is a perturbatively non-renormalizable
theory, and at best can be regarded as an effective field theory valid
at low energies. This is not enough to answer questions about, for
instance, singularity resolution. There also remain deep philosophical
questions about how to reconcile a theory of dynamical spacetime to
standard quantum mechanics which takes place in a spacetime.

Black holes are an ideal arena in which to explore the failures and
possible extensions of GR. They are typically regions of strong gravity
which are as simple as possible whilst being non-trivial, and they exist
(in the sense that there is something dense, dark and small, that is
well approximated by a black hole) for us to potentially study [ 132 ] .

Let us take a historical tour of the hints that black holes have given
us on the nature of gravity and spacetime.

It was first understood by Planck, well before the formulation of
general relativity, that using the constants @xmath , @xmath , and
@xmath one can create natural units of length, time, and mass. These
units are too small or big for our current technology to even approach
directly measuring these scales.

Such units became more interesting after Schwarzschild’s discovery of
the black hole solution to general relativity [ 143 ] . The Planck mass
is precisely the mass at which, the Schwarzschild radius is the Compton
wavelength. This implies that at this scale, both gravity and quantum
mechanics are crucially important. Naively, locating a Planck-mass black
hole within the accuracy of its radius means that the momentum has such
an uncertainty that one could create another black hole of equal size.

The Schwarzschild solution is the simplest black hole: a static,
spherically symmetric, vacuum solution to Einstein’s equations. By
Birkhoff’s theorem [ 33 , 105 ] it is the unique metric for the
spacetime outside any spherically symmetric asymptotically flat source
for GR (this has also been proven for f(R) theories [ 123 ] and Lovelock
gravity [ 166 ] ). In Schwarzschild coordinates (also sometimes referred
to as curvature coordinates) it takes the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

At the surface @xmath this solution appears to break down (as well as at
@xmath ). This is a signal, not of a true singularity, but of an event
horizon. One can also work in horizon-penetrating coordinates such as
Eddington–Finkelstein coordinates

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

so the metric takes the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The existence of such coordinates shows that @xmath is only a coordinate
singularity (as opposed to the singularity at @xmath which is a true
curvature singularity, as can be computed by, for instance, checking
@xmath ). However the reason a coordinate singularity appears in such
natural coordinate systems is that @xmath is a special surface, the
event horizon, the surface from which light cannot escape. One way to
see this is to note that the surface @xmath is defined by constant
@xmath , and is thus null. Further, as the Schwarzschild is static, it
is equipped with the timelike Killing vector @xmath . At the Killing
horizon @xmath so is null, and inside @xmath becomes spacelike.

Note that Eddington-Finkelstein coordinates are only one of many
possible horizon penetrating coordinates. Another common choice are
Painleve – Gullstrand coordinates, which shall be useful later. Defining

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

the line element transforms to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

The Schwarzschild solution is highly idealized, and many doubted objects
such as black holes would exist in the real world (as real matter
twists, shears, and has pressure). However, in the 60s and 70s a series
of singularity theorems were developed proving that general and
physically reasonable matter configurations can form singularities [ 85
] . Further, in the 1960s Kerr discovered a rotating black hole solution
[ 106 ] that is both more complicated and more astrophysically relevant.
It is a axisymmetric, stationary, vacuum solution for a black hole.
Significant work over a number of years has gone into proving that this
is the unique solution. However, there is no equivalent of the Birkhoff
theorem: outside a rotating star, the metric is not uniquely Kerr (but
should approximate Kerr at large distances).

In Boyer-Linquist coordinates the solution is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (1.6)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Here @xmath , where @xmath can be identified as the angular momentum of
the black hole. If @xmath we recover the Schwarzschild solution, while
@xmath is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (1.7)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

which can be seen to be (in very odd coordinates) Minkowski space.

There are event horizons when @xmath . The two Killing vectors are,
@xmath and @xmath , but more useful is the combination @xmath where
@xmath , is the rotation of the horizon. This is the (unique) Killing
vector that is null on the event horizon.

Furthermore, there is a new surface, where the timelike Killing vector,
@xmath , becomes null, known as the ergosurface, at @xmath . This is the
point at which it is no longer possible to “stand still”.

For @xmath the black hole is maximally rotating, meaning the inner and
outer horizons coincide. For @xmath the horizons vanish and the black
hole becomes a naked singularity.

#### 1.1.1 Penrose process and superradiance

In the late 1960s Penrose [ 127 ] devised a mechanism for extracting
energy from these rotating black holes. Start with particle @xmath ,
with energy, as measured at infinity, of @xmath , where @xmath is the
timelike Killing vector. This quantity is conserved along geodesics and
is the energy measured at infinity. Let @xmath drop into the ergosphere
of a black hole, where it splits into particles @xmath and @xmath ,
which have @xmath and @xmath respectively. As we are in the ergosphere,
@xmath is now spacelike and thus, along certain geodesics, @xmath can be
negative. We let @xmath fall behind the horizon, carrying this negative
energy, while @xmath escapes. As the energies are conserved, @xmath and
we have extracted energy from the black hole.

This process also necessarily causes the black hole to lose angular
momentum, in turn shrinking the volume of the ergoregion. If repeatedly
carried out, eventually all the rotational energy will be extracted, the
ergoregion will vanish, and one will be left with a Schwarzschild black
hole. As with all processes for extracting energy one can ask how
efficient can this process be made. It turns out the the maximally
efficient way to extract energy in the Penrose mechanism is through a
process by which the area of the horizon (which depends on both the mass
and the angular momentum) is unchanged.

A similar process exists for fields incident on a spinning black hole,
known as superradiance can occur (for an extensive review see [ 42 ] ).
The simplest way to see this, (following [ 160 ] ) is to take a scalar
field of form @xmath the energy current is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The flux out of a region containing the horizon can be calculated by the
flux over the horizon by the innner product with the current and the
normal, @xmath , to the horizon

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (1.9)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Thus if @xmath the energy flux into the black hole becomes negative.
Note how crucially the difference between the time translation Killing
vector, @xmath , and the linear combination of radial and time Killing
vectors, @xmath , which defines the horizon, comes in.

This seems like a simulated emission, as in a laser, and the question
arises of whether spontaneous emission can also occur. These two
techniques for extracting energy from a black hole paved the way to
black hole mechanics, Hawking radiation, and finally black hole
thermodynamics.

#### 1.1.2 Surface gravity

Before we go on to state the four laws of black hole thermodynamics, we
need to introduce one useful quantity associated to the horizon, the
surface gravity, which is essentially a measure of the strength of the
pull of gravity at the horizon. This section will mostly follow [ 160 ]
.

At the horizon @xmath is both null and perpendicular to the horizon,
meaning @xmath is also perpendicular to the horizon, so there is a
function of proportionality such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

This @xmath is the surface gravity, and can be shown to be a constant
over the horizon.

The properties of the symmetry of the Kerr solution means that on the
horizon, the Killing vector is geodesic and foliates the horizon,
meaning it obeys the geodesic equation, so one may re-express @xmath via

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

One can physically understand this by considering the force on a
(co-rotating, ideal) rope held at infinity. Through a series of slightly
tedious but straightforward manipulations using the Killing, and
geodesic equations and the Frobenius theorem [ 160 ] , one can arrive at

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the limit is taken on-horizon. This can be see as a combination of
the redshift, @xmath , and the acceleration,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is the force needed to hold a object static against gravity. One
can rewrite @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now the reason for the name surface gravity becomes clear: the force to
hold a mass stationary at the horizon is infinite, but so is the
redshift. Holding a rope at infinity attached to a test mass at the
horizon gives a sensible, finite calculation of the force of gravity at
the horizon surface.

Note that many of these calculations hinge on exact geometrical
properties, and once any of these properties fail to hold, notions of
surface gravity become a lot murkier. Even in the case of spherically
symmetric evolving black holes, a quite significant amount of work has
been devoted to considering extensions to the usual notion of surface
gravity that would be suitable for dynamical situations in standard
general relativity, such as a forming or evaporating black hole (see,
for instance [ 121 , 122 , 129 ] and [ 89 , 71 , 90 , 38 , 39 ] ). The
difficulty of the task is not so surprising; in dynamical scenarios the
event horizon may not even exist and many notions of a locally defined
horizon can be constructed [ 140 , 3 ] .

Consider the simplest possible scenario of a slowly evolving black hole;
there are essentially two basic conceptions of surface gravity, related
to the inaffinity of null geodesics on the horizon 1.10 , and the
peeling off properties of null geodesics near the horizon 1.11 ,
respectively. For stationary Killing horizons these two notions
coincide, but even in the simplest case of a spherically symmetric
dynamical evolution these are two quite distinct quantities. We will
work thorough a brief calculation, adapted from [ 16 ] (see also [ 17 ]
), as an example. Without loss of generality, write the metric for an
evolving spherically symmetric black hole in the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

and define the “evolving horizon”, @xmath , by the location where @xmath
. (Working from the Kodama vector, a “geometrically natural”
justification for interest in this particular form of the line element
is presented in [ 1 ] .)

##### Peeling off properties of null geodesics

A radial null geodesic satisfies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

If the geodesic is near @xmath , that is @xmath , then we can Taylor
expand

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the dash indicates a radial derivative. That is, defining

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

which, in the static case, reduces to the standard result [ 154 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then, for two null geodesics @xmath and @xmath on the same side of the
evolving horizon

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

(automatically keeping track of all the signs), so

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

This makes manifest the fact that @xmath as we have defined it is
related to the exponential peeling off properties of null geodesics near
the horizon .

##### Inaffinity properties of null geodesics

Consider the outward-pointing radial null vector field

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

In a static spacetime, this null vector field is very simply related to
the Killing vector,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a 2-form acting on the @xmath – @xmath plane, normalized
by @xmath . The radial null vector field @xmath is automatically
geodesic. Hence the inaffinity @xmath can be defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

which always exists, everywhere throughout the spacetime. This
construction naturally extends the notion of on-horizon geodesic
inaffinity, defined in a static spacetime as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

That is, equation ( 1.25 ) naturally defines a notion of surface gravity
even for a time-dependent geometry. A brief calculation shows that at
the evolving horizon [ 121 , 1 ] ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (1.27)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

While we do not a priori know exactly where the event horizon (absolute
horizon) is, we can certainly assert that when asymptotically
approaching a quasi-static situation the event horizon will be close to
the evolving horizon. We then have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

in which case we can expand in a Taylor series

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

That is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

In particular, for sufficiently slowly evolving horizons the two
concepts are for all practical purposes indistinguishable.

#### 1.1.3 Four laws of black hole thermodynamics

In addition to the Penrose process and superradiance, some interesting
hints towards possible new physics came from a series of ideas in the
1970s, starting with Hawking noting that in collisions between black
holes the (total) area of the black hole horizons never decreases [ 86 ]
. Shortly thereafter, Wheeler proposed a gedanken experiment: mix hot
and cold tea together, then drop it behind the horizon of a black hole.
All traces of your ”crime” of increasing the entropy of the universe are
now hidden (this also works for hiding evidence of other crimes very
effectively). In response, Bekenstein [ 25 ] , [ 23 ] , [ 24 ] ,
inspired by processes of energy extraction from black holes, and black
hole collisions in which the area must increase, proposed associating an
entropy to the horizon area. That it is the area , as opposed to the
volume is of particular interest.

If an object has an entropy that implies some sort of microstructure,
and therefore it should also have a temperature. It was eventually
proved by Hawking in [ 88 ] that black holes do indeed have a
temperature. Such Hawking radiation relies on the fact that in curved
spacetime different one obcserver may measure nothing with their
particle detector, while another obsever can measure particles for the
same state (further discussion of Hawking radiation is reserved for
chapter 4 ). This last piece in the puzzle means the analogy with the
laws of thermodynamics seems to be complete.

-   Zeroth law: The surface gravity is constant over the horizon.

    This is non-trivial and can be proven in two ways. Either use the
    field equations of general relativity and the dominant energy
    condition, and the assumption of stationarity [ 85 ] .
    Alternatively, assuming that the horizon is Killing, and that the
    spacetime is either static or @xmath symmetric [ 133 ] .

-   First law: @xmath .

    This is in direct correspondence to the usual first law @xmath ,
    with Hawking temperature @xmath and black hole entropy @xmath . Note
    that the efficiency of the Penrose process of section 1.1.1 is
    maximum when the horizon area does not change, i.e. for a reversible
    process.

-   Generalized Second Law: In any process @xmath , where @xmath is
    calculable from observable properties of the black hole alone.

    This is basically a statement that entropy of black holes can be
    calculated by features observable to an outside observer — in the
    case of general relativity, proportional to the horizon area. The
    net entropy of the outside universe and black hole entropies cannot
    decrease. This is the generalization of the fact that area cannot
    decrease in processes where the strong energy condition s obeyed. In
    processes such as Hawking radiation the area will decrease, but the
    entropy of the universe is increased. Note that, with reasonable
    assumption for the scaling of the entropy of the black hole (the
    best we can do in absence of a full quantum theory), without the
    generalized second law one can theoretically build some types of
    perpetual motion machines. While an understanding of the number of
    quantum gravity microstates could fix this issue, it is highly
    distasteful. Several proofs of the generalized second law in general
    relativity have been proposed, for an informative review see [ 162 ]
    .

-   Third Law: The surface gravity of a black hole cannot be reduced to
    zero in a finite number of steps.

    This is the equivalent of the “process version” of the third law of
    thermodynamics: that is is impossible to reach absolute zero in a
    finite number of steps. An alternative version, which states that
    the entropy of a system cannot be reduced to zero has no clear
    correspondence to black hole thermodynamics.

    Although the third law has been proven under certain assumptions [
    94 ] , it is not clear whether this covers all scenarios of physical
    interest see discussions in [ 93 , 27 , 58 , 102 , 135 , 47 , 75 ,
    137 , 40 , 41 , 48 , 6 , 5 ] ).

For further details on various aspects of black hole thermodynamics see
the reviews [ 97 , 124 , 161 ] , and various references therein.

Black hole thermodynamics are tantalizing, but one may wonder if they
are properties of these particular solutions of general relativity, or
are manifestations of a deeper thermodynamic character of the theory.

### 1.2 The Einstein Equation as a Thermodynamic Relation

In an attempt to strengthen the relation between general relativity and
thermodynamics Jacobson [ 95 ] showed that the Einstein equations can be
derived from thermodynamic identities on the Rindler horizon. Here we
shall succinctly review the basic steps that are key to this derivation.

#### 1.2.1 The Rindler horizon

Take standard Minkowski space

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

With the transform

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

One arrives at

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

The @xmath surfaces can be associated with uniformly accelerating
observers (see figure 1.1 ) with proper time @xmath . Note these
coordinates do not cover the whole of Minkowski space, but only one
section: the Rindler wedge, where @xmath with the surface @xmath forming
a forms a causal barrier, the Rindler horizon; light emitted behind such
a surface can never reach the accelerating observer.

Similarly to how a black hole horizon radiates, a Rindler horizon might
be expected to radiate also. this fact was independently discovered by
Fulling [ 74 ] , Davies [ 57 ] and Unruh [ 148 ] . Indeed, an observer
constantly accelerating with @xmath would experience a thermal bath of

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 1.2.2 Deriving the Einstein Equations

Pick a point p, with an associated 2-surface in the directions
orthogonal to @xmath , called @xmath , such that its past null normal
has vanishing shear and expansion (at first order). This is essentially
the condition of equilibrium. Now the past horizon for @xmath is the
local Rindler horizon of @xmath . Consider a heat flow across this
horizon,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

for

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is tangent to the horizon generators. So one may write the
heat flux as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

An important assumption, that the entropy is entanglement entropy and
therefore

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the area variation is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

where theta is the expansion of the horizon generators. We can
re-express this using the (null) Raychaudhuri equation,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

If the Rindler horizon is instantaneously stationary at point @xmath the
@xmath and @xmath terms are of order @xmath and can be neglected, so

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now we use the fundamental thermodynamic relation and the assumption (
1.38 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

to arrive at

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

Given that @xmath is an arbitrary null vector, this means

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

What form can @xmath take? We need @xmath to be conserved, so @xmath for
some constant @xmath . This lead us to the end result: the Einstein
equations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

For further elucidation of these ideas see [ 124 ] .

##### Near-equilibrium thermodynamics

What if we work slightly out of equilibrium, including dissipative
terms? What meaning would these terms have gravitationally? This was
considered in [ 46 ] . Work from a generalized Clausius relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath and @xmath are the entropy exchange with the surrounding and
internal entropy production respectively, and @xmath is the
“uncompensated heat”, the heat lost the the internal degrees of freedom.
From the irreversible part one can find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is a Hartle-Hawking tidal heating. This term describes the energy
loss associated to the emission of gravitational waves, which dissipates
a shear on the horizon. As such, we see that the gravitational fluxes
are analogous to heat fluxes in the spacetime thermodynamics approach.

### 1.3 Emergent Gravity

The analogy above seems a powerful hint that some microstructure, other
than the simple quanta of gravitation, should account for the fabric of
spacetime. What sort of microstructure? We can quantize electromagnetism
to arrive at QED. But if we quantize hydrodynamics nothing quite so
simple happens.

Which sort of theory is gravity? Naive quantization fails. Such a
standard picture could still be rescued, for instance by the ongoing
programme into asymptotic safety (see [ 119 ] ). However, many
researchers are looking into the idea of the continuum geometry and
equation of motions “emerging” from a fundamentally different picture at
microscopic scales. Possibly the earliest incarnation of this idea is
due to Sakharov [ 138 ] .

However, note there are general restrictions on such theories [ 163 ,
112 ] under certain assumptions.

A word of caution is necessary when talking about “emergent gravity”.
This term has been used extensively in the past few decades, and means
very different things to different researchers. Some interesting
perspectives can be found in [ 22 , 12 , 43 ]

In the broadest sense, emergence will imply that the symmetries of
general relativity could merely be a low-energy effect, and violated at
high energies. Some implementations of this idea will be discussed in
section 1.5

The next section will be devoted to one encouraging feature that has
been developed in the last few decades i.e. the discovery that it is
possible to emerge some features of gravity from a diverse range of
physical systems. This analogue gravity programme has been successful in
opening both experimental and theoretical aspects in gravitational
physics.

### 1.4 Analogue Gravity

One arena where some - but very importantly not all - of the features of
gravitational solutions and Lorentz symmetry can emergence is analogue
gravity. The basic idea of analogue gravity is that for some range of
energy/length scales, perturbations feel a metric that is not the lab
Minkowski metric, but instead a curved metric. This was first realized
in water waves [ 149 ] , but has since been extended to many systems.

#### 1.4.1 The Basic Picture

Consider a sound ray, in a fluid that is moving at velocity @xmath with
respect to a laboratory observer. The velocity of the sound ray, by
Galilean Relativity, is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

Which we can rewrite as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

using the fact that @xmath is a unit normal vector. This in turn is
equivalent to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

This equation is precisely that for a null ray moving in the metric

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is undetermined at this level of analysis, as the lightcone
structure is conformally invariant.

This very general and simple derivations shows that lightcones “feel” a
curved Lorentzian metric. This can be extended to perturbations of many
systems. And is enough for discussing the causal structure of the
emergent spacetime. However, when dealing with more general other
features we will need physical acoustics, examining the equation of
motion for perturbation of a given background for a particular physical
system.

#### 1.4.2 Bose Einstein Condensates

One of the most physically interesting analogue gravity systems is that
of Bose Einstein Condensates (BECs), first studied in [ 78 ] . These are
interesting as one of the main motivations behind the analogue gravity
programme was to potentially observe semiclassical curved space effects
(such as Hawking radiation and cosmological particle production), in the
laboratory. For such a direct observation to be feasible we would like
system at low temperature, with a high level of quantum coherence and a
low speed of sound (see the discussion in [ 19 ] ). BECs are good
candidates for all these requirements. The derivation in this section
will mostly follow the presentation in [ 18 ] .

In a dilute gas, the evolution of a BEC can be described by a many-body
Hamiltonian

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (1.52)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

We then separate out @xmath into background condensate, @xmath (the
Boboluibov decomposition)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using this and assuming that @xmath , we can arrive at the
Gross-Pitaevskii equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is also sometimes known as the non-linear Schrödinger equation.

Now @xmath can be written in the Madelung representation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the density is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

and we can define a speed of sound

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the background velocity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

Plugging the Madelung representation into the Gross-Pitaveskii equation,
taking the real and imaginary parts, and using the definitions of @xmath
and @xmath , one arrives at two equations: a continuity equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

and a type of Hamilton-Jacobi equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

These are very similar to the equations for a irrotational inviscid
fluid (discussed in [ 157 , 20 ] ), the difference being in the presence
of the quantum potential

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

The presence of the @xmath means that the quantum potential is
suppressed,and for the present purposes can be safely neglected. For
further discussion see [ 18 ] . Neglecting this term, we can now follow
the steps of [ 20 ] , and rewrite the Euler equation as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that @xmath can be expressed as the derivative of a scalar by
definition, it is irrotational (vorticity free). Hence the first term on
the RHS of the previous equation is zero.

Now linearize around this solution

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

From the continuity equation

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.64)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and from the Hamilton-Jacobi equation (after we have thrown away the
quantum potential)

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.65)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Now we can solve the linearized Hamilton-Jacobi equation for @xmath ,
and substitute into the continuity equation.

  -- -- -------- -------- -------- --------
        @xmath   @xmath            (1.66)
                 @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- -------- --------

Now consider the matrix

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.68)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

By inspection, one can see that equation 1.66 is equivalent to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can further identify @xmath as a tensor density, @xmath so this can
be rewritten as the standard form of the Klein-Gordon equation in curved
spacetime.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore we can read off the metric as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note there are two physically inequivalent ways of deriving a analogue
mspacetime from a BEC: Here we are linearizing the Gross-Pitaveskii
equation essentially dealing with perturbations of the classical
background field, whereas one could look explicitly at the quantum
excitations, as in [ 18 ] . For further details of mimicking spacetimes
with BECs see [ 79 , 78 , 18 , 77 ] .

#### 1.4.3 Dispersion relation

So far we have neglected the quantum potential. What is the effect of
including it? Take the eikonal approximation on the perturbation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

One can maintain the quantum potential throughout the calculation to
arrive at a more complicated version of eqn 1.66 (see [ 18 ] ). Plugging
eqn 1.73 into this, one arrives at the dispersion relation for the BEC

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

Neglecting the quantum potential, one would have instead have arrived at
@xmath . Obviously such systems only have an approximate Lorentz
symmetry; the dispersion relation incorporates the information that at
sufficiently high energies the physics governing such perturbations is
quite different.

##### An Emergent Analogue Gravity

Usually in analogue gravity it is only the spacetime, not the dynamics
that emerge in the low-energy limit. However in the case of
Bose–Einstein condensates it is possible to have a type of gravitational
dynamics [ 83 ] (but see also [ 26 , 84 , 65 ] ). These attempts emerge
Newtonian and Nordström gravity respectively (Given the degrees of
freedom available one cannot expect to derive a tensor equation for
gravity). This is a tantalizing hint that one could delve into the
dynamics of general relativity and other theories of gravity in a
similar way (see however, [ 112 ] for some non-trivial requirements on
the fundamental theory in order to give rise to a truly background
independent gravitational theory).

### 1.5 Einstein-Æther and Hořava –Lifshitz Gravity

Einstein–Æther and Hořava–Lifshitz gravity are two well-studied theories
of gravity that are diffeomorphism invariant but violate local Lorentz
invariance. Einstein–Æther theory violates Lorentz invariance by
introducing a preferred frame @xmath , while Hořava–Lifshitz gravity
introduces a preferred foliation defined by a scalar field @xmath called
the khronon.

#### 1.5.1 Einstein–Æther gravity

Originally proposed in modern form in [ 100 ] (but see also [ 80 ] , [
81 ] ), Einstein–Æther (Æ) gravity was developed as a general framework
for probing Lorentz violating effects, while maintaining the useful
features of general relativity of diffeomorphism invariance and not
having higher than second-order terms in the Lagrangian. This is
achieved by introducing a unit, timelike vector field, the æther .

The most general action possible under these constraints is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath is a Lagrange multiplier, enforcing the unit timelike
constraint on @xmath , and @xmath couples the æther to the metric
through four distinct coupling constants:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

The unit constraint ensures that the æther can never vanish. In many
contexts it is convienent to use additive combinations of these
coeficients, for which a easy shorthand is @xmath and so forth.

The action 1.75 is invariant under disformal transformations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

This transformation changes the effective metric to a mode moving with
speed @xmath rather than @xmath .

A nice way of rewriting this action, as pointed out in [ 98 ] , is to
decompose the æther vector as one would for the Raychaudhuri equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can then rewrite the action of the æther in terms of these variables

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the spatial Ricci scalar constructed with @xmath and the
coupling constants are combinations of the @xmath previously in 1.75 .

#### 1.5.2 Hořava –Lifshitz Gravity

One way to improve the renormalizability of gravity is to include higher
order terms (this was first attempted in [ 147 ] ). However, due to the
presence of higher order time derivatives, these theories become
non-unitary. The way around this would be to add higher order spatial
derivatives, but not time derivatives.

The natural way to implement promoting time and space to different
footings is via the Arnowitt–Deser–Misner (ADM) construction. Note that
once we include such terms as the extrinsic curvature in the action we
have changed from using the ADM construction as a natural system to
express a given metric, to something much more fundamental, a physical
foliation of space and time. The ADM decomposition involves splitting a
metric into a lapse function, @xmath , shift vector, @xmath , and a
spatial metric @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

A natural quantity to consider is the extrinsic curvature of the spatial
metric embedded in the foliation,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the covariant derivative associated with the spatial
metric (note also that some definitions of extrinsic curvature differ on
overall sign). Further note that, in this formalism, one can write the
action for general relativity as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.83)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that the the term involving the extrinsic curvature are the only
ones with time derivatives and can be regarded as the kinetic term,
while @xmath contains only spatial derivatives and can be regarded as
the potential energy. It is this potential term that Hořava –Lifshitz
gravity changes.

If we include a preferred foliation, the theory can no longer be
invariant under the full set of diffeomorphisms allowable in general
relativity. The best one can do it to maintain invariance under a
restricted set of diffeomorphisms

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now if one wants to construct a theory that is only second order in time
derivatives, one must consider what invariants to include. @xmath has
one time derivative so both @xmath and @xmath are second order in time.
Any invariants constructed with @xmath and @xmath would not preserve the
restricted set of diffeomorphisms desired. Therefore, the most general
action possible is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

In principle, @xmath could have infinitely many terms. However, there is
a minimum number of spatial derivatives for achieving a power-counting
renormalizable theory. In three spatial dimensions, if can be shown that
including terms with up to order six operators renders the theory
power-counting renormalizable [ 92 , 156 ] .

##### Projectable and detailed balance versions

Due to the unmanageably large number of potential terms in the full
theory, often two possible restrictions are considered, the projectable
version and the detailed balance versions of Hořava –Lifshitz gravity.
Neither of these restrictions are strongly physically motivated, and a
more for calculations convenience.

-    Detailed Balance
    This is the original version proposed by Hořava [ 92 ] . The
    detailed balance version states that @xmath must come from a
    superpotential, inspired by critical phenomena.

-    Projectable version
    This version makes the assumption that the lapse is only a function
    of time, @xmath , thus removing any derivatives of @xmath from
    @xmath . See [ 164 ]

For many purposes, one may want to consider the full theory, which has
the action

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the determinant of the induced metric @xmath on the
spacelike hypersurfaces, while

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . The quantities @xmath and @xmath denote a collection of
@xmath and @xmath order operators respectively, and @xmath is the scale
that suppresses these operators (which does not coincide a priori with
@xmath ). This full version of the theory, also sometimes known as the
“extended” or “healthy” version [ 34 , 36 , 35 ] , has the possibility
to be phenomenologically viable [ 145 ] (but see also [ 125 ] , which
contrains @xmath as the theory is strongly coupled in the IR), and has
been extensively studied.

#### 1.5.3 Relation between Æ and HL gravity

Given that both Einstein–Æther and Hořava–Liftshitz gravity are Lorentz
violating theories people considered that there may be some relation
between the two. Indeed this is the case. Taking the Æ action 1.75 and
imposing that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.88)
  -- -------- -- --------

and taking the variation of the action with respect to @xmath , one
obtains the @xmath part of the action in 1.86 .

A nice way of viewing this, as pointed out in [ 98 ] is using equation
1.80 . If @xmath is hypersurface orthogonal, @xmath becomes
antisymmetrizations of partial derivatives, and is therefore zero. Thus
we see that (low-energy) Hořava –Lifshitz gravity is twist-free
Einstein–Æther gravity. This automatically implies we have one fewer
coupling constants in low energy HL gravity.

Note that this equivalence is only when the hypersurface orthogonality
is taken before variation to find the equations of motion, as discussed
in [ 98 , 10 ] . In particular, though any solution of Æ theory for
which the aether is hyperssurface orthogonal is also a solution of HL
gravity, but the converse is not true (see section 2.1 of [ 9 ] ).

#### 1.5.4 Dispersion relations

In a Lorentz-violating scenario, particles will generically be coupled
to the preferred frame, and such a coupling will imply modified
dispersion relations which can be naturally assigned in the preferred,
æther frame. If, as in the case of Einstein–Æther and Hořava –Lifshitz
the æther is dynamical, modified dispersion relations do not cause any
inconsistency in the Bianchi identities as discussed in Ref. [ 108 ] .

Let us stress that Lorentz-violation in the gravitational sector is
expected to percolate into the matter sector via radiative corrections,
at least in an effective field theory framework. This implies that even
starting with a Lorentz invariant matter sector our theory will end up
providing modified dispersion relations for all particles. In the matter
sector, dispersion relations are well constrained [ 114 ] , however
there is a mechanism of protection due to the weakness of the
gravitational coupling. Indeed, if there is a large separation between
the Lorentz breaking scale in gravity and the Planck scale @xmath then
the theory is viable [ 131 , 109 ] . Further note that we often only
consider UV modifications of the matter dispersion relations, while of
course also in this case one might also expect radiative corrections to
produce IR modifications (for e.g., inducing particle-dependent
coefficients of the order @xmath terms), see for e.g. Ref. [ 49 ] . Such
effects are even more highly constrained, and several protection
mechanisms to suppress them have been devised in the literature [ 109 ]
. Modified dispersion relations in the context of Einstein–Æther theory
are also discussed in Ref. [ 30 ] .

### 1.6 Lorentz Violation and Thermodynamics

Let us come full circle and discuss black hole thermodynamics in the
presence of Lorentz violations. One of the motivations for initially
considering Lorentz violations was, based on hints from black hole
thermodynamics, the idea that mircostructure of quantum gravity may be
based on very different physics than the macrostructure, and thus have
different symmetries. However, when one considers black hole
thermodynamics in the Lorentz violating case, one runs into potential
problems.

This was initially observed in [ 60 ] , which studied the ghost
condensate model (for background on this model see [ 2 ] ). For our
purposes the key point is that it is natural in this theory for
different particles to propagate at different speeds, that is, the
@xmath term in the dispersion relation can have different coeffiecents.
Thus different species have different Killing horizons for the same
black hole, being at a larger radius for subluminal particles and a
smaller radius for superluminal particles. Already at this point it is
unclear what horizon area one might associate to an entropy. Further,
different horizons radiate at different temperatures. To see just how
worrying this feature is [ 60 ] used the following gedanken experiment
to generate a perpetuum mobile of the @xmath kind (that is, a machine
whose sole result is the transfer of energy from a cold object to a hot
object):

Consider two particles, @xmath and @xmath , with speeds @xmath and
@xmath respectively with @xmath , and therefore the horizons for these
fields have temperatures @xmath . Now surround this black hole with two
shells, @xmath and @xmath such that shell @xmath interacts only with
@xmath and shell @xmath only with @xmath . Let the temperatures of these
shells satisfy

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.89)
  -- -------- -- --------

As @xmath there will be a flow of heat from shell @xmath into the black
hole, and as @xmath there will be a low of heat from the black hole to
shell @xmath . We can therefore choose the temperatures such that the
net heat flow out of the black hole is zero, leaving the state of the
black hole the same for an outside observer. Thus a perpetual motion
machine has been created.

In response to this [ 61 ] (but see also [ 103 ] ), considered a number
of possible ways this conclusion might be evaded, but found only effects
that would be negligible for large black holes. They further constructed
another gedanken experiment to violate the GSL, involving a classical
extraction of energy through a process similar to the Penrose process.

For this process we must make some reasonable assumptions on the form of
the entropy @xmath , namely: i). For

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.90)
  -- -------- -- --------

and ii). For a large enough M, thew entropy carried away by radiation
can be a sufficiently small fraction of @xmath . Both of these
conditions are satisfied if @xmath for @xmath .

Take a particles @xmath and @xmath with limiting speeds @xmath , so that
the @xmath horizon is outside the @xmath horizon. Let a system made of
both @xmath and @xmath particles fall through the @xmath horizon, into
the @xmath ergoregion, and then split, such that the @xmath falls across
the @xmath horizon carrying negative Killing energy , and @xmath exits
from the @xmath horizon. By energy conservation carrying more energy
than when the system entered the A horizon. Thus the mass, and hence
entropy, of the black hole has decreased. It is possible to have @xmath
and @xmath in a pure state, carrying no entropy at all. Hence by this
process the total entropy of the universe has decreased.

### 1.7 Æ and HL Black Holes and Universal Horizons

In the special case of spherically symmetric, static, asymptotically
flat solutions are the same in Hořava –Lifshitz and
Einstein–Æther gravity [ 9 ] . Such solutions have been extensively
considered in recent years (see for example Refs. [ 7 , 37 , 28 , 29 ,
62 , 118 ] ).

In addition to the spherically symmetric solutions mentioned here,
rotating black holes in three dimensional Hořava –Lifshitz [ 144 ] , and
slowly rotating black holes in both theories have been studied [ 10 , 8
, 7 ] , as well as black holes which are asymptotically de Sitter/Anti
de Sitter [ 31 ] .

Among the most striking results concerning these solutions was the
realization — in the (static and spherically-symmetric) black-hole
solutions of both Einstein–Æther and Hořava–Lifshitz gravity — that they
seem generically to be endowed a new structure that was soon christened
the universal horizon [ 7 , 37 ] .

These universal horizons can be described as compact surfaces of
constant khronon field and radius. As nothing singular happens to the
metric, and the khronon, which diverges, can be reparameterized to be
regular, this is not a singularity. Given that the khronon field defines
an absolute time, any object crossing this surface from the interior
would necessarily also move back in absolute time (the æther time),
something forbidden by the definition of causality in the theory.
Another way of saying this is that even a particle capable of
instantaneous propagation, (light cones opened up to an apex angle of a
full 180 degrees, something in principle possible in Lorentz-violating
theories), would just move around on this compact surface and hence be
unable to escape to infinity. This explains the name of universal
horizon; even the superluminal particles would not be able to escape
from the region it bounds.

One way to grasp the universal horizon is to consider the disformal
transformation of eqn 1.78 and consider what happens to the Killing
horizon when we move to a mode of speed @xmath . Note we must also
rescale

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.91)
  -- -------- -- --------

so @xmath and @xmath are equal at infinity. Now

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.92)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can see that depending on the value of @xmath the condition for the
Killing horizon will move inwards (for @xmath ) or outwards (for @xmath
). Now consider taking the limit @xmath .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.93)
  -- -------- -- --------

So, in the limit of infinite velocity, the horizon is where @xmath ,
which is precisely the condition for a universal horizon.

The causal structure of these black hole spacetimes is as shown in Fig.
1.2 . The indicated hypersurfaces are constant khronon hypersurfaces.
The special hypersurface behind the Killing horizon — where the æther
and the Killing vector fields become orthogonal — is the Universal
horizon. Note that the Killing vector generates the time-translation
isometry outside the Killing horizon, while inside it is spacelike.

Universal horizons can be shown to form from (idealized) gravitational
collapse [ 139 ] , and their stability perturbations have been studied [
37 ] .

For some specific combinations of the coefficients there are explicit,
exact solutions for black holes. In particular, two exact solutions for
static, spherically symmetric black holes have been found. As we will
use these solutions extensively throughout this paper, we will briefly
summarize some of their relevant details. For more information and
background we refer the reader to Ref. [ 28 ] . Both solutions, in
Eddington–Finkelstein coordinates, can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.94)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is precisely the case in which the metric can be fully characterized
by just one function that these exact solutions have been found [ 30 ] .
Here the form of the æther is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.95)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note from the normalization condition, @xmath , there is a relation
between @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.96)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can also define a spacelike vector @xmath (either inwards or outwards
pointing), such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.97)
  -- -------- -- --------

Explicitly, for the inward pointing,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.98)
  -- -------- -- --------

which clearly ensures @xmath . The two known exact black-hole solutions
to Einstein–Æther theory correspond to the special combinations of
coefficients @xmath and @xmath .

-   Solution 1: @xmath .

    For this solution we have

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (1.99)
      -- -------- -- --------

    where

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (1.100)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    Here is @xmath is essentially the mass parameter, which can be
    directly related to the ADM mass [ 28 ] . Furthermore

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (1.101)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    It is also useful to decompose the Killing vector along @xmath and
    @xmath using the relations

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (1.102)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    For this particular exact solution, the Killing horizon and
    universal horizons are located at

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (1.103)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    respectively.

-   Solution 2: @xmath .

    For this solution we have

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (1.104)
      -- -------- -- ---------

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (1.105)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    Furthermore, the Killing vector is decomposed as

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (1.106)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    The Killing horizon is located by solving the quartic polynomial
    @xmath , so

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (1.107)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    where

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (1.108)
      -- -------- -- ---------

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (1.109)
      -- -------- -- ---------

    The Universal horizon is located at

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (1.110)
      -- -------- -- ---------

These universal horizons are interesting from the thermodynamics point
of view, and have been shown to obey a first law [ 28 ] , and there are
hints they may radiate [ 29 ] . Could these surfaces offer a solution to
the problems with the generalized second law in Lorentz violating
theories?

### 1.8 Final Remarks

We have now essentially come full circle: black hole thermodynamics and
a thermodynamic derivation of the Einstein equations has led us to
consider the possibility that the fundamental symmetries of general
relativity, in particular Lorentz invariance, may only be low-energy
effects. We are strengthened in this supposition by an understanding of
analogue models of spacetimes, where we can express motion of
perturbations in terms of movement of a curved geometry.

One exciting feature of such analogue gravities is the solutions can
have more (and less) freedom, and the dynamics are completely different.
This is an aspect we will explore further in the next chapter. We saw
that BECs were ideal systems for analogue gravity. We will later return
to a different sort of BEC in an attempt to model new features in
analogue gravity.

If the inspiration that Lorentz symmetry may only be a low-energy
symmetry, it makes sense to study Lorentz violating theories of gravity,
and in particular, black holes, our “hydrogen atom” in such theories.
Surprisingly, we find there are problems with the thermodynamics of
black holes in such therories, the same hint that brought us here in the
first place! Chapters three and four will look into universal horizons,
the thermodynamics of which could solve this issue.

## Chapter 2 Surface Gravities for Non-Killing Horizons

  Space-time is like some simple and familiar system, which is both
  intuitively understandable and precisely analogous, and if I were
  Richard Feynman I’d be able to come up with it

  Randall Munroe, XKCD, Teaching Physics

### 2.1 Introduction

Surface gravity, as discussed in section 1.1.2 , is an important
quantity in classical general relativity, which plays a vital role in
black hole thermodynamics and semi-classical aspects of gravity, being
closely related to the temperature of Hawking radiation. However, in a
large number of situations, the surface gravity cannot be calculated
unambiguously, as standard definitions rely on the existence of a
stationary spacetime with a Killing horizon.

Despite the recent work on developing notions of surface gravity for an
evolving black hole ( [ 121 , 122 , 129 , 89 , 71 , 90 , 38 , 39 ] ),
much less effort has been devoted to stationary scenarios where the
horizon is no longer a Killing horizon. The explanation for this is
simple: For the standard case of general relativity, due to the rigidity
theorem (see, for instance [ 85 , 44 , 45 ] and [ 91 , 72 , 136 , 107 ]
), in stationary spacetimes all event horizons are automatically Killing
horizons ( i.e. , the spacetime must possess a Killing field which is
normal to the event horizon). However, this result hinges on the
Einstein field equations, and in modified gravity, or in the arena of
analogue spacetimes, there is no a priori reason to expect this result
will continue to hold. We will address a number of scenarios where the
standard calculations for surface gravities either will not hold, or
will give rise to distinct quantities.

This technical heart of the chapter is essentially divided into three
sections. In the first section, we will briefly present the standard
general relativity case, and run through several quite standard ways to
calculate the surface gravity in stationary spacetimes, as presented
(for instance) by Wald in reference [ 160 ] , drawing explicit attention
to the assumptions built into the calculations; assumptions that we
shall then relax in subsequent discussion. As a first step in this
relaxation process we consider the conformal Killing horizons of
Jacobson and Kang [ 99 ] .

The second section is devoted to the analogue spacetime case, focussing
specifically on acoustic horizons. In this context, all horizons are
null surfaces, (in fact, they are even geodesic null surfaces), but in
the case of non-zero rotation, (non-zero vorticity, or more precisely
non-zero helicity), can nevertheless be non-Killing. We demonstrate that
the different definitions of the surface gravity will in this context
lead to physically and mathematically distinct quantities, and discuss
which is the most relevant one in the case of analogue horizon
thermodynamics.

The third section will be devoted to discussing the universal horizons
of section 1.7 . Such horizons are spacelike instead of null surfaces,
and are not Killing horizons. Thus they seem to require new techniques
to calculate. We will present a first attempt at understanding the
surface gravity of such horizons.

Finally we end with a brief discussion putting our calculations in
context. In particular, while for definiteness in this chapter we will
discuss non-Killing horizons in analogue spacetime and in
Einstein-Æther and Hořava –Lifshitz contexts, the issues raised are much
more general — similar considerations will apply in various modified
gravity models where modification of the Einstein equations generically
eliminates the rigidity theorems so non-Killing horizons are likely to
be generic. This has importance for mmany areas of physica and, for
instance, non-Killing horizons have very recently become of interest
both in AdS/CFT [ 70 ] and holographic [ 64 ] situations.

### 2.2 Standard general relativity — stationary case

Let us now consider stationary horizons in standard general relativity,
so that (in view of the classical rigidity theorems [ 85 , 44 , 45 , 91
, 72 , 136 , 107 ] ) all horizons are automatically Killing.

-   The peeling definition of surface gravity @xmath is somewhat messy
    to write down in the general stationary case, though it is already
    clear from the spherically symmetric discussion in the previous
    chapter that it will almost certainly equal @xmath .

-   In contrast, for stationary horizons the inaffinity definition of
    surface gravity is typically restricted to an explicitly on-horizon
    version, and given by a simple explicit formula. In terms of the
    Killing vector @xmath (see for example Wald [ 160 ] ):

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (2.1)
      -- -------- -- -------

    where this formula now makes sense only on the horizon.

-   A third notion of surface gravity is that of the null normal
    derivative evaluated on the horizon (see for example Wald [ 160 ] ):

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (2.2)
      -- -------- -- -------

    Equivalently,

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (2.3)
      -- -------- -- -------

    Using Killing’s equation we see @xmath , but this equality will
    generically fail once we move to consider non-Killing horizons. (We
    shall exhibit explicit failure of this equality for acoustic
    horizons later on in the chapter.)

-   As a fourth notion of surface gravity Wald [ 160 ] furthermore
    argues that it is useful to define the equivalent of

      -- -- -- -------
               (2.4)
      -- -- -- -------

    (this name is chosen because the integral curves of the vector field
    @xmath generate the horizon.) This definition makes sense everywhere
    throughout the spacetime. A brief calculation [ 160 ] demonstrates
    that on the (Killing) horizon

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (2.5)
      -- -------- -- -------

    Again, this inequality will generically fail once we move to
    consider non-Killing horizons. (Also in this case we shall exhibit
    explicit failure of this equality for acoustic horizons later on in
    the chapter.)

-   A fifth notion of surface gravity can be formulated in terms of the
    tension in an ideal massless rope holding a unit mass steady just
    above the Killing horizon:

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (2.6)
      -- -------- -- -------

    Here @xmath denotes the magnitude of the 4-acceleration. Wald
    demonstrates that for Killing horizons @xmath , but this equality
    will again generically fail once we move to consider non-Killing
    horizons. (Again, we shall demonstrate explicit failure of this
    equality for acoustic horizons later in the chapter.)

-   A sixth notion of surface gravity recently developed by Jacobson and
    Parentani [ 101 ] is based on relating the surface gravity to the
    expansion of the 2-d surface drawn by (timelike) geodesic
    congruences orthogonal to the horizon. Define

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (2.7)
      -- -------- -- -------

    for

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (2.8)
      -- -------- -- -------

    is the surface projector onto the 2-d surface generated by the
    congruence with tangent @xmath , and @xmath is (spacelike) vector
    orthogonal to @xmath , which can always be expressed as

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (2.9)
      -- -------- -- -------

    We pick an appropriate congruence Lie dragged by the Killing flow
    such that

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.10)
      -- -------- -- --------

    and, using ( 2.8 ), we can write this 2-d expansion as

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.11)
      -- -------- -- --------

    Then on-horizon, where @xmath , we have

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.12)
      -- -------- -- --------

    It is then most useful to normalize by defining

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.13)
      -- -------- -- --------

    which in the case of standard general relativity automatically
    implies, as can be seen by taking 2.2 and decomposing @xmath into
    @xmath and a vector orthogonal to @xmath

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.14)
      -- -------- -- --------

    This notion of surface gravity has been explicitly constructed so
    that @xmath , and hence, in this case, is also equal to @xmath .
    This derivation relies on the construction of a geodesic congruence
    that is invariant under the flow of a Killing vector, and so cannot,
    without suitable alterations, be extended to non-Killing horizons
    that might be present in modified gravity or analogue spacetimes.

-   Finally, a seventh notion of surface gravity can be based on
    Euclidean continuation (Wick rotation), and demanding the
    elimination of the deficit angle at what used to be the horizon in
    Lorentzian signature (see chapter 6 of [ 73 ] ). This construction
    of @xmath is extremely delicate, implicitly requiring constancy of
    the surface gravity over the horizon (and so implicitly appealing to
    the rigidity theorems) to even make sense — but when it works this
    Euclideanization procedure has the virtue that it automatically
    forces all quantum fields into an equilibrium thermal bath at the
    Hawking temperature @xmath . This procedure works best for static
    spacetimes, and is already somewhat delicate for stationary
    non-static spacetimes. We will not explore this particular approach
    any further.

While all of these notions of surface gravity are degenerate in the case
of Killing horizons, the situation for non-Killing horizons is much more
complex.

-   In standard general relativity it is a well-known result that the
    surface gravity is constant over the event horizon. This result can
    be proven without recourse to the field equations if the horizon is
    assumed to be Killing [ 133 ] , but for modified gravity (with field
    equations that differ from the Einstein equations) one may encounter
    non-Killing horizons. Alternatively, in standard general relativity,
    constancy of the surface gravity can be proved using stationarity,
    the Einstein field equations, and the dominant energy condition for
    matter [ 87 ] . (However, note that the dominant energy condition is
    known to be violated by vacuum polarization effects [ 21 ] .) In
    short, this result strongly hinges on the classical equations of
    motion, and as such, we have no reason to believe this will hold for
    modified gravity or in analogue spacetime scenarios.

-   As a first step beyond standard general relativity, note that even
    in the case of conformal Killing horizons four of the definitions
    given in section 2.2 (inaffinity, normal, generator, tension) do not
    generically coincide. This case was considered by Jacobson and Kang
    [ 99 ] , motivated by theories, such as Brans-Dicke, where two
    conformally related metrics are of physical interest. The key point
    is that Jacobson and Kang distinguish several slightly different
    notions of surface gravity, all of which happen to coincide for
    Killing horizons (see also [ 120 , 59 ] ).

    The key result (from our current perspective) can be summarized as
    follows: For a conformal Killing vector by definition one has

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.15)
      -- -------- -- --------

    Then the relationship between the various surface gravities defined
    above is

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.16)
      -- -------- -- --------

    where we have altered their notation to correspond to ours. Only one
    of the definitions can be a true conformal invariant, which they
    find to be @xmath , while the others will at best be conformally
    invariant only for those conformal transformations that are constant
    on the horizon. Furthermore @xmath will be invariant for this
    special class of transformations, but loses its interpretation for
    more general conformal transformations.

These results, in and of themselves, already provide a clear warning
against unrestrictedly interchanging the definitions of surface gravity
when working in non-general relativity contexts.

We shall now discuss two explicit examples of stationary but non-Killing
horizons — one based on the analogue spacetime programme, and the other
on universal horizons.

### 2.3 Analogue spacetimes

While we considered the specific system of Bose Einstein condensates and
derived an analogue spacetime from the perturbation in the system, as
argued in section 1.4.1 , for the case of non-relativistic acoustics in
the limit of geometrical acoustics, which is enough for our purposes, we
can write the metric as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where (for now) the quantities @xmath and @xmath are position (but not
time) dependent. The corresponding inverse metric is:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Equivalently, the line element is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

For later convenience also set

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.20)
  -- -- -- --------

Note that indices on @xmath are raised and lowered using @xmath and
@xmath .

#### 2.3.1 Horizons

Because of the definition of event horizon in terms of phonons (which
are null geodesics of the analogue spacetime) that cannot escape the
acoustic black hole, the event horizon is automatically a null surface,
and the generators of the event horizon are automatically null
geodesics.

Stationary horizons are surfaces, located for definiteness at some
@xmath , that are defined by the 3-dimensional spatial condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

That is, on a horizon the normal component of the fluid velocity equals
the speed of sound, thereby either trapping or anti-trapping the
acoustic excitations (resulting in black holes or white holes).

On the horizon we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

which we can rewrite in 3-dimensional form as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

that is,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since the conformation, and location, of the horizon is time independent
this statement can be bootstrapped to 3+1 dimensions to see that on the
horizon

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

That is, the 4-vector @xmath is null on the horizon. In fact, on the
horizon, where in terms of the (inward-pointing) 3-normal @xmath we can
decompose @xmath (where the subscript @xmath indicates on-horizon), we
can furthermore write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

That is, not only is the 4-vector @xmath null on the horizon, it is also
a 4-tangent to the horizon (note this means we can always apply the
Frobenius theorem) — so, as in general relativity, the horizon is ruled
by a set of null curves. Furthermore, extending the 3-normal @xmath to a
region surrounding the horizon (for instance by taking @xmath ) we can
quite generally write @xmath . Then away from the horizon

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

That is, the 4-vector @xmath is spacelike outside the horizon, null on
the horizon, and timelike inside the horizon.

#### 2.3.2 ZAMOs

A rotating analogue black hole (to be more precise: an analogue black
hole where the fluid velocity is not 3-orthogonal to the horizon), need
not be equipped with the same Killing vectors as the Kerr black hole
(and in fact it can be shown it is impossible to reproduce the exterior
of a Kerr black hole with analogue models [ 159 , 153 , 152 , 76 ] ). In
particular, the usual theorems whereby stationarity implies axial
symmetry need no longer apply. To attempt to generalize the
constructions in Wald [ 160 ] , we want a natural vector that is
timelike outside, spacelike inside, and null on the horizon. For this we
will consider a vector describing an observer similar to a ZAMO (zero
angular momentum observer, see for instance [ 134 ] ). To capture a
suitable notion of “comoving with the horizon” let us define

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is null on the horizon. Furthermore @xmath , so these vector
fields @xmath foliate the constant- @xmath surfaces, @xmath , and in
particular foliate the horizon at @xmath .

In the current context the vector @xmath is the closest we can get to a
horizon-foliating Killing vector; it is at least horizon-foliating, even
if it is not necessarily Killing.

For later convenience, we also define

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 2.3.3 The on-horizon Lie derivative

Note the Lie derivative

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

evaluates to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

Explicitly

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.33)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

It is the fact that this quantity is non-vanishing that makes the
horizon non-Killing. The @xmath term is just a conformal Killing
contribution, hence more or less “trivial” (apply the Jacobson–Kang [ 99
] argument). Now, on-horizon,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.34)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

We can write this in terms of the 3-d spatial Lie derivative (with
respect to @xmath ) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

This makes it obvious that it is the in-horizon symmetries (or lack
thereof) which governs whether or not the horizon is Killing. Such
symmetries will naturally be enhanced by solutions with particular
symmetries (such as spherical symmetry).

From this perspective, the key reason for the degeneracy of surface
horizon definitions in general relativity is that the field equations
impose symmetries on horizon . Comparing equation ( 2.32 ) to equation (
2.15 ) we can clearly see how our how our results in the next section
correspond to and extend those of Jacobson and Kang [ 99 ] .

#### 2.3.4 Surface gravities

We shall now evaluate the various definitions of surface gravity by
explicit calculation.

##### Geodesic peeling

In the spherically symmetric case, we previously considered the peeling
properties of radial null geodesics in section 1.1.2 . In contrast, here
we want corotating null geodesics, that is, outgoing null geodesics that
are as close as possible to ZAMOs. Furthermore, as these geodesics
emerge from the region near the horizon, their 3-velocity will have a
normal component, the “speed” with which it is escaping “vertically”.
That is, take

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

here @xmath denotes a normal height above the horizon, and dot indicates
a time derivative. The null condition,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thence we have the very simple and physically plausible result

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

For those null curves that are just escaping, near the horizon we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

(Remember @xmath is inward pointing.) Let us define:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the transverse Mach number. Note this quantity @xmath is
manifestly conformally invariant.

Further note that @xmath is not necessarily constant over the horizon;
the steepness of the Mach number is not constrained automatically to be
the same everywhere along the horizon. Then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is clearly related to the peeling off ( @xmath -folding) properties
of escaping null curves near the horizon.

##### Null gradient normal to horizon

(It is best to consider this particular notion slightly “out of order”,
as @xmath will prove useful when discussing @xmath .) The gradient
normal definition of surface gravity always works for acoustic horizons
as we have defined them above, as on the horizon @xmath , and so its
gradient is normal to the horizon. If we have already decided that the
horizon is a null surface , then its null normal must lie in the
horizon, and so be proportional to @xmath . Then there must be a scalar
@xmath such that:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

Equivalently

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

But by explicit computation we now see

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.45)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore with this definition:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

So we explicitly see that the peeling and normal gradient notions of
surface gravity are still degenerate for acoustic horizons.

##### Inaffinity

Now consider the inaffinity definition of surface gravity. We would like
to be able to write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

Our first problem is that, although @xmath is null, we have no a priori
reason to expect @xmath to be null, despite being automatically
orthogonal to @xmath . We need to show that our horizon is what we will
term as “geodesic”, that is, foliated by null geodesics. Note that (on
horizon) we always have:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.49)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

(The occurrence of the quantity @xmath above is the explicit signal of a
possible non-Killing horizon, and the reason we discussed and evaluated
this quantity previously.) On the horizon @xmath is guaranteed null;
both @xmath and @xmath are guaranteed to be orthogonal to @xmath , but
without further assumptions we cannot guarantee that they are null. If
(for now) we simply assume the horizon is geodesic , that is, foliated
by null geodesics, then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

and then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note the condition @xmath is equivalent to demanding

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

This construction defines a hierarchy of possible horizons:

-   Killing ( @xmath , the standard GR case);

-   conformally Killing ( @xmath , @xmath , the Jacobson–Kang
    generalization);

-   “Kerr–Schild-like” ( @xmath , @xmath , @xmath );

-   general geodesic ( @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , our current case).

The horizons termed “Kerr–Schild-like”, where @xmath is of Kerr–Schild
form on the horizon, have not to the best of my knowledge, been
separately studied. We will now prove that all the acoustic horizons we
are considering are geodesic horizons, a fact that will also be used in
the analysis of the next definition ( @xmath ).

We see from equation ( 2.49 ) that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.54)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Thus the horizon is geodesic iff (on the horizon)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

Recall the definitions of @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath given in
section ( 2.3 ). We note

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

where on the horizon

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

But by definition we have @xmath , so

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we now define

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

with dimensions @xmath . Therefore

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now defining @xmath , again on the horizon

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thence, defining @xmath we see that on the horizon

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

But then

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.63)
  -- -- -- --------

This observation is already enough to guarantee that the horizon is
geodesic.

But now that we have shown that the horizon is geodesic, it follows
immediately that we have the even stronger statement:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.64)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

But now

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

Furthermore

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.66)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Pulling it all together

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

The last term is an internal horizon shear . This quantity @xmath is
manifestly not a conformal invariant. One can also express this as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is consistent with the Jacobson–Kang analysis, as for them,
automatically, the in-horizon shear is taken to be zero.

##### Generator-based

We shall define

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can always define this quantity into existence, the question is how
does it relate to the previous two definitions?

We have already shown that at the analogue horizon

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

But then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.72)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

and so

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

Pulling it all together we see

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

Alternatively,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

This quantity is manifestly not conformally invariant.

##### Tension in a rope

There is a nice argument leading to a tidy physical interpretation of
the surface gravity in terms of tension in an ideal massless rope held
at infinity. In the current context we would want to evaluate

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath the magnitude of the 4-acceleration of the integral curves
of @xmath . Define

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

as the velocity and acceleration of an orbit of @xmath . Now using

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

we see

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then working outside the horizon, where @xmath and @xmath are
4-perpendicular, and @xmath is timelike while @xmath is spacelike, we
have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now, as we approach the horizon

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since this is indeterminate it is useful to consider

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.82)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

So by the l’Hospital rule:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.83)
  -- -------- -- --------

Furthermore, as we approach the horizon

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

So

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

(Remember that for an acoustic horizon there is no need to believe in a
zeroth law, there is no need for @xmath to be constant over the
horizon). Pulling everything together

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

That is:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now using

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.88)
  -- -------- -- --------

we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.89)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

So also this quantity is manifestly not a conformal invariant.

##### 2-d expansion

Finally, we consider the definition relating the surface gravity to the
expansion of a suitably defined congruence of timelike geodesics normal
to the horizon [ 101 ] . See earlier discussion and equations ( 2.7 )–(
2.13 ). The key point here, is once again this equality relies on the
existence of an appropriate geodesic congruence invariant under the flow
of a Killing (or Killing-like) vector, and so cannot be applied blindly
to modified gravity or analogue gravity scenarios.

For an acoustic horizon we would want to pick a congruence dragged by
@xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.90)
  -- -------- -- --------

If it is possible to construct such a congruence, then from equation (
2.43 ), we know that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.91)
  -- -------- -- --------

And hence, now for an acoustic horizon,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.92)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### Summary

For an acoustic horizon we generically have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.93)
  -- -------- -- --------

On the other hand @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are generically distinct
from each other, and from the preceding three items.

### 2.4 Modified gravity

While in the previous section we have been interested in the framework
of analogue gravity, the concerns we have are also of vital importance
for modified gravity. Some general points to consider:

-   The usual situation, where the final state of a black hole is either
    static, or stationary and axisymmetric, depends critically on the
    standard Einstein equations (and “reasonable” matter sources). This
    could easily fail in modified gravity.

-   The usual situation, where black hole horizons are Killing horizons,
    depends critically on the standard Einstein equations (and
    “reasonable” matter sources), which could also easily fail in
    modified gravity [ 85 , 44 , 45 , 91 , 72 , 136 , 107 ] .

-   The usual situation, where black holes satisfy the zeroth law
    (constancy of @xmath ), depends critically on the “effective stress
    energy”, in the sense @xmath , satisfying some form of classical
    energy condition. Again, this could easily fail in modified gravity
    [ 133 , 87 ] .

In short, the distinctions between the various surface gravities can
also easily become important outside of the analogue spacetime
framework. Here we will work through one specific example within the
framework of Lorentz-violating theories to demonstrate this.

#### 2.4.1 Universal horizons and their surface gravities

As discussed in section 1.7 , universal horizons, defined by @xmath are
present in solutions to Einstein-Æther and Hořava-Lifshitz gravity. From
our point of view for the present, these universal horizons are
interesting because they provide examples of non-Killing horizons, and
furthermore these horizons are not null surfaces, unlike the cases we
have previously been looking at. Relevant questions are:

-   Which of the definitions of surface gravity can be extended to these
    universal horizons?

-   Are these all identical? If not, how do they differ?

These are non-trivial questions, important for other open issues such as
whether or not Hawking radiation exists for such theories, from what
surface it originates, and further the wider issues surrounding the
thermodynamics of such spacetimes.

##### Generator-based

This is the quantity calculated in reference [ 28 ] ; we reproduce the
most salient aspects of the derivation here. (We will carefully work
through this definition first, as it is the one used in previous
literature, and our subsequent constructions rely heavily on this
set-up).

Set up a tetrad of unit vectors, the timelike vector given by the
aether, @xmath , then two spacelike vectors @xmath and @xmath , which
are mutually orthogonal and lie in the tangent plane of two-spheres, and
a spacelike unit vector is provided by the outward-pointing @xmath (our
radial vector). Further, any rank-two tensor can be expanded in terms of
the quantities @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath ; where
@xmath is projection tensor onto the spatial two-sphere surface.

As we have spherical symmetry any physical vector should have components
only along @xmath and @xmath . Also note the acceleration will only have
a component along @xmath . That is, @xmath . Further note that at the
universal horizon @xmath is, by definition, parallel to @xmath . We
therefore have the useful relations:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.94)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.95)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath is the extrinsic curvature of the hypersurfaces orthogonal
to the aether flow @xmath , while @xmath is the extrinsic curvature of
the hypersurfaces orthogonal to @xmath , and @xmath and @xmath are the
traces of the extrinsic curvatures of the 2-spheres due to their
embeddings in these two hypersurfaces, respectively. Finally @xmath is
related to the 4-acceleration of the integral curves of @xmath by @xmath
.

Now consider an arbitrary vector of form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.96)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are arbitrary functions respecting the
symmetries of the spacetime, so in particular @xmath is Lie dragged by
the Killing vector @xmath . By spherical symmetry

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.97)
  -- -------- -- --------

(as this is the only possible fully anti-symmetric choice possible
within spherical symmetry), with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.98)
  -- -------- -- --------

We have chosen an opposite sign convention to [ 28 ] to minimize
subsequent sign flips.

Our Killing vector is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.99)
  -- -------- -- --------

And from the results above, and the Killing equation, we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.100)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where now

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.101)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

The second equality follows from the fact that for any @xmath respecting
the symmetries of the spacetime

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.102)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

Specializing this relation to our case we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.103)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.104)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Combining these results we obtain the second line of ( 2.101 ).

We can now identify @xmath with @xmath , as given in equations (22) and
(23) of reference [ 28 ] , since, provided ( 2.100 ) holds true, we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.105)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Therefore (at any point in the spacetime)

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.106)
  -- -------- -- ---------

At the universal horizon, @xmath by definition, and thus @xmath and
@xmath are parallel. Therefore

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.107)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the absolute value and the explicit minus sign can safely be
removed given that both @xmath and @xmath are both positive on the
universal horizon. Indeed, this is consistent with [ 28 ] from which, by
confronting our equation ( 2.100 ) with equation (22) of [ 28 ] , one
can deduce @xmath . In closing let us stress that this derivation relies
very heavily on the special symmetries of the solution and that @xmath
on the universal horizon.

##### Peeling

A specific class of spherically symmetric black holes was examined in [
7 ] , which in Eddington–Finkelstein coordinates take the form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.108)
  -- -------- -- ---------

First, in analogy with section ( 1.1.2 ), change this into Schwarzschild
coordinates. Set

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.109)
  -- -------- -- ---------

so that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.110)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Consider an out-going null ray

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.111)
  -- -------- -- ---------

so that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.112)
  -- -------- -- ---------

For @xmath and @xmath close to the universal horizon at @xmath

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.113)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and so for a generic universal horizon we can define

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.114)
  -- -------- -- ---------

in general.

Let us now apply this construction to the simplest explicit example we
can find. Taking a look at section (4.2) in reference [ 29 ] , we see an
example of an exact solution with

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.115)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Here

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.116)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath a constant depending on the coupling constants of the
theory. Plugging this into the above, we find, that for this specific
example

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.117)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In [ 28 ] the surface gravity was computed to be @xmath which we can see
from inspection is equal to @xmath . Thus, (at least in situations where
they can both meaningfully be defined), @xmath for universal horizons.
We do not wish to apply this construction to the general solutions in
terms of asymptotic expansions presented in that paper, as those are
only valid for large @xmath , and as such, ill-adapted to this
calculation.

##### Null normal

Let us now see if it is possible to extend the notion @xmath to a
universal horizon, at least in a highly symmetric case. First, define a
vector @xmath , everywhere orthogonal to @xmath , by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.118)
  -- -------- -- ---------

(There is a sign ambiguity in this definition depending on whether you
want the inwards or outwards pointing unit spacelike vector at
infinity.) Note also, that on the Killing horizon, @xmath , so @xmath .
Now, by spherical symmetry

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.119)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

everywhere in the spacetime. Off the Killing horizon, this seems to
provide the most natural definition of @xmath , and it is equal to
@xmath .

##### Inaffinity

Likewise, for null horizons we have defined @xmath by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.120)
  -- -------- -- ---------

But, (as we have already seen), by spherical symmetry,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.121)
  -- -------- -- ---------

so, now evaluating on the universal horizon, we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.122)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

where the last line is our definition of @xmath , which is now seen to
be the same as @xmath and @xmath .

##### Tension in a rope

Note that it is not at all obvious there should be any possible
calculation for the tension in a rope at infinity, as our universal
horizon is inside the Killing horizon, where nothing can stay still, so
we certainly must abandon the notion of @xmath directly relating to the
tension on a rope held at infinity.

However, if we want to mathematically continue this idea, we want to
calculate

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.123)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Because the universal horizon is not a null surface the limit is
straightforward, and it is easy to see that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.124)
  -- -------- -- ---------

But, we can again use equation ( 2.100 ), so that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.125)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

That is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.126)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Again we note that many of these definitions degenerate.

##### 2-d expansion

Another possibility is to consider the quantity defined by Jacobson and
Parentani [ 101 ] . Instead of the form given in that paper, for
spacelike regions (such as we have under consideration here) it is
better to start from the basic definition

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.127)
  -- -------- -- ---------

use the fact that @xmath on the universal horizon, and expand the
numerator to obtain

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.128)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Now we can again use our useful symmetries, and note that on the
universal horizon @xmath , to see

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.129)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We see that, whereas for Killing horizons, where we relate this quantity
to the surface gravity through normalization with an appropriate
horizon-crossing timelike vector @xmath , here we want to normalize with
an appropriate spacelike vector @xmath . Specifically, for universal
horizons we can define

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.130)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In particular, comparing with equation ( 2.107 ), we see that @xmath at
the universal horizon.

So the equivalence of the usual plethora of sruface gravities does not
necessarily require the horizon to be a Killing one. It would be
interesting to see if such a degeneracy remains for universal horizons
of stationary black holes, for which there is no solution in 4D.

##### Summary

For a spherically symmetric universal horizon, and subject to the
definitions adopted above, we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.131)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In the exact solutions, where it is possible to calculate @xmath , we
find @xmath .

Note that it is only by using tricks of spherical symmetry that we have
been able to define some extension of @xmath and @xmath . The most
natural notions for such horizons seem to be @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
, as they do not a priori require a null surface. In the case of our
modified gravity scenario, the symmetries of the problem seem to have
reduced the plethora of surface gravities we have. Likewise, in analogue
cases, if we have enough symmetry in the set up, the number of distinct
surface gravities should collapse.

Indeed the calculations presented in this section rely so heavily on the
spherical symmetry, that for a stationary non-static solution possessing
a universal horizon, it seems that a completely new mode of attack would
need to be developed. It is far from obvious which if any of these
degeneracies would remain in such a case, and it seems somewhat unlikely
that the notions of @xmath and @xmath could be developed at all.
Overall, the best statement seems to be this: There are many possible
definitions of surface gravity, identical in cases of high symmetry.

### 2.5 Discussion

In this chapter we have considered a number of different definitions of
surface gravity, all of which reduce to the standard case in stationary
general relativity. We have shown in the case of stationary analogue
black holes how these different surface gravities can be calculated, and
how they are related.

These concerns are also important for modified gravity, and we have
illustrated this with one example involving the so-called “universal
horizon”. In general, the differences between these definitions, and
appropriate choices of which to use, will become more relevant the less
symmetry there is in the case under consideration.

In the case of the universal horizon, it seems that the surface gravity
calculated disagrees with the temperature derived in [ 29 ] . We shall
see this is due to the fact that all these definitions are purely
geometrical, whereas the very existence of these horizons depends
crucially on the æther structure. We will return to such concerns in the
next chapter.

The symmetries in question might be obvious ones (spherical symmetry,
axial symmetry), but might also be less obvious — such as the enhanced
conformal symmetry at general relativity horizons that is at least
partly connected with the specific field equations and inter-twined with
the rigidity theorem and zeroth law.

Once one moves away from standard general relativity the situation
becomes much more complicated than one might have naively expected.

## Chapter 3 Ray tracing Einstein–Æther black holes

  The law that entropy always increases holds, I think, the supreme
  position among the laws of Nature. If someone points out to you that
  your pet theory of the universe is in disagreement with Maxwell’s
  equations – then so much the worse for Maxwell’s equations. If it is
  found to be contradicted by observation – well, these experimentalists
  do bungle things sometimes. But if your theory is found to be against
  the second law of thermodynamics I can give you no hope; there is
  nothing for it but to collapse in deepest humiliation.

  Arthur Eddington (1882 –- 1944)

### 3.1 Introduction

As discussed in section 1.6 , the GSL runs into problems in the presence
of Lorentz violation. One may have the hope that the universal horizon,
if it is possible to associate thermodynamic variables to it, can solve
this problem. Indeed, the Universal horizon is found to satisfy the
first law of black-hole mechanics [ 28 ] . Not only that, the
calculation of Ref. [ 29 ] to calculate the temperature, using the
tunneling formalism of Ref. [ 126 ] , seems to predict the emission of a
thermal flux from the Universal horizon (later, a second calculation was
performed which disputes this conclusion [ 116 ] ). We will discuss both
of these calculations for Hawking radiation in more detail in the next
chapter. But is this temperature associated with the Universal horizon
relevant for observers outside the black hole? Or is the emitted
radiation somehow reprocessed at the Killing horizon, in an energy and
species dependent way? Is this the key to recovering a healthy
thermodynamic behavior of black holes in Lorentz-violating theories? In
order to answer these questions, as a preliminary step we need to
understand particle dynamics on these spacetimes, and how it is affected
by the presence of the Universal and Killing horizons.

The problem is that the natural ray trajectories to consider in these
spacetimes correspond to particles which have non-trivial dispersion
relations as discussed in section 1.5.4 , which adds complications as
these trajectories are no longer metric geodesics, and are not
determined by the spacetime geometry alone. How are the rays affected by
the presence of Universal and Killing horizons? Does the Universal
horizon affect the ray trajectories of modified dispersion relations, in
a way analogous to the Killing horizon affecting the relativistic rays?
If so, what is the effect of the Killing horizon? Can we say anything
about which surface is relevant for Hawking radiation? The purpose of
this chapter is to clarify these questions.

This chapter is arranged as follows: In Sec. 3.2.5 we review the
behavior of relativistic rays at the Killing horizon and, as a warm-up,
we perform a study of slices of constant “æther time”. We then proceed
to the main body of our investigation in Sec. 3.2 where we look at the
ray trajectories associated to modified dispersion relations in these
spacetimes. In addition to studying the behavior of rays near the
Universal and Killing horizons, we also provide a notion of surface
gravity for the Universal horizon, and compare it to those already
existing in the literature [ 28 , 29 , 56 ] . We conclude in Sec. 3.4
with a summary and discussion of the implications of our work, and
indicate some possible future directions. Appendix 3.3.1 discusses the
universality of temperature of the Universal horizon.

### 3.2 Physical trajectories in an Einstein–Æther black hole

We analyze the motion (determined by the group velocity) of particles
endowed with modified, Lorentz-violating, dispersion relations in the
black-hole geometries discussed in Sec. 1.7 . Modified dispersion
relations arise due to the interaction of these particles with the
æther. Thus the trajectories are not simply the geodesics determined
from the spacetime metric.

It will prove beneficial to first review the standard description of
particle trajectories in a black-hole spacetime, with particular
attention to their behavior close to the Killing horizon. We do that in
Secs. 3.2.1 and 3.2.2 . After discussing the modified dispersion
relations in Sec. 3.2.3 , we will introduce an appropriate notion of the
conserved particle energy in Sec. 3.2.4 , which will then be needed in
Sec. 3.2.5 where we finally construct the ray trajectories.

#### 3.2.1 Ray tracing and peeling in purely metric black holes

Let us then first briefly recap some aspects of ray tracing, taking as a
simplest example the Schwarzschild spacetime. (See also [ 130 ] .) In
Eddington–Finkelstein coordinates introduced in 1.3

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

the outgoing rays will be given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

with the ingoing rays travelling at @xmath .

In these coordinates a peeling-off of rays from the Killing horizon can
be seen (Fig. 5.4.1 ). It is this peeling that is related to the large
increase in frequency/energy as one traces back along an outgoing mode
in Hawking radiation [ 96 ] .

In particular one can associate a surface gravity notion to this peeling
by a suitable expansion of the ray behaviour close to the Killing
horizon. This takes the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

At the Killing horizon, the first term on the right hand side of this
equation vanishes, and the second term defines the peeling surface
gravity

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

There are other ways to define surface gravity, as noted in the previous
chapter, all of which coincide for stationary black holes in general
relativity, but this particular version is that most closely linked to
the trajectories of particles, and therefore of most utility in a ray
tracing study. Furthermore, this version of surface gravity is closely
linked to Hawking radiation when the degeneracy between definitions is
broken (see [ 16 , 56 ] ).

Strengthened by this brief review of the standard case, we can now
consider the propagation of rays in the presence of the æther. However,
before doing so, we find it useful to perform a study of the slices of
constant khronon field @xmath in our spacetime, as these are closely
related to the universal horizon and also can be seen as the ray
trajectories of physical particles in the limiting case of an infinite
propagation speed (with respect to the aether).

#### 3.2.2 Rays of constant æther time

As noted, we have a clear notion of causality in these theories: Nothing
can travel backwards in æther time. The æther time can be related to the
metric one (what we might call the Killing time, given that we are
dealing with static metrics) given that the æther one-form is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now, using the fact that @xmath has a unit norm, it can verified that
there exists a function @xmath such that @xmath . The explicit form of
@xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Likewise, we can define a spatial @xmath coordinate, corresponding to
constant @xmath slices, @xmath , and in a similar manner, find

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

We plot the constant @xmath , @xmath surfaces in Fig. 3.2 for the @xmath
solution.

A peeling-like behavior at the Universal horizon is evident, and indeed
a notion of @xmath can be associated to the constant @xmath slices. As
realistic rays must travel forward in æther time they must have paths as
steep as, or steeper than, the constant @xmath slices. Thus the constant
@xmath slices, corresponding to infinite velocity with respect to the
æther  will provide a lower bound to the peeling properties (and so the
peeling surface gravity) of physical rays.

We can easily calculate the value of this surface gravity which, as
noted, will be the relevant one for rays propagating with infinite group
velocity @xmath . Generically any particle propagating in our spacetimes
will have a four-velocity that can be given in the orthonormal frame
provided by @xmath and @xmath as,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The trajectory for an instantaneously propagating ray would then be
given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then, Taylor expanding the trajectory close to the horizon one gets

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

A straightforward calculation based on Eq. ( 1.98 ) shows that @xmath
for both the aforementioned solutions. (This happens because @xmath ,
which can be checked by plugging in either of the explicit formulae
given in Sec. 1.7 ). This is also what one should expect from the
behavior in Fig. 3.2 . Consequently,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is by definition the “surface gravity” corresponding to the
peeling-off property of the infinite velocity modes close to the
horizon.

#### 3.2.3 Modified dispersion relations

As discussed in section 1.5.4 the theories we are considering naturally
have dispersion relations. For radial motion one can then generically
expect modified dispersion relations of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the energy in the æther frame (note that @xmath for
propagating particles) and (for radial motion) @xmath is the spatial
component of @xmath orthogonal to the æther field. The length scale
@xmath here is the UV Lorentz-violating scale for matter which we do not
need to necessarily identify with the Planck scale. Letting @xmath one
would recover standard Lorentz-invariant dispersion relations.

Note that we are considering only UV modifications of the matter
dispersion relations, while of course a priori one might also expect
radiative corrections to produce IR modifications (for e.g., inducing
particle-dependent coefficients of the order @xmath terms), see for e.g.
Ref. [ 49 ] . We do not explicitly consider these potential
complications as they are highly constrained phenomenologically, and
furthermore there are known mechanisms that suppress such terms (see,
for e.g., Ref. [ 109 ] and references therein). Also, in general a
modified speed of light will not effect our results except for the fact
that different particles will perceive different Killing horizons
(placed at different radii).

Hence, we shall only consider @xmath , which we shall further brutally
simplify by looking at the expansion for low @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

We do this mainly for simplicity, (in particular, by solving the cubic,
@xmath can be written down in a closed form of reasonable length).
Henceforth we will absorb the factor of @xmath into the suppression
factor. Later on we shall consider the possibility of more general
dispersion relations and show that our main results are independent of
the specific form of the dispersion relation.

#### 3.2.4 A notion of conserved energy

The modified dispersion relation gives us one equation between @xmath
and @xmath . In order to find their explicit values on spacetime we need
a second equation relating them. This equation is a conservation
equation, which says that @xmath is constant on the whole spacetime. We
now give two arguments whic are valid for general modified dispersion
relations.

For the first derivation, start by, defining differential operators
acting on a generic quantity @xmath by setting

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

These are respectively temporal derivatives in the direction of the
æther, and spatial derivatives on constant æther-time hypersurfaces.
Then to a given dispersion relation, @xmath , we can naturally associate
the differential operator

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

We are working with a static spacetime, and therefore the Killing
equation implies that in terms of the Killing time coordinate

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Both of these are Hermitian operators, so the vanishing of their
commutator implies simultaneous diagonalizability. This implies that
@xmath is explicitly diagonalizable, so one may write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath a position independent constant.

Now pick a particular tetrad based on completing the zwei-bein @xmath .
Using spherical symmetry one can decompose the 4-momentum as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

from which we can read

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

which implicitly defines @xmath via

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

In particular, we now have the statement

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

The fact that we have this position-independent constant means we can
solve for @xmath and @xmath . Then we can integrate the group velocity
to obtain the ray trajectory of the particle explicitly. Physically,
@xmath is the Killing energy at infinity, where also @xmath . That is,
when we talk about high (low) @xmath rays, we mean rays that arrive at
infinity with high (low) Killing energy.

An alternative derivation of this result uses that, in the
geometric-optics approximation, the dynamics of the wavepacket is
described as a point particle and is governed by some Hamiltonian,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the generalized momenta conjugate to the position
coordinates @xmath of the particle (the centre of the wave-packet), and
@xmath is a metric on the phase space, which is generally a function of
both position and momentum. Since the underlying field theory is
diffeomorphism invariant, the @xmath that descends from it is
independent of the parameter along the trajectory of the particle. This
implies that @xmath is a constant on shell. Its value is the squared
mass, which we take to be zero. Then Eq. ( 3.22 ) is nothing but the
dispersion relation [ 117 , 82 ] .

Now let the coefficients of the spacetime metric @xmath in the
Eddington-Finkelstein @xmath coordinates be independent of @xmath ,
i.e., the coordinate vector field @xmath is a Killing vector field. If
the underlying dynamical field is Lie-dragged by @xmath , the
corresponding @xmath has to respect this symmetry too, hence there is no
explicit @xmath -dependence in @xmath .

Now, Hamilton’s equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

then implies that @xmath , the momentum conjugate to @xmath , is a
constant, i.e., @xmath , where @xmath is a constant.

Suppose now that the dispersion relation is given in the æther frame as
@xmath , where @xmath and @xmath . The Hamiltonian is then @xmath .
Hamilton’s equation for the evolution of the position is

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the derivative w.r.t the argument. Now noting that
@xmath is just the group velocity @xmath we get, after dividing @xmath
by @xmath , the equation describing the trajectory of the particle,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath sign is for the outgoing(ingoing) particle.

#### 3.2.5 Physical ray trajectories

We now are set to solve for the trajectory, with our cubic dispersion
relation in Eq. ( 3.13 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the conservation equation,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

The @xmath refers to whether the mode is outgoing or ingoing,
respectively. In what follows we will focus on the outgoing modes. As
@xmath is the energy in the æther frame at spatial infinity, we require
that @xmath be non-negative.

What happens to @xmath and @xmath near the Universal horizon? On the
Universal horizon we have @xmath and @xmath . We might naively but
incorrectly argue from Eq. ( 3.27 ) that @xmath , but this is
inconsistent because the RHS is positive while the LHS is negative. This
just emphasizes the fact that something singular is happening on the
Universal horizon. Let us then seek to better understand the divergence
structure of @xmath on the Universal horizon.

Note that @xmath is everywhere timelike while @xmath is timelike
outside, null on, and spacelike inside the Killing horizon. Also from
the fact that @xmath at infinity and becomes zero only at the Universal
horizon, we deduce that this product is negative everywhere outside the
Universal horizon, we hence write it as @xmath . For the sign of @xmath
one has to specify a choice of the @xmath basis (inward or outward
pointing). We choose @xmath in Eq. ( 1.98 ) so that @xmath is positive
everywhere outside the Universal horizon. We hence write it as @xmath .
So we may rewrite Eq. ( 3.27 ) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us parametrize the singular behavior of @xmath at the Universal
horizon as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is regular at the Universal horizon and @xmath is a
constant to be determined. Substituting this ansatz in Eq. ( 3.28 ),
finiteness of the LHS implies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, close to the Universal horizon @xmath .

Let us now move away from the Universal horizon and consider the
trajectory throughout the whole spacetime. To do this we shall basically
follow the procedure of section 3.2.2 , with the difference that the
group velocity @xmath is no longer infinite, but is now a function of
@xmath which diverges at the Universal horizon. From our dispersion
relation in Eq. 3.13 we find the group velocity to write the four
velocity of the particle as in Eq. ( 3.8 ), @xmath . In the
Eddington-Finkelstein coordinate system denoted by @xmath , the
trajectory of the particle can again be obtained by solving the
differential equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

When one aims at plotting the above trajectories in spacetime it is
clear that the only difficulty arises from the @xmath -dependence of
@xmath , as the 3-momentum @xmath is not a conserved quantity along the
path. This is where the conservation equation, Eq. ( 3.28 ), comes in as
it allows us to solve for @xmath as a function of @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where the functions @xmath and @xmath can be read off for either of the
two particular solutions given in section 1.7 . (The particular form of
@xmath given above of course depends crucially on the assumed cubic
dispersion relation. For more general dispersion relations, while @xmath
certainly exists, it may be difficult to exhibit an explicit formula.)

We can now numerically integrate Eq. ( 3.31 ) and plot trajectories for
different values of the conserved energy @xmath . The result is shown in
Fig. 3.4 . We see that the particles which arrive at infinity with a
high energy (i.e., the trajectories of high @xmath ) hardly feel the
presence of the Killing horizon. The particles which arrive at infinity
with a low energy (i.e., the trajectories for low @xmath ) instead feel
the presence of the Killing horizon acutely: they hover close to it for
a considerable interval before escaping to infinity.

### 3.3 Near-horizon physics

In this section we study the behavior of rays close to the Universal and
Killing horizons. In Sec. 3.3.1 the peel-off behavior of all rays, low
or high @xmath , at the Universal horizon will let us define the surface
gravity of the Universal horizon. In Sec. 3.3.2 we attempt to define a
surface gravity for the low- @xmath rays close to the Killing horizon.
In Sec. 3.3.3 we attempt to quantify the extent to which the Killing
horizon might reprocess the information in the low- @xmath rays.

#### 3.3.1 Near the Universal horizon

As seen in Fig. 3.4 , there is a peeling behavior at the Universal
horizon, therefore it is possible to associate with this behavior a
notion of surface gravity. Surface gravity for Universal horizons has
previously been considered in the literature (see for example Refs. [ 28
, 56 ] ). Such derivations are non-trivial, given that the Universal
horizon is qualitatively different from the Killing horizon, for which
several alternative definitions of surface gravity all agree with each
other (see the previous chapter and Ref. [ 56 ] for an exhaustive
discussion). Let us stress that Refs. [ 28 ] and [ 56 ] and chapter 2
use metric quantities and specific symmetries of spacetime to define the
surface gravity of Universal horizons, and are in agreement with each
other.

However, in Ref. [ 29 ] , the tunneling method [ 126 ] was used to claim
that the Universal horizon should Hawking radiate at a particular
temperature @xmath . Given this temperature, a surface gravity can be
associated to it in the usual way, @xmath . The surface gravity thus
defined, however, does not agree with the one derived in Refs. [ 28 , 56
] and the previous chapter. As a consequence of this mismatch it was
claimed in Ref. [ 29 ] that for Universal horizons the usual relation
between surface gravity and temperature might break down.

Given this state of affairs, it is interesting to calculate the surface
gravity in our framework, as the relevant quantity governing the
observed peeling at the Universal horizon. As we already understand the
divergence at the Universal horizon, the calculation follows easily. We
know that @xmath at the Universal horizon. This can be easily deduced
from the fact that @xmath diverges there and that @xmath (see also Fig.
3.3 ). Then from Eq. ( 3.9 ) one can easily see that at the Universal
horizon one gets

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus the near-horizon peeling is the same as that calculated for the
constant- @xmath slices at the Universal horizon, and it is independent
of the specific form of dispersion relation (as long as the dispersion
relation is superluminal with unbounded group velocity, i.e., of the
form as in Eq. ( 3.12 ) possibly with additional parity-odd terms). This
can be confirmed by explicit computation (see appendix 3.3.1 ). The
surface gravity ( 3.11 ) for the two exact solutions at hand is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

respectively.

One can now easily check that the temperature calculated in Ref. [ 29 ]
, and the above surface gravity, are indeed related in the standard way.
While at the leading order we use the same dispersion relation as in
Ref. [ 29 ] , we stress that our analysis shows that the peeling surface
gravity of the Universal horizon is indeed universal, i.e., independent
of the specific form of the superluminal dispersion relation. (An
explicit demonstration is provided in Appendix 3.3.1 ). This strongly
suggests that it should be possible to carry out the tunneling
calculation of Ref. [ 29 ] for general dispersion relations, and that
the resulting temperature should be universal.

One might wonder why our analysis agrees with the temperature provided
by the tunneling method, but does not agree with the surface gravity
previously calculated in Ref. [ 28 , 56 ] and chapter 2 . Again the gist
of the problem is that the methods of those references do not capture
the role of æther, and hence do not take into account the
non-relativistic nature of the particle dynamics. On the contrary, the
calculations presented here rely on æther in an essential way. Given
that the Universal horizon is an æther-dependent object, it is our
“æther sensitive” surface gravity which ends up being related to the
temperature of the Universal horizon and has the physical meaning
related to the peel-off behavior of ray trajectories.

In connection to this last comment one final remark is due. While it can
be shown that the metric notion of surface gravity associated to
geodesic peeling is equivalent to self-evidently covariant definitions [
56 ] , one might wonder if such alternative definitions are available
for the peeling surface gravity associated to physical rays as discussed
here. A natural candidate for a covariant definition of the surface
gravity, which should match the peeling one, is the so called @xmath ,
which is equal (modulo a sign) to the normal derivative to the horizon
of the redshift factor. For the case of the Universal horizon this
simply takes the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

and can be shown to be equal to the peeling surface gravity for geodesic
rays [ 56 ] . However, such a definition obviously does not capture the
role of the æther in the propagation of the physical rays. We will argue
in the next chapter that a natural generalization of the redshift factor
@xmath to our framework is given by @xmath which is constant (actually
zero) on the Universal horizon. Then, following the standard logical
steps, one can recognize that the natural generalization of the above
formula is @xmath evaluated on the Universal horizon. A straightforward
calculation shows that using this definition yields the same values as
in Eq. ( 3.34 ),  ( 3.35 ). In fact, using the general form of the
metric coefficients for spherically symmetric solutions given in Sec.
1.7 one can show that @xmath as defined by @xmath always equals the
peeling-off surface gravity @xmath as defined by Eq. ( 3.11 ). We
therefore have a covariant expression for the surface gravity of the
Universal horizon as defined by the peeling-off behavior of rays,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the Killing equation this can also be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the acceleration of the æther, @xmath .

##### More General Dispersion Relations

We have picked a superficially rather strange dispersion relation for
our explicit numerical calculations. (It is certainly valid for low
energies, simply being the expansion of @xmath , where @xmath is
generally expected to be the most relevant term at low energies). But we
showed earlier that @xmath blows up near the Universal horizon, so how
many of our conclusions can be carried over for more general dispersion
relations? Let us first look at the behavior near the Universal horizon.
We still have the conservation equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

Again, on the Universal horizon we have @xmath and @xmath , we would
naively but incorrectly get that @xmath , which is inconsistent because
the RHS is positive while the LHS is negative. This argument holds just
as well for a very large and relevant class of superluminal dispersion
relations. Let us now write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

near the Universal horizon, with @xmath regular on the Universal
horizon.

Now (temporarily) assume the dispersion relation has the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

Substituting this ansatz in the conservation equation, the finiteness of
@xmath implies that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

so

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

How steeply @xmath diverges near the Universal horizon varies, but for
superluminal dispersion relations of this form, it always will diverge.
This would lead to a divergent group velocity at the Universal horizon.

In fact, we can generalize this argument even further. As the phase
velocity is @xmath , we can rearrange Eq. ( 3.39 ) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

If we assume the existence of outgoing modes at the universal horizon
(meaning that this, rather than some Killing horizon, is the casual
barrier), we necessarily have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

implying the phase velocity diverges at the Universal horizon. Now,
using L’Hopital’s rule,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

So, (assuming sufficient smoothness in @xmath ), the group velocity also
diverges.

Note other forms of superluminal dispersion exist, for instance
extrapolating between two distinct limiting velocities. As
Einstein-Æther and Hořava-Lifshitz fundamentally violate Lorentz
invariance, we do not expect to move between two Lorentzian regimes in
this way, so dispersion relations of the form in Eq. ( 3.41 ) are the
most relevant (also note for such rays the Universal horizon will not be
the casual barrier). Finally, using Eqs. ( 3.9 ) and ( 3.11 ), we get a
surface gravity which is universal and thus associates the universal
temperature with the Universal horizon.

In [ 56 ] it was argued that equations 3.34 and 3.35 should therefore
hold for all dispersion relations of this form: however, there is an
extra subtlety that went unnoticed.

Previously we argued that as @xmath at the universal horizon, we can
calculate this as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

However, at the universal horizon @xmath is also zero (see appendix A ),
so @xmath can be regular, and we cannot first take the limit of infinite
velocity then close to universal horizon approximation.

This is easier to see if rewrite everything in terms of @xmath and
@xmath . A quick check shows

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

which are correct everywhere, so that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now, pick a dispersion relation. Near the UH, the highest power of
@xmath is most relevant, so just work with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

Further, using equations 3.40 and 3.44

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

Plugging this into our formula for the trajectory and simplifying

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.55)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

So that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

Compare this to what we had before:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the approximation is near the universal horizon, and therefore

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

Differing by a factor of @xmath from the correct surface gravity.

This means that 3.34 and 3.35 are only correct in the case @xmath . It
can be argued however, that this is the most natural situation. Some
thought will show that if we have species @xmath and @xmath which both
have polynomial dispersion relations of order @xmath and @xmath we could
revive the violation of the GSL using Hawking radiation at the universal
horizon. However, as both species have to interact gravitationally, it
is difficult to construct a protection mechanism to stop terms in the
dispersion relation of @xmath being generated in the dispersion relation
of @xmath by loop corrections, such that the highest term is the same
for both.

#### 3.3.2 Near the Killing horizon

In this section, we will work with the particular solution corresponding
to @xmath . As for the other solution, calculations become unpleasantly
long and do not give any additional insight.

At the Killing horizon, ( @xmath ), the standard metric-determined
surface gravity, (which can be found by any of the standard methods),
is:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now at the Killing horizon, for the cubic dispersion relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

While the group velocity is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.62)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

which is still close to @xmath for small values of @xmath , so for a
dispersion relation only modified at high energies we are still almost
relativistic until inside the Killing horizon.

Can we define an approximate æther-sensitive notion of surface gravity?
We can certainly expand the ray trajectory in a Taylor series around the
Killing horizon, trying to follow the standard peeling surface gravity
calculation as given in Sec. 3.2.1 . However, as these rays have a
non-relativistic dispersion relation the first term in this expansion (
3.3 ) is no longer zero, and there is a net non-zero
Killing-horizon-crossing velocity:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

For the specific cubic dispersion relation considered above we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is an outward-pointing, radial group velocity of the particle at
the Killing horizon. Note that it has the correct relativistic limit,
i.e., it vanishes as @xmath . (The particular form above depends very
much on the assumed cubic dispersion relation, but the fact that @xmath
is generic.)

In analogy with the usual treatment we can still use the second term of
the Taylor expansion for defining a peeling surface gravity of the
Killing horizon. The trick is to note that near the Killing horizon

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then if we compare two nearby trajectories @xmath and @xmath , we see

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

So this difference certainly exhibits exponential peeling near the
Killing horizon, with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

For the specific cubic dispersion relation considered above we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is the closest notion we can construct to the usual metric surface
gravity @xmath at the Killing horizon once we are in the presence of
modified dispersion relations. We see that it shows an @xmath dependent
correction to @xmath . For @xmath , this value agrees with the standard
@xmath . (Again, the particular form above depends very much on the
assumed cubic dispersion relation, but the general features are
generic.)

We can also consider a quantitative comparison of the magnitude of the
surface gravity at the Universal and Killing horizons. In particular,
the ratio of Universal horizon surface gravity (see Eq. ( 3.35 ) for the
@xmath solution), and Killing horizon surface gravity (Eq. ( 3.68 )), is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence, the surface gravity of the Universal horizon is higher than that
of the Killing horizon.

#### 3.3.3 Lingering near the Killing horizon

From the ray trajectories plotted in Fig. 3.4 it is apparent that the
low- @xmath rays are strongly affected by the presence of the Killing
horizon. These rays linger close to the Killing horizon before escaping
out to infinity. It is conceivable that there is some sort of
reprocessing going on in the vicinity of the Killing horizon. The ratio
of the time scale of lingering with respect to the intrinsic time scale
associated to the ray seems like a good quantity to quantify the degree
of reprocessing at the Killing horizon. In particular, one might try to
compare how many “ray cycles” at the Killing horizon, @xmath , are
contained in the lingering time, as this might give a good estimate of
the extent to which the rays are significantly reprocessed.

An educated guess could then be to consider the ratio

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have defined the lingering time as the “width” of the horizon,
(for which @xmath is the simplest choice, though in the presence of
modified dispersion relation a broadening of the horizon was found in,
e.g., Ref. [ 68 ] ), times the crossing velocity. There is a problem
with this, however. The lingering is outside the Killing horizon, and
the rays, even those with low energies, cross the horizon with a high
coordinate velocity quite independently from how long they have lingered
close to it. This can be seen in Fig. 3.5 , which shows the time scales
@xmath and @xmath , (the time taken to go distance @xmath at
instantaneous velocity @xmath ). On the other hand, the previously
defined @xmath carries information about the concavity of the ray. If a
particle has lingered it enters concave up, while those with high @xmath
, will enter concave down.

Alternatively, we could consider the dispersion-dependent part of the
Killing surface gravity in Eq. ( 3.68 ), and write

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.71)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

and then identify @xmath . Note that this @xmath goes to zero for large
@xmath , and becomes infinite as @xmath goes to zero. Using Eq. ( 3.61 )
for @xmath , in the small @xmath limit we now get

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.72)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

So, rays with small @xmath remain close enough to the Killing horizon
for long enough to be significantly reprocessed.

### 3.4 Discussion

For the known Einstein-Æther black holes, the relevant causal barrier is
not the Killing horizon but the Universal horizon. This is the surface
that admits an exact peeling behavior for ray trajectories, and it is
also this is the surface for which the associated notion of surface
gravity leads to the temperature obtained from tunneling methods. In
this sense these results lend support to the findings of Refs. [ 28 , 29
, 118 ] , which point towards the Universal horizon being the surface
relevant for thermal emission.

We have seen indications of the reprocessing of the low-energy particles
at the Killing horizon. This seems to suggest that any thermal spectrum
from the Universal horizon will be modified by the presence of the
Killing horizon.

To summarize, our work supports a picture of thermal radiation from the
Universal horizon, with an associated temperature determined by the
peeling surface gravity ( 3.34 ) in the standard way ( @xmath ). The
Killing horizon appears instead as a “reprocessing/scattering surface”
that distorts the low-energy part of the original thermal spectrum in an
energy and species (i.e., dispersion relation) dependent way.

A shortcoming is that we cannot (with the current analysis) predict
exactly what spectrum an observer at infinity will see from such a black
hole. Further, there are several complications that, while not making
the calculation impossible, will add an extra level of difficulty to
determining such a spectrum. Even assuming that Hawking radiation is
produced at the Universal horizon one would still need to include the
role of the Killing horizon in reprocessing the outgoing low-energy
modes.

Nonetheless we feel that the clearer picture we have now, of the
ergoregion behind the Universal horizon, the peeling-off behavior at the
Universal horizon, and reprocessing of low-energy rays at the Killing
horizon, shines new light on the thermodynamic character of black holes
in Lorentz-violating theories. It is perhaps too early to apply
Eddington’s rule-of-thumb to these theories.

## Chapter 4 Hints of Hawking Radiation

  Well, the thing about a black hole - its main distinguishing feature -
  is it’s black. And the thing about space, the colour of space, your
  basic space colour, is black. So how are you supposed to see them?

  Holly, Red Dwarf, Season III

This chapter will discuss some possible lines of inquiry into the
existence and temperature of Hawking radiation from the universal
horizon. As per the title, this will merely be hints of what may go into
such a calculation, an exploration of some of the difficulties and
possible approaches to the problem.

Consider black hole spacetime, as in the previous chapter, with a
universal horizon inside a Killing horizon. What can we say about
whether either or both of these horizons radiate? There are several
basic ingredients necessary for Hawking radiation. However, studies
related to the robustness of Hawking radiation show that these
conditions only need to be valid at low energies. Firstly, we need a
causal barrier enclosing an ergoregion, from which the energy needed to
fuel Hawking radiation can be mined. In addition, we need an exponential
peeling of rays from the causal barrier, which links the ingoing and the
outgoing rays, as discussed in [ 16 ] . Finally, we need an Unruh state,
which is a vacuum state for the ingoing observer.

We have seen that the Universal horizon is a true causal barrier for
particles of any energy, with a peel-off associated to all superluminal
particles. It is then tempting to associate a temperature with the
Universal horizon determined by the surface gravity of the previous
chapter in Eq. ( 3.34 ) and Eq. ( 3.35 ),

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

This is in agreement with Ref. [ 28 ] , where the temperature associated
with the Universal horizon was found using the Parikh-Wilczek tunneling
formalism [ 126 ] . But it is not entirely clear as to where the energy
for the Hawking radiation is mined from.

In the case of Killing horizon in a static geometry, one has an
intuitive picture of pair-creation close to the horizon: by energy
conservation one particle must have positive energy while the second has
negative energy. The positive energy particle escapes to infinity, while
the negative energy particle which is classically not allowed to exist
outside the horizon, tunnels through the horizon and appears inside
where it can now exist as a real particle because the Killing vector is
spacelike there. From the point of view of the outside observer however,
the negative energy has gone in, the black hole has lost mass which has
been carried away as energy in the Hawking radiation. What is the
analogous story in case of the Universal horizon? Is there an analogue
of the ergoregion behind the Universal horizon?

The relevant notion of energy in case of conventional Hawking radiation
from a Killing horizon is the Killing energy. For a Universal horizon on
the other hand, the relevant notion of energy is the energy measured in
the æther frame, @xmath . Indeed, it is in the æther frame that we have
the modified dispersion relation, Eq. ( 3.12 ). Now consider the
pair-creation process right outside the Universal horizon. The particle
created with positive @xmath escapes to infinity. As for the negative
@xmath particle of the pair, from the equation for the conservation of
energy Eq. ( 3.27 ) we have that for an ingoing mode with a negative
energy outside the Universal horizon,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

We note that @xmath changes sign at the Universal horizon, with @xmath
now playing the role of the redshift factor @xmath in the standard
calculation. This is so because @xmath is negative outside, zero on, and
positive inside the Universal horizon. Thus the negative energy particle
of the pair after tunnelling through the Universal horizon appears
inside with a positive @xmath and propagates thereafter as a real
particle. This suggests that the region behind the Universal horizon is
analogous to ergoregion in the standard case and the picture that the
pair-production close to horizon is responsible for the Hawking
radiation carries over to the Universal horizon. The only change being
that the appropriate notion of energy is no longer the Killing energy
but the energy measured in the æther frame.

There have been studies, mostly in the context of analogue spacetimes,
which show that Hawking radiation from the Killing horizon is robust
with respect to UV modifications of the dispersion relation, which will
be discussed further below. In fact, the horizon does not even need to
be an event horizon, but only some effective horizon [ 14 , 16 ] . This
conclusion seems to be supported by Fig. 3.4 where the low @xmath rays
seem to be peeling off the Killing horizon. However, there is a crucial
difference. The cited studies do not have a Universal horizon whose
presence will modify the boundary conditions for the modes. Once one
realizes that there is in fact a Universal horizon one finds that, all
the rays, irrespective of their energy, actually peel off the Universal
horizon. The Killing horizon then seems to play the role of an efficient
scattering surface for the low energy rays. The lesson is that the
findings of analogue gravity can not be blindly applied to the case at
hand. The reason, as we will fully discuss in the next chapter, is
simply that we do not (yet) have an analogue spacetime modeling the
Universal horizon. Hence the intuition from the analogue gravity program
must be exercised with caution.

Finally, a crucial aspect of the derivation of Hawking radiation is the
onset of an Unruh-type quantum vacuum state after the gravitational
collapse. While there is evidence that Universal horizons form in
spherically symmetric collapse [ 139 ] , we do not yet know the nature
of the quantum vacuum state that is established at the end of this
process. The experience based on black hole physics in general
relativity [ 15 ] would suggest that the quantum vacuum state for free
falling observers (i.e., the Unruh state) should be established only at
the Universal horizon because the universal and exact “redshift”
associated with the peel-off behavior would erase any leftover
renormalized stress energy tensor exponentially fast at the horizon once
it is formed. Furthermore, the evidence found in Ref. [ 29 ] , and in [
55 ] and the previous chapter, strongly suggests that thermal radiation
will be produced at the Universal horizon and will escape the Killing
horizon. This in turn suggests that the state experienced by the free
falling observers at the Killing horizon would be non-generic, and would
typically be different from the Unruh vacuum.

In this chapter, we will first present on of the standard calculations
of Hawking radiation, then discuss a potential physical problem with the
high energies involved in standard calculations. The discussion will
then turn to analogue spacetimes with dispersion and how such systems
have played in understanding the robustness of Hawking radiation.

Next, we shall briefly present two existing calculations for Hawking
radiation from the universal horizon, and discuss some potential issues
with both approaches. Finally we shall focus on a way forward to do a
calculation addressing questions or drawbacks in the existing
approaches.

### 4.1 Hawking Radiation – The standard picture

As mentioned in section 1.1 of the introduction, a major turning point
in our understanding of black holes was Hawking’s discovery [ 88 ] that
black holes radiate. We now work through a derivation of this radiation
to understand it better. Today, there are many ways we can arrive at
this result, and this derivation is loosely based on chapter six of [ 97
] . The setup is as shown in 4.1

We want the expectation value @xmath of the number operator, @xmath ,
where @xmath is the outgoing wavepacket far from the black hole. This is
split into a near-horizon outgoing part @xmath and a reflected
wavepacket, @xmath . Using stationarity, boundary conditions of no
incoming radiation, and the Unruh vacuum state, one can express this as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Splitting @xmath into positive and negative frequency parts ( @xmath and
@xmath ) with respect to an infalling observer with proper time @xmath
(who sees everything in the ground state at horizon crossing), we can
further write

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a spacelike slice sufficiently after the black hole has
formed. So we need to understand the form of the wavepacket and be able
to split it into positive and negative frequency parts.

Look at wavepacket @xmath emerging from, and close to, the Killing
horizon. As the wavepacket is outgoing it must be a function of the
retarded time @xmath .

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath divergent at the horizon.

Consider how this wavepacket is seen by the infalling observer. We
relate @xmath and the free-fall time by noting for the line element

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

(here we certainly want to use something horizon-penetrating but other
than this, the coordinate choice is not crucial). The path of the
infalling radial timelike observer with proper time, @xmath , is given
by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Implying

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

This measures the pile-up of rays (described by @xmath ). Further,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.10)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where the last relation is only true near the horizon . From the
definition of @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Near the horizon, @xmath diverges and @xmath is finite, and using @xmath
.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Integrating,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Pick the free-fall observer who falls across horizon at @xmath . For
this observer wavepacket has a dependence on the proper time @xmath ,
and vanishes for @xmath (inside horizon). Then we split @xmath into
positive and negative frequency parts. This is simple because of the
form of the wavepacket is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

and we just need to work with the analytic continuation of logarithm,
where across @xmath the positive frequency extension is obtained by
replacing @xmath with @xmath and the negative frequency extension by
replacing @xmath with @xmath

Define @xmath by flipping the wavepacket across the horizon, so it only
has support inside, i.e. @xmath for @xmath . Then the combinations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

are the positive and negative frequency components. We can match with T
outside horizon to fix

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Finally, this leads us to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is a thermal spectrum with a greybody @xmath .

#### 4.1.1 Which infalling observer?

In the standard calculation of [ 97 ] presented above, one uses the
infalling observer at horizon crossing to define a vacuum state. If we
are working within the framework of general relativity, this is
completely unambiguous: pick a ingoing timelike (radial) geodesic. Here,
however, we appear to have (at least) two natural notions for an
infalling observer: An infalling (metric) geodesic observer, and
infalling æthereal observer. We could make a more complicated choice by
giving our observer a non-trivial coupling to the æther via a dispersion
relation, and then showing the results are valid for a large range of
dispersion relations. This would be overkill, as we see the key results
don’t depend on the type of infalling observer within reasonable
restrictions.

Which should we work with, and how much will this affect the conclusions
drawn? Notice the important point from the calculation above: we want to
extract the divergent part and therefore what we need (and what we have
for the geodesic observer) is that @xmath is finite and regular at
horizon crossing.

For this section we will use @xmath for aether time and @xmath for
proper time of an æther observer. We define the aether observer by an
unnormalized vector parallel to the aether,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that the proper time, @xmath , along an infalling æthereal observer
is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

working in EF coordinates where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

and further,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.24)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

We have a solution of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the @xmath s are arbitrary constants. Near the universal horizon

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

and therefore

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

Assuming @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are regular and non-zero on horizon,
and correspondingly one can pick @xmath such that at @xmath where the
ray crosses the horizon @xmath , as we had previously with the geodesic
observer ( @xmath with @xmath and @xmath regular).

As long as we choose an infalling observer that is related in a
similarly regular way, it will not affect the final spectrum calculated.

### 4.2 The Transplanckian Problem

Calculations of Hawking radiation involve using outgoing rays close to
the event horizon, which are highly blueshifted (consider the form of
eqn 4.6 ). To see how much consider and outgoing ray of frequency @xmath
measured by an observer crossing the horizon at @xmath . At @xmath the
ray is blueshifted by an exponential factor

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

For a astrophysically reasonably sized black hole and @xmath of order of
second this requires blueshifting into the regime beyond the Planck
mass.

This naturally raises the question of validity of Hawking’s calculation,
as this would mean trusting the symmetries of general relativity, the UV
structure of the QFT for the relevant field, and the structure of
spacetime up to such energies. A number of investigations have now shown
that, at leading order Hawking radiation is robust against some
modifications to the standard picture. For an interesting discussion of
this issues see [ 96 , 11 ] .

### 4.3 Hawking Radiation Calculations with Dispersion

Recall that Hawking radiation calculations relies only on the kinematics
of the spacetime, not the dynamics. Therefore, if Hawking radiation is
independent of the UV completion of gravity, we should also see such an
effect in analogue spacetimes. Alternatively, given that we know what
the UV physics of condensed matter systems is, we should see where the
calculation breaks down or is altered.

Consider a simple fluid set-up, so that at the horizon @xmath . Tracing
back along an outgoing ray, it is blueshifted until it reaches the point
where the dispersion relation is significant enough to change the group
velocity from @xmath down to below the local speed of fluid flow. If the
group velocity is below the fluid flow speed, the ray is dragged in.
This means when tracing back, the Hawking quanta came originally from
far outside the black hole, moves in and has “mode conversion” takes
place near the horizon, changing to an outgoing mode. This mode
conversion depends, at the lowest order, on the surface gravity of the
black hole, and hence the spectrum is approximately thermal at the
temperature of Hawking radiation.

There is an extra level of complexity with superluminal modes — if one
is considering something similar to a Schwarzschild black hole, by the
argument above, outgoing modes come from inside the horizon, and should
emerge from the singularity, Therefore one must impose some sort of
boundary condition inside the horizon (and possibly on the singularity
itself), which is difficult to justify without a full-fledged theory of
quantum gravity. However, one may study such systems in the analogue
framework where, the easiest set up is connecting two regions of
constant velocity, one superluminal and one subluminal. On both of these
asymptotic regions one may now happily place sensible boundary
conditions without invoking new physics.

Numerous studies of such systems have taken place (see [ 104 , 150 , 69
, 54 , 110 , 111 , 67 , 53 , 51 , 52 ] ), and have generally concluded
that, at leading order, the Hawking result is unchanged. Additionally,
it has also been found that some new exotic effects can exist due to the
presence of dispersion, such as black holes lasers [ 50 , 66 , 115 , 146
] . It has been understood that the horizon should be considered of
finite width, rather than a 2D surface [ 68 ] . Interesting results also
concern white hole horizon stability in the presence of modified
dispersion relations [ 20 ] .

### 4.4 Hawking Radiation with a Universal Horizon

At the time of writing, two calculations exist computing the radiation
from the universal horizon, which are in wild disagreement with each
other. The first [ 29 ] used a tunnelling method a lá Parikh and Wilczek
[ 126 ] . In this approach one considers particle creation near the
horizon, and the contribution from both positive energy outgoing
particles escaping from just inside the horizon and negative energy
particles falling inside the horizon. One does this by considering

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

The outgoing ray will be singular at the horizon, giving an imaginary
contribution. Thus tunnelling probability is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath indicates positive energy and @xmath outgoing rays.

By this technique [ 29 ] found a thermal spectrum using a quartic
dispersion relation. Importantly nothing in this construction relies on
the null character or other special aspects of event horizons, and so is
easily adaptable. However, it clearly dependent on the exact pole
structure for @xmath near the horizon. For this reason it was impossible
to extend this technique to arbitrary dispersion relations, clearly an
undesirable feature. Another drawback is nothing in this technique can
tell us the effect of the Killing horizon: whether it also radiates or
if it effects the shape of the spectrum via a frequency dependent
greybody.

The second attempt [ 116 ] takes inspiration from condensed matter
calculations with dispersion. The authors take an idealized collapse of
a null shell of matter to form a black hole, allowing them to place
boundary conditions on the flat space section inside the shell. Looking
at the area near both the shell and the universal horizon, one
calculates the overlap along the shell of the stationary modes and the
outwards propagating modes. This overlap decreases at high energies
(which are the relevant ones due to the high blue-shift near the
horizon) and becomes negligible, and thus the relevant Bogliubov
coefficient is suppressed.

This is used to argue that the universal horizon does not effect the
standard calculation with dispersion for a Killing horizon, and the
temperature measured at infinity is thus, at first order, the one of the
Hawking radiation from the Killing horizon, and is determined by the
surface gravity associated to the Killing horizon.

The advantage to this approach is that, although a quartic dispersion
relation was used, it is clear the result should hold for general
superluminal dispersions.

However, questions remain about this approach. In particular, two
features give pause: looking along the ingoing shell, the æther is
discontinuous, which raise the question of whether the vacuum is
continuous through this shell. It is also less clear that outside the
shell the vacuum corresponds to physical observers. It seems the
observers measuring this vacuum would have to be moving infinitely fast
close to the universal horizon. While infinitely fast observers are
possible in these theories, this does not seem to correspond to vacuum
seen by an infalling observer in any simple (regular) way.

### 4.5 Adiabaticity

Particle creation, such as Hawking radiation, can generally be expected
to occur when an adiabatic or WKB condition breaks down (see discussion
in [ 15 , 141 , 142 ] ). Such concerns, as noted in [ 141 ] , are
dependent on the frame chosen, so one must make sure one considers the
breakdown of adiabaticity with respect to sensible observers.

Which observers are sensible to pick in the case of Æ gravity? We will
consider the breakdown of adiabaticity of the æther frequency with
respect to the æther time, that is we want @xmath for @xmath . From the
ray tracing results for we have @xmath for one dispersion relation, so
we can easily find @xmath . Then we can combine

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can use the formulae ( 3.6 ) for the khronon slices and ( 3.31 ) for
the outgoing null rays to write this as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

Simplify slightly using results from appendix A so that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now, we have explicit formaulae for everything appearing in eqn 4.34 ,
as we have @xmath from the previous chapter.

Note that @xmath depends explicitly on both @xmath and @xmath , as a
consequence of @xmath being a function of both parameters (see appendix
A ). However, once we pick a given sector (the @xmath coefficients) of
the theory we are in a one-parameter family of solutions, and one can
express both these surface gravities in terms of the mass.

One may notice the adiabaticity only seems to be broken near or outside
the Killing horizon (see figure 4.2 ). One might try to take this as
evidence that particles are created at the Killing horizon and not the
universal horizon. However, the key point for the observer at infinity
is not where such particles are created, but what controls the
temperature. In this sense the dependence of the adiabaticity on both
surface gravities could be taken as a hint that the temperature of
radiation will not be purely fixed by the properties of the Killing
horizon.

### 4.6 Euclidean continuation

One alternative way to find the temperature of Hawking radiation is
using the Euclidean continuation and finding the deficit angle near the
horizon. This relies on the fact that periodicity in imaginary time
corresponds to thermality in Lorentzian signature [ 73 ] .

The standard technique is as such: expand the Scharzschild black hole
near the Killing horizon, so that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

and change coordinates to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

so the near horizon metric takes the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now preform an analytic continuation @xmath , so

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

This has the form of polar coordinates on the flat @xmath plane if the
angular variable @xmath has the correct periodicity, that is periodic in
@xmath with periodicity @xmath . Therefore the spacetime has temperature

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

Could we adapt such a construction to the universal horizon? At first
sight, it seems obvious we cannot: this is a geometrical construction
relying on the vanishing of @xmath . In our spacetimes this happens
precisely at the Killing horizon, and nowhere else. Instead of this
approach, let us take a disformal transformation, as in ( 1.78 ), for an
arbitrary velocity, s.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.40)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Using the fact that both original metric and æther are spherically
symmetric and time-independent, we can transform by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the use the unit condition,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

to get this back to diagonal form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

We now have a speed-dependent horizon, @xmath , which we can solve for
for either of the exact solutions in section 1.7 . We can now follow
through the standard steps, expanding near the horizon

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

and preforming the same (now s-dependent) transformations, to arrive at

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

which in turn implies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

As we saw in section 1.7 , the universal horizon corresponds to the
Killing horizon of a disformally transformed metric in the limiting case
where the velocity, @xmath , goes to infinity. Does @xmath give a
sensible result in this limit?

Take the exact solution for @xmath (similar results can be obtained for
the other exact solution).

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

and so

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is exactly the expected Hawking temperature if the relevant surface
gravity is provided by the @xmath calculated in the previous section.

### 4.7 Ansatzë for Hawking radiation calculations

We could try naive extensions of the approach in section 4.1 . Consider,
for instance,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is our conserved energy conjugate to v and @xmath is
defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

We define

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

One physical issue with this approach is that when we are calculating
@xmath this is no longer a measure of the density (and hence pile-up) of
rays, as @xmath is not constant along the rays. Of course one can write
a form that does this, namely,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

and is clearly related to the equation describing the ray from our ray
tracing paper. This form also ensures that @xmath is only a function of
an appropriate retarded time, so outgoing.

From such a form, we can continue with the construction of section 4.1
to find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

and hence

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

It therefore seems like part of the problem is the breaking of the
relationship between @xmath and the coordinate describing ray pile up.
However, there is hardly any justification for the form 4.54 other than
the fact it is related to the physical ray structure we provided. As
such it is unclear if this would be consistent with a standard WKB
approach.

If, instead one starts with eqn 4.51 , one runs into a pole structure
which becomes difficult to work with mathematically, and interpret
physically.

### 4.8 Ways Forward

Overall, there appears to be several open issues. Firstly, the right
boundary conditions and picking the right vacuum state, and secondly
finding a calculation that can handle a different pole structure at the
horizon.

Given the complexities of the only collapse scenario, it seems best to
work with a static geometry or, in the same style of 4.1 , a geometry
long after collapse.

Following techniques of [ 151 ] , we can take a dispersive field
equation and, expanding around the universal horizon now, instead of the
Killing horizon, approximately solve this equation near the horizon, for
the several possible modes near the universal horizon. We could then
link to the solution far away, and match what leads to the outgoing
particle at infinity.

One difficulty with following the techniques of [ 151 ] is that their
set-up was within the analogue framework and involved linking two
asymptotically flat regions. Therefore the boundary conditions of such a
set-up cannot be followed blindly.

It is clear that a full understanding of Hawking radiation in spacetime
is still lacking, and that gaining such a full understanding would give
us much insight into the process of Hawking radiation.

## Chapter 5 Relativistic Bose–Einstein condensates for mimicking
Killing and Universal horizons

  In 1972, I was asked to give a colloquium to the physics department at
  Oxford. In trying to describe what a black hole was, I came up with an
  analogy. Imagine you are a blind fish, and are also a physicist,
  living in a river. At one place in the river, there is a particularly
  virulent waterfall, such that at some point in the waterfall, the
  velocity of the water over the waterfall exceeds the velocity of sound
  in the water.

  Bill Unruh

### 5.1 Introduction

Analogue spacetimes, as we have discussed previously, can often have
more freedom in their configurations than those spacetimes that are
vacuum or simple matter solutions in general relativity. But what about
theories with new degrees of freedom? As we have seen with our
investigations of universal horizons, some features cannot be understood
solely in terms of the metric.

In this chapter we will consider how to couple a fluid to external
fields so as to incorporate effects due to extra scalar or vector
degrees of freedom. As a convenient system we will consider relativistic
Bose–Einstein condensates (rBECs). We pick up this system as it is clear
how to couple fields, and as we have in mind Æ gravity, we want a
relativistic system which we can naturally couple a four-vector to.

These rBECs have been less investigated than their non-relativistic
counterparts, for obvious reasons of lack of existing experimental
capabilities. To date, the only explicit analogue spacetime developed
with rBECs is the @xmath FLRW cosmological solution [ 63 ] (but see also
a “draining bathtub” geometry [ 32 ] for relativistic acoustics). As
static black holes are some of the most useful and simple analogue
spacetimes, we investigate black holes and how to relate black hole
features to the properties of the rBEC. In the first part of this
chapter, we will look explicitly at the difficulties in modelling the
Schwarzschild solution, and examine a simplified flow leading to a
canonical acoustic black hole.

In the second part of this chapter, we will look at coupling an external
electromagnetic field to the rBEC to simulate an æther field. We will
see the simplest option, while allowing the incorporation of vorticity
in analogue spacetimes, does not supply us with an observable
æther field. We will then consider other couplings and other fields
which allow the interpretation of an æther field. Finally, we shall try
modelling a universal horizon in these analogue spacetimes

### 5.2 Modelling Universal horizons in standard acoustic geometries

Let us first reassure ourselves that we truly cannot incorporate
features such as the universal horizon into the standard picture of
analogue models. It is interesting to note that in the menagerie of
acoustic spacetimes, a specific causal structure similar to that of
these Einstein–Æther black holes was found (see Fig. 26 of Ref. [ 13 ]
). This spacetime was named the “unphysical black hole” as it needed an
unphysical, diverging, fluid flow in order to mimic the presence of a
singularity. Nonetheless, the resemblance with the causal structure
shown in Fig. 1.2 appears striking. However, no concept of Universal
horizon has ever surfaced in acoustic spacetimes (or any of the other
analogue models for that matter). It is therefore interesting to clarify
why this is the case.

Of course, it is trivial to put the metric of the two previously
described black-hole solutions of Einstein–Æther theory into the
standard Painleve–Gullstrand form,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the flow velocity and @xmath the speed of sound for the
corresponding acoustic geometry. In this geometry there is a natural
notion of the preferred frame, the frame in which the fluid is at rest.
So the corresponding æther field is most naturally taken to be

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The zeroth component is determined by the requirement that the æther
field is unit timelike, which gives

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Regularity at the Killing horizon (the surface where @xmath ) fixes the
sign to be minus. Now let us calculate — when is the Killing vector
orthogonal to the æther? We have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

But this, being proportional to a sum of squares, is never zero for
real-valued @xmath . Therefore, there is no Universal horizon.

One might similarly try with a relativistic fluid, as in [ 158 ] , and
which will be more fully described below, which has a metric given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the effective metric, @xmath the background metric
(which we pick to be Minkowski, as appropriate for any laboratory
set-up) and @xmath . If we set the æther to be our naturally preferred
frame, @xmath , then the norm constraint on the æther is imposed by the
choice @xmath . If we want to model an Æ black hole, we have timelike
Killing vector, and the condition for a Universal horizon is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Which is tantamount to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

which again is impossible to satisfy.

Why is there no Universal horizon in these cases? In the acoustic
geometry, the æther field is determined by the same flow, @xmath , that
determines the metric. There is simply not enough freedom to have
additional structures such as Universal horizon, where the geometry is
well behaved, but the æther time has run to infinity. One needs a
separately defined dynamical æther to have a Universal horizon. This of
course does not mean that we cannot capture this structure within the
context of analogue models. One simply needs more degrees of freedom in
order to do so. It is clear that we truly need to add some new degrees
of freedom to model the æther.

### 5.3 Relativistic BECs: a new system for analogue black holes

In this section we will give a brief description of a relativistic
Bose–Einstein condensate. For further details, see [ 63 ] . We start
with the Lagrangian density for a complex scalar field @xmath which can
be given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the mass of bosons, @xmath is an external potential,
@xmath is the speed of light, @xmath is a self-interaction term and
@xmath are the coupling constants.

The Lagrangian ( 5.8 ) is invariant under the global @xmath symmetry and
has a conserved current

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

related to a conserved ensemble charge @xmath , where @xmath is the
number of bosons (anti-bosons).

In the case where there are no self-interactions ( @xmath ) and no
external potential ( @xmath ), the average number of bosons @xmath in
the state of energy @xmath can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.11)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and @xmath is the chemical potential, @xmath is the temperature and the
energy of the state @xmath is given by @xmath .

The relation between the conserved charge density @xmath (where @xmath
is the volume of the system) and the critical temperature is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath .

The non-relativistic and ultra-relativistic limits can be obtained
directly from ( 5.12 ). The non-relativistic limit, @xmath , is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Riemann zeta function. The ultra-relativistic limit,
@xmath , implies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

The condensation of the relativistic Bose gas occurs when @xmath . In
this phase, it is possible to uncouple the BEC ground state from its
perturbations. To separate this state from its perturbation, analogously
to section 1.4.2 we can make use of the mean-field approximation,
performing the substitution @xmath , where @xmath is the classical
background field satisfying the equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath is a fluctuation. The nonlinear Klein-Gordon equation ( 5.15
) gives the dynamics of the relativistic condensates.

It is also convenient decompose the degrees of freedom of the complex
scalar classical field in terms of the Madelung representation, @xmath .
Using this representation, the continuity equation and the condensate
equation ( 5.15 ) are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.16)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.17)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the fluid four-velocity of the condensate.

The quantum perturbation @xmath satisfies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is related to the interaction strength and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

is a generalized kinetic operator, the relativistic equivalent of the
quantum potential (cf. equation 1.61 ). It is instructive to obtain a
single equation for the field @xmath . This can be done taking the
Hermitian conjugate of ( 5.19 ) and using the result to eliminate @xmath
. After some manipulation, the equation describing the propagation of
the linearized perturbations is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

which does not depend on the external potential @xmath . This is the
relativistic generalization of the Bogoliubov-de Gennes equation. The
rBEC perturbations has many interesting physical situations. An
extensive analysis of the dispersion relation of such perturbations was
carried out in [ 63 ] . Here, we are concerned with the low momentum
massless modes,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this limit, we can disregard the quantum potential @xmath , and the
description of the acoustic disturbances propagation is governed by an
acoustic metric. This can be seen by applying the above conditions, the
equation ( 5.21 ) reduces to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the continuity equation ( 5.16 ), we can rewrite the equation (
5.23 ) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now, taking the usual approach, we express this as a Klein-Gordon in a
curved metric, which is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Sometimes it is more convenient express the acoustic metric ( 5.25 ) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the normalized (with respect to Minkowski) four-velocity
and @xmath is the speed of sound, which is defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

### 5.4 Analogue Black holes for rBECs

Other than the FLRW solution studied in [ 63 ] , few solutions have been
studied to date. Here we investigate black hole solutions in these
analogue models (but see also the analysis of horizons in [ 32 ] ).

#### 5.4.1 Schwarzschild black hole

Can we match the Schwarzschild solution with the form ( 5.26 )? If we
take

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

(note that this obeys the unit timelike constraint on @xmath by
construction), we see the corresponding acoustic metric is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.30)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

(note the similarity to the metric in section 4 of [ 4 ] ). This can be
seen to be a form of the Schwarzschild metric by starting with 5.30 and
transforming to a new coordinate, @xmath by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

to bring the metric into standard diagonal form.

However, at this point we have not taken into neither account the
continuity equation ( 5.16 ), nor the hypersurface orthogonal condition
( 5.18 ). These are not satisfied with this velocity flow.

What we can do is this; pick @xmath to be constant, and set @xmath as
above. This means that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

But the hypersurface orthogonal condition ( 5.18 ) implies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

so @xmath is fixed up to a multiplicative constant. Then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

which will appear in the conformal factor.

Thus, as in the non-relativistic case, we have a metric that is not
identical to, but conformal to the Schwarzschild solution. For many
purposes this will be enough, as many features (causal features, for
example), are conformally invariant.

#### 5.4.2 Canonical acoustic metric

From above, we see that, as in the non-relativistic analogue metrics,
working with the exact Schwarzschild picture involves some complexity.
Depending on the use to which one wishes to put the analogue spacetime
to, it is advisable to either work with a metric conformal to
Schwarzschild, or to take a simplified flow. We take the latter approach
here, following closely on [ 155 ] .

Let us assume we have an incompressible fluid, @xmath constant. In four
dimensions, for spherical symmetry, the continuity equations implies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

And from the hypersurface orthogonality condition @xmath . Picking
@xmath (where we have the negative sign to indicate ingoing flow), we
have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the metric becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.37)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

This can be converted to Schwarzschild coordinates by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

bringing the metric into the diagonal form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now we check if this velocity flow has a Killing horizon. As there is no
time dependence, and no rotation this is defined where @xmath , which is
true when

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

so we have a Killing horizon at a positive @xmath , as needed.

Similarly to the metric in section 8 of [ 155 ] , there is a singular
sphere when @xmath , which is precisely where @xmath , so becomes null
with respect to the lab Minkowski metric. This will not concern us so
long as we are only working with physics outside this singular surface.

#### 5.4.3 Killing Horizon in Relativistic Acoustic Metrics

Let us consider again the relativistic acoustic metric of 5.26 , and
make the assumption of stationary, so that there is a Killing vector
associated to time translation isometries given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

as @xmath . Note that the condition that this becomes null, corresponds
to the horizon in the static case. For the stationary case this is the
condition for the ergosurface. From this, and using the unit norm
constraint,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

This seems somewhat at odd with the usually non-relativistic flow
condition for the horizon. however, in terms of charge current we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

so

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

which appears more similar to the usual expression. Let us note that a
similar approach is presented in [ 32 ] , where the the velocity, @xmath
, used is related ours at horizon a rescaling of @xmath , so these
conditions are in agreement with one another.

#### 5.4.4 Surface Gravity

What of the surface gravity in such spacetimes? Here we will be dealing
only with static Killing horizons (though this is easily extendable to
stationary spacetimes), so we will not concern ourselves with the
complications of [ 56 ] and chapter 2, though such concerns will be
equally relevant when considering non-Killing horizons in the context of
relativistic fluids.

Taking the one of the standard definitions discussed in [ 55 ] (in terms
of inaffinity of null geodesics), the surface gravity, @xmath of the
Killing horizon is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

Which we can directly calculate with the metric and the timelike Killing
vector to give

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that taking @xmath we can recover the standard definition for
non-relativistic fluid flow. Also note again the relation between our v
and the one used in the expression for surface gravity in [ 32 ] , as
above. Taking this rescaling into account our result also agrees with
that of [ 32 ] . Finally, in terms of the charge current, we can
re-write ( 5.46 ) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

### 5.5 Coupling an External Field to the rBEC

To mimic universal horizons in analogue gravity framework it is
necessary to input an additional structure to the rBEC system. As
discussed in the introduction of this chapter, neither non-relativistic
nor relativistic acoustic metrics give us enough freedom to simulate a
region where arbitrarily fast supersonic modes can be trapped. One
possible way to circumvent this problem is to take into account the role
of an external background field coupled to the condensate. This will
allow us to uncouple the fluid four-velocity from another preferred
system, and associate to the latter the role of an acoustic æther field,
while the analogue metric would be determined by the charge current
@xmath . To this end, we will consider a electrically charged rBEC. The
minimal prescription implies that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.48)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.49)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the gauge field. The @xmath gauge invariant Lagrangian
describing the interaction of the complex scalar field @xmath and the
electromagnetic field can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the electromagnetic field strength. The Noether theorem
leads to a locally conserved current @xmath which is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

So that the conserved charge is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

which we can associate to a bosonic chemical potential @xmath .

The momentum canonically conjugate to @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since we are treating the fields @xmath and @xmath independently, the
Hamiltonian density will be given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the partition function is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.55)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Integrating the momenta away, we arrive at

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.57)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the effective potential. It is clear from the above potential that in
order to spontaneous break the @xmath local symmetry, the condition
@xmath must be satisfied.

Now, the equation of motion for @xmath is

  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------
           @xmath            (5.59)
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------

Making a shift @xmath , we can factor out the chemical potential
dependence and express the field equation as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is an equation that describes a charged relativistic Bose–Einstein
condensate. Following exactly the same steps of section 5.3 , we get the
gauge invariant linearized perturbation equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the gauge invariant four-velocity in the Madelung representation
satisfying the conservation equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

The equation ( 5.61 ) is a generalization of the linearized perturbation
propagation equation in a charged relativistic Bose–Einstein condensate.

It is clear from the charged conserved current that the role of the
gauge field @xmath is basically perform a shift in the fluid
four-velocity @xmath .

#### 5.5.1 Modified Dispersion Relation

As we commented at the end of the previous section, the equation
describing the charged linearized perturbations has the same structure
that the uncoupled case. This is useful since we can make use of the
previous results of section 5.3 . In the ray optics limit/eikonal
approximation, the Fourier decomposition of equation ( 5.61 ) gives us

  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------
           @xmath            (5.64)
           @xmath   @xmath   
                    @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------

We can further simplify ( 5.64 ) by going to the frame where @xmath ,
which give us as solution

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

Again, as we are interested in a description of phonons in an effective
geometry, the relevant excitations to our problem are the gapless
excitations in the low momentum regime

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

which gives us

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.68)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

At low momentum range, is clear from ( 5.68 ) that our system can have
supersonic modes.

#### 5.5.2 Coupled Relativistic Acoustic Metric

As in the uncoupled case, it is possible neglect the quantum potential
@xmath in the eikonal approximation. With that, our new relativistic
effective metric describing the propagation of the massless excitation
is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

One might now hope to interpret the first two terms as a d’Alembertian,
to which we can associate the standard acoustic metric ( 5.26 ), and the
other terms as the interaction (which adds a force term, rather than
free geodesic motion) of an acoustic perturbation with an analogue æther
field defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

However there is a problem with this approach, that @xmath is a gauge
field, and as such, physically unobservable. The only gauge invariant
quantity is @xmath , which is the conserved current, and we can always
write the metric

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

So we appear to be back to the original scenario, where our only
possible æther , @xmath , is also what defines the metric. Does this
mean the coupling makes essentially no change?

#### 5.5.3 Vorticity

To derive a metric, normally one must assume the vorticity is zero
(consider what we have done in section 1.4.2 , or the standard fluid
derivation in [ 20 ] ), which places restrictions on the form of the
flows chosen. In particular, working within physical acoustics, it is a
long-standing problem to introduce vorticity into this the analogue
spacetime framework [ 128 ] . We will show that systems coupled this way
can have non-zero vorticity, in a natural and simple manner.

Consider the full metric, incorporating both the flow and the coupling,
of equation 5.71 , formed with @xmath , and consider the vorticity
tensor

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.72)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Sot the vorticity will automatically be non-zero as long as @xmath .

If we want to split the potential into @xmath , we can see this is
direct proportional to the magnetic field.

### 5.6 Coupling a Proca Field

Previously we had the problem of gauge freedom, and our æther field
candidate was gauge-dependent, and therefore unphysical. Fundamentally
this comes from the original assumption of gauge coupling — this is a
nice simple and physically realizable option, but is evidently too
simple for our purposes. Furthermore the physical motivation for our
investigation is more theoretical in nature as nor rBEC has yet been
realized in a laboratory. This allows us to consider more general fields
and couplings which might not be so simple to realize experimentally as
gauge coupling. Given our previous investigation, a very economic
approach could be to consider again a vector field but remove the
obstruction related to gauge invariance.

Therefore instead of the standard electromagnetic field, we can try to
couple a Proca field to our rBEC. This is a massive vector field,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

obviously the mass term is not gauge invariant. However, the field
equations imply that the Proca field must obey

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is the Lorentz condition, albeit this is no longer a gauge
condition. For more details see [ 113 ] .

We couple this field via

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is given by 5.9 .

#### 5.6.1 Metric and Dispersion Relation

Similarly to section 5.5 we can write the equation for the perturbation
as

  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------
           @xmath            (5.76)
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------

Now, using the conservation equation,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

the Lorentz condition (now a field equation), and the condition that
@xmath is a constant (we must now assume this separately, as the
conserved current is @xmath not @xmath ), we can rewrite the
perturbation equation as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

Given that @xmath is still our conserved current, we want write the
first two terms as the metric — consider setting up the flow and hence
the metric and turning on the coupling. As the flow does not change we
regard it as natural to interpret the metric as the one associated to
@xmath with no dependence on @xmath . We can interpret the other terms
as a force term incorporating the coupling to the Proca field.

As for the dispersion relation, we can borrow from the gauge coupling as
the perturbation is insensitive to the mass term, so

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

The key points here being that this the @xmath lab frame, and that we
have higher order terms due to the quntum potential.

### 5.7 Analogue Universal horizons

Now we turn our attention to the question of whether we can mimic the
æther and universal horizons.

#### 5.7.1 Coupled canonical acoustic metric

We could attempt to mimic the exact solutions of section 1.7 . For
instance, for the @xmath solution we can follow the steps of section
5.4.1 , using

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

We remain with the same problem as before, we can match up to a
conformal factor, with a non-constant @xmath . We therefore take the
simpler approach, using the canonical acoustic metric. This hopefully
encompasses much of the physics needed for many uses of a analogue model
without the complexity of the exact solution.

Let us then take the metric from section 5.4.2 , and try to pick an
external field such that we mimic a black hole with a universal horizon.

We want to mimic a static æther , so we choose @xmath to be a function
of @xmath only. Now the electrostatic Proca equations in 4D for
spherical symmetry, are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the conserved current, and so directly related to @xmath
. We wish to solve this for the simplest scenario we can, so we solve
this using the current associated to the metric of 5.4.2 . Here, @xmath
and @xmath are both constants, and therefore so is @xmath , so that the
relevant equation is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.83)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 5.7.2 Universal Horizon

Universal horizon is where @xmath

Killing vector is @xmath , @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.85)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

So the condition for the universal horizon is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note the inner product is taken with the Minkowski metric. Plugging the
form of @xmath into this, we see we have a universal horizon if

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

which cannot be solved exactly for @xmath .

Let us pick a specific set of coefficients ( @xmath ), so that our full
solution is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.88)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.89)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is a rather artificial example as there is no reason the mass scale
of the Proca field should be at all related to a length scale of the
metric. However, this is certainly enough to show the existence of a
universal horizon. Indeed, we see the condition 5.87 is true at @xmath
while the Killing horizon is @xmath .

One can see the universal horizon by plotting @xmath as in figure 5.1 .

##### Ray Tracing

To understand whether this surface truly blocks perturbations, we work
adapt the ray tracing picture of [ 55 ] . Our dispersion relation,
defined at infinity, is given by, for @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.90)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath constants, @xmath , @xmath . As we will have to work inside
the Killing horizon (where timelike and spacelike directions flip), we
choose to work with the tetrad frame given by @xmath and a unit vector
orthogonal to @xmath , @xmath . Taking

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.91)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the transformations between the two given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.92)
  -- -------- -- --------

From which we can derive a relation on @xmath and @xmath . Explicitly,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.93)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

which, differently from [ 55 ] and chapter 3, is regular on the
universal horizon. However,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.94)
  -- -------- -- --------

Which diverges at the universal horizon. In this frame we can now again
write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.95)
  -- -------- -- --------

For infinite group velocity, this is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.96)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the second equality is a consequence of the fact that @xmath is
orthogonal to @xmath . This means that infinite velocity rays (in the
tetrad frame) travel along constant khronon surfaces. This is the basis
of the blocking mechanism of the universal horizon, as, by construction,
no constant khronon surface can cross it.

### 5.8 Discussion

Relativistic Bose Einstein condensate provide an exciting analogue
system, that is relativistic (with limiting speed @xmath ) at low
energies, and at high energies (with limiting speed @xmath ). Thus they
provide and interesting theoretical testbed for studying effects present
in Lorentz-violating theories of gravity.

We have explored incorporating new structure into analogue geometries.
The hope is to break the degeneracy between the what sets the preferred
frame and what sets the metric, allowing us to reproduce an æther field
and the universal horizon.

To that end, we have explored coupling a vector field to the a rBEC. The
simplest, minimally coupled gauge field does not provide enough new
structure to allow this, by nature of being a gauge field. This does
however allow a simple way to incorporate vorticity into analogue
systems.

To mimic the æther we introduce a Proca field, removing the problematic
gauge freedom, and found a solution with a universal horizon. However,
currently, getting a physical grasp of how the blocking mechanism works
is proving elusive, and further investigations are needed. It seems that
the Proca field coupling to charged excitations can force them to
propogate along field lines. As a matter of fact, one might imagine that
if excitations of any energy cannot propogate against the preferred
direction imposed by the Proca field then at most they can move along a
surface orthogonal to it at high energies, i.e. the khronon. At present
this is speculation, albeit a plausible one.

## Chapter 6 Conclusions and future directions

Black holes have been extensively studied within the framework of
general relativity for the past 99 years. Throughout this time, much has
been understood about general relativity by studying such simple
interesting systems. However, general relativity is not the final word
of gravity, especially in light of problems with unifying it with
quantum mechanics.

Given how useful they have proven for our understanding, figuring out
the key aspects of black holes in other theories of gravity is expected
to gain us both an understanding of how theories of gravity can work,
and what our understanding of a black hole is.

This thesis explored two lines of inquiry into understanding black holes
beyond general relativity, via analogue models and Lorentz violating
modified gravity.

Analogue gravity gives us a testbed in which to explore aspects of
kinematics (and sometimes dynamics) of curved spacetime. For black holes
this has given us insight into lines of inquiry such as, for instance,
the robustness of Hawking radiation. As could be expected, given the
differing dynamics of the set up, black holes in such systems do not
obey the same symmetries as black holes in general relativity.

In particular, for a axisymmetric black holes, enhanced symmetry
on-horizon means a possible wealth of definitions, representing
different physical properties, of surface gravity are reduced to just
one. Analogue gravity provides a natural setting in which to explore
such definitions, giving us a picture of the differences in terms of
in-horizon velocity flows and shears. But such concerns are broader than
just the analogue gravity programme: the simplicity and symmetry of the
axisymmetric solutions of general relativity are crucially dependent on
the field equations, and can be expected to fail for general theories of
gravitation. Given the role surface gravity plays within the
thermodynamic picture of black holes, elucidating which surface gravity
we want to study and the differences between them becomes important.

Within the analogue framework, generically modified dispersion relations
are present, and at high enough energies sonic black holes no longer act
as barriers; the horizon is merely a low-energy effect. One might
imagine there would be similar consequences in any theory with Lorentz
violation. However, in some theories, a new barrier is present, and
understanding these universal horizons has made a significant part of
this thesis.

It could be hoped that universal horizons would provide an escape from
issues plaguing black hole thermodynamics in Lorentz violating theories.
However, to understand whether this is the case we must understand the
physics of this new type of horizon. Can we associate an entropy to it?
What is its surface gravity? Does it radiate? What is the role of the
Killing horizon?

We have explored these issues in several ways. Ray tracing is one of the
least fraught ways to study such spacetimes; many methods developed to
study black holes rely on the pure metric nature of general relativity.
The very definition of a universal horizon is dependent of non-metric
aspects of these theories, and such aspects cannot be ignored. Such rays
are not geodesic (except possibly in the rainbow metric/Finslerian
approach). These rays peel off the universal horizon, and as such can
have a surface gravity associated to this peeling, while a lingering is
found for the low-energy rays near the Killing horizon. Together with
previous calculations done on tunnelling at the universal horizon, this
suggests a temperature, and radiation can be associated to the universal
horizon while some reprocessing of mode conversion may still occur at
the Killing horizon. However, collapse scenario calculation brings this
picture into doubt, and much is still yet to be fully understood.

To shed light on this, we have explored some avenues for a new
calculation of the Hawking effect at the universal horizon, and have
identified two main points of difficulty: setting the correct boundary
condition for the vacuum state, and the more complicated pole structure
at the universal horizon. Working through a calculation which, unlike
the tunnellling approach, will tell us the effect of the Killing horizon
would be most valuable.

Another way we may seek to understand the universal horizon is by
returning to the analogue framework, and seeking out a way to model this
new feature. The difficulty is that, in the standard approach there is
not enough freedom to separately set the preferred frame and the
geometry, a freedom which is crucial for the existence of the universal
horizon.

We have sought to tackle this problem by using a Bose–Einstein
condensate (which provides some obvious methods to couple fluids to
another field) and, given the four-dimensional nature of the æther have
opted to use a relativistic Bose Einstein condensate.

These systems have been less studied than their non-relativistic
counterparts, given the possibilities the latter offer for real
experimental set-ups. Therefore we take some time to explore the
relativistic acoustic metric and its properties which have been less
elucidated in the literature. In particular, the simplest black holes
system is devised, and the closest match to the Schwarzschild black hole
derived. We then explore the coupled system and its physics, to provide
and æther for our system. In particular, the coupling of a Proca field
to a realistic BEC seems a promising avenue in this sense

Much of this thesis has been developing a toolset for understanding
general black holes. When we move to new theories, and new features
within these theories which may change our notion of black hole, how do
we begin to study such objects? What changes? what notions can be kept
and what discarded? Given the breadth of such questions, there obviously
remain many aspects unanswered and unexplored.

However, exploring different aspects of this problem, and forging these
pieces and hints together, we begin to gain a greater understanding of
these strange black holes beyond general relativity.

## Appendix A Some relations for spherically symmetric, static
æther black holes

For convenience several relations between æther and metric components
are collected here.

For both the exact solutions of section 1.7 , we can express

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

For concreteness, take Eddington-Finkelstein coordinates, then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

This makes it explicit that the system @xmath only has two free
functions, not three as it may at first appear.

From the condition that @xmath and @xmath are orthogonal

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

From this and the unit condition, we can now express

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

This makes it clear why the khronon runs to infinity at the universal
horizon as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Taking the @xmath solution we may always express

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

or, alternatively,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the one found via ray tracing, while @xmath is the
standard metric one. Consequently, one can see that @xmath can always be
re-expressed in terms of @xmath or @xmath .

Throughout the thesis we have used both @xmath and @xmath , depending on
the purpose. The relation between them is defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

so

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.12)
  -- -------- -- --------