## Part I Introduction

Statistical physics focuses on the study of those systems that comprise
a large number of simple components. Regardless of the particular nature
of these fundamental entities, it describes the interactions among them
and the global properties that appear at a macroscopic scale. These
emergent phenomena are the hallmark of complex systems. Such systems are
used to model processes in several disciplines, most of the times, far
from the physical sciences. That’s why, during the last few years,
statistical physics has become a powerful cross disciplinary tool,
supplying the theoretical framework and the mathematical techniques that
allow the study of many different problems in biology, economics or
sociology. It provides a scenario that makes possible to encapsulate the
huge number of microscopic degrees of freedom of a complex system into
just a few collective variables.

On the other hand, ecology is concerned with the study of the
relationships between organisms and their environment. In terms of this
thesis, it is a paradigmatic example of complexity science. Ecological
systems are formed by a huge number of heterogeneous constituents that
interact and evolve stochastically in time. In addition, they are
subject to changes and fluctuations in the surroundings that apart them
from equilibrium ² ² 2 Here equilibrium refers to the thermodynamic
equilibrium. It is a state of balance characterized by the absence of
fluxes and currents in the system¡. .

Because of this complex nature, ecology was originally an empirical
science with purely descriptive purposes. Ancient Greek philosophers
such as Hippocrates and Aristotles laid the foundations of ecology in
their studies on natural history. However, over the years, the need for
a mathematical formalism to tighten all the observations increased,
until ecology adopted a more analytical approach in the late 19th
century. The first models attracted the attention of many physicist and
mathematicians that started developing new techniques and tools.
Nowadays, theoretical ecology is a well established discipline that
deals with several topics related not only with environmental
conservation but also with evolutionary biology, ethology and genetics.
It constitutes, together with recent technological advances, a potent
instrument to better understand the natural environment.

Ecological systems show characteristic variability on a range of
spatial, temporal and organizational scales [ Levin , 1992 ] . However,
when we observe them, we do it in a limited range. Theoretical studies
aim to comprehend how information is transferred from one level to
other. They permit understanding natural phenomena in terms of the
processes that govern them, and consequently develop management
strategies. Without this knowledge, each stress must be evaluated
separately in every system, and it would not be possible to extrapolate
the knowledge obtained from one situation to another. But, what is the
role of statistical physics in this task? On the one hand, most
ecological systems can exhibit multistability, abrupt transitions,
patterns or self-organization when a control parameter is varied. These
concepts are characteristic of nonlinear systems, that have been
traditionally studied by statistical physicists. Particularly
interesting are those cases in which the dynamics at one level of
organization can be understood as a consequence of the collective
behavior of multiple similar identities. This reminds the definition of
the systems that are the focus of statistical physics, which serves for
developing simple models that retain and condense the essential
information, omitting unnecessary details.

There is a large list of recent developments that may serve as examples
of this relationship [ Fort , 2013 ] : collective animal movement [
Cavagna et al. , 2010 ] , demographic stochasticity in multiple species
systems [ McKane and Newman , 2005 ; Butler and Goldenfeld , 2009 ] ,
evolutionary theory [ Chia and Goldenfeld , 2011 ] , population genetics
[ Vladar and Barton , 2011 ] , species distribution [ Harte et al. ,
2008 ; Volkov et al. , 2003 ] , complex ecological networks [ Montoya
et al. , 2006 ; Bastolla et al. , 2009 ] , animal foraging [ Méndez
et al. , 2014 ; Viswanathan et al. , 2011 ] , or species invasion [
Seebens et al. , 2013 ] . In this thesis, I will abroad different
problems within the framework of statistical physics, in particular
vegetation pattern formation, animal behavior and ecosystem’s
robustness. It is important to remark the diverse nature of each of
these systems. Plants are inert, and so the development of patterns is a
consequence of the interaction with the environment and the birth-death
dynamics. On the other hand, animals usually show large migratory
displacements and tend to form groups of individuals by coming together.
Gathering these problems, the objective of this dissertation is to
emphasize the connection between statistical physics and environmental
sciences and its role in the establishment of ecological models.

The powerful of statistical physics as a cross disciplinary tool allows
to tackle different questions depending on the particularities of each
system. Here we wonder how external variability affects robustness and
evolution of ecosystems and the mean lifetime of the species. We are
also interested in disentangling the different facilitative and
competitive interaction among plants in vegetation systems to unveil its
role in the formation of patterns. Are both needed to maintain these
regular structures? How efficient are inhomogeneous distributions of
vegetation to avoid desertification in water-limited systems? Finally,
we will try to shed light on the relationship between communication and
foraging efficiency. This is one of the less investigated topics in the
study of searching strategies. How can different communication
mechanisms affect searching processes? Is the mean searching time a good
metrics to quantify search efficiency? Does it exist an optimal
communication range that accelerates the search? How does sharing
information affect the collective use of a heterogeneous landscape?
Answering these and other issues will be the goal of this thesis.

The results of each chapter can be found in the following publications:

-    Chapter 2:

    -    R. Martínez-García, J.M. Calabrese, and C. López, (2013),
        Spatial patterns in mesic savannas: the local facilitation limit
        and the role of demographic stochasticity, Journal of
        Theoretical Biology , 333 , 156-165.

-    Chapter 3:

    -    R. Martínez-García, J.M. Calabrese, E. Hernández-García and C.
        López, (2013), Vegetation pattern formation in semiarid systems
        without facilitative mechanisms , Geophysical Research Letters,
        40 , 6143-6147.

    -    R.Martínez-García, J.M. Calabrese, E. Hernández-García and C.
        López, (2014), Minimal mechanisms for vegetation patterns in
        semiarid regions , Reviewed and resubmitted to Philosophical
        Transactions of the Royal Society A.

-    Chapter 4:

    -    R. Martínez-García, J.M. Calabrese, T. Muller, K.A. Olson,
        and C. López, (2013), Optimizing the Search for Resources by
        Sharing Information: Mongolian Gazelles as a Case Study ,
        Physical Review Letters, 110 , 248106.

    -    R. Martínez-García, J.M. Calabrese, and C. López, (2014),
        Optimal search in interacting populations: Gaussian jumps versus
        Lévy flights , Physical Review E, 89 , 032718,

-    Chapter 5:

    -    R. Martínez-García, J.M. Calabrese, T. Muller, K.A. Olson,
        and C. López, (2013), Optimizing the Search for Resources by
        Sharing Information: Mongolian Gazelles as a Case Study ,
        Physical Review Letters, 110 , 248106.

-    Chapter 6:

    -    R. Martínez-García, F. Vázquez, C. López, and M.A. Muñoz,
        (2012) Temporal disorder in up-down symmetric systems , Physical
        Review E, 85 , 051125.

### Chapter 1 Methods and tools

#### 1.1 From Individual Based to Population Level Models

##### 1.1.1 The Master equation

The master equation provides a complete description of a stochastic
dynamics. It encapsulates, in the evolution of the probability of
finding the system in a particular state, all the processes that occur
with given transition rates. Let us consider an arbitrary system with
@xmath possible states jumping from to other with exponentially
distributed waiting times. In addition, let us consider that the state
of the system at a given time only depends on the previous state, which
is called the Markovian assumption. The probability of finding it in a
particular one, @xmath , at a time @xmath is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath in the first term denotes the set of states that can be
reached from @xmath while in the second one it refers to the states from
which @xmath can be reached. The first term in Eq. ( 1.1 ) is the
probability of having the system in the state @xmath at time @xmath and
still remaining there at time @xmath (no transitions occur in the time
interval @xmath ). The second one gives the probability of finding the
system at any state @xmath at time @xmath and then jumping to @xmath in
a time interval @xmath .

In the limit of infinitely short time steps, @xmath , Eq. ( 1.1 )
becomes an evolution equation for the probability of finding the system
at each state @xmath . This is the master equation:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Gain and loss terms in Eq. ( 1.2 ) balance each other, so the
probability distribution remains normalized. In addition, the
coefficients @xmath are rates rather than probabilities, so they have
units of omverse of time and may be greater than one.

Master equations are often hard to solve because they involve a set of
several, many times infinite, coupled first order ordinary differential
equations. The most common techniques to obtain analytical solutions are
based on the use of integral transformations such as the generating
function, the Fourier or the Laplace transform [ Redner , 2001 ] .
However, only in few simple cases the general time dependent solution
@xmath can be found, and most of the times numerical simulations of the
underlying stochastic dynamics are done [ Gillespie , 1977 ] .

To illustrate all the derivarions shown in this chapter, we will use a
Lotka-Volterra model as a paradigmatic case of a stochastic dynamics
that can be modelled at different levels. As it is shown in Fig. 1.1 ,
several events can take place with given rates: a birth of a prey with
rate @xmath , a death of a predator with rate @xmath and a predation and
birth of a predator with rate @xmath .

The elementary processes occuring in the time interval @xmath that
contribute to @xmath are the following:

1) The population was @xmath at time @xmath and nothing happened.

2) The population was @xmath at time @xmath and a rabbit reproduced.

3) The population was @xmath at time @xmath and a fox died.

4) The population was @xmath at time @xmath and a fox ate a rabbit and
reproduced.

These contributions imply a probability of having @xmath prey and @xmath
predators at time @xmath given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

that in the limit @xmath , and retaining linear terms in @xmath , gives

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The master equation contains all the information about the stochastic
dynamics, so it is possible to know the probability of finding the
system in a particular state as a function of time. However, due to the
difficulties that one usually finds to obtain its complete solution,
many numerical techniques and analytical approximations have been
developed to deal with it. This is the case of the Gillespie algorithm
and the mean-field approximation, that will be explained next.

###### The Gillespie algorithm

The Gillespie algorithm [ Gillespie , 1977 ] is a Monte Carlo method
used to simulate Poissonian ¹ ¹ 1 Exponentially distributed waiting
times between events stochastic processes where transitions from one
state to another take place with different rates. The main objective of
the algorithm is to calculate the time until the next transition takes
place and the state where the system will move to. In principle, one
should obtain the time at which every transition occurs, then select the
one that happens first, and execute it. The advantage of Gillespie
method is that it avoids simulating all the transitions and, instead,
only the one that takes place first has to be reproduced.

The algorithm can be explained in four steps:

1.   Considering that the system is initially in one of the possible
    @xmath states, @xmath , we obtain the total escape rate from it

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (1.5)
      -- -------- -- -------

    where @xmath is the set of accesible states from @xmath and @xmath
    are the individual transition rates from @xmath to each of the
    states labelled by @xmath .

2.   The time until the next jump, @xmath , is computed. It is drawn
    from an exponential distribution of mean @xmath . To this aim one
    generates a random number uniformly distributed, @xmath , and
    computes @xmath as

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (1.6)
      -- -------- -- -------

3.   The final state has to be determined. Each of the possible
    transitions takes place with a probability @xmath that is
    proportional to the corresponding rate @xmath ,

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (1.7)
      -- -------- -- -------

4.   The time is updated @xmath

When simulated, a Gillespie realization represents a random walk
trajectory for the stochastic variables that exactly represents the
distribution of the master equation. It can be used, for instance, to
reproduce the dynamics of the individual based Lotka-Volterra model of
the Fig. 1.1 , where birth, death or predation can be interpreted as a
transition from a state with @xmath prey and @xmath predators to a new
one with different population sizes depending on which event has
occured. In Fig. 1.2 a simulation of the stochastic Lotka-Volterra
dynamics using the Gillespie algorithm is shown.

###### Mean-field approximation

It is the simplest analytical approximation to deal with a master
equation. It allows the derivation of deterministic differential
equations for the mean values of the stochastic variables and
establishes the simplest class of population-level models. Referring to
the Lotka-Volterra model as a guiding example, we will derive the
equations for the evolution of the mean number of preys, @xmath , and
predators, @xmath . Given a multivariate probability density function
with discrete variables, as it is @xmath , the expected values are
defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Multiplying the master equartion, Eq. ( 1.1.1 ), by @xmath and @xmath
respectively and making the summation over both variables, one gets the
equations for the temporal evolution of the mean values coupled to the
higher moments @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (1.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is possible to obtain the equation for the temporal evolution of
@xmath , but it would be again coupled to higher moments, leading to an
infinite system of coupled differential equations. The main assumption
of the mean-field approximation is to consider that both populations are
independent, @xmath , so it is possible to write a closed system of
deterministic differential equations for the mean value of preys and
predators

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath .

For simplicity, the set of equations ( 1.1.1 ) can be nondimensionalised
by writing [ Murray , 2002 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

and it becomes,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (1.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

The nondimensional system ( 1.1.1 ) can be solved analytically, although
this is not the general case for nonlinear systems. Most of the times
one has to use linear approximations and other techniques developed in
the study of dynamical systems. Additionally, it is always possible to
numerically integrate the equations. This has been done for equations (
1.1.1 ) and the results are shown in Fig. 1.3 .

The mean-field equations are a simplified version of the complete
stochastic dynamics, but still contain most of the relevant information
of the system. For instance, the oscillations in the populations are
preserved for the Lotka-Volterra model. However, there are many other
approximations that, although more complicated, are able to keep the
inherent stochasticity of the system. The Fokker-Planck and the Langevin
equations are two of them.

##### 1.1.2 The Fokker-Planck equation

The master equation describes the dynamics of a physical system as a
sequence of jumps from one state to another. We present in this section
an approximation that considers the limit where these jumps are very
short and the evolution of the system can be seen as a diffusive
process. This leads to a simpler description in terms of the
Fokker-Planck equation. The accuracy of this method is better the
smaller are the jumps, so the master equation becomes a Fokker-Planck in
the limit of infinitely small jumps.

There are many ways of deriving the Fokker-Planck equation. In this
section, we focus on the Kramers-Moyal expansion [ van Kampen , 2007 ;
Gardiner , 1985 ] . This is not a completely rigourous derivation from a
mathematical point of view, in fact many alternatives have been used in
this thesis, but it is still one of the most common and intuitive
approaches.

To begin with, we consider a system with several possible states. To
ensure the accuracy of the expansion, we assume that all the jumps
between two states are small enough, so that the set of possible states
of the system can be considered as a continuous in the master equation,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Next, we write, in Eq. ( 1.13 ), the transition rates as a function of
the size of the jump, @xmath , and of the starting point, @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . Then, the master equation, Eq. ( 1.13 ), becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

At this point, two assumptions have to be introduced to allow the
expansion of the transition rates:

1.   Only small jumps occur. That is, @xmath is a sharply peaked
    function of @xmath but varies smoothly with @xmath . Mathematically,
    it means that

      -- -- -------- -------- -- --------
            @xmath   @xmath      (1.16)
            @xmath   @xmath      (1.17)
      -- -- -------- -------- -- --------

2.   The solution, @xmath , varies slowly with @xmath as it is expressed
    by Eq. ( 1.17 ).

Therefore, one can do a Taylor expansion up to second order in Eq. (
1.13 ) to deal with the shift from @xmath to @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (1.18)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The first and fourth term in the right-hand side of Eq. ( 1.18 ) cancel
each other, and defining the jump moments

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

the final result can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is the Fokker-Planck equation. It is important to remark that we
have not shown a completely rigurous derivation. The election of the
small parameter to perform the Taylor expansion has not been justified
and there are many processes in which this expansion fails. This is the
case of systems with jump size @xmath or some small integer, whereas
typical sizes of the variable may be large, e.g., the number of
molecules in a chemical reaction or the position of a random walker on a
long lattice. In those cases expansions where the small parameter is
explicitly taken are much more appropiate (See Chapter 3 for a rigorous
derivation of the Fokker-Planck equation). Nevertheless, this
description provides a good first contact with the Fokker-Planck
equation, that allows the development of a large variety of population
level spatial models.

On the other hand, many ecological systems, such as groups of animals
and vegetation landscapes that will be studied in this thesis, are
formed by many particles. Let us now suppose that we have a suspension
of a very large number of identical individuals, and denote its local
density by @xmath . If the suspension is sufficiently diluted, to the
extent that particles can be considered independent, then @xmath will
obey the same Eq. ( 1.20 ) [ Peliti , 2011 ] . This family of models
based on the density of individuals is the basis of the studies on
vegetation patterns shown in the Part II of this thesis.

In either case, and independently of the way used to write it, the
Fokker-Planck equation describes a large class of stochastic dynamics in
which the system has a continuous sample path. The state of the system
can be written as a stochastic and continuous function of time. From
this picture, it seems obvious to seek a description in some direct
probabilistic way and in terms of stochastic differential equations for
the path of the system. This procedure is discused next.

##### 1.1.3 The Langevin equation

In some cases it is useful to describe a system in terms of a
differential equation, that gives the stochastic evolution of its state
as a trajectory in the phase space. This is the Langevin equation, that
has the general form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a stochastic variable that gives the state of the system
at every time. @xmath and @xmath are known functions and @xmath is a
rapidly fluctuating term whose average over single realizations is equal
to zero, @xmath . Any nonzero mean can be absorbed into the definition
of @xmath . An idealization of a term like @xmath must be that in which
if @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are statistically independent (white
noise), so

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath gives the strength of the random function.

To be rigorous, the differential equation ( 1.21 ) is not properly
defined, although the corresponding integral equation,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

can be consistently defined understanding the integral of the white
noise as a Wiener process @xmath [ van Kampen , 2007 ; Gardiner , 1985 ]
:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the second integral can be seen like a kind of Riemann integral
with respect to a sample function @xmath .

The definition of the Langevin equation ( 1.21 ), requires a careful
interpretation due to this lack of mathematical rigor. When the noise
term appears multiplicatively, that is, @xmath is not a constant,
ambiguities appear in some mathematical expressions. Giving a sense to
the undefined expressions constitutes one of the main goals when
integrating a Langevin equation. The most widely used interpretations
are those of Itô and Stratonovich (Appendix A ). The Itô integral is
preferred by mathematicians [ van Kampen , 2007 ] , but it is not always
the most natural choice from a physical point of view. The Stratonovich
integral is more suitable, for instance, when @xmath is a real noise
with finite correlation time where the vanishing correlation time limit
wants to be taken. (In the Appendix A we show a more detailed
discussion). The matter is not what is the right definition of the
stochastic integral, but how stochastic processes can model real
systems. That is, in what situations either Itô or Stratonovich choice
is the most suitable.

Langevin equations are also valid to go beyond a mean-field description.
In these cases a new term enters in the equation to include diffusion,
besides other spatial couplings and degrees of freedom. The variable
@xmath becomes a continuous field @xmath that depends on space and time.
The Langevin equation becomes a stochastic partial differential equation
of the type

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

This approach is quite useful for spatially extended systems or to study
the formation of patterns.

###### From the Fokker-Planck to Langevin equation and vice versa.

To close this overview on the modeling of stochastic systems, we will
show the relationship between Fokker-Planck and Langevin equations.
Starting from a Fokker-Planck equation for the probability distribution
of the variable @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

it is easy to write down a Langevin equation of the type ( 1.21 ) [
Gardiner , 1985 ; van Kampen , 2007 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a white, Gaussian and zero mean noise.

The coefficients of the equations are related according to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.29)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.30)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

provided that the Itô interpretation is chosen.

The first term in Eq. ( 1.27 ) is called drift , because it leads to the
deterministic part of the Langevin equation, and the second one, the
diffusion term , since it determines the stochastic part of the Langevin
equation.

In the Stratonovich scheme an additional drift appears,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

On the other hand, if the starting point is a Langevin equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

to obtain the Fokker-Planck equation one has to specify if the Itô or
the Stratonovich calculus will be used. In the Stratonovich
interpretation the Fokker-Planck is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

while in the Itô case it is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

The diffusion term vanishes typically with the number of components as
@xmath , so it is negligible if the system is large enough. Therefore,
in the thermodynamic limit where @xmath and the volume @xmath tend to
infinity keeping @xmath finite, a deterministic mean-field approximation
gives an accurate description. Sometimes, this way is walked on the
inverse sense. One may start with a deterministic equation and, using
heuristic arguments, add noise to obtain the Langevin equation. Then,
following the steps that have been explained in this section it is
possible to get a Fokker-Planck equation.

#### 1.2 Linear stability analysis

Linear stability analysis is the simplest analytical tool used to study
the formation of patterns in deterministic spatially extended systems.
It assumes an ideal infinite system and uses Fourier analysis to
investigate the stability of its homogeneous state. We will consider in
this section the two dimensional case. The starting point is the
equation for the evolution of a field @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the control parameter. The linear stability analysis
assumes that the system is at the homogeneous (spatially independent)
stationary state @xmath and studies its stability against small
perturbations that will be denoted by @xmath , with @xmath . The
technique is applied in the Appendix A to one particular case and the
calculations explained in detail. In this section we will introduce and
discuss the theoretical basis and the main results that can be obtained.
Plugging the ansatz @xmath into the model Eq. ( 1.35 ) and retaining
only linear terms in the perturbation, one obtains a linear equation for
the evolution of the perturbation at short times that can be solved
using the Fourier transform. Then, the final task is to solve the
transformed equation for the perturbation, @xmath . Assuming that at
short time scales the temporal dependence is @xmath , where @xmath is
the growth rate, then @xmath . Finally an expression for @xmath can be
obtained. It is called the dispersion relation and contains all the
information about the evolution of the Fourier modes of @xmath . The
modes @xmath with a negative growth rate will be stable while those
corresponding to @xmath are unstable and lead to perturbations growing
in time and, therefore, to spatial patterns in the system. The
dispersion relation also allows to obtain the characteristic wavelength
of the pattern through the value of the most unstable Fourier mode,
@xmath , that most of the times corresponds with the one with the
highest growth rate.

Depending on the functional form of the dispersion relation, it is
possible to establish a classification of the different types of linear
instabilities appearing in natural systems [ Hohenberg and Halperin ,
1977 ] . These classes are shown in Fig. 1.4 , where the real part of
@xmath is sketched as a function of the wave number, @xmath . They are:

-    Type I. For @xmath the homogeneous state is stable and @xmath ,
    whereas for @xmath the instability sets in ( @xmath ) at a wave
    vector @xmath . For @xmath there is a band of wave vectors @xmath
    for which the uniform state is unstable. The patterns observed in
    these system will be dominated by a wavelength given by one of this
    unstable modes, typically by that with the highest growth rate,
    @xmath . This case is represented in the left panel of Fig. 1.4 .

-    Type II. This is a different type of instability appearing when,
    for some reason (usually a conservation law), @xmath independently
    of the value of the control parameter @xmath . This corresponds with
    the central panel of Fig. 1.4 . The critical wave vector, the one
    that becomes unstable by the first time, is now @xmath , and a band
    of unstable modes appears between @xmath and @xmath for @xmath . The
    pattern occurs on a long length scale. This case is remarkable
    because the critical wave vector is different from that with the
    highest growth rate.

-    Type III. In this case both the instability and the maximum growth
    rate occur at @xmath . There is not an intrinsic length scale, and
    patterns will occur over a length scale defined by the system size
    or the dynamics. This situation is depicted in the right panel of
    Fig. 1.4 .

Finally, there are two subtypes for each type of instability depending
on the temporal instability: stationary if @xmath , and oscillatory if
@xmath .

Linear stability analysis provides analytical results about the
formation of patterns in spatially extended systems, such as the
dominant wavelength and the type of instability leading the structure.
However, it is important to remark that the analysis assumes that the
perturbations of the uniform state are small. This assumption is good at
short times and for an initial condition that has a small magnitude, but
at long times the nonlinear terms left out in the linear approximation
become important [ Cross and Greenside , 2009 ] . One effect of
nonlinearity is to quench the assumed exponential growth. Further
analysis, such as weakly nonlinear stability analysis [ Cross and
Hohenberg , 1993 ] , must be used in these cases.

#### 1.3 First-passage times processes

First-passage phenomena are of high relevance in stochastic processes
that are triggered by a first-passage event [ Redner , 2001 ] and play a
fundamental role quantifying and limiting the success of different
processes that can be mapped into random walks. Ecology and biology
offer some examples such as the lifetime of a population or the duration
of a search or a biochemical reaction.

In this section we will present some results on first-passage times in
the simple case of a discrete symmetric random walk moving in a finite
interval @xmath [ Redner , 2001 ] . The extension to higher dimensions
is straightforward. Let us denote the mean time to exit the interval
starting at @xmath by @xmath . This quantity is equal to the exit time
of a given trajectory times the probability of that path, averaged over
all the trajectories,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the exit time of the trajectory @xmath that starts at
@xmath and @xmath the probability of the path. Because of the definition
of a symmetric random walk on a discrete space with jump length @xmath
and time step @xmath , the mean exit time also obeys

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

with boundary conditions @xmath which correspond to a mean exit time
equal to zero if the particle starts at either border of the interval.
@xmath is the jumping length. This recursion relation expresses the mean
exit time starting at @xmath in terms of the outcome one step in the
future, for which the initial walk can be seen as restarting in @xmath
(each with probability @xmath ) but also with the time incremented by
@xmath .

Doing a Taylor expansion to the lowest nonvanishing order in Eq. ( 1.37
), and considering the limit of continuous time and space, it yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the difussion constant. In the case of a two dimensional
domain Eq. ( 1.38 ) is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

These results can be extended to the case of general jumping processes
with a single-step jumping probability given by @xmath . The equivalent
of Eq. ( 1.37 ) is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

that provides an analog of Eq. ( 1.39 ) that is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a local velocity that gives the mean displacement after
a single step when starting from @xmath in the hopping process. This
equation can be solved in each particular case. We have used it in this
thesis as an starting point of many of the calculations in the Part IV .
See Appendix B for a detailed calculation.

## Part II Vegetation Patterns

### Chapter 2 Mesic savannas

In this chapter we propose a continuum description for the dynamics of
tree density in mesic savannas Martínez-García et al. [ 2013a ] inspired
on the individual based model introduced in Calabrese et al. [ 2010 ] .
It considers only long-range competition among trees and the effect of
fires resulting in a local facilitation mechanism. Despite short-range
facilitation is taken to the local-range limit, the standard full
spectrum of spatial structures obtained in general vegetation models is
recovered. Long-range competition is thus the key ingredient for the
development of patterns. This result opens new questions on the role
that facilitative interactions play in the maintenance of vegetation
patterns. The long time coexistence between trees and grass, the effect
of fires on the survival of trees as well as the maintenance of the
patterns are also studied. The influence of demographic noise is
analyzed. The stochastic system, under parameter constraints typical of
more humid landscapes, shows irregular patterns characteristic of
realistic situations. The coexistence of trees and grass still remains
at reasonable noise intensities.

#### 2.1 Introduction

Savanna ecosystems are characterized by the long-term coexistence
between a continuous grass layer and scattered or clustered trees [
Sarmiento , 1984 ] . Occurring in many regions of the world, in areas
with very different climatic and ecological conditions, the spatial
structure, persistence, and resilience of savannas have long intrigued
ecologists [ Scholes and Archer , 1997 ; Sankaran et al. , 2005 ;
Borgogno et al. , 2009 ; Belsky , 1994 ] . However, despite substantial
research, the origin and nature of savannas have not yet been fully
resolved and much remains to be learned.

Savanna tree populations often exhibit pronounced, non-random spatial
structures [ Skarpe , 1991 ; Barot et al. , 1999 ; Jeltsch et al. , 1999
; Caylor et al. , 2003 ; Scanlon et al. , 2007 ] . Much research has
therefore focused on explaining how spatial patterning in savannas
arises [ Jeltsch et al. , 1996 , 1999 ; Scanlon et al. , 2007 ; Skarpe ,
1991 ; Calabrese et al. , 2010 ; Vazquez et al. , 2010 ] . In most
natural plant systems both facilitative and competitive processes are
simultaneously present [ Scholes and Archer , 1997 ; Vetaas , 1992 ] and
hard to disentangle [ Veblen , 2008 ; Barbier et al. , 2008 ] . Some
studies have pointed toward the existence of short-distance facilitation
[ Caylor et al. , 2003 ; Scanlon et al. , 2007 ] , while others have
demonstrated evidence of competition [ Skarpe , 1991 ; Jeltsch et al. ,
1999 ; Barot et al. , 1999 ] , with conflicting reports sometimes
arriving from the same regions.

Different classes of savannas, which can be characterized by how much
rainfall they typically receive, should be affected by different sets of
processes. For example, in semiarid savannas water is extremely limited
(low mean annual precipitation) and competition among trees is expected
to be strong, but fire plays little role because there is typically not
enough grass biomass to serve as fuel. In contrast, humid savannas
should be characterized by weaker competition among trees, but also by
frequent and intense fires. In-between these extremes, in mesic
savannas, trees likely have to contend with intermediate levels of both
competition for water and fire [ Calabrese et al. , 2010 ; Sankaran
et al. , 2005 , 2008 ; Bond et al. , 2003 ; Bond , 2008 ; Bucini and
Hanan , 2007 ] .

Competition among trees is mediated by roots that typically extend well
beyond the crown [ Borgogno et al. , 2009 ; Barbier et al. , 2008 ] .
Additionally, fire can lead to local facilitation due to a protection
effect, whereby vulnerable juvenile trees placed near adults are
protected from fire by them [ Holdo , 2005 ] . We are particularly
interested in how the interplay between these mechanisms governs the
spatial arrangement of trees in mesic savannas, where both mechanisms
may operate. On the other side, it has frequently been claimed that
pattern formation in arid systems can be explained by a combination of
long-distance competition and short-distance facilitation [ Klausmeier ,
1999 ; Lefever and Lejeune , 1997 ; Lefever et al. , 2009 ; Lefever and
Turner , 2012 ; Rietkerk et al. , 2002 ; von Hardenberg et al. , 2001 ;
D’Odorico et al. , 2006b ] . This combination of mechanisms is also
known to produce spatial structures in many other natural systems [
Cross and Hohenberg , 1993 ] . Although mesic savannas do not display
the same range of highly regular spatial patterns that arise in arid
systems (e.g., tigerbush), similar mechanisms might be at work.
Specifically, the interaction between long-range competition and
short-range facilitation might still play a role in pattern formation in
savanna tree populations, but only for a limited range of parameter
values and possibly modified by demographic stochasticity.

Although the facilitation component has often been thought to be a key
component in previous vegetation models [ D’Odorico et al. , 2006b , c ;
Rietkerk et al. , 2002 ; Scanlon et al. , 2007 ] , Rietkerk and Van de
Koppel [ Rietkerk and van de Koppel , 2008 ] , speculated, but did not
show, that pattern formation could occur without short-range
facilitation in the particular example of tidal freshwater marsh. In the
case of savannas, as stated before, the presence of adult trees favor
the establishment of new trees in the area, protecting the juveniles
against fires. Considering this effect, we take the facilitation
component to its infinitesimally short spatial limit, and study its
effect in the emergence of spatially periodic structures of trees. To
our knowledge, this explanation, and the interrelation between
long-range competition and local facilitation, has not been explored for
a vegetation system.

To this aim, we develop a minimalistic model of savannas that considers
two of the factors, as already mentioned, thought to be crucial to
structure mesic savannas: tree-tree competition and fire, with a primary
focus on spatially nonlocal competition. Employing standard tools used
in the study of pattern formation phenomena in physics (stability
analysis and the structure function) [ Cross and Hohenberg , 1993 ] , we
explore the conditions under which the model can produce non-homogeneous
spatial distributions. A key strength of our approach is that we are
able to provide a complete and rigorous analysis of the patterns the
model is capable of producing, and we identify which among these
correspond to situations that are relevant for mesic savannas. We
further examine the role of demographic stochasticity in modifying both
spatial patterns and the conditions under which trees persist in the
system in the presence of fire, and discuss the implications of these
results for the debate on whether the balance of processes affecting
savanna trees is positive, negative, or is variable among systems. This
is the framework of our study: the role of long-range competition, local
facilitation and demographic fluctuations in the spatial structures of
mesic savannas.

#### 2.2 The deterministic description

In this section we derive the deterministic equation for the local
density of trees, such that dynamics is of the logistic type and we only
consider tree-tree competition and fire. We study the formation of
patterns via stability analysis and provide numerical simulations,
showing the emergence of spatial structures.

##### 2.2.1 The nonlocal savanna model

Calabrese et al. [ 2010 ] introduced a simple discrete-particle lattice
savanna model that considers the birth-death dynamics of trees, and
where tree-tree competition and fire are the principal ingredients.
These mechanisms act on the probability of establishment of a tree once
a seed lands at a particular point on the lattice. In the discrete
model, seeds land in the neighborhood of a parent tree with a rate
@xmath , and establish as adult trees if they are able to survive both
competition neighboring trees and fire. As these two phenomena are
independent, the probability of establishment is @xmath , where @xmath
is the probability of surviving the competition, and @xmath is the
probability of surviving a fire event. From this dynamics, we write a
deterministic differential equation describing the time evolution of the
global density of trees (mean field), @xmath , where the population has
logistic growth at rate @xmath , and an exponential death term at rate
@xmath . It reads:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Generalizing Eq. ( 2.1 ), we propose an evolution equation for the
space-dependent (local) density of trees, @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

We allow the probability of overcoming competition to depend on tree
crowding in a local neighborhood, decaying exponentially with the
density of surrounding trees as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a parameter that modulates the strength of the
competition, and @xmath is a positive kernel function that introduces a
finite range of influence. This model is related to earlier one of
pattern formation in arid systems [ Lefever and Lejeune , 1997 ] , and
subsequent works [ Lefever et al. , 2009 ; Lefever and Turner , 2012 ] ,
but it differs from standard kernel-based models in that the kernel
function accounts for the interaction neighborhood, and not for the type
of interaction with the distance. Note also that the nonlocal term
enters nonlinearly in the equation.

Following Calabrese et al. [ 2010 ] , @xmath is assumed to be a
saturating function of grass biomass, @xmath , similar to the
implementation of fire of Jeltsch et al. in [ Jeltsch et al. , 1996 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath governs the resistance to fire, so @xmath means no
resistance to fires. Notice how our model is close to the one in [
Calabrese et al. , 2010 ] through the definitions of @xmath and @xmath ,
although we consider the probability of surviving a fire depending on
the local density of trees, and in [ Calabrese et al. , 2010 ] it
depends on the global density. The final deterministic differential
equation that considers tree-tree competition and fire for the spatial
tree density is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Thus, we have a logistic-type equation with an effective growth rate
that depends nonlocally on the density itself, and which is a
combination of long-range competition and local facilitation mechanisms
(fire). The probability of surviving a fire is higher when the local
density of trees is higher, as can be seen from the definition in Eq. (
2.4 ).

In Fig. 2.1 we show numerical solutions for the mean field Eq. ( 2.1 )
(lines) and the spatially explicit model (equation 2.5 ) (dots) in the
stationary state @xmath using different values of the competition. We
have used a top-hat function as the competition kernel, @xmath (See Sec.
2.2.2 for more details on the kernel choice). We observe a very good
agreement of both descriptions which becomes worse when we get closer to
the critical point @xmath , where the model presents a phase transition
from a tree-grass coexistence to a grassland state. This disagreement
appears because while the mean field equation describes an infinite
system, the Eq. ( 2.5 ) description forces us to choose a size for the
system.

The model reproduces the long-term coexistence between grass and trees
that is characteristic of savannas. To explore this coexistence, we
study the long-time behavior of the system and analyze the homogeneous
stationary solutions of Eq. ( 2.5 ), which has two fixed points. The
first one is the absorbing state representing the absence of trees,
@xmath , and the other can be obtained, in the general case, by
numerically solving

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the regime where @xmath is small (near the critical point), if
competition intensity, @xmath , is also small, it is possible to obtain
an analytical expression for the critical value of the probability of
surviving a fire, @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Outside of the limit where @xmath , we can solve Eq. ( 2.7 ) numerically
in @xmath to show that the critical value of the fire resistance
parameter, @xmath , does not depend on competition. A steady state with
trees is stable for higher fire survival probability (Fig. 2.1 ).

There is, then, a transition from a state where grass is the only form
of vegetation to another state where trees and grass coexist at @xmath .
In what follows, we fix @xmath , so we choose our temporal scale in such
a way that time is measured in units of @xmath . This choice does not
qualitatively affect our results.

##### 2.2.2 Linear stability analysis

The spatial patterns can be studied by performing a linear stability
analysis [ Cross and Hohenberg , 1993 ] of the stationary homogeneous
solutions of Eq. ( 2.5 ), @xmath . The stability analysis is performed
by considering small harmonic perturbations around @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath . After some calculations ¹ ¹ 1 A linear stability analysis in a
similar equation modeling vegetation in arid systems is shown in detail
in Appendix A . , one arrives at a perturbation growth rate given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath , is the Fourier transform of the kernel,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

The critical values of the parameters of the transition to pattern,
@xmath and @xmath , and the fastest growing wavenumber @xmath , are
obtained from the simultaneous solution of

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.11)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Note that @xmath represents the most unstable mode of the system, which
means that it grows faster than the others and eventually dominates the
state of the system. Therefore, it determines the length scale of the
spatial pattern. These two equations yield the values of the parameters
@xmath and @xmath at which the maximum of the curve @xmath , right at
@xmath , starts becoming positive. This signals the formation of
patterns in the solutions of Eq. ( 2.5 ). As Eq. ( 2.12 ) is explicitly
written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

the most unstable wavenumber @xmath can be obtained by evaluating the
zeros of the derivative of the Fourier transform of the kernel.

Eq. ( 2.9 ) shows that competition, through the kernel function, fully
determines the formation of patterns in the system. The local
facilitation appears in @xmath and it is not relevant in the formation
of spatial structures. If the Fourier transform of @xmath never takes
positive values, then @xmath is always negative and only the homogeneous
solution is stable. However, when @xmath can take negative solutions
then patterns may appear in the system. What does this mean in
biological terms? Imagine that we have a family of kernels described by
a parameter @xmath : @xmath ( @xmath gives the range of competition).
The kernels are more peaked around @xmath for @xmath and more box-like
when @xmath . It turns out that this family of functions has
non-negative Fourier transform for @xmath , so that no patterns appear
in this case. A lengthy discussion of this property in the context of
competition of species can be found in Pigolotti et al. [ 2007 ] . Thus,
the shape of the competition kernel dictates whether or not patterns
will appear in the system. If pattern formation is possible, then the
values of the fire and competition parameters govern the type of
solution (see Sec. 2.2.3 ).

Our central result for nonlocal competition is that, contrary to
conventional wisdom, it can, in the limit of infinitesimally short
(purely local) facilitation, promote the clustering of trees. Whether or
not this occurs depends entirely on the shape of the competition kernel.
For large @xmath we have a box-like shape, and in these cases trees
compete strongly with other trees, roughly within a distance @xmath from
their position. The mechanism behind this counterintuitive result is
that trees farther than @xmath away from a resident tree area are not
able to invade the zone defined by the radius R around the established
tree (their seeds do not establish there), so that an exclusion zone
develops around it. For smaller @xmath there is less competition and the
exclusion zones disappear. We will develop longer this concept in the
next chapter.

For a more detailed analysis, one must choose an explicit form for the
kernel function. Our choice is determined by the original @xmath taken
in [ Calabrese et al. , 2010 ] , so that it decays exponentially with
the number of trees in a neighborhood of radius @xmath around a given
tree. Thus, for @xmath we take the step function (limit @xmath )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

As noticed before, the idea behind the nonlocal competition is to
capture the effect of the long roots of a tree. The kernel function
defines the area of influence of the roots, and it can be modeled at
first order with the constant function of Eq. ( 2.14 ). Thus the
parameter R, which fixes the nonlocal interaction scale, must be of the
order of the length of the roots [ Borgogno et al. , 2009 ] . Since the
roots are the responsible for the adsorption of resources (water and
soil nutrients), a strong long-range competition term implies strong
resource depletion. For this kernel the Fourier transform is [ López and
Hernández-García , 2004 ] @xmath and its derivative is @xmath , where
@xmath , and @xmath is the @xmath -order Bessel function. Since @xmath
can take positive and negative values, pattern solutions may arise in
the system, that will in turn depend on the values of @xmath and @xmath
. The most unstable mode is numerically obtained as the first zero of
@xmath , Eq. ( 2.13 ), which means the first zero of the Bessel function
@xmath . This value only depends on @xmath , being independent of the
resistance to fires and competition, and it is @xmath . Because a
pattern of @xmath cells is characterized by a wavenumber @xmath , where
@xmath is the system size, the typical distance between clusters, @xmath
, using the definition of the critical wavenumber is given by @xmath .
In other words, it is approximately the range of interaction @xmath .
This result is also independent of the other parameters of the system.

Since we are interested in the effect of competition and fire on the
distribution of savanna trees, we will try to fix all the parameters but
@xmath and @xmath . We will explore the effect of different values of
these parameters on the results. First, we have chosen, as in Calabrese
et al. [ 2010 ] , the death rate @xmath , and solving Eq. ( 2.7 ) we
will roughly estimate the birth rate, @xmath . We will work in the limit
of intermediate to high mean annual precipitation, so water is
non-limiting and thus we can neglect the effects of competition ( @xmath
). At this intermediate to high mean annual precipitation the
empirically observed upper limit of savanna tree cover is approximately
@xmath [ Sankaran et al. , 2005 ; Bucini and Hanan , 2007 ] . To reach
this upper limit in the tree cover, disturbances must also be absent,
implying no fire ( @xmath ). In this limit, the mean field Eq. ( 2.1 )
is quantitatively accurate, as it is shown in Fig. 2.1 , and the
stationary mean field solution of the model depends only on the birth
rate

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

It can be solved for @xmath for a fixed @xmath , and it yields @xmath [
Calabrese et al. , 2010 ] . In the following we just consider the
dependence of our results on @xmath and @xmath . In particular, @xmath .

The phase diagram of the model, computed numerically, is shown in Fig.
2.2 , where we plot the spatial character of the steady solution
(homogeneous or inhomogeneous) as a function of @xmath and @xmath . Note
that increasing competition enhances the inhomogeneous or pattern
solution. This is because, as we are now in the case of a kernel giving
rise to clusters, increasing @xmath makes it more difficult to enter the
exclusion zones in-between the clusters. For very strong competition
(high, unrealistic, @xmath ), fire has no influence on the pattern.

The critical line separating these two solutions (pattern and
homogeneous) can be obtained analytically as a function of the
parameters @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Taking @xmath and
@xmath , it is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This complicated expression must be evaluated numerically together with
the solution of Eq. ( 2.7 ) for the stationary density of trees, which
is also a function of the competition and fire parameters. We show the
results in Fig. 2.2 , where the curve, represented with the black
crosses, fits perfectly with the numerical results from the linear
stability analysis.

With @xmath , in the absence of fire ( @xmath ), and for weak
competition, we can take the limits @xmath and @xmath of the dispersion
relation Eq. ( 2.9 ), leading to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

In Fig. 2.1 , for large @xmath , it can be seen that typically @xmath ,
so Eq. ( 2.17 ) becomes negative. This result means that in this limit,
trees are uniformly distributed in the system as there is no
competition, and space does not play a relevant role in the
establishment of new trees. Such situation could be interpreted as
favorable to forest leading to a fairly homogeneous density of trees.
This result agrees with the phase plane plotted in Fig. 2.2 . In
biological terms, there are no exclusion zones in the system because
there is no competition.

##### 2.2.3 Numerical simulations

The previous analysis provides information, depending on the competition
and fire parameters, about when the solution is spatially homogenous and
when trees arrange in clusters. However, the different shapes of the
patterns have to be studied via numerical simulations [ Ridolfi et al. ,
2011 ] of the whole equation of the model. We have taken a finite square
region of savanna with an area of @xmath ha., allowed competition to
occur in a circular area of radius @xmath , and employed periodic
boundary conditions and a finite differences algorithm to obtain the
numerical solution. Similarly to what has been observed in studies of
semiarid water limited systems [ D’Odorico et al. , 2006b ; Rietkerk
et al. , 2002 ] , different structures, including gaps, stripes, and
tree spots, are obtained in the stationary state as we increase the
strength of competition for a fixed value of the fire parameter or, on
the other hand, as we decrease the resistance to fires for a given
competition intensity. In both equivalent cases, we observe this
spectrum of patterns as far as we go to a more dry state of the system,
where resources (mainly water) are more limited (see Figs. 2.3 (a)- 2.3
(c)) and competition is consequently stronger. This same sequence of
appearance of patterns has been already observed in the presence of
different short-range facilitation mechanisms [ Lejeune and Tlidi , 1999
; Rietkerk et al. , 2002 ] . It indicates that, when @xmath is increased
(i.e. the probability of surviving competition is decreased), new trees
cannot establish in the exclusion areas so clustering is enhanced.

On the other hand, in the case of fire-prones savannas, previous works
had only shown either tree spot [ Lejeune et al. , 2002 ] or grass spots
[ D’Odorico et al. , 2007 ] . Therefore, at some values of the parameter
space (see Fig. 2.3 b), the patterns in our deterministic approach are
not observed in mesic savannas, and should correspond to semiarid
systems. However, we will show in the following sections that under the
parameter constraints of a mesic savanna, and considering the stochastic
nature of the tree growth dynamics in the system (i.e. demographic
noise), our model shows realistic spatial structures.

A much more quantitative analysis of the periodicity in the patterns can
be performed via the structure function. This will be helpful to check
the previous results and, especially, for the analysis of the data of
the stochastic model of the next section, for which we will not present
analytical results. The structure function is defined as the modulus of
the spatial Fourier transform of the density of trees in the stationary
state,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the average is a spherical average over the wavevectors with
modulus @xmath . The structure function is helpful to study spatial
periodicities in the system, similar to the power spectrum of a temporal
signal. Its maximum identifies dominant periodicities, which in our case
are the distances between tree clusters. Note that the geometry of the
different patterns cannot be uncovered with the structure function,
since it involves a spherical average. In Fig. 2.4 , we show the
transition to patterns using the maximum of the structure function as a
function of the competition parameter. A peak appears when there are
spatial structures in the system, so @xmath . However, we do not have
information about the values where the shapes of the patterns change.
Taking @xmath , the peak is always at @xmath for our deterministic
savanna model, independently of the competition and fire resistance
parameters, provided that they take values that ensure the emergence of
patterns in the system (see the line labeled by @xmath in Fig. 2.5 ; for
the definition of @xmath see Sec. 2.3 ). This result is in good
agreement with the theoretical one provided for the wavelength by the
linear stability analysis @xmath , which is also independent of
competition and resistance to fires.

#### 2.3 Stochastic model

The perfectly periodic patterns emerging in Fig. 2.3 seem to be far from
the disordered ones usually observed in aerial photographs of mesic
savannas and shown by individual based models [ Calabrese et al. , 2010
; Jeltsch et al. , 1999 ; Barot et al. , 1999 ; Caylor et al. , 2003 ] .
We have so far described a savanna system in terms of the density of
trees with a deterministic dynamics. The interpretation of the field
@xmath is the density of tree (active) sites in a small volume, @xmath .
If we think of trees as reacting particles which are born and die
probabilistically, then to provide a reasonable description of the
underlying individual-based birth and death dynamics, we have to add a
noise term to the standard deterministic equation. It will take into
account the intrinsic stochasticity present at the individual level in
the system.

If we take a small volume, @xmath , the number of reactions taking place
is proportional to the number of particles therein, @xmath , with small
deviations. If @xmath is large enough, the central limit theorem applies
to the sum of @xmath independent random variables and predicts that the
amplitude of the deviation is of the order of @xmath [ Gardiner , 1985 ]
. This stochasticity is referred to as demographic noise. The
macroscopic equation is now stochastic,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath (but we take it as a constant, [ Dickman , 1994 ] )
modulates the intensity of @xmath , a Gaussian white noise term with
zero mean and correlations given by Dirac delta distributions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

The complete description of the dynamics in Eq.( 2.19 ) should have the
potential to describe more realistic patterns.

We first investigate the effect of demographic noise on the persistence
of trees in the system. We show in (Fig. 2.6 ) that the critical point,
@xmath , depends on the value of the competition parameter @xmath . This
effect is rather small, so that when @xmath increases the transition to
the grassland state appears only for a slightly larger @xmath (i.e, less
frequent fire). The reason seems to be that fire frequency and intensity
depend on grass biomass. Seasonally wet savannas support much more grass
biomass that serves as fuel for fires during the dry season [ D’Odorico
et al. , 2006a ; Hanan et al. , 2008 ] . Dry savannas have much lower
grass biomass, so they do not burn as often or as intensely. The shift
of the critical value of @xmath when competition is stronger is
consistent with the one showed in [ Calabrese et al. , 2010 ] , as can
be seen comparing Fig. 2 therein with Fig. 2.6 here. Besides, the values
obtained for @xmath are larger when we consider the demographic
stochasticity [ Stanley , 1987 ] neglected in the deterministic field
approach.

We explore numerically the stochastic savanna model using an algorithm
developed in Dickman [ 1994 ] (See B ). Note that the noise makes the
transition to pattern smoother so the change from homogeneous to
inhomogeneous spatial distributions is not as clear as it is in the
limit where the demographic noise vanishes (See Fig. 2.4 ). The presence
of demographic noise in the model, as shown in Fig. 2.2 (red stars),
also decreases the value of the competition strength at which patterns
appear in the system, as has been observed in other systems.
Mathematically, these new patterns appear since demographic noise
maintains Fourier modes of the solution which, due to the value of the
parameters, would decay in a deterministic approach [ Butler and
Goldenfeld , 2009 ] . Biologically, exclusion zones are promoted by
demographic noise, since it does not affect regions where there are not
trees. On the other hand in vegetated areas fluctuations may enhance
tree density, leading to stronger competition. The presence of
demographic noise in the model allows the existence of patterns under
more humid conditions. This result is highly relevant for mesic
savannas, as we expect competition to be of low to intermediate strength
in such systems. We show two examples of these irregular patterns in
Fig. 2.7 (a) and Fig. 2.7 (b). Unrealistic stripe-like patterns no
longer appear in the stochastic model.

We have studied the dynamics of the system for some values of the fire
and competition parameters. Demographic noise influences the spatial
structures shown by the model. The deterministic approach shows a full
spectrum of patterns which are not visually realistic for mesic savannas
(but for arid systems). The role of the noise is to transform this
spectrum of regular, unrealistic patterns into more irregular ones
(Figures 2.7 (a)- 2.7 (d)) that remind the observed in aerial
photographs of real mesic savannas. On the other hand, these patterns
are statistically equivalent to the deterministic ones, as it is shown
with the structure function in Fig. 2.5 . The dominant scale in the
solution is given by the interaction radio, @xmath , and it is
independent of the amplitude of the noise (see the structure function in
Fig. 2.5 , peaked around @xmath independently of the noise). Besides,
over a certain treshold in the amplitude, demographic noise destroys the
population of trees. Therefore, the model presents an active-absorbing
transition with the noise strength, @xmath , being the control
parameter.

#### 2.4 Discussion

Understanding the mechanisms that produce spatial patterns in savanna
tree populations has long been an area of interest among savanna
ecologists [ Skarpe , 1991 ; Jeltsch et al. , 1999 ; Barot et al. , 1999
; Caylor et al. , 2003 ; Scanlon et al. , 2007 ] . A key step in such an
analysis is defining the most parsimonious combination of mechanisms
that will produce the pattern in question. In this chapter the
combination of long-range competition for resources and the facilitation
induced by fire are considered the responsible of the spatial
structures, in the line of studies of vegetation pattern formation in
arid systems, where also a combination of long-range inhibition and
short-range facilitation is introduced [ Klausmeier , 1999 ; Lefever and
Lejeune , 1997 ; Rietkerk et al. , 2002 ; von Hardenberg et al. , 2001 ]
. The main difference is that the facilitation provided by the
protection effect of adult trees against fires in our savanna model
takes the short-range facilitation to its infinitesimally short limit
(i.e, local limit). Under this assumption we have studied the conditions
under which our model could account for patterns. We have shown that
nonlocal competition combined with local facilitation induces the full
range of observed spatial patterns, provided the competition term enters
nonlinearly in the equation for the density of trees, and that
competition is strong enough.

The key technical requirement for this effect to occur is that the
competition kernel must be an almost constant function in a given
competition region, and decay abruptly out of the region. We verify this
condition working with supergaussian kernel functions. In practice, this
means that competition kernels whose Fourier transform takes negative
values for some wavenumber values, will lead to competition driven
clustering.

The other mechanism we have considered for a minimalistic but realistic
savanna model, fire, has been shown to be relevant for the coexistence
of trees and grass and for the shape of the patterns. However,
competition is the main ingredient allowing pattern solutions to exist
in the model. If the shape of the kernel allows these types of
solutions, then the specific values of fire and competition parameters
determine the kind of spatial structure that develops. It is also worth
mentioning that one can observe the full spectrum of patterns in the
limit where fires vanish ( @xmath ), so there is no facilitation at all,
provided competition is strong enough. However, when there is no
competition, @xmath , no patterns develop regardless of the value of the
fire term. Therefore, we conclude that the nonlocal competition term is
responsible for the emergence of clustered distributions of trees in the
model, with the fire term playing a relevant role only to fix the value
of the competition parameter at which patterns appear. In other words,
for a given competition strength, patterns appear more readily when fire
is combined with competition. A similar mechanism of competitive
interactions between species has been shown to give rise to clusters of
species in the context of classical ecological niche theory. Scheffer
and van Nes [ Scheffer and van Nes , 2006 ] showed that species
distribution in niche space was clustered, and Pigolotti et al. [
Pigolotti et al. , 2007 ] showed that this arises as an instability of
the nonlocal nonlinear equation describing the competition of species.

Long-distance competition for resources in combination with the local
facilitation due to the protection effect of adult trees in the
establishment of juvenile ones can explain the emergence of realistic
structures of trees in mesic savannas. In these environmental
conditions, competition is limited, so we should restrict to small to
intermediate values of the parameter @xmath , and the effect of fires is
also worth to be taken into account. However, these two ingredients give
a full range of patterns observed in vegetated systems, but not in the
particular case of savannas. It is necessary to consider the role of
demographic noise, which is present in the system through the stochastic
nature of the birth and death processes of individual trees. In this
complete framework our model shows irregular patterns of trees similar
to the observed in real savannas.

The other important feature of savannas, the characteristic long-time
coexistence of trees and grass is well captured with our model (Figures
2.1 and 2.6 ). Besides, the presence of demographic noise, as it is
shown in Fig. 2.6 , makes our approach much more realistic, since the
persistence of trees in the face of fires is related to the water in the
system. On the other hand, demographic stochasticity causes tree
extinction at lower fire frequencies (larger @xmath ) than in the
deterministic case. This is because random fluctuations in tree density
are of sufficient magnitude that this can hit zero even if the
deterministic stationary tree density (for a given fire frequency) is
greater than zero. This effect vanishes if we increase the system size.
The demographic noise is proportional to the density of trees
(proportional to @xmath ), so fluctuations are smaller if we study
bigger patches of savannas. As usually happens in the study of critical
phenomena in Statistical Mechanics, the extinction times due to
demographic noise increase exponentially with the size of the system for
those intensities of competition and fire that allow the presence of
trees in the stationary state. Over the critical line, this time will
follow a power law scaling, and a logarithmic one when the stationary
state of the deterministic model is already absorbing (without trees) [
Marro and Dickman , 2008 ] .

#### 2.5 Summary

We have shown the formation of patterns in a minimal savanna model, that
considers the combination of long-range competition and local
facilitation mechanisms as well as the transition from trees-grass
coexistence to a grass only state.

The salient feature of the model is that it only considers nonlocal (and
nonlinear) competition through a kernel function which defines the
length of the interaction, while the facilitation is considered to have
an infinitesimally short influence range. Our model thus differs from
standard kernel-based savanna models that feature both short-range
facilitation and long-range competition. The same sequence of spatial
patterns appears in both approaches, confirming Rietkerk and van de
Koppel’s [ Rietkerk and van de Koppel , 2008 ] suggestion that
short-range facilitation does not induce spatial pattern formation by
itself, and long-distance competition is also needed. It also suggests
that long-range competition could be not only a necessary, but also a
sufficient condition to the appearance of spatial structures of trees.

Inspired by [ Calabrese et al. , 2010 ] , we have proposed a nonlocal
deterministic macroscopic equation for the evolution of the local
density of trees where fire and tree-tree competition are the dominant
mechanisms. If the kernel function falls off with distance very quickly
(the Fourier transform is always positive) the system only has
homogenous solutions. In the opposite case, patterns may appear
depending on the value of the parameters ( @xmath and @xmath ), and in a
sequence similar to the spatial structures appearing in standard
kernel-based models. Under less favorable environmental conditions,
trees tend to arrange in more robust structures to survive (Fig. 2.3
(d)). Biologically, trees are lumped in dense groups, separated by empty
regions. Entrance of new trees in these exclusion zones is impossible
due to the intense competition they experience there.

A great strength of our approach is that our deterministic analysis is
formal, and we have shown the different spatial distributions of the
trees that occur as competition becomes more intense, concluding that
self organization of trees is a good mechanism to promote tree survival
under adverse conditions [ Rietkerk et al. , 2002 ] . Trees tend to
cluster in the high competition (low resources) limit (Fig. 2.3 (d)),
due to the formation of exclusion zones caused by nonlocal competition,
and not as a result of facilitation. However, because we are dealing
with a deterministic model, the patterns are too regular and the
transition between the grass-only and a tree-populated states is
independent of tree competition. We therefore considered stochasticity
coming from the stochastic nature of individual birth and death events,
to provide a more realistic description of savanna dynamics. Calabrese
et al. [ Calabrese et al. , 2010 ] also noted that savanna-to-grassland
transition was independent of competition intensity in the mean field
approach, but not when demographic noise was included. In the present
model, both the grassland to savanna transition and the spatial
structures that develop are influenced by demographic stochasticity. In
the case of spatial structures, demographic noise is specially relevant,
since it turns much of the unrealistic patterns of the deterministic
model into more realistic ones, that remind the observed in real
savannas. It also allows the existence of periodic arrangements of trees
in more humid systems, which means environmental conditions closer to
mesic savannas.

We have quantified the characteristic spacing of spatial patterns
through the structure function. The irregular patterns produced by the
stochastic model still have a dominant wavelength whose value is the
same as in the deterministic model and depends only on the value of the
range of the interaction, @xmath , in the kernel function. The match
between the typical spatial scale of the patterns and the characteristic
distance over which nonlocal competition acts suggests that it could be
responsible for the presence of clustered spatial structures. In the
next chapter we will propose a competition model, neglecting every
facilitative interaction, to confirm this hypothesis in arid to semiarid
systems.

### Chapter 3 Semiarid systems

Regular vegetation patterns in semiarid ecosystems have been
traditionally believed to arise from the interplay between long-range
competition and facilitation processes acting at smaller distances. In
this chapter, it is shown that under rather general conditions,
long-range competition alone may be enough to shape these patterns. To
this end we propose three simple, general models for the dynamics of
vegetation, that include only long-range competition between plants
through a nonlocal term, where the kernel function quantifies the
intensity and range of the interaction. Firstly, long-range competition
is introduced influencing the growth of vegetation, secondly it is
assumed to affect its death. Finally, it is considered as a term
independent of the local birth-death vegetation dynamics, entering
linearly in the equation. In all the situations, regardless of the way
in which competition acts, we recover the vegetation spatial structures
that account for facilitation in addition to competition. Models only
have consider the finite range of the competition among plants, given by
the length of the roots.

#### 3.1 Introduction

Regular patterns and spatial organization of vegetation have been
observed in many arid and semiarid ecosystems worldwide (Fig. 3.1 ),
covering a diverse range of plant taxa and soil types [ Klausmeier ,
1999 ; Rietkerk and van de Koppel , 2008 ; Thompson et al. , 2009 ] . A
key common ingredient in these systems is that plant growth is severely
limited by water availability, and thus plants likely compete strongly
for water [ Rietkerk et al. , 2002 ] . The study of such patterns is
especially interesting because their features may reveal much about the
underlying physical and biological processes that generated them in
addition to giving information on the characteristics of the ecosystem.
It is possible, for instance, to infer their resilience against
anthropogenic disturbances or climatic changes that could cause abrupt
shifts in the system and lead it to a desert state [ van de Koppel
et al. , 2002 ; D’Odorico et al. , 2006c , b ] .

Much research has therefore focused on identifying the mechanisms that
can produce spatial patterning in water limited systems [ Lefever and
Lejeune , 1997 ; Klausmeier , 1999 ; Pueyo et al. , 2008 ] . An
important class of deterministic vegetation models (i.e., those not
considering noise associated with random disturbances) that can produce
regular patterns are the kernel-based models [ D’Odorico et al. , 2006c
] . These models produce patterns via a symmetry-breaking instability
(i.e., a mechanism by which the symmetric-homogeneous state loses
stability and a periodic pattern is created) that has its origins in the
interplay between short-range facilitation and long-range competition [
D’Odorico et al. , 2006b ; Rietkerk and van de Koppel , 2008 ; Borgogno
et al. , 2009 ] , with field observations confirming this hypothesis in
some landscapes [ Dunkerley , 2002 ] . Therefore it has been long
assumed that both of these mechanisms must be present in semiarid
systems to account for observed vegetation patterns, although
quantifying the importance of each one has proven to be a difficult and
contentious task [ Barbier et al. , 2008 ; Veblen , 2008 ] . A key role
theory can play here is to identify the minimal requirements for pattern
formation to occur. Some authors have speculated that pattern formation,
under certain conditions, could occur without short-range facilitation [
Rietkerk and van de Koppel , 2008 ] . In this line, in the previous
chapter we proposed a model for mesic savannas that includes fire and
plant-plant competition as key ingredients. Fire introduces a positive
feedback so that this model considers both competition and facilitation
mechanisms. However, the model still produces regular patterns even when
the facilitative interaction, fire, is considered at its very
short-range (in fact, local) limit. These considerations suggest that
local facilitation may be superfluous for pattern formation, and that a
deeper exploration of the range of conditions under which pattern
formation can occur in the absence of facilitation is therefore
warranted. This will be the major concern of this chapter.

We will study simple, but quite general, single-variable models for
vegetation density in water-limited regions. Only competitive
interactions are considered, modeled in different ways to analyse if
patterns depend on how competition enters in the dynamical equations
Martínez-García et al. [ 2013 , 2014a ] . The role of nonlinearities is
also investigated. We show that when only a single broadly applicable
condition is met, that competitive interactions have a finite range, the
full set of regular patterns formerly attributed to the interaction
between short-range facilitation and long-distance competition can be
produced in the absence of facilitation.

#### 3.2 Competition in a nonlocal nonlinear birth term

Arid and semiarid ecosystems are typified by patches of vegetation
interspersed with bare ground. Water is a very limited resource for
which juvenile plants must compete with those that have already
established. Logistic-type population models have been used in a wide
variety of applications including semiarid systems and, as shown in the
previous chapter, savannas [ Calabrese et al. , 2010 ] . They thus form
a reasonable and very general starting point. Specifically, we consider
the large-scale long-time description of the model in terms of a
continuous-time evolution equation for the density of trees, @xmath .
Death occurs at a constant rate @xmath , whereas population growth
occurs via a sequence of seed production, dispersal, and seed
establishment processes. Seed production occurs at a rate @xmath per
plant. For simplicity we consider dispersal to be purely local and then
if all seeds would give rise to new plants the growth rate would be
@xmath . But once a seed lands, it will have to overcome competition in
order to establish as a new plant. We consider two different competition
mechanisms. First, space availability alone limits density to a maximum
value given by @xmath . Thus, @xmath . The proportion of available space
at site @xmath is @xmath , so that the growth rate given by seed
production should be reduced by this factor. Second, once the seed
germinates, it has to overcome competition for resources with other
plants. This is included in the model by an additional factor @xmath ,
@xmath , which is the probability of overcoming competition. This
probability decreases with increasing average vegetation density within
a neighborhood @xmath , and the strength of this decrease depends on the
competition intensity parameter, @xmath . Higher values of @xmath
represent more arid lands, and thus stronger competition for water. In
the following, we measure density in units so that @xmath . Combining
all processes, the evolution equation for the density then takes the
form:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath is the nonlocal density of vegetation that is obtained by
averaging (with a proper weighting function) the density of plants in a
neighborhood:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a normalized kernel function, which accounts for the
weighted mean vegetation density, and defines the neighborhood of the
plant. A Laplacian term could be included in the right-hand side of
Eq. ( 3.1 ) as a way to model seed dispersal, but doing so would not
qualitatively change our results, so we have left it out.

We have presented a phenomenological derivation of the model. An open
problem is to infer this type of description from a mechanistic one
where the explicit interactive dynamics of vegetation competing for
water is considered. Preliminary results on this derivation are shown in
the Appendix C .

In previous kernel-based vegetation models [ Lefever and Lejeune , 1997
; D’Odorico et al. , 2006c ] , the kernel function contained information
on the class of interactions present in the system, that were both
facilitative and competitive. That is, it can take positive and negative
values either enhancing or inhibiting the vegetation growth. On the
contrary, we introduce purely competitive interactions through the
nonlocal function @xmath , where the kernel is always positive and thus
defines the area of influence of a focal plant, and how this influence
decays with distance. These two kernels are compared in Fig. 3.2 .
Competition is included by assuming that the probability of
establishment @xmath decreases with increasing vegetation density in the
surroundings:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

As @xmath modulates the strength of the competition, it must be that
@xmath , and @xmath . This means that when water is abundant ( @xmath )
competition for water is not important ( @xmath ), whereas new plants
cannot establish in the limit of extremely arid systems, @xmath .

Note the generality of this vegetation competition model: a spatially
nonlocal population growth term of logistic type with rate fulfilling
Eq. ( 3.3 ), and a linear death term. A complete description of our
model should specify both the kernel function @xmath as well as @xmath ,
but we can go further with the analysis in general terms.

The possible homogenous stationary values of the density for Eq. ( 3.1 )
are: a) no vegetation @xmath , and b) the vegetated state @xmath . The
system will show either one or the other depending on the relationship
between the seed production and death rates, @xmath and @xmath [
Calabrese et al. , 2010 ] . The non-trivial homogeneous stationary
solution, @xmath , can be obtained by solving

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

that has only one solution in the interval @xmath because of the
conditions imposed on the function @xmath in equation( 3.3 ). We now ask
if this stationary solution gives rise to periodic structures via a
symmetry-breaking instability as happens in other models that include
not only competition but also facilitation mechanisms in the
interactions [ Borgogno et al. , 2009 ] . To explore this possibility in
our model, we perform a linear stability analysis [ Cross and Hohenberg
, 1993 ] introducing a small perturbation to the stationary solution, so
@xmath , with @xmath . Technical details of this derivation may be found
in Appendix A . The perturbation growth rate is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the Fourier transform of the kernel, @xmath , and @xmath
.

Patterns appear if the maximum of the growth rate (i.e., of the most
unstable mode), @xmath , is positive, which means that the perturbation
grows with time. From Eq. ( 3.5 ), this is only possible if the Fourier
transform of the kernel function, @xmath , takes negative values, since
@xmath . As has been in the previous chapter, this happens, for example,
for all stretched exponentials @xmath with @xmath , where @xmath is a
typical interaction length [ Pigolotti et al. , 2007 , 2010 ] . Kernels
satisfying this criterion have broader shoulders and shorter tails
(i.e., are more platykurtic) than the Gaussian function, which is
obtained for @xmath . In reality, any competitive interaction among
plants will have finite range because their roots, which mediate the
interaction, have finite length. The interaction range @xmath between
two plants will be twice the typical root length. Kernels with finite
range can, in general, be modeled by considering a truncated function
such that @xmath , where @xmath is a normalization constant, @xmath is a
unit-step function defined as @xmath if @xmath and @xmath if @xmath ,
and @xmath is a function of the distance that models the interactions
among the plants. Because of the finite range in the kernel function,
the Fourier transform will show oscillations and thus will always take
negative values. The functional form of the probability of surviving the
competition, @xmath , changes only the parameter regime where patterns
first develop, but they will appear in the system, regardless of its
form, for @xmath large enough.

For the rest of our analysis, we will use @xmath , so the kernel is
given by @xmath if @xmath and @xmath if @xmath , which defines an
interaction area of radius @xmath (that is, roots of typical length
@xmath ). Its Fourier transform (in two dimensions) is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the first-order Bessel function. We will further specify
the model by assuming particular forms for the growth rates. Let us
consider a probability of surviving competition given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath . In the particular case of @xmath , the homogeneous
density, @xmath , and the perturbation growth rate, @xmath , can be
obtained analytically. Numerical evaluations must be done if @xmath . In
the following, for simplicity, we consider the case @xmath and only
briefly discuss other values. The nontrivial stationary solution, @xmath
, can be obtained analytically

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . Eq. ( 3.8 ) shows that the homogeneous density of trees
in the stationary state decays as @xmath with increasing competition
strength (i.e., large @xmath ). It can be analytically shown that the
same dependence of @xmath on large @xmath occurs for any value of @xmath
.

From Eq. ( 3.5 ), the growth rate of the perturbations can also be
calculated

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

and is shown in Fig. 3.3 (Left) for different values of the competition
strength. When the growth rate of the most unstable mode (i.e. the
maximum of @xmath ), @xmath , becomes positive, patterns emerge in the
system [ Borgogno et al. , 2009 ] . To obtain the critical value of the
competition parameter at the transition to patterns, @xmath , we have to
calculate the most unstable mode as the first extreme of @xmath at
@xmath , i.e., the first zero of the derivative of @xmath . This was
already done in the previous chapter, and gives @xmath . It depends only
on the the range defining @xmath ). This value changes depending on the
kernel, but in the case of kernels with a finite range (i.e. truncated
by a unit step function of radius @xmath ) it is always of this order.
The critical wavenumber is determined mainly by the contribution of the
unit step function to the Fourier transform, which is always the same.
This result is also independent of the other parameters of the system,
and shows that the nonlocal competition mechanism is responsible for the
formation of patterns in the system.

To identify the parameter values for the transition to patterns, we
solve @xmath in Eq. ( 3.9 ), which shows that patterns emerge when
competition strength exceeds @xmath , which is positive because @xmath .
Figure 3.3 (Right) shows the growth rate of the most unstable mode as a
function of competition strength for different values of the exponent
@xmath for fixed values @xmath , and @xmath . Note that the critical
value of the competition parameter depends on the functional form of
@xmath . This dependence could be used to tune the value of @xmath to
have a realistic competition strength for the transition to patterns,
provided that one has sufficient data.

We can also explain the separation length between clusters of plants
using ecological arguments adn expanding the concept of exclusion areas
that was mentioned in the previous chapter. Consider a random and
inhomogeneous distribution of plants. Maxima of this distribution
identify places with the highest plant density. Imagine that two such
maxima occur at a distance larger than @xmath but smaller than @xmath
from each other. There will be no direct interaction between the roots
of plants in these different patches because they are separated by a
distance larger than the interaction range @xmath (twice the root
extension as first order approximation). But there is an area in-between
which is simultaneously within the range of both patches. Compared with
plants occurring inside a cluster, which only have to compete with
plants in their own cluster, those that occur in-between clusters will
experience stronger competition and will therefore tend to disappear
(Fig. 3.4 ). We call these regions exclusion areas [ Hernández-García
and López , 2004 ; Pigolotti et al. , 2007 , 2010 ] . The disappearance
of plants in these exclusion areas in turn reduces competition on the
two well-populated patches, so that a positive feedback appears
reinforcing the establishment of plants in patches periodically
separated with a distance between @xmath and @xmath . We stress again
that competition alone is responsible for the symmetry breaking
instability, and no facilitative interactions are needed for pattern
formation.

This mechanism does not work only in the particular case of considering
competition among plants modifying the birth rate. It also leads to the
formation of patterns if nonlocal competition is introduced in the death
rate or entering linearly in the dynamics. This will be shown in
Sections 3.3 and 3.4 respectively.

Finally, we have numerically integrated Eq. ( 3.1 ) in a patch of @xmath
m @xmath with periodic boundary conditions and a competition range of
@xmath m. Time stepping is done with an Euler algorithm. The results
(see Fig. 3.5 ) exhibit steady striped and spotted vegetation patterns
typically arising from symmetry breaking.

Similar results can be obtained for different growth rates, for example
considering a family of stretched exponentials in the probability of
overcoming long-range competition @xmath .

This gives a perturbation growth rate of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the stationary density, @xmath has to be obtained numerically from
Eq. ( 3.4 ). The value of the competition parameter at the transition to
patterns @xmath also has to be obtained numerically for a given set of
values of @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . This critical value is shown in
Fig. 3.6 using a top-hat kernel for different values of @xmath . It is
represented the value of the perturbation growth rate of the most
unstable mode @xmath as a function of the competition strength @xmath .

This further confirms our result that competition is the only necessary
ingredient for the formation of vegetation patterns in the present
framework, and that this does not depend on the functional form of the
probability of surviving competition (growth rate) provided it verifies
the requirements given by Eq. ( 3.3 ).

#### 3.3 Competition in a nonlocal nonlinear death term

In the previous section we have considered that plant death occurs at a
constant rate and the birth process takes place following a sequence of
seed production, dispersal and establishment. The establishment of new
seeds has been studied as a process depending on the density of
vegetation in a given neighborhood. However, it is possible to consider
it affecting the death rate.

In this framework, the population growth has two stages, namely seed
production at rate @xmath and local seed dispersal. This means that once
a seed is produced by a plant, it still has to compete for available
space, limiting the density of vegetation to a maximum value @xmath . As
it was done before, we choose units so that @xmath . On the other hand,
the death of plants is influenced by the availability of resources and
thus include nonlocal interactions. When water is abundant the
competition for it is not relevant and plants die at a typical constant
rate @xmath . However, the scarcity of resources promotes the death of
vegetation, and this is included in the model by an additional factor
@xmath in the death term, the probability of dying because of
competition, @xmath . That is, the probability of not being able to
overcome competition @xmath , where @xmath is the function introduced in
Sec. 3.2 . The probability of dying because of competition for resources
has to increase with the density of vegetation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

and it must tend to its maximum value in the limit of extremely arid
systems @xmath and to vanish when water is not a constraint for
vegetation growth @xmath . These properties can be derived from the
properties of the function @xmath and its relationship with @xmath .

Under these conditions, the model equation for the density of vegetation
is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the nonlocal density of vegetation at @xmath , @xmath ,
and @xmath is the kernel function that defines an interaction range and
modulates its strength with the distance from the focal plant, as it was
in Sec. 3.2 . Also following the step of this previous section, we study
the existence of patterns in this model.

First of all, the stationary solutions of Eq. ( 3.12 ), @xmath , are
obtained solving

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

that has a trivial solution, @xmath referring to the desert state. The
vegetated state must be obtained from

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

once the function @xmath has been chosen.

Second of all, the formation of patterns in the system has to be studied
through a linear stability analysis of Eq. ( 3.12 ), introducing a small
perturbation to the stationary homogeneous state, @xmath . Considering
that @xmath , with @xmath , the perturbation evolves according to the
following linear integro-differential equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

that can be solved using the Fourier transform to obtain the growth rate
of the perturbation,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where, again, @xmath is the Fourier transform of the Kernel function.
Using Eq. ( 3.13 ), one finally gets

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

that shows that, as it was in the case of models with nonlocal
interactions in the birth rate, that the patterns appear only when the
Fourier transform of the kernel takes negative values. To investigate
the particular behavior of this model in a simple situation, one needs
to choose a function @xmath .

The simplest case that allows a complete analysis is to choose a
probability of dying because of competition growing linearly with the
nonlocal density of vegetation,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

The behavior of this function @xmath is shown in the left panel of Fig.
3.7 for different values of @xmath . The choice of this functional form
in @xmath restricts the domain of the parameter @xmath . It has to be
@xmath since it must be @xmath to represent a probability.

The nontrivial stationary solution, Eq. ( 3.14 ), is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

This solution has the proper behavior in the limits @xmath and @xmath .
The growth rate of the perturbation is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

from where we obtain a transition to pattern at,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the most unstable mode, i.e., that with the highest
growing rate. Eq. ( 3.21 ) limits the possible value of the birth and
the death rates for a given kernel. They have to take values such as
@xmath . This is a new condition that was not present in the model
presented in Sec. 3.2 , and appears because of the constraints imposed
on the values of the competition parameter by the linear function @xmath
. For @xmath , @xmath and a top-hat kernel of radius @xmath , patterns
emerge for a competition strength @xmath . As it can be observed in Fig.
3.8 , the homogeneous distribution is the stationary solution when
@xmath (Panel a), while patterns (stripes and spots) appear otherwise
(Panels b and c respectively).

A different function for the probability of dying might be chosen ¹ ¹ 1
It is important to justify that @xmath has no dimension, and there is a
saturating density, @xmath , that we have set to @xmath so that @xmath .
,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

that is shown in the right panel of Fig. 3.7 for different values of
@xmath . Although this makes the analysis much more complicated, it
allows the competition strength parameter @xmath to take any positive
real value. We present some results showing that the functional form of
@xmath is not relevant for pattern formation.

The nontrivial stationary solution is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have chosen the positive sign in the square root because it
must be @xmath . The growth rate of the perturbation is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Plugging Eq. ( 3.23 ) into Eq. ( 3.24 ) and considering the most
unstable mode, @xmath , we can obtain an expression for the value of the
competition parameter at the transition to patterns,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using @xmath , @xmath and a constant top-hat kernel of radius @xmath one
obtains @xmath . This result can be checked integrating numerically
Eq. ( 3.12 ) with these values of the rates and the interaction range.
We do not show this patterns again because they are equivalent as the
ones in Fig. 3.8 .

#### 3.4 Competition in a nonlocal linear death term

The study that we are going to present in this section is inspired by
the kernel-based models reviewed in [ Borgogno et al. , 2009 ] , where
it is assumed that both competitive and facilitative interactions
between plants must come into play for pattern formation. These models
are not well posed, since the density of vegetation can become negative
at some spatial points because the long range interactions entering
linearly. This incovenience is often overcome assuming that whenever the
density becomes negative, it takes a value @xmath . In this section, we
extend these models to the situations where there is only competition
among trees, and also study the effect of seed dispersal through a
diffusive term. The vegetation density changes in time because of its
local dynamics (logistic growth) and the spatial interactions
(competition) with other points of the space,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the carrying capacity of the system (i.e, the maximum
density of vegetation in the absence of competition) and @xmath is the
interaction strength parameter . To account for purely competitive
interactions @xmath and the Kernel function @xmath are positive. It is
important to remark, once more, that the dynamics of this model is not
bounded at @xmath , so negative values must be avoided by imposing that
@xmath when it becomes negative in the numerical simulations.

The stationary solutions are, @xmath (no vegetated state), and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

that limits the values of the interaction strength parameter. It must be
@xmath to verify that @xmath , while in the limit @xmath , where the are
not long range interactions, the population of plants grows logistically
until it reaches its carrying capacity.

The linear stability analysis of Eq. ( 3.4 ) gives a peturbation gorwth
rate,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

that, in the absence of diffusion, @xmath , allows the existence of
patterns if

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the most unstable mode. Provided that we choose, again,
a normalized constant kernel of width @xmath the transition to patterns
appears at @xmath . Integrating the full Eq. ( 3.4 ) including
long-range seed dispersal @xmath laberynthic and spotted patterns
emerge. This result is shown in Figures 3.9 (a) and 3.9 (b) for
different values of @xmath .

#### 3.5 Summary and conclusions

In this chapter we have presented several models of vegetation in
water-limited regions where, despite the absence of facilitative
interactions, regular structures may still appear: stripes and spots of
vegetation interspersed on the bare soil forming a hexagonal lattice.
Patterns consisting on spots of bare soil characteristic of models with
competition and facilitation are not observed when positive interactions
are neglected. In fact, in the previous chapter, where we studied a
model for mesic savannas with local facilitation, the gapped
distributions appear only when the system is on the transition line to
patterns. This result is different from what is observed in models
including nonlocal facilitation, that show the whole sequence of
patterns (gaps, stripes and spots), with each type of structure in a
wide region of the parameter space. This suggests that facilitative
interactions, although not indispensable for the formation of patterns
in arid systems, could be relevant to substain some of the structures
that have been reported in field observations. Future work is planned to
address this problem.

From a mathematical point of view, nonlocality enters through an
influence function that determines the number of plants competing within
a range with any given plant. A first-order approximation of this
distance can be given by (twice) the typical length of the roots, but
field measurements are needed in order to determine the resources
uptaking range of a given plant species. A necessary condition for
pattern transitions, common to all the presented models, is the
existence of negative values of the Fourier transform of the kernel
function, which always happens, but not only, for kernel functions with
finite range.

From a biological point of view, competitive interactions alone may give
rise to spatial structures because of the development of regions
(typically located between maxima of the plant density) where
competition is stronger, preventing the growth of more vegetation.

An unfortunate consequence of the universal character of these models is
that the information that is possible to gain on the underlying
biophysical mechanisms operating in the system just by studying the
spatial structures of the vegetation is limited. Many different
mechanisms lead to the same patterns. Although they are universal models
should be specific to each system, emphasizing the importance of
empirical studies. Field work may help theoretical efforts by placing
biologically reasonable bounds on the shape and extent of the kernel
functions used in the models, and also by approximations to the
probablity of overcoming competition, @xmath , or of dying because of it
@xmath .

Finally, with this work, we aim at showing that competitive interactions
alone may be responsible of patterns in arid to semiarid systems,
regardless of how they are introduced in the different modeling
approaches. Under certain conditions, nonlocal competition alone may be
responsible of the formation of patterns regardless of entering in the
equations either linearly or nonlinearly. We hope that our results shed
light on the task of understanding the fundamental biological mechanisms
-and the possible absence of facilitation- that could be at the origin
of pattern formation in semiarid systems.

### Appendix A Linear stability analysis

In chapters 2 and 3 , we have referred many times to the linear
stability analysis of the equations in order to gain insight into the
possible emergence of patterns. This is a broadly used technique. Its
objective is to obtain the temporal evolution of small perturbations to
the stationary homogeneous state of the system. To this aim we assume
idealized conditions that can be summarized in three points: choosing a
uniform geometry for the walls that confine the medium; replacing the
lateral boundaries with ones consistent with translational symmetry; and
choosing to study the linear instability towards time-independent
patterns that are consistent with translational symmetry. We impose
periodic boundary conditions and study the formation of stationary
patterns.

Our starting point is Eq. ( 3.1 ),

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Considering that the system is in the homogeneous stationary state,
@xmath , how will perturbations to this state evolve with time? Will
they vanish, taking the system back to the homogeneous state, or will
they grow up allowing the formation of stationary spatial structures?
The key quantity will be the growth rate of the perturbation, restricted
to the linear regime, so that only small perturbations in the short time
limit will be considered. If a small perturbation is done to the
stationary homogeneous state, the density is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath . Plugging Eq. ( A.2 ) into Eq. ( A.1 ), it is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the spatiotemporal dependence in the perturbation @xmath is
omitted to simplify the notation. We have also used that @xmath is
stationary and thus its time derivative equals to zero together with the
normalization of the kernel to simplify the dependence on @xmath in the
function @xmath .

Eq. ( A.3 ) can be simplified because we are interested in small
perturbations. The function @xmath can be expanded in a Taylor series
and higher order terms in @xmath neglected. This gives a linearized
integro-differential equation for the evolution of @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

that can be solved using Fourier transform. Notice that the stationary
solution of Eq. ( A.1 ),

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

has been used to obtain Eq. ( A ). We apply the Fourier transform to
Eq. ( A ),

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.6)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where @xmath is the Fourier transform of the perturbation, and
equivalently, @xmath is the Fourier transform of the kernel.

Finally, Eq. ( A.6 ) is solved considering @xmath , so that a linear
growth rate of the perturbation is obtained

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

### Appendix B Numerical integration of Eq. (2.19)

The integration of stochastic equations where the noise amplitude
depends on the square root of the variable, @xmath , and there are
absorbing states (i.e, states where the system stays indefinitely), has
awaken a great interest, specially in the study of critical phenomena
(i.e, properties of the system that appear when it is close to the
critical point). The amplitude of the fluctuations tends to zero there,
and thus numerical instabilities may appear. Recently [ Dornic et al. ,
2005 ; Pechenik and Levine , 1999 ] a very efficient method has been
developed, but we have used in this work an older one, presented in [
Dickman , 1994 ] , since its implementation is easier and it gives
precise results working far from the transition point. It consists on
discretizing the Langevin equation, taking a step size @xmath in the
variable.

First of all, to integrate the Eq. ( 2.19 ) we discretize the space,
whose area is @xmath , in a @xmath regular grid and compute the integral
in the exponential term. It is approximated by a sum of the field
evaluated in the nodes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are the spatial steps in both directions. They
are given by @xmath .

Then, we integrate the temporal dependence. The key of the algorithm is
to prevent @xmath to take negative values. From a general equation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a Gaussian white noise with zero mean and delta
correlated, it is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . @xmath is a Gaussian number with zero mean and unit
variance. To avoid negative values of @xmath , Dickman [ 1994 ] proposes
to dicretize the density setting @xmath and to simetrically truncate the
Gaussian distribution from where @xmath is drawn, so that @xmath . The
negative values are avoided requiring

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

This can be seen adding @xmath in both sides of Eq. ( B.3 ), considering
the discretization of the density and assuming that @xmath takes its
most negative value according to the constraint ( B.4 ), so

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

that is always positive for @xmath integer.

Eq. ( B.4 ) can be verified in many ways but, following Dickman [ 1994 ]
again, we use

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Finally, rescaling the equation, we can achieve a discretized version in
which positive and zero-mean noise are ensured at the cost of a
“quantized” density.

### Appendix C Derivation of the effective nonlocal description from
tree-water dynamics

In this section we present a preliminar (and not fully satisfactory)
attempt to derive the model presented in Section 3.2 of Chapter 3 (the
derivation corresponding to the nonlocal death model in 3.3 is a
straightforward extension of this calculation).

Let us consider a system involving dimensionless vegetation density,
@xmath , and soil-water @xmath . The dynamics is purely local and
competitive and takes the form:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.1)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where the nondimensional positive parameters are: the seed production
rate @xmath ; the vegetation death rate @xmath ; the consumption rate of
water by vegetation, @xmath ; the evaporation rate @xmath , and the
rainfall, @xmath . Water percolation in the ground is modeled by a
diffusion constant @xmath . Note that this model is a simplified
version, which only includes competitive interactions, of the model
presented in Gilad et al. [ 2004 ] .

Since the characteristic time scale of the water is much faster than the
one of the biomass we can do an adiabatic elimination of the variable
@xmath (i.e. @xmath ) so that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

and thus

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

whose formal solution can be obtained using Green’s functions, @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

with the boundary conditions @xmath . For simplicity we now consider a
one-dimensional situation, although analogous calculations can be done
in two dimensions. The Green’s function is the solution of

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

and it is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Taking the nondimensional small number @xmath as the perturbative
parameter, we can further obtain an approximate expression for @xmath
from Eq. ( C.5 )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , since the Green’s function is always negative. Plugging
this in the equation for the biomass density ( C.1 ), we obtain the
closed expression:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Defining the positive nonlocal density @xmath , where @xmath , we can
write Eq. ( C.9 ) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have defined @xmath .

To have a good agreement with the effective nonlocal dynamics Eq. ( 3.1
), @xmath since it represents a probability. This is certainly the case
for small @xmath . Note that some additional conditions on the
normalization of the Green’s function have to be imposed to limit @xmath
to values less than @xmath . Also @xmath is always negative, as we
expected.

In this particular example we obtained the exponential kernel of Eq. (
C.7 ), which does not have the finite-range support that would be
associated to the finite root extent. As a consequence, the Fourier
transform of this kernel has no negative components and then does not
lead to pattern formation. The simple modeling of water dispersion by
means of a diffusion constant does not contain the additional spatial
scale associated to root size, and should be replaced by some mechanism
implementing root effects. On the other side, the finite-range of the
kernel is a sufficient but not a necessary condition for its Fourier
transform to have negative values. It is well-known the existence of
infinite-range kernels whose Fourier transform has negative values. This
is the case of all stretched exponentials @xmath with @xmath as has been
already mentioned several times before. Kernels satisfying this are more
platykurtic than the Gaussian function. Work is in progress along this
line.

## Part III Animal mobility

### Chapter 4 Optimal search in interacting populations

In this chapter we investigate the relationships between search
efficiency, movement strategy, and nonlocal communication in the
biological context of animal foraging. We consider situations where the
members of a population of foragers perform either Gaussian jumps or
Lévy flights, and show that the search time is minimized when
communication among individuals occurs at intermediate ranges,
independently of the type of movement Martínez-García et al. [ 2014b ,
2013b ] . While Brownian strategies are more strongly influenced by the
communication mechanism, Lévy flights still result in shorter overall
search durations.

#### 4.1 Introduction

Situations where a single individual or a group of searchers must find
an object (target) appear in many different fields including chemistry [
Bénichou et al. , 2011 ] , information theory [ Pirolli and Card , 1999
] , and animal foraging [ Viswanathan et al. , 2011 ; Méndez et al. ,
2014 ] . The study of these searching problems has generated an
increasing amount of work in the last years, many of them oriented
towards the identification of efficient strategies [ Bénichou et al. ,
2011 ; Viswanathan et al. , 2011 ; Vergassola et al. , 2007 ; Bénichou
et al. , 2006 ] . Many remarkable examples can be found in the context
of biological encounters, such as proteins searching for targets on DNA
[ Taylor and Halford , 1989 ] , or animals searching for a mate, shelter
or food [ Campos et al. , 2013 ; Bénichou et al. , 2011 ; Viswanathan
et al. , 2008 ; Mejía-Monasterio et al. , 2011 ; Bartumeus et al. , 2003
] . In these cases, the search time is generally limiting and minimizing
it can increase individual fitness or reaction rates.

The optimality of a search strategy depends strongly on the nature of
both the targets and the searchers [ Bartumeus et al. , 2005 , 2002 ] .
In the context of animal foraging, which is our focus here, searchers
may move randomly, may use memory and experience to locate dispersed
targets or they may also combine random search with memory-based search.
In highly social species, groups of searchers may share information when
no single individual is sufficiently knowledgeable. This is based on the
many wrong hypothesis [ Hoare et al. , 2004 ; Torney et al. , 2009 ] ,
that states that error in sensing of individuals can be reduced by
interacting with the rest of the group, where all individuals can act as
sensors.

It is well known that individual movement plays a central role in search
efficiency, and many studies have focused on the comparative efficiency
of Lévy and Brownian movement strategies [ Bénichou et al. , 2011 ;
Viswanathan et al. , 2008 ; Bartumeus et al. , 2005 , 2002 ] . Lévy
flights are more efficient in some random search scenarios [ Viswanathan
et al. , 1999 , 2000 ] , but whether or not they are used in real animal
search strategies is still an open and contentious topic [ Edwards ,
2011 ; Edwards et al. , 2007 ] . Much less effort, however, has been
spent on trying to understand the long-range (i.e. nonlocal) interaction
mechanisms among social searchers. While diverse observations suggest
that such interactions occur in many taxa, including bacteria [ Liu and
Passino , 2002 ] , insects, and mammals [ Zuberbühler et al. , 1997 ;
McComb et al. , 2003 ] , previous studies have focused almost
exclusively on how the collective movements of a group of animals can
emerge from local interactions among individuals [ Mishra et al. , 2012
; Kolpas et al. , 2013 ; Couzin et al. , 2002 ] . The distance at which
communication can be maintained strongly depends on the species. A
variety of mammalian species are known to communicate acoustically over
distances of up to several kilometers [ McComb et al. , 2003 ; Mathevon
et al. , 2010 ; Estes , 1991 ] , but while group formation via
vocalizations has been well studied [ McComb et al. , 2003 ; Ford , 1991
; Smith et al. , 2011 ] , incidental benefits such as increased foraging
efficiency have received little research attention. Therefore many open
questions remain, particularly on the interrelation between
communication and optimal search for resources. How can communication
facilitate group formation and identification of areas of high quality
resources? Does a communication range exist that optimizes foraging
efficiency? To what degree does search efficiency depend on the
communication mechanism? Finally, how does communication affect
individual space use in a heterogeneous environment?

Here, we present a theoretical model to study the effect of nonlocal
communication on the search efficiency of a group of individuals.
Communication and the amount of shared information are directly
connected through the distance travelled by the signals emitted by
successful searchers (communication range). To introduce the model, we
start from an individual based description and compare the situations
where the individuals employ either Lévy or Brownian random search
strategies. In the first section we study many properties of the model
such as the existence of an optimal communication range and the
influence of the distance between targets and the movement strategy on
its value. For tractability, we will next consider a simplified,
one-dimensional version of the model and compute analytically the search
time for both Brownian and Lévy searchers as a function of the
communication length scale. This simplified model allows us to unveil
the dependence of this time on both the parameters governing individual
mobility, and on the distance between targets. Finally, a continuum
description in terms of an equation for the density of searchers is
derived. The chapter ends with a discussion comparing Brownian and Lévy
strategies.

#### 4.2 The Individual Based Model for Brownian searchers

We consider @xmath particles which undergo a @xmath Brownian random
walk. Correlated random walks, often more appropriate to model
directional persistence in animal movement, reduce to Brownian motion
for large spatiotemporal scales [ Turchin , 1998 ] . The movement is
biased by the gradients of the landscape quality (local information),
and by the interaction among individuals through a communication
mechanism that is activated when good resources are found, thus
providing information on habitat quality in other areas (nonlocal
information). The dynamics of any of the particles @xmath is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a Gaussian white noise term characterized by @xmath ,
and @xmath , with @xmath the diffusion coefficient. The term @xmath
refers to the local search, where @xmath is the environmental quality
function (amount of grass, prey, etc…) and @xmath is the local search
bias parameter. @xmath is the nonlocal search term, with @xmath the
nonlocal search bias parameter and @xmath is the available information
function of the individual @xmath . It represents the information
arriving at the spatial position of the animal @xmath as a result of the
communication with the rest of the population. This term makes the
individuals move along the gradients of the information received. It is
a function of the superposition of pairwise interactions between the
individual @xmath and each one of its conspecifics,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath is an arbitrary perception function that must be set in each
application of the model, @xmath is the interaction between the receptor
particle @xmath depending on its position @xmath and the emitting
particle fixed at @xmath , and @xmath is the activation function
(typically, a Heaviside function) that indicates that the individual at
@xmath calls the others if it is in a good habitat.

We begin with Monte Carlo simulations of the individual based dynamics
in Eq. ( 4.1 ) using a square system ( @xmath ) with periodic boundary
conditions, and a population of @xmath individuals. We use a theoretical
landscape quality function, @xmath , consisting of three non-normalized
Gaussian functions, to ensure that @xmath , centered at different
spatial points (Fig. 4.1 ). As a first approach, we consider a
Gaussian-like interaction kernel. Manipulating its typical range via the
standard deviation, @xmath , the information sent by a successful
searcher will travel farther and the number of individuals with which
the communication is established will be larger. The available
information function of the individual @xmath depending on its position
is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where, as mentioned before, @xmath is a theta Heaviside function that
activates the interaction when the quality is over a certain threshold
@xmath , @xmath . The perception function has been chosen as the
identity for simplicity @xmath .

The question is how the typical communication distance affects the
average efficiency of individuals searching for targets in space (areas
of high-quality forage). We give an answer in terms of spatial
distributions of individuals at long times starting from a random
initial condition and the mean first arrival time to the targets, @xmath
, as it is done in related works [ Bénichou et al. , 2005 ] . This
quantity (Fig. 4.2 ) may be optimized with a communication range
parameter, @xmath , of intermediate scale. As it was said before, the
number of individuals from which a given animal receives a signal will
typically increase with the interaction scale. When this scale is too
small, individuals receive too little information (no information when
@xmath ), and thus exhibit low search efficiency (Fig. 4.2 ). Similarly,
interaction scales that are too large lead to individuals being
overwhelmed with information from all directions, also resulting in
inefficient search (Fig. 4.2 ). In this case, the information received
by any individual is constant over the whole space, so that it does not
have gradients to follow. Only intermediate communication scales supply
the receiving individual with an optimal amount of information with
which to efficiently locate the callers and the high-quality habitat
areas they occupy. The values of the threshold @xmath , as long as they
fall within a reasonable range, only change the absolute time scales of
the searching process.

#### 4.3 Lévy flights

In the case of Lévy flights individual trajectories show sequences of
short displacements interspersed with long straight displacements.
Alternatively, Lévy flights have been shown as a good searching strategy
that may be used by some species. However, empirical studies have
generated controversy, since many of the statistical methods used to
support the presence of Lévy flights in nature have been questioned, and
the issue remains unresolved [ Humphries et al. , 2010 ; Edwards et al.
, 2007 ; Edwards , 2011 ] . In this section the case of Lévy searchers
is considered. The results will show that neither the behavior of the
model, nor the existence of an intermediate optimal communication scale,
depend on the characteristics of the motion of the individuals.

Lévy flights do not have a typical length scale and thus the searcher
can, in principle, make jumps as larger as the size of the system. The
lengths of the jumps, @xmath , are sorted from a probability
distribution with a long tail [ Metzler and Klafter , 2000 ; Klages
et al. , 2008 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath , and @xmath , where @xmath is a characteristic length scale
of the system. This distribution is not defined for @xmath , its mean
and variance are unbounded for @xmath , and it has a mean but no
variance for @xmath . Finally, for @xmath , the two first moments exist
and thus it obeys the central limit theorem. The Brownian motion limit
is recovered in this latter case, while very long jumps are more
frequent when @xmath . This extreme is usually referred as the ballistic
limit, with a high abundance of straight-line long displacements [
Viswanathan et al. , 2011 ; Méndez et al. , 2014 ] . The cumulative
distribution corresponding to Eq. ( 4.4 ) is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

As a simple normalizable cumulative distribution function, with the
asymptotic behavior of Eq. ( 4.5 ), we will use [ Heinsalu et al. , 2010
]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

whose probability distribution, @xmath , is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath , and @xmath . We fix @xmath . In addition, individuals will
stop if they find a target during a displacement of length @xmath . This
naturally introduces a cutoff in the length of the jumps, which becomes
more important as target density increases [ Viswanathan et al. , 2011 ]
. However, as we will focus on a situation where target density is low,
we introduce an exponential cutoff of the order of the system size in
the jump length probability distribution to ensure that very long jumps
without physical meaning (they imply very high velocities) do not occur

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the normalization constant, and @xmath .

Finally for the pairwise interaction we choose a family of functions
given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath gives the typical communication scale. For simplicity, and
without loss of generality, we will consider only the case @xmath .
Indeed, the choice of the function @xmath is not relevant for the
behavior of the model, provided that it defines an interaction length
scale through the parameter @xmath . This scale must tend to zero in the
limit @xmath and to infinity in the limit @xmath . This assures that the
gradient of the calling function vanishes in these limits.

Generally, the search is faster when long displacements occur more
frequently. Fig. 4.3 shows search time for different values of @xmath
and the mean searching time at the optimal communication range as a
function of the Lévy exponent (inset). As the frequence of long
displacements decreases (increasing @xmath ) the search is slower.
Again, the effect of the communication mechanism is more important when
we approach the Brownian limit ( @xmath ), as will be explained in Sec.
4.6 .

#### 4.4 One-dimensional analytical approximations

To gain clearer insight and provide analytical arguments, we study a
minimalistic version of the model. Consider a single individual in a
one-dimensional space of length @xmath , so that the highest quality
areas are located beyond the limits of the system, i.e. at @xmath and
@xmath (see Fig. 4.4 ). Note that this would correspond to the ideal
situation where all the members of the population but one -the searcher-
have already reached one of the targets. A landscape quality function,
@xmath must also be defined. Provided it is a smooth, well-behaved
function, its particular shape is not relevant. We therefore assume a
Gaussian-like quality landscape,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath gives the characteristic width of a high quality region.
Notice that @xmath is defined so that highest quality areas are located,
as mentioned, at @xmath and @xmath . This ensures that the gradient of
the function does not vanish at the extremes of the system (Fig. 4.4 ),
and it is equivalent to setting the value of the threshold @xmath such
that the targets start at @xmath and @xmath . We assume that a foraging
area is good enough when its quality is higher than @xmath of the ideal
environment, which means @xmath . As we center the patches of resources
at @xmath and @xmath , fixing a good quality treshold at @xmath is
equivalent to fix the width of the environmental quality function at
@xmath , to ensure that @xmath . However, the qualitative behavior of
the model is independent of this choice.

Finally, for the pairwise communication function we choose the functions
defined in Eq. ( 4.9 ) with @xmath again. The combination of local and
nonlocal information gives the total available information for the
searcher, @xmath .

To obtain analytical results, we work in the following on a discrete
space. The stochastic particle dynamics equivalent to Eq. ( 4.1 )
considers left and right jumping rates which are defined for every
individual using the total information function,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a small positive constant to avoid negative rates that
has been given an arbitrary value @xmath , and @xmath is the spatial
discretization ( @xmath ). Finally, @xmath is the jumping rate of an
individual in absence of information, and it is related to the diffusion
component of the dynamics of Eq. ( 4.1 ). Given the transition rates of
Eq. ( 4.11 ), the movement with a higher gain of information has a
higher rate, and therefore a larger probability of taking place.

The simplest situation, which allows an analytical treatment of the
problem, is to consider only @xmath individuals. Two of them are located
in the top quality areas just beyond the frontiers of the system limit,
@xmath and @xmath , and the other one is still searching for a target.
Under these considerations, using the environmental quality function
defined in Eq. ( 4.10 ), and the pairwise potential of Eq. ( 4.9 ), the
total available information for the searcher is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

As it was done in Sec. 4.2 , the efficiency of the search process is
measured in terms of the first arrival time at one of the high quality
areas, either at @xmath or @xmath , starting from @xmath . From the
definition of the transition rates in Eq. ( 4.11 ), @xmath , and
equivalently @xmath . This means that at both extremes of the system,
the rate at which particles arrive is much higher than the rate at which
they leave, so particles do not move when they arrive in the top quality
areas. This allows us to consider both extremes @xmath and @xmath of the
system as absorbing, and the first arrival time may be obtained from the
flux of presence probability of the searcher there [ Redner , 2001 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

This definition will be used in the following sections to investigate
the influence of sharing information (i.e., of the interaction
mechanism) on search times. The results will be compared with those
obtained using a deterministic approximation of the movement of the
searcher. We study two different random strategies: Brownian and Lévy.

##### 4.4.1 Brownian motion

We start studying the Brownian case, where the searcher only jumps -with
a given rate- to its nearest neighbors. Therefore the coupling of the
set of differential equations describing the occupancy probability of
every site of the system is (notice that lattice spacing @xmath ),

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . If the initial position of the particle is known, it is
possible to solve Eq. ( 4.4.1 ) using the Laplace transform. Once the
probability distribution of each point has been obtained, it is possible
to obtain the mean first arrival time using Eq. ( 4.13 ). The thick line
in Fig. 4.5 shows this result, indicating that the searching process is
optimal (minimal time to arrive to one of the good quality areas) for
intermediate values of @xmath . A particularly simple limit in Eq. (
4.4.1 ) appears when @xmath when @xmath (and the contrary on the other
half of the system). The search time is @xmath . This is the expected
result since the movement is mainly in one direction and at a constant
rate.

In biological terms this means that the optimal situation for the
individuals is to deal with intermediate amounts of information. Extreme
situations, where too much ( @xmath ) or too little ( @xmath )
information is provided by the population, have the same effect on the
mean first arrival time, which tends to the same asymptotic value in
both limits. In both cases, the search is driven only by the local
perception of the environment.

This calculation gives exact results, but it implies fixing the system
size, solving a set of equations of dimension @xmath , and finally
obtaining the inverse Laplace transform of the solutions. The main
disadvantage of this approach is that it is not possible to study the
influence of the distance between targets on the optimal communication
length. To circumvent this we use a deterministic approach in the
continuum limit @xmath and define, using the symmetry of the system, a
mean drift velocity towards one of the high quality areas, @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Substituting the definition of the transition rates Eq. ( 4.11 ), the
drift velocity is,

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.16)
  -- -- -- --------

and therefore the search time is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

We compute the searching time using Eq. ( 4.17 ) with the same values of
the parameters used before ( @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath , @xmath ) to
compare it with the results given by Eq. ( 4.13 ) (inset of Fig. 4.5 ).
The approach in Eq. ( 4.17 ) (dotted-dashed line) reproduces the
qualitative behavior of the searching time although underestimates the
value of the optimal communication range ( @xmath while Eq. ( 4.13 )
produces @xmath ). This can be fixed excluding from the average in Eq. (
4.15 ) the boundary of the system introducing a parameter @xmath in the
limits of the integration. To estimate the value of @xmath it is useful
to plot @xmath versus @xmath (not shown). The difference between rates,
although depending on @xmath , starts increasing quickly when @xmath ,
so one can estimate @xmath . The inset of Fig. 4.5 shows the exit time
as a function of the communication range computed with this approach
(dashed line). Its optimal value is in good agreement with the result
obtained using the definition of the search time (thick line), with
@xmath for both approaches. However the temporal scale of the problem
(the absolute values of the times), although higher than with @xmath ,
is still lower in this calculation. Results for @xmath correspond to the
dashed line in the inset of Fig. 4.5 .

Regardless of the value of @xmath used in the average, this
approximation underestimates the temporal scale of the problem (the
absolute values of the times). This is because it is assumed that the
searcher follows a deterministic movement to the target neglecting any
fluctuation that may slow the process.

Finally, increasing @xmath beyond its optimal value, there is a maximum
for the search time for any of the approaches. For these values of the
communication range, the nonlocal information at the middle of the
system coming from both targets is higher than in the extremes and thus
there is a bias to the middle in the movement of the searcher. This
small effect, that vanishes when @xmath increases and the information
tends to be constant in the whole system, seems to be an artifact of the
particular arrangement of the simplified @xmath system, and does not
seem relevant for any real-world consideration of this kind of model. In
addition, it does not substantially affect the dynamics because local
perception of the environment pushes the individual towards one of the
targets.

Finally, within this deterministic approximation, besides studying
larger systems with no additional computational cost, it is possible to
obtain the optimal value of the interaction range parameter, @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

which has to be solved numerically for different sizes of the system.
The typical optimal communication scale defined by @xmath , (i.e., by
@xmath since @xmath ) grows approximately linearly with the distance
between targets in the asymptotic limit. Using a regression of the
results obtained from the integration of Eq. ( 4.18 ) yields an exponent
@xmath for @xmath (Fig. 4.6 ).

##### 4.4.2 Lévy flights.

Proceeding as in the case of Brownian motion, considering a Lévy
searcher the set of equations for the probability of occupancy is

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

with @xmath .

We assume that if a jump of length in between @xmath and @xmath takes
place, the individual gets the position @xmath . To this aim, the
coefficients @xmath enter in the set of equations ( 4.4.2 ) and are
defined as @xmath . They give the probability of a jump of length
between @xmath and @xmath to happen. The coefficients @xmath are defined
as @xmath , to take into account that the searcher stops if it arrives
to a target. This introduces a cutoff in the jumping length distribution
Eq. ( 4.7 ).

Given the size of the system, @xmath , which fixes the dimension of the
system of equations ( 4.4.2 ), it is possible to obtain an analytical
solution for the occupancy probabilities and the mean arrival time to
the targets using Eq. ( 4.13 ). This is shown in Fig. 4.5 , where the
Brownian limit is recovered when @xmath . It is also observed that when
long jumps are frequent the search is much faster, although the gain in
search efficiency due to the communication mechanisms is lower close to
the ballistic limit (i.e., @xmath ). This will be explained later in
Sec. 4.6 .

Similarly to the Brownian case, a particularly simple limit in Eq. (
4.4.2 ) appears when @xmath for @xmath (and the contrary on the other
half of the system). The search time is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the proportionality constant is a combination of the coefficients
@xmath that depends on the size of the system.

#### 4.5 Continuum approximation

From the Langevin Eq. ( 4.1 ), and following the standard arguments
presented in Dean [ 1996 ] and Marconi and Tarazona [ 1999 ] it is
possible to write an equation for the evolution of the density of
individuals, @xmath ¹ ¹ 1 In Appendix A we show this derivation in
detail. . This approach will allow us to fix the parameters of the
problem having a better understanding of the role they are playing in
the dynamics through a dimensional analysis. However, in the case of the
large grazing mammals we are going to study later, it is not very
suitable to describe a population as a continuum since the number of
individuals is not very high and the typical distances among them is
large. Neglecting fluctuations the continuum equation for the density is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is quite similar to the one derived in Savel’ev et al. [ 2005 ] to
study the transport of interacting particles on a substrate.

The same behavior is also shown by the macroscopic Eq. ( 4.5 ) (Fig. 4.7
). Now @xmath is defined as the time that passes until half of the
population has found a target, that is @xmath . We have integrated the
Eq. ( 4.5 ) in @xmath system of length @xmath , using a single Gaussian
patch of resources centered at @xmath and periodic boundary conditions
for a random initial condition. This is equivalent to the case of an
infinite system with equidistant high quality areas. We have taken the
calling bias as being much stronger than the resource bias to make the
nonlocal mechanism much more important in the search process and thus
easier to see how the communication range parameter affects the search
time. The differences between the @xmath individual-based and the @xmath
deterministic density equation description, coupled with the parameter
choices (stronger bias in the density equation), explain the different
observed time-scales in Figs. 4.2 and 4.7 . Due to the simplicity of
resources landscape, the stationary distribution of individuals is Dirac
delta peaked at the maximum of resources (the center of the system). In
Fig. 4.8 we show the density of individuals in the long time limit (not
stationary). All the animals are in good habitats, i.e., in areas where
the maxima of the @xmath function occur.

#### 4.6 Brownian jumps vs. Lévy flights

As a general result of the model, searching is faster when individuals
have intermediate amounts of information, regardless of the kind of
movement strategy followed by the population (Brownian or Lévy).
However, communication has a larger impact on Brownian motion, i.e., the
depth of the well at @xmath is larger (Figs. 4.3 and 4.5 ).

A measure of the improvement in search performance at the optimal
communication range is given by the ratio between the search time
without communication and that at the optimal communication range,
@xmath . This quantity is plotted in Fig. 4.9 for different Lévy
exponents. As previously mentioned, Brownian searchers that are not able
to perform long displacements benefit more from communication than Lévy
searchers. This is because introducing an additional source of
information increases the directionality of the random motion and
prevents the searcher from revisiting the same place many times, which
is the key problem with Brownian search strategies [ Viswanathan et al.
, 2011 ] . A Brownian walker has no directionality in the movement, so
provided with sources of information (communication together with the
local quality of the landscape) it can search much more efficiently.
This effect is less important for Lévy searchers due to the presence of
long, straight-line moves that, by themselves, decrease the number of
times that a particular area is revisited. In addition the return
probability to a given point is much higher in @xmath than in @xmath .
Therefore the directionality introduced by the communication has a
stronger effect in the simple @xmath scenario that we have studied. It
is also important to remark that in this case the walker only can move
either to the right or to the left at each step. This will make the
influence of the bias due to communication much stronger in the jumping
probabilities.

In summary, the communication mechanism is less important in Lévy
strategies, so that its effect is less noticeable as it is shown in Fig.
4.9 both in @xmath and @xmath .

However, the value of the optimal interaction range changes with the
kind of motion. This is shown in the @xmath model by the dependence of
the mean search time on the communication range for different Lévy
exponents (Fig. 4.3 ). The value of @xmath increases with the Lévy
exponent, so Brownian searchers @xmath need to spread the information
farther (a larger value of @xmath ) than Lévy @xmath walkers to obtain
the maximum benefit. In Fig. 4.10 we show the value of the optimal
communication range, @xmath , as a function of the Lévy exponent. Lévy
trajectories show clusters of short displacements with frequent turns
occasionally broken up by long linear displacements, which account for
most of the target encounters. However, because these steps are often
much longer than the average distance between targets they are not
positively influenced by communication, so any benefit a Lévy strategy
gains from communication occurs during the series of short
displacements. The time that an individual spends doing short movements
is limited by the interarrival time of the large steps, so unless an
individual is already relatively close to a target, it will not have
time to reach a target before the next big step comes and moves it far
away from that original target. Therefore the optimal communication
range decreases with decreasing Lévy exponent, @xmath , as longer
displacements become more frequent at lower @xmath values.

In addition, the value of @xmath depends on both the number of targets
and their spatial distribution, as was shown in Sec. 4.4 for a simple
@xmath situation where @xmath .

#### 4.7 Summary and conclusions

In this chapter we compared Brownian and Lévy search strategies using a
population of individuals that exchange information about the location
of spatially distributed targets. Using a simple @xmath model we have
provided analytical results on both cases, concluding that frequent long
jumps ( @xmath , ballistic limit) minimize the searching times.

However the effect of a communication mechanism is more pronounced in
the limit of short jumps i.e., Brownian motion. This means that a
population of individuals employing Brownian motion gains proportionally
more benefit from communicating and sharing information than does a
population of Lévy walkers, where long jumps are more or less frequent
depending on the value of the Lévy exponent @xmath . When messages are
exchanged in a range that minimizes search duration, communication is
the driving force in the Brownian limit, but occasional long jumps are
still responsible for most of the encounters with targets in the case of
long-tailed step-length distributions.

The main result of this work is rather general: independently of the
kind of communication performed by the population, and of the spatial
distribution of the targets, a population of individuals with the
ability to communicate will find the targets in a shorter time if the
information is spread at intermediate ranges. Both an excess and a lack
of information increase the search time. However, the communication
mechanism does not have the same quantitative effect on the different
moving strategies (i.e., ballistic, Lévy or Brownian). Uninformed
Brownian individuals perform a random movement revisiting the same
position many times, so having an external source of information
introduces directionality on the movement, decreasing the number of
times that a point in the space is visited. In the case of Lévy and
ballistic strategies @xmath , communication is less noticeable because
individuals are able to do long jumps. This is already a source of
directionality that prevents individuals from revisiting the same points
in space many times, and thus weakening the effect of the directionality
introduced by communication.

### Chapter 5 Foraging in Procapra gutturosa

In this chapter we show an application of the model presented in Chapter
4 to the particular case of acoustic communication among Mongolian
gazelles ( Procapra gutturosa ) Martínez-García et al. [ 2013b ] , for
which data are available, searching for good habitat areas. Using Monte
Carlo simulations, our results point out that the search is optimal
(i.e. the mean first hitting time among searchers is minimum) at
intermediate scales of communication. We also present this result in
terms of the frequency of the sounds, showing a good agreement with
field measurements of the sounds emitted by these gazelles in the wild.
The formation of groups in the populations is also studied.

#### 5.1 Introduction

Many living organisms, including bacteria [ Liu and Passino , 2002 ] ,
insects, and mammals [ Zuberbühler et al. , 1997 ; McComb et al. , 2003
] communicate for a variety of reasons including facilitation of social
cohesion [ Cap et al. , 2008 ; Pfefferle and Fischer , 2006 ] , defense
against predators [ Zuberbühler , 2001 ] , maintenance of territories [
Slater et al. , 1994 ; Frey et al. , 2007 ] , and to pool information on
resource locations when no single individual is sufficiently
knowledgeable [ von Frisch , 1967 ; Hoare et al. , 2004 ; Berdahl et al.
, 2013 ; Simons , 2004 ; Torney et al. , 2009 ] . Communication among
individuals frequently leads to group formation [ Eftimie et al. , 2007
] , which often has clear direct benefits such as reducing individual
vulnerability to predators. Such strategies may, however, also have
important incidental benefits. For example, an individual that has found
a good foraging patch might try to attract conspecifics to reduce its
risk of predation, but also provides its conspecifics with information
on the location of good forage, thus increasing the foraging efficiency
of those responding to the call.

We apply a specialized version of the model introduced in Chapter 4 to
the particular case of acoustic communication among Mongolian gazelles,
the dominant wild herbivore in the Eastern Steppe of Mongolia (Fig. 5.1
a) among 14 species of ungulates. A population of about one milion of
animals is estimated, but it is difficult to give a good measurement
because of large fluctuations due to the extreme conditions in the
steppe that cause periods with important population losses. In addition,
the nomadism of the species, travelling long distances during the year,
makes more difficult a demographic control. In any case, the species is
still recognized as one of Asia’s largest remaining wildlife populations
[ Olson et al. , 2005 ] , although it has experienced a major reduction
in range during the past century, and is further threatened by excessive
hunting and continued habitat loss and fragmentation (grassland steppes
are increasingly being carved up by fences, roads, agriculture, and
densely settled areas while oil fields and pipelines are being developed
in the region) (Fig. 5.1 b-d). In fact, Mongolian gazelles were formerly
distributed across the whole area of the Republic of Mongolia but the
range of this species, between the 1940s and 1960s, was reduced by 70%
owing to excessive official hunting and poaching. Nowadays, although
individuals or small groups are found across a wider geographical range,
higher concentrations of this gazelle species are now limited to the
Eastern Steppe (Fig. 5.1 a) where they avoid narrow valleys, forest,
sand dunes or cultivated fields unless driven there by exceptional
circumstances. The plant cover of the dry Steppes of Eastern Mongolia is
extremely sparse, generally 5–20% (Fig. 5.1 , right panel), rarely
reaching 30–40% [ Frey and Gebler , 2003 ; Mueller et al. , 2008 ] .

In summary, gazelles must find each other to form grazing groups less
susceptible to preadator’s attacks (Fig. 5.1 ), and relatively small
areas of good forage in a vast landscape where sound can travel
substantial distances [ Frey et al. , 2008 ] (Fig. 5.2 a) . We aim to
explore whether acoustic communication in the steppe could lead to the
formation of observed large aggregations of animals (Fig. 5.2 b) [ Olson
et al. , 2009 ] , and how search efficiency depends on the distances
over which calls can be perceived. We wonder if the frequency of the
voice of the gazelles is optimal to communicate in the steppe, and if
the call length-scales that optimize search in real landscapes are
biologically and physically plausible. To do this, we couple an
individual-based representation of our model with remotely-sensed data
on resource quality in the Eastern Steppe.

#### 5.2 The model for acoustic communication

A detailed analysis of gazelle relocation data has shown that, over the
spatiotemporal scales relevant to searching for resources (days to
weeks), the movement of Mongolian gazelles can be closely approximated
by simple Brownian motion for the spatiotemporal scales involved in
foraging. Therefore, the starting point of the modeling is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a Gaussian white noise term to characterize Brownian
motion. The function @xmath is defined by its statistical properties:
its mean value @xmath , and the correlation @xmath . @xmath is the
diffusion coefficient. The terms @xmath and @xmath are referred to the
local and the nonlocal search, as it was defined in Chapter 4 . These
terms drive the movement to the best grazing areas.

The function @xmath quantifies the habitat quality in the Eastern Steppe
of Mongolia through the Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI),
one of the most widely used vegetation quality estimators. It can be
calculated from satellite imagery, and has been already applied to
gazelle habitat associations in the Mongolian Steppe [ Mueller et al. ,
2008 ] . NDVI is characterized by the function @xmath , a continuous
function taking values between @xmath (no vegetation) and @xmath (fully
vegetated). As the vegetation at low NDVI is too sparse, and at high
NDVI is too mature and indigestible, gazelles typically seek forage
patches characterized by intermediate NDVI values [ Mueller et al. ,
2008 ] . To make gradients of resources drive the movement of the
individuals to regions with intermediate NDVI values, we apply to the
data a linear transformation:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The new function @xmath defines a resources landscape with values
between @xmath and @xmath , where @xmath represents both fully vegetated
and no vegetation (i.e., low quality forage). We study a subregion with
an extension of around @xmath km @xmath (Coordinates: @xmath N, @xmath
E; @xmath N, @xmath E; @xmath N, @xmath E; @xmath N, @xmath E) and
assume that the resources remain constant in time during the search. It
is crucial now to properly choose the perception function in order to
realistically model the case of gazelles performing acoustic
communication . It is well known that the sensitivity of the response of
the ear does not follow a linear scale, but approximately a logarithmic
one. That is why the bel and the decibel are quite suitable to describe
the acoustic perception of a listener. Therefore we choose an acoustic
perception function of the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is taken as a logarithmic function. The sound calling of
@xmath , @xmath , plays the role of a two body interaction potential,
and @xmath is the low perception threshold. We take the value of a human
ear, @xmath , which is similar for most other mammals [ Fletcher , 1992
] , and in any case, is just a reference value on which our results will
not depend. The interaction potential mimicking acoustic communication
is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

considering that sound from an acoustic source attenuates in space
mainly due to the atmospheric absorption (exponential term), and the
spherical spreading of the intensity ( @xmath contribution), and
neglecting secondary effects [ Naguib and Wiley , 2001 ] . @xmath may be
understood as the power of the sound at a distance of @xmath from the
source. According to Stoke’s law of sound attenuation [ Fletcher , 1992
] , the absorption coefficient, @xmath , is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the viscosity of the air, @xmath its density, @xmath the
propagation velocity of the acoustic signal (which depends on the
temperature and the humidity), and @xmath its frequency. We work under
environmental conditions of @xmath , and relative humidity of @xmath ,
which are quite close to the corresponding empirical values for the
summer months from the Baruun-Urt (Mongolia) weather station, averaged
over the last 4 years. These values give an absorption coefficient of
@xmath . The inverse of the absorption coefficient, @xmath , gives the
typical length scale for the communication at each frequency, and thus
plays the same role as the standard deviation, @xmath , did in the
Gaussian interaction used in the general model. From its functional
dependence, different values of the frequency will modify the value of
the absorption coefficient, and consequently, will lead to different
communication ranges. Therefore, we will use sound frequency, @xmath ,
as the control parameter of the interaction range.

From a statistical analysis of GPS data tracking the positions of @xmath
gazelles between 2007 and 2011, we estimate a diffusion constant of
@xmath km @xmath day @xmath (Fig. 5.3 ). To give empirically-based
values to the bias parameters, we define a drift velocity, and based on
previous field work [ Mueller et al. , 2008 ] we set @xmath . The local
search mechanism is responsible for short-range slow movements, while
nonlocal communication gives rise to long and faster movements, and thus
we require @xmath .

#### 5.3 Results and discussion

We explore the dependence of this metric on the communication length,
@xmath , or equivalently the frequency, @xmath (Fig. 5.4 ). To this aim,
we couple an individual-based model following the dynamics of Eq. ( 5.1
), with a data-based resources landscape sampled every @xmath m (shown
in Fig. 5.5 ), and quantify the efficiency of the search for areas of
high quality resources in terms of the mean first arrival time of the
population. Similarly to other species, such as lions [ Estes , 1991 ]
or hyenas [ Mathevon et al. , 2010 ] , the optimal foraging time (
@xmath hours) is obtained for @xmath of the order of kilometers (around
@xmath km). This result cannot currently be checked with data. However,
switching to frequencies, the optimal search is obtained when gazelles
communicate at a frequency of @xmath kHz, which lies inside the measured
interval of frequencies of the sounds emitted by gazelles, @xmath kHz [
Frey and Gebler , 2003 ; Frey et al. , 2008 ] . This means that the
search is optimal when the receiving individual has an intermediate
amount of information. A lack of information leads to a slow,
inefficient search, while an overabundance of information makes the
individual to get lost in the landscape. These different regimes are
also observed in the long time spatial distributions (i.e. efficiency of
the search in terms of quality) of the Fig. 5.5 . For frequencies out of
the optimal range, either smaller (Fig. 5.5 top) or larger (Fig. 5.5
bottom right), some animals are still in low-quality areas at the end of
the simulation period. At intermediate communication scales, @xmath kHz,
(Fig. 5.5 bottom left) all of the animals end up in regions with the
best resources, regardless of where they started from.

In summary, communication over intermediate scales results in faster
search, and all the individuals form groups in areas of good resources.
While this has obvious advantages in terms of group defense and predator
swamping, it will also lead to rapid degradation of the forage (and thus
habitat quality) at those locations. This is the problem of foraging
influencing the patterns of vegetation, which could be treated in future
investigations. Shorter-scale communication implies an almost individual
search, which helps preserve local forage quality, but has clear
disadvantages in terms of group defense strategies. On the other hand,
longer scales lead to the formation of big groups (faster degradation of
foraging), and animals need more time to join a group, which has
negative consequences against predation. Furthermore, acoustic
communication scales significantly larger than the optimal scale for
foraging efficiency identified here would be biologically implausible,
even if ultimate group size (and not rate of group formation) was the
most important aspect of an antipredation strategy.

Our study clarifies some questions on the relationship between
communication and optimal search for resources. Our key result is that,
in general, intermediate communication distances optimize search
efficiency in terms of time and quality. Individuals are able to find
the best quality resource patches regardless of where they start from,
opening new questions about the distribution of individuals in
heterogeneous landscapes. The existence of maximum search efficiency at
intermediate communication ranges is robust to the choice of functional
form of @xmath , allowing the model to be generalized to many different
ways of sharing information. Also considering different species on the
model (preys and predators or males and females to studying the case of
mating) would be interesting extensions of this work. Finally, regarding
to the formation of groups because of communication among individuals,
exploring tradeoffs between group defense and individual foraging
efficiency in highly dynamic landscapes may be a promising avenue for
future research.

### Appendix A Derivation of the macroscopic Eq. (4.3)

In this appendix we will show the derivation of the macroscopic equation
( 4.5 ) in Chapter 4 , starting from the Langevin equation for the
movement of a singles individual.

Considering a single individual, the Langevin equation is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a Gaussian white noise with zero mean and correlation
delta-correlated in space and time. The available information function,
@xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

To obtain the equation for the density of individuals, we will derive a
density equation for the case of a single particle and then extend the
result to a population with @xmath individuals [ Dean , 1996 ] .

In the case of a single particle the density is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the stochastic trajectory of the particle. Then, using
this equation A.3 for the density of searchers and the definition of the
Dirac delta,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is an arbitrary function. Its time derivative is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using the Itô’s formula Eq. ( A.5 ) can be expanded,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

and then, rearranging and integrating by parts each term ¹ ¹ 1 It is
straightforward just choosing @xmath in the integration by parts. In the
case of the laplacian term, we must integrate twice. ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.7)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

On the other hand the time derivative of @xmath can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

As both Eq. ( A.7 ) and ( A.8 ) are true in the case of an arbitrary
function, @xmath , it is possible to write:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Finally, we neglect the last stochastic term to get a deterministic
approximation as Eq. ( 4.5 ).

### Appendix B Voronoi diagrams of the model.

The behavior of the model, resulting in optimal searches at intermediate
communication ranges, can be explained in terms of Voronoi diagrams
Okabe et al. [ 1992 ] . Consider every target as a seed that has
associated a Voronoi cell formed by those points whose distance to that
seed is less than or equal to its distance to any other one (See Figure
B.1 (top) for a distribution of the space in @xmath Voronoi cells for an
initial distribution of particles with five targets (crosses)). The
searching time will be minimized when the information coming from the
individuals located on one target covers the full associated Voronoi
cell, but only that cell. In this situation, the searchers within that
cell will receive information coming only from that target and move
towards it. @xmath is the communication range that maximizes the
gradient (approximately the smallest value of @xmath that makes the
calling function not vanishing) of the calling function at the frontiers
of the Voronoi cells. Increasing the communication range provides
individuals with information coming from different targets, and makes
them get overwhelmed in the limit @xmath . This Voronoi construction may
also help to explain the improvement of the searching strategies because
of sharing information. The difference between Brownian and Lévy
strategies can be seen in Figure B.1 (Bottom). They show the origin of
the individuals that are at each target at the end of a Lévy (Left) and
a Brownian search (Right) (i.e., in which Voronoi cell they were at the
beginning). In the case of Brownian individuals most of the particles at
every target were initially in its Voronoi cell. For Lévy flights the
long displacements mix the population in the stationary state (i.e.,
individuals at a target come from different cells). The communication
mechanism is less important in Lévy strategies, so that its effect is
less noticeable and the encounters of individuals with targets are
caused mainly by the long displacements.

## Part IV Temporal fluctuations

### Chapter 3 Temporal disorder in up-down symmetric systems

In this chapter we study the effect of temporal fluctuations on systems
with up-down symmetry through the behavior of the first-passage times
Martínez-García et al. [ 2012 ] ; Martínez-García [ 2011 ] . This is a
relevant question in the modeling of ecosystems, since they are subject
to environmental changing conditions. Therefore, it is important to have
models that include temporal disorder. We analyze two well-known
families of phase transitions in statistical physics —the Ising and the
generalized voter universality classes— and scrutinize the consequences
of placing them under fluctuating global conditions. It is observed that
the variability of the control parameter induces in both classes
“temporal Griffiths phases” (TGPs), characterized by broad regions in
the parameter space in which the mean first-passage times scale
algebraically with system size. In an ecological context, first-passage
times are related to typical extinction times, and studying how they are
affected by the size of the system (e.g. habitat fragmentation) is a
problem of outmost relevance.

#### 3.1 Introduction

Systems with up-down @xmath symmetry –including the Ising model– are
paradigmatic in mathematical ecology. They allow to address a big
variety of problems ranging from species competition [ Clifford and
Sudbury , 1973 ] and neutral theories of biodiversity [ Durrett and
Levin , 1996 ] to allele frequency in genetics [ Baxter et al. , 2007 ]
. Some of them, such as the voter model, exhibit absorbing states, a
distinctive feature of nonequilibrium dynamics. Once these particular
configurations are reached, the system cannot escape from them so they
imply the presence of currents [ Hinrichsen , 2000 ; Ódor , 2004 ;
Grinstein and Muñoz , 1996 ; Marro and Dickman , 2008 ] .

Phase transitions into absorbing states are quite universal and they
depend on few general properties of the system, such as symmetries and
its dimensionality, and are insensitive to the underlying microscopic
properties. This universality makes possible to establish a
classification of the phase transitions into different classes. Those
systems exhibiting one absorbing state belong generically to the so
called Directed Percolation (DP) universality class and share the same
set of critical exponents and scaling functions. However, when there is
some additional symmetry or conservation, the phase transition exhibits
critical scaling differing from DP. This is the case of systems with two
symmetric absorbing states [ Hinrichsen , 2000 ; Ódor , 2004 ; Grinstein
and Muñoz , 1996 ; Marro and Dickman , 2008 ] , that show a phase
transition usually referred to as Generalized voter (GV). In an
ecological context, this is a relevant class of models that can be used
in many situations with two equivalent species.

Analytical and numerical studies [ Dornic et al. , 2001 ; Droz et al. ,
2003 ; Al Hammal et al. , 2005 ; Vazquez and López , 2008 ; Russell and
Blythe , 2011 ] have shown that, depending on some details such GV
transition can split into two separate ones: an Ising-like transition in
which the up-down symmetry is broken, and a second DP-like transition
below which the broken-symmetry phase collapses into the corresponding
absorbing state. In particular, a general stochastic theory, aimed at
capturing the phenomenology of these systems, was proposed in Al Hammal
et al. [ 2005 ] ; depending on general features they may exhibit a DP,
an Ising, or a GV transition.

When they try to mimick ecological systems, these models should not be
isolated but, instead, affected by external conditions or by
environmental fluctuations. The question of how external variability
affects diversity, robustness, and evolution of complex systems, is of
outmost relevance in ecology. Take, for instance, the example of the
neutral theory of biodiversity: if there are two @xmath -symmetric (or
neutral) species competing, what happens if depending on environmental
conditions one of the two species is favored at each time step in a
symmetric way? Does such environmental variability enhance species
coexistence or does it hinder it? [ Giles Leigh Jr. , 1981 ; Vazquez
et al. , 2010 ; Borgogno et al. , 2009 ] .

Motivated by these questions, we study how basic properties of up-down
symmetric systems, such as response functions and first-passage times,
are affected by the presence of temporal disorder.

Some previous works have explored from a theoretical point of view the
effects of fluctuating global conditions in simple models that exhibit
phase transitions [ Jensen , 1996 ; Alonso and Muñoz , 2001 ; Kamenev
et al. , 2008 ] . Recently, a modified version of the simplest
representative of the DP class –i.e. the Contact Process– equipped with
temporal disorder was studied in Vazquez et al. [ 2011 ] . In this
model, the control parameter (birth probability) was taken to be a
random variable, varying at each time unit. As the control parameter is
allowed to take values above and below the transition point of the pure
contact process, the system alternates between the tendencies to be
active or absorbing. As shown in Vazquez et al. [ 2011 ] this dynamical
frustration induces a logarithmic type of finite-size scaling at the
transition point and generates a subregion in the active phase
characterized by a generic algebraic scaling of the extinction times
with system size. More strikingly, this subregion is also characterized
by generic divergences in the system susceptibility, a property which is
reserved for critical points in pure systems. This phenomenology is akin
to the one in systems with quenched “spatial” disorder [ Vojta , 2006 ]
, which show algebraic relaxation of the order parameter, and
singularities in thermodynamic potentials in broad regions of parameter
space: the so-called, Griffiths Phases [ Bray , 1987 ] .

In order to investigate whether the anomalous behavior that leads to
TGPs around absorbing state (DP) phase transitions is a universal
property of systems in other universality classes –and in particular, in
up-down symmetric systems– we study the possibility of having TGPs
around Ising and GV transitions. We scrutinize simple models in these
two classes and assume that the corresponding control parameter changes
randomly in time, fluctuating around the transition point of the
corresponding pure model, and study mean-first passage times.

#### 3.2 Spatial disorder. Rare regions and the Griffiths Phase.

The presence of noise is an intrinsic property of natural system and it
may change its behavior when compared with an ideal situation. Knowing
whether and how the critical behavior changes when introducing a small
amount of impurities is important in order to apply criticality to real
systems. This is the case of the brain, where Griffiths Phases and
Lifshitz tails could play a relevant role [ Moretti and Muñoz , 2013 ] .

Will the phase transition remain only at one point in presence of
disorder or will the critical point split? If so, will the critical
behavior change quantitatively, giving new universality classes with new
critical exponents, or even qualitatively with new non-power law
scalings at criticality? In this section we will review some of these
questions in systems with quenched disorder i.e. depending on the
spatial variables but that does not evolve in time [ Ódor , 2004 ; Vojta
, 2006 ] . One of the most common ways of introducing quenched disorder
in a system is the dilution , that is, the absence of spins in some
fixed places of the lattice. The dilution reduces the tendency towards
magnetic long-range order in the system. Therefore, the critical value
of the control parameter (typically the inverse of the temperature) for
the pure model (without noise), @xmath , moves into the ordered phase,
@xmath (Fig. 3.1 ). That is, the transition to an ordered system is at a
lower temperature.

On the other hand, in the case of infinite systems, as happens in the
thermodynamic limit, it is possible to find regions without vacancies of
an arbitrary size, regardless of the impurity concentration, that is the
number of vacancies in the whole lattice. When the value of the control
parameter is between @xmath and @xmath , although the whole system is in
the disordered phase these pure regions can exhibit some local order,
which means a local non-vanishing value of the magnetization. These pure
spatial regions are called rare regions and the probability of finding
them decreases exponentially with its size @xmath and the impurity
concentration, @xmath . In addition, the dynamics in these regions is
very slow since a coherent change (fluctuation) is needed in order to
flip all the spins therein.

The interval between @xmath and @xmath , in the disordered phase, (Fig.
3.1 ) is the so-called Griffiths Phase , because it was Robert B.
Griffiths the first who showed the possible existence of a singularity
in the free energy in this region [ Griffiths , 1969 ] . Its main
characteristics are the generic divergences of the susceptibility, as a
consequence of the singularity in the free energy, and an anomalously
slow relaxation to zero of the order parameter. Other time-dependent
quantities also relax specially slow, mainly as a power law or a
stretched exponential, in contrast with the fast decay typical of pure
systems, usually exponential.

In a given system with impurity concentration @xmath , the probability
of finding a rare region decreases exponentially with its d-dimensional
volume, @xmath . Calling @xmath the probability of finding a rare
region, up to constant factors, it is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

so it is very unlikely to find large rare region. In contrast, the
long-time dynamics inside the Griffiths phase is dominated by these
regions. Consider for instance the temporal evolution of the order
parameter, typically magnetization in magnetic systems, @xmath . As its
long time behavior is governed by rare regions, it is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the flipping time of a rare region, and increases
exponentially with its size, so it is @xmath . The integral in Eq. ( 3.2
) can be solved using a saddle-node integration to obtain the slow
relaxation of the magnetization typical of Griffiths Phases

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a non-universal exponent.

#### 3.3 Mean-field theory of @xmath-symmetric models with temporal
disorder

Interacting particle models, such as ecosystems, evolve stochastically
over time. A useful technique to study such systems is the mean-field
(MF) approach, which implicitly assumes a well-mixed situation, where
each particle can interact with any other, providing a sound
approximation in high dimensional systems. One way in which the
mean-field limit can be seen at work is by analyzing a fully connected
network (FCN), where each node (particle) is directly connected to any
other else, mimicking an infinite dimensional system.

In the models that we study here, states can be labeled with
occupation-number variables @xmath taking a value @xmath if node @xmath
is occupied or @xmath if it is empty, or alternatively by spin variables
@xmath , with @xmath . Using these latter, the natural order parameter
is the magnetization per spin, defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the total number of particles in the system. Its value
varies between @xmath an @xmath , both of them corresponding to a fully
ordered state, with the intermediate value @xmath reflecting a
disordered system with the same amount of spins up and down. The rate
equation for the probability @xmath of having magnetization @xmath at a
given time @xmath , is

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath are the transition probabilities from a state with
magnetization @xmath to a state with magnetization @xmath .

In the limit of @xmath ( @xmath ) Eq. ( 3.3 ) becomes a Master equation
(Sec. 1.1.1 ),

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

This describes a process in which a “spin” is randomly selected at every
time-step (of length @xmath ), and inverted with a probability that
depends on @xmath and the control parameter @xmath . The allowed
magnetization changes in an individual update, @xmath , are
infinitesimally small in the @xmath limit. In this limit one can perform
a Taylor expansion of the rates around @xmath , leading to the
Fokker-Planck equation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

with drift and diffusion terms given, respectively, by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

From Eq. ( 3.7 ), and working in the Itô scheme (as justified by the
fact that it comes from a discrete in time equation [ Horsthemke and
Lefever , 1984 ] ), its equivalent Langevin equation is [ Gardiner ,
1985 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the dot stands for time derivative, and @xmath is a Gaussian white
noise of zero-mean and correlations @xmath . The diffusion term is
proportional to @xmath , and therefore, it vanishes in the thermodynamic
limit ( @xmath ), leading to a deterministic equation for @xmath (Sec.
1.1.1 ).

The drift and diffusion coefficients in Eq. ( 3.10 ) depend not only on
the magnetization, but also on the parameter @xmath . To analyze the
behavior of the system when @xmath changes randomly over time, and
following previous works [ Vazquez et al. , 2010 , 2011 ] , we allow
@xmath to take a new random value, extracted from a uniform
distribution, in the interval @xmath at each MC step, i.e. every time
interval @xmath . Thus, we assume that the dynamics of @xmath obeys an
Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a step-like function that randomly fluctuates between
@xmath and @xmath , as depicted in Fig. 3.3 a. Its average correlation
is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the bar stands for time averaging. The parameters @xmath and
@xmath are chosen with the requirement that @xmath takes values at both
sides of the transition point of the pure model (see Fig. 3.3 b), that
is, the model with constant @xmath . Thus, the system randomly shifts
between the tendencies to be in one phase or the other (see Fig. 3.4 ).

The model presents both intrinsic and extrinsic fluctuations, as
represented by the white noise @xmath and the colored noise @xmath ,
respectively. Plugging Eq. ( 3.11 ) for @xmath into Eq. ( 3.10 ), and
retaining only linear terms in the noise one readily obtains

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath is a function determined by the
functional form of @xmath , that might also depend on @xmath . To
simplify the analysis, we assume that relaxation times are much longer
than the autocorrelation time @xmath , and thus take the limit @xmath in
the correlation function Eq. ( 3.12 ), and transform the external
colored noise @xmath into a Gaussian white noise with effective
amplitude @xmath . Then, we combine the two white noises into an
effective Gaussian white noise, whose square amplitude is the sum of the
squared amplitudes of both noises [ Gardiner , 1985 ] , and finally
arrive at

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath .

In the next two sections we analyze the dynamics of the kinetic Ising
model with Glauber dynamics and a variation of the voter model (the,
so-called, q-voter model) –which are representative of the Ising and GV
transitions respectively– in the presence of external noise. For that we
follow the strategy developed in this section to derive mean-field
Langevin equations and present also results of numerical simulations
(for both finite and infinite dimensional systems), as well as
analytical calculations.

#### 3.4 Ising transition with temporal disorder

We consider the kinetic Ising model with Glauber dynamics [ Glauber ,
1963 ] , as defined by the following transition rates

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

The sum extends over the @xmath nearest neighbors of a given spin @xmath
on a @xmath -dimensional hypercubic lattice, and @xmath is the control
parameter. @xmath is the coupling constant between spins, which we set
to @xmath from now on, and @xmath . Note that @xmath in this case is
proportional to the inverse temperature.

##### 3.4.1 The Langevin equation

In the mean-field case, the cubic lattice is replaced by a
fully-connected network in which the number of neighbors @xmath of a
given site is simply @xmath . Then, the transition rates of Eq. ( 3.15 )
can be expressed as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

which implies @xmath for jumps in the magnetization. Following the steps
in the previous section, and expanding @xmath to third order in @xmath ,
we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the mean value of the stochastic control parameter,
@xmath , and @xmath .

The potential @xmath associated with the deterministic term of Eq. (
3.17 ) has the standard shape of the Ising class, that is, of systems
exhibiting a spontaneous breaking of the @xmath symmetry (Fig. 3.5 ). A
single minimum at @xmath exists in the disordered phase, while two
symmetric ones, at @xmath exist below the critical point.

##### 3.4.2 Numerical results

In this section we study the behavior of the mean crossing time , that
has been shown to be relevant in the presence of temporal disorder [
Vazquez et al. , 2011 ] . The crossing time is the time employed by the
system to reach the disordered zero-magnetization state for the first
time, starting from a fully ordered state with @xmath (see Fig. 3.6 ).
Crossing times were calculated by numerically integrating Eq. ( 3.17 )
for different realizations of the noise @xmath and averaging over many
independent realizations. These integrations were performed using a
standard stochastic Runge-Kutta scheme (note that, the noise term does
not have any pathological behavior at @xmath as occurs in systems with
absorbing states, for which more refined integration techniques are
required [ Dornic et al. , 2005 ] ) . Results are shown in Fig. 3.7 .

To estimate the critical point, we calculated the time evolution of the
average magnetization @xmath by integrating the Langevin equation ( 3.17
), and also by performing Monte Carlo simulations of the particle system
on a fully connected network. At the critical point @xmath the
magnetization decays to zero as @xmath . We have estimated @xmath ,
which coincides with the pure case critical point @xmath : the critical
point in the presence of disorder in mean-field is not shifted with
respect to the pure system, in agreement with the analytical calculation
in appendix B . At this critical point, as it is characteristic of TGPs
[ Vazquez et al. , 2011 ] , a scaling of the form @xmath is expected.
The numerically determined exponent value @xmath for @xmath is higher
than the exponent @xmath of the asymptotic analytical prediction Eq. (
B.45 ), probably because of the asymptotic regime in @xmath has not been
reached. Instead, the behavior for arbitrary values of @xmath appears to
be a second order polynomial in @xmath , as we can see in Eq. ( B.42 ).
Indeed, the numerical data is well fitted by the quadratic function
@xmath (see inset of Fig. 3.7 ).This is to be compared with the standard
power-law scaling @xmath characteristic of pure systems, i.e. for @xmath
. Moreover, a broad region showing algebraic scaling @xmath with a
continuously varying exponent @xmath ( @xmath as @xmath ) appears in the
ordered phase @xmath . Both @xmath and @xmath are not universal and
depend on the noise strength @xmath . Finally, in the disordered phase
the scaling of @xmath is observed to be logarithmic, @xmath .

We have also performed Monte Carlo simulations of the time-disordered
Glauber model on two- and three-dimensional cubic lattices with nearest
neighbor interactions. The critical point was computed following
standard methods, that is, by looking for a power law scaling of @xmath
versus time, as we mentioned above. In @xmath , a shift in the critical
point was found: from @xmath in the pure model to @xmath for @xmath .
However, the scaling behavior of @xmath with @xmath resembles that of
the pure model, with @xmath at criticality (with an exponent numerically
close to that of the pure model [ Marro and Dickman , 2008 ] ), and an
exponential growth @xmath , where @xmath is a positive constant, in the
ordered phase (Arrhenius law) ) (see Fig. 3.8 (Left)). Thus, no region
of generic algebraic scaling appears in this low-dimensional system. On
the contrary, in @xmath , results qualitatively similar to mean-field
ones are recovered (see Fig. 3.8 (Right)). The critical point is shifted
from @xmath (calculated in Heuer [ 1993 ] ) to @xmath , with a critical
exponent @xmath for @xmath , and generic algebraic scaling in the
ordered phase. In conclusion, our numerical studies suggest that the
lower critical dimension for the TGPs in the Ising transition is @xmath
. This is in agreement with the analytical finding in Alonso and Muñoz [
2001 ] , establishing that temporal disorder is irrelevant in Ising-like
systems below three dimensions. This result is to be compared with
@xmath numerically reported for the existence of TGPs in DP-like
transitions [ Vazquez et al. , 2011 ] (observe, however, that temporal
disorder, in this case, affects the value of critical exponents at
criticality in all spatial dimensions). Further studies are needed to
clarify the relation between disorder-relevance at criticality and the
existence or not of TGPs.

##### 3.4.3 Analytical results

Let us consider the Langevin equation ( 3.14 ) in the thermodynamic
limit ( @xmath ). Given that the remaining intrinsic noise comes from a
transformation of a colored noise into a white noise, the Stratonovich
interpretation is to be used to obtain its associated Fokker-Planck
equation (see e.g. [ Horsthemke and Lefever , 1984 ] )

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Starting from this N-independent Fokker-Planck equation ( 3.4.3 ), we
will next provide analytical results on the mean crossing times. An
effective dependence on @xmath is implemented by calculating the
first-passage time to the state @xmath rather than @xmath . This is
equivalent to the assumption that the system reaches the zero
magnetization state with an equal number @xmath of up and down spins
when @xmath , that is, when @xmath . The mean-first passage time @xmath
associated with the Fokker-Planck equation ( 3.4.3 ) obeys the
differential equation (Chapter 1 ) [ Redner , 2001 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

with absorbing and reflecting boundaries at @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively. The solution, starting at time @xmath from @xmath is given
by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Computing these integrals (see Appendix B ) we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

These expressions qualitatively agree with the numerical results of Fig.
3.7 , showing that @xmath grows logarithmically with @xmath in the
absorbing phase @xmath , as a power law in the active phase @xmath , and
as a power of @xmath (i.e. poly-logarithmically) at the transition point
@xmath . The exponents @xmath do not agree well with the numerically
determined exponents. This is due to the fact that we have neglected the
@xmath term by taking @xmath , which becomes of the same magnitude as
the @xmath term when @xmath approaches @xmath . This was confirmed by
testing that analytical expressions Eq. ( 3.22 ) agree very well with
numerical integrations of Eq. ( 3.17 ) performed for @xmath , and
setting the crossing point at @xmath (See Fig. 3.9 ). In summary, this
analytical approach reproduces qualitatively –and in some cases
quantitatively– the above reported non-trivial phenomenology.

#### 3.5 Generalized Voter transition with temporal disorder

We study in this section the GV transition [ Dornic et al. , 2001 ] ,
which appears when a @xmath -symmetry system simultaneously breaks the
symmetry and reaches one of the two absorbing states. A model presenting
this type of transition is the nonlinear @xmath -voter model, introduced
in Castellano et al. [ 2009 ] . The microscopic dynamics of this
nonlinear version of the voter model consists in randomly picking a spin
@xmath and flipping it with a probability that depends on the state of
@xmath randomly chosen neighbors of @xmath (with possible repetitions).
If all neighbors are at the same state, then @xmath adopts it with
probability @xmath (which implies, in particular, that the two
completely ordered configurations are absorbing). Otherwise, @xmath
flips with a state-dependent probability

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the fraction of disagreeing (antiparallel) neighbors and
@xmath is a control parameter. Three types of transitions, Ising, DP and
GV can be observed in this model depending on the value of @xmath [
Castellano et al. , 2009 ] . Here, we focus on the @xmath case, for
which a unique GV transition at @xmath has been reported [ Castellano
et al. , 2009 ] .

##### 3.5.1 The Langevin equation

In the MF limit (FCN) ¹ ¹ 1 For a fully connected network the number of
neighbors has no meaning. However the MF limit of the model refers to
the use of the probability given by Eq.( 3.23 ) , the fractions of
antiparallel neighbors of the two types of spins @xmath and @xmath are
@xmath and @xmath , respectively. Thus, the transition probabilities are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Following the same steps as in the previous section, we obtain the
Langevin equation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let us remark that the potential in the nonlinear voter model (Fig. 3.10
) differs from that for the Ising model. Owing to the fact that the
coefficients of the linear and cubic term in the deterministic part of
Eq. ( 3.5.1 ) coincide (except for their sign), the system exhibits a
discontinuous jump at the transition point, where the potential minimum
changes directly from @xmath in the disordered phase to @xmath in the
ordered one. Furthermore, the potential vanishes at the critical point [
Al Hammal et al. , 2005 ] .

##### 3.5.2 Numerical Results

The ordering time , defined as the averaged time required to reach a
completely ordered configuration (absorbing state) starting from a
disordered configuration, is the equivalent of the crossing time above.
We have measured the mean ordering time @xmath by both, integrating the
Langevin equation ( 3.5.1 ) and running Monte Carlo simulations of the
microscopic dynamics on FCNs and finite dimensions. In Fig. 3.11 we show
the MF results. We observe that @xmath has a similar behavior to the one
found for the mean crossing time in the Ising model, and for the mean
extinction time for the contact process [ Vazquez et al. , 2011 ] . That
is, a critical scaling @xmath at the transition point @xmath , with a
critical exponent @xmath for @xmath , a logarithmic scaling @xmath in
the absorbing phase @xmath , and a power law scaling @xmath with
continuously varying exponent @xmath in the active phase @xmath .

Monte Carlo simulations on regular lattices of dimensions @xmath and
@xmath revealed that there is no significant change in the scaling
behavior respect to the pure model (not shown). The critical point
shifts in @xmath and remains very close to its mean-field value in
@xmath , but results are compatible with the usual critical (pure) voter
scaling @xmath and @xmath . In the absorbing phase @xmath grows
logarithmically with @xmath , while in the active phase @xmath grows
exponentially fast with @xmath , as in the pure-model case. Therefore,
in these finite dimensional systems we do not find any TGP nor other
anomalous effects induced by temporal disorder, although we cannot
numerically exclude their existence in @xmath . Such effects should be
observable only in higher dimensional systems (closer to the mean-field
limit).

##### 3.5.3 Analytical results

The ordering time @xmath can be estimated by assuming that the dynamics
is described by the Langevin equation ( 3.5.1 ), and calculating the
mean first-passage time from @xmath to any of the two barriers located
at @xmath . It turns out useful to consider the density of up spins
rather than the magnetization

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath is the mean first-passage time to @xmath starting from @xmath .
The Langevin equation for @xmath is obtained from Eq. ( 3.5.1 ), by
neglecting the @xmath term and applying the ordinary transformation of
variables (which is done employing standard algebra, given that Eq. (
3.5.1 ) is interpreted in the Stratonovich sense) is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath .

Now, we can follow the same steps as in Sec. 3.4.3 for the Ising model,
and find the equation for the mean first-passage time @xmath by means of
the Fokker-Planck equation. The solution is given by (see Appendix B)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

These scalings, which qualitatively agree with the numerical results of
Fig. 3.11 for the @xmath -voter, show that the behavior of @xmath is
analogous to the one observed in the Ising transition of section 3.4 and
in the DP transition found in Vazquez et al. [ 2011 ] . Therefore, we
conclude that TGPs appear around GV transitions in the presence of
external varying parameters in high dimensional systems.

For the GV universality class the renormalization group fixed point is a
non-perturbative one [ Canet et al. , 2005 ] , becoming relevant in a
dimension between one and two. A field theoretical implementation of
temporal disorder in this theory is still missing, hence, theoretical
predictions and sound criteria for disorder relevance are not available.

#### 3.6 Summary and conclusions

We have investigated the effect of temporal disorder on phase
transitions exhibited by @xmath symmetric systems: the (continuous)
Ising and (discontinuous) GV transitions which appear in many different
scenarios. We have explored whether temporal disorder induces Temporal
Griffiths Phases as it was previously found in standard (DP) systems
with one absorbing state. By performing mean-field analyses as well as
extensive computer simulations (in both fully connected networks and in
finite dimensional lattices) we found that TGPs can exist around
equilibrium (Ising) transitions (above @xmath ) and around discontinuous
(GV) non-equilibrium transitions (only in high-dimensional systems).

Therefore, we confirm that TGPs may also appear in systems with two
symmetric absorbing states, illustrating the generality of the
underlying mechanism: the appearance of a region, induced by temporal
stochasticity of the control parameter, where first-passage times scale
as power laws of the system size. The algebraic scaling of the crossing
time, compared with the exponential one observed in pure system, shows
that temporal disorder makes the ordered/active phase less stable. This
implies that the system becomes highly susceptible to perturbations.
This appears to be a rather general and robust phenomenon and an
relevant result with applications in ecology. At a given system size,
considering the effect of the environmental variablity considerably
reduces the crossing times, that in some cases can be identified with
population lifetimes. This is a consequence of the change in the growth
of this magnitude with the system size, from exponential to algebraic,
when external fluctuations are introduced. From a conservational point
of view, the power-law scaling of the crossing times implies that
population lifetimes would decrease less, compared with the exponential
behavior of the pure model, when going from larger to smaller systems,
which is the main consequence of habitat fragmentation.

Additionally, although it is of secondary interest to our focus on
ecological systems and it has been not shown in this chapter, we have
also confirmed that the response function of the system (i.e.
susceptibility) diverges in a finite region close to the critical point.
This complementary result has been also obtained in Vazquez et al. [
2011 ] and confirms the phenomelogical similarities between Temporal
Griffiths Phases and Griffiths Phases in systems with quenched disorder.

It also seems to be a general property that TGPs do not appear in low
dimensional systems, where standard fluctuations dominate over temporal
disorder. In all the cases studied so far, a critical dimension @xmath
–at and below which TGPs do not appear– exist ( @xmath for DP
transitions, @xmath for Ising like systems, and @xmath for GV ones).
Calculating analytically such a critical dimension and comparing it with
the standard critical dimension for the relevance/irrelevance of
temporal disorder at the critical point (i.e. at the renormalization
group non-trivial fixed point of the corresponding field theory) remains
an open and challenging task.

Future research might be oriented to the effect of temporal disorder on
the formation and dynamics of spatial structures.

### Appendix A Itô-Stratonovich discussion.

The integration of stochastic differential equations with multiplicative
white noise presents some problems because the integral of the noise is
not well defined. These problems are solved choosing either the Itô or
the Stratonovich definition of the integral. ¹ ¹ 1 Any definition can be
chosen or even made, but these two are the most often used. We have
chosen one or the other depending on the origin of the noise term. This
Appendix explains how Itô calculus works, and the connection between Itô
and Stratonovich schemes. We will finish discussing what of them is more
suitable in each situation.

#### a.1 Stochastic integration.

Let us start providing a precise definition of the second integral in

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

that is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The integration interval @xmath is divided into n subintervals,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

and intermediate points in each interval @xmath defined

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The stochastic integral in Eq. ( A.2 ) is defined as the limit of the
partial sums,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the Itô vs Stratonovich dilemma resides in the fact that the limit
of @xmath depends on the particular set of points @xmath that are used.
Itô stochastic integral is defined taking @xmath , so Eq. ( A.5 )
becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

that is, the known function @xmath is evaluted on the beginning point of
the interval while Stratonovich is obtained if @xmath and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

#### a.2 Itô’s formula.

In spite of being much more elegant from a mathematical point of view,
Ito’s prescription is not always the most suitable choice for physical
interpretation. Calculus we are used to does not work in this scheme,
and a different change of variables must be considered. Let us take an
arbitrary function @xmath with @xmath obeying the SDE

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a white Gaussian noise. Consider

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where higher terms in @xmath have been neglected. Now, replacing @xmath
(see [ Gardiner , 1985 ] for a proof),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is known as the Itô’s formula and shows that change of variables
is not given by ordinary calculus unless @xmath is linear in @xmath .

#### a.3 From Stratonovich to Itô.

As may be expected, both interpretations of the stochastic integral are
somehow related. To show it, consider an stochastic differential
equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a white, zero mean, Gaussian noise. Integrating, it is,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes that a Stratonovich integration is used. We will
derive the equivalent Itô stochastic differential equation.

Assuming that @xmath is a solution of

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

the corresponding @xmath and @xmath will be deduced. The first step is
to compute the connection between @xmath and @xmath , where the lack of
notation in the second integral means an Itô interpretation. Then,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Taking into an account

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

in the Stratonovich integral, then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now, the Itô SDE ( A.13 ) is used in order to write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using Itô’s formula given by Eq. ( A.10 ) as well as simplifying the
notation writing @xmath instead of @xmath , Eq. ( A.16 ) becomes,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.18)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Finally, substituing into Eq. ( A.14 ), neglecting terms in @xmath and
@xmath and setting @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

or going back to integrals,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

which means that the stochastic integral in Stratonovich representation
is equivalent to a stochastic integral in Itô’s and a drift term. It is
also important to remark that this formula gives a connection between
both integrals of function @xmath , in which @xmath is the solution of
the Itô SDE ( A.13 ). It does not give a general connection between the
Itô and Stratonovich integrals of arbitrary functions.

  -- -- -- -------- --
           @xmath   
           @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- --

Or

  -- -- -- -------- --
           @xmath   
           @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- --

There are many consequences of this transformation formula, but the more
important are

-    It is always possible to change from the Stratonovich to the Itô
    interpretation of a SDE by adding @xmath or in the inverse direction
    subtracting a similar term.

-    In the case of additive noise, i.e., @xmath in Eq. ( A.8 ) there is
    no difference between the Itô and Stratonovich integral.

-    In the case of multiplicative noise, i.e., @xmath in Eq. ( A.8 ),
    where the influence of the random force depends on the state of the
    process, the correlation between both the random force and the state
    of the process is implicit in the Stratonovich integral. It gives
    raise to the noise induced drift when moving to Itô appearing in the
    deterministic part of the equation.

-    The Stratonovich calculus obeys the classical chain rule, Itô’s
    formula derived in Section A.2 plays a similar role on Itô’s
    calculus.

#### a.4 Stratonovich / Itô dilemma.

The long controversy in the physical literature about what is the right
definition of the stochastic integral has created some confusion on this
topic. That’s why, although a much more mathematically rigorous and
longer discussion can be found in the references, [ van Kampen , 2007 ;
Horsthemke and Lefever , 1984 ; Jazwinski , 2007 ] some hand waving
arguments will be given in this section.

First of all it is important to say that this kind of ambiguity when
working with SDE only yields for the particular, but most common, case
of differential equations with multiplicative white noise ² ² 2 Cases
where the rapidly fluctuating external force depends on the state of the
system. . As a first approach, it is natural to tend to believe that due
to invariance of the equations under “coordinate transformation” @xmath
when working on Stratonovich scheme it is the proper choice. However, it
means nothing but it obeys the classical calculus rules we are familiar
with. The only quantities that have to be invariant under a
transformation @xmath , where @xmath is one to one, are the
probabilities,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

and this is of course guaranteed in both calculi. They lead to a
consistent calculus.

It looks sensible, then, to change the question. The matter is not what
is the right definition of the stochastic integral, but how do we model
real systems by stochastic processes. That is, in which situation either
Itô’s or Stratonovich’s choice is the most suitable.

On the one hand, if the starting point is a phenomenological equation in
which some fluctuating parameters represented through colored noise
terms are approximated by Gaussian white noise, then the most appropiate
process is the one that is defined by the Stratonovich interpretation of
the equation.

On the other hand, in many systems the appropiate starting point is a
discret time equation, as it happens, for instance, in biology when
working with populations of insects. In these cases the equation reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath in every time step and @xmath are Gaussian independent
random variables with expected values @xmath and @xmath .

If times considered are longer compared to @xmath , the continuous time
limit can be taken. Then the system is described by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is also a SDE where @xmath is the Wiener process. However, due to
the asymmetric form of Eq. ( A.24 ) with respect to time it is much more
appropiate the stochastic process defined according to the Itô
interpretation in this case.

To sum up, as a take to home message from this section, two different
cases can be considered when working with SDE. When the white Gaussian
noise limit is considered as the limit of a colored noise when the
correlation time tends to zero, the Stratonovich interpretation is more
sensible, when Itô’s is more suitable when it represents the continuous
limit of a discrete time problem. In any case, there are no universally
valid theoretical reasons why one or the other interpretation of an SDE
should be preferred and the ultimate test must be the confrontation of
the analytical (or numerical) results with the experimental facts.

### Appendix B Analytical calculations on the escape time for the Ising
Model

We will show here all the analytical calculations done to obtain the
result of Eq. ( 3.22 ). To make the integrals analytically solvable we
take @xmath , so the Langevin equation is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath is, again, a white Gaussian noise
defined by its autocorrelation function @xmath , and its mean value
@xmath .

The Langevin equation ( B.1 ) presents one absorbing state in @xmath
induced by the simplification done when neglecting thermal fluctuations.

Working in the Stratonovich scheme ¹ ¹ 1 Because the noise term comes
from taking the white noise limit in a colored one , the associated
Fokker-Planck equation is

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

According to Gardiner [ 1985 ] and Redner [ 2001 ] , the escape time
from an starting point @xmath obeys,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

As the size of the system does not appear naturally in the problem
because of the simplification done when taking @xmath , the mean escape
time will be defined as that needed to pass through @xmath , which is
the length of the jumps of the Brownian particle to whose movement the
problem has been mapped. Then, taking into an account that there is an
absorbing barrier in @xmath and a reflecting one in @xmath and the
initial condition, the solution is [ Gardiner , 1985 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

which involves @xmath and @xmath order polynomial functions.

To make the integral simpler, we expand the functions up to @xmath
order, and takre the low integration limit in Eq. ( B.7 ) at @xmath
instead of @xmath . This change can be done because @xmath appears both
in the numerator and the denominator of @xmath , so the contribution of
the lower limit vanishes, allowing to take it in our interest. The first
assumption leads to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where it has been defined @xmath ; @xmath ; @xmath . The size of the
system will be rescaled too, so the lower limit in the expression of the
escape time Eq. ( B.6 ) is @xmath . This simplifies the notation and
does not affect the qualitative behaviour of the results in the
asymptotic limit (only a constant factor appears).

Now, it can be written,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath .

Lets now define the function

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

which presents a singularity when @xmath as can be seen integrating by
parts. With the definition made of the parameters, it can be shown that
it corresponds to @xmath .

Considering the definitions of Eq. ( B.9 ) and Eq. ( B.10 ), the mean
escape time is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Each case will be studied separately.

#### b.1 Case @xmath

Integrating by parts Eq. ( B.10 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the new integral can be solved again integrating by parts. Working
recursively this way,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

or

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

The mean escape time is given now by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.16)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.17)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Integrating @xmath by parts (taking again the exponential part as @xmath
and the rest as @xmath ) and following the same procedure as in Eq. (
B.10 ) it is obtained

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

while @xmath is easily solved

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

At the end, an expresion for the mean escape time is achieved

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

In the asymptotic limit @xmath two different cases must be considered.

##### b.1.1 @xmath

Under this prescription, @xmath when @xmath so in @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

which leads to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally, for the mean escape time,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

what means,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### b.1.2 @xmath

It is taken as a starting point

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

where considering that @xmath , only the first term in Eq. ( B.25 ) is
relevant. It implies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

and in the mean escape time

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

#### b.2 Case @xmath Critical point.

It has to be solved now

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

using the expansion of the exponential function and integrating it is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

It makes the mean escape time to obey, taking the form of @xmath Eq. (
B.29 ) into Eq. ( B.11 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (B.31)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

First of all, lets consider the solution of @xmath integrating by parts
( @xmath and @xmath ) so,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the new integral is solved again integrating by parts taking

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

It leads to a solution behaving like

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

so finally,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

which scales in the asymptotic limit as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

Secondly, lets focus on @xmath , where, again, an expansion of the
exponential function has to be done

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

which can be easily solved

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

The leading behavior when the size of the system is big enough @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

The last integral to be solved, also using the expansion of the
exponential function, is

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

It finally leads to an expression for the mean escape time in the
critical point

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the limit of very big systems ( @xmath ) the mean escape time scales
as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

with asymptotic behaviour

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

To sum up, it has been obtained analytically the finite size scaling of
the mean escape time, defined as the time taken by the system for
reaching @xmath from an initial condition @xmath . It is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

or in terms of the original parameters

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

## Part V Conclusions and outlook

### Chapter 3 Conclusions and outlook

This thesis has addressed a series of ecological problems from the point
of view of statistical physics, that has provided the theoretical
framework to develop different mathematical models.

The origin of the regular structures of vegetation that are observed in
many regions around the world has been studied. They appear in
landscapes where there is a limited amount of rainfall during the year,
regardless of the type of soil and vegetation. This scarcity of water is
an important constraint for the establishment of new plants.
Traditionally, it has been thought that the emergence of the patterns
comes from the presence of facilitative and competitive interactions
among plants acting simultaneously but at different spatial scales. This
phenomenon has been referred to as scale-dependent feedback in the
literature. The findings presented in this thesis, using mathematical
models that contain only competitive interactions, suggest that
facilitative interactions could be superfluous if the finite length of
the roots is considered in the equations. As an alternative to the
scale-dependent feedback , we have introduced the concept of exclusion
areas . They are regions, typically between two maxima of vegetation
density, where the competition is so strong that it cannot be overcome
by new plants. The extension and the location of these areas are given
by the interaction kernel of the different species of plants, which is
intimately related to the length of their roots. This concept allows to
know in which regions the vegetation will disappear and in which it will
remain given an initial ditribution of plants. Determining the existence
of exclusion areas could also have important implications on the design
of farming strategies that minimize the competition in the crops. This
would allow an optimal exploitation of the water resources, mainly in
arid regions.

In addition, the proposed models follow previous results that allow the
use of these patterns as early warning signals of desertification in
arid regions, allowing the development of conservation strategies by
anticipating the death of vegetation. As the amount of rainfall
decreases, the shapes of the distributions show a universal sequence of
gaps, stripes and, finally, spots of plants when the water is very
limited. This sequence is independent on the species in that particular
landscape. Unveiling the basic mechanisms that drive the formation of
these structures becomes essential to change the natural tendency that
would lead arid regions to dessert states.

The collective searching behavior of some animal species with
communication skills has been also studied. Although the main focus of
the work is on foraging strategies, our results could be extended to
many other situations, such as mating or predation. The influence of
different classes of random movements on the results is also analysed.
This work constitutes one of the first theoretical approaches tackling
the effect that animal interactions have on the duration of their daily
tasks. The main result is that the effect of communication on searching
times is maximum when they send information at intermediate length
scales. Longer communication ranges, that suppose interacting with more
individuals, overwhelm the searchers with too much information coming
from all the directions. On the other hand, short ranges do not provide
all the population with information enough to expedite the search. In
both extreme situations the displacements of the foragers lose
directionality to the targets. This result is robust against changes in
the type of movement, either Brownian jumps or Lévy flights. As a
general result, Lévy strategies give faster searches, but Brownian jumps
are more influenced by a communication mechanism.

An application of this model to the foraging behavior of the gazelles
inhabiting the Eastern Steppe of Mongolia is also presented. The steppe
is one of the largest remaining grasslands in the world, where gazelles
have to find each other and small areas of good resources. In addition,
because of the orography of this landscape, sound can travel long
distances therein. This, together with the strength of gazelle’s vocal
tract, allows them to communicate accoustically over long distances. The
model predicts an optimal search for resources when the communication is
on a frequency of @xmath kHz, a value that lies in the range measured
for gazelles in the wild ( @xmath kHz to @xmath kHz). This result not
only confirms the robustness of the model against changes in the
communication channel, but also gives realistic values for the measured
quantities. This is our central finding, and suggests that, during its
evolution, the species could have optimized its vocal tract to
efficiently communicate in the steppe. This work aims to open new
research lines in the interrelation between communication, optimal
search and mobility patterns. From a theoretical point of view, we
propose a new collective searching strategy that offers a wide range of
potential fields of applicability, even far away from an ecological
context. Similar algorithms, based on collective animal behavior, have
been recently implemented in collectivities of robots to tackle
different problems [ Penders et al. , 2011 ; Werfel et al. , 2014 ] .
Due to its simplicity, our model could be applied to several searching
processes, optimizing the first hitting times if the individuals are
enforced to communicate over intermediate lengths. Furthermore, the
comparison between Brownian jumps and Lévy flights makes possible to
choose the mobility strategy that better works in a given scenario.

Finally, it has been studied the effect of external variability on the
diversity, robustness, and evolution of many interacting particles
systems. The behavior of the crossing times changes substantially when
driven by fluctuating environments. It appears a finite region around
the critical point where this time scales with the system size as a
power law with continuously varying exponents. These results have clear
implications in the mean lifetimes of species in an ecological context
(species coexistence, competition…) and also allow to extend the concept
of Temporal Griffiths Phases , originally found in epidemic spreading
models, to a larger variety of systems.

There are several open questions to be tackled in the future. Many of
them are related with the influence of patterns and the role that
different scales play on its formation. Most of the future challenges in
ecology involve many spatial and temporal scales. In fact, most of the
natural systems do not have a characteristic scale and the observed
spatial strucutres most of the times have their origin in phenomena that
take place at smaller scale. The key for understanding and predicting
lies in unveiling the mechanisms underlying these structures [ Levin ,
1992 ] .

In this dissertation, vegetation pattern formation has been addressed
developing mathematical models with a single spatial scale. However,
trees also present facilitative interactions, related to the size of the
tree canopy, that act at a shorter scale than competition which are
mediated by the roots. Although one of our main results is that positive
interactions could be superfluous in the formation of patterns, they
could have further implications on its shape and stability. In addition,
nature is full of examples where many interaction scales are involved,
as it is the case of the regular distributions observed in many mussel
beds. Beyond spatial degrees of freedom, ecological systems also show
different organizational scales. In the particular case of plants, they
are not isolated in the landscape but in interaction with many other
species that influence its evolution. This is the case of termites or
some microbials, that are known as ecosystems engineers. Investigating
its influence on the evolution and formation of the vegetation
distributions constitutes a promising challenge.

Establishing relationships between vegetation distributions and animal
mobility presents also many challenging questions. Most of them should
focus on merging both research lines, addressing the influence that
grazing could have on the patterns, and how the formation of groups of
animals could modify their shapes or destroy them. While larger groups
have clear benefits in terms of group defense and predator swamping,
they also lead to a faster degradation of the vegetation. This is the
problem of foraging influencing the vegetation patterns which should be
treated in the future.

The study of how an information flow can modify collective searching
processes is attracting more attention the last years. In this work, we
have studied how the ranges at which the information is shared modify
the duration of foraging. However, many other questions, such as how
informed individuals in a population may adapt its mobility pattern in
order to increase the success of the group remain still open.

In summary, coming years promise an intense activity trying to answer
these and more open questions. Statistical physics is now much more than
a discipline devoted to the study of the macroscopic properties of
thermal systems, and theoretical ecology is a well established
quantitative field. Their development during these years has brought
them to a common point, from where natural environment can be better
described and understood.
