### 3.2.2 Tachyon dynamics

The role of the tachyon in theoretical physics has a long story. For the
most part of it, tachyon has been considered an illness whose treatment
and cure have been hard to be achieved. In the field theory, tachyon is
associated with a negative mass-squared particle, which means that the
potential is expanded around its maximum point. The natural question
that arises is whether tachyon potential has a good minimum elsewhere.
The Mexican hat potential in the spontaneous symmetry breaking is an
example of this perspective. In the bosonic string, its ground state is
the tachyon field, whereas in supersymmetric string theory a real
tachyon is present in non-BPS Dp-branes, ³ ³ 3 Dp-branes are @xmath
-dimensional objects where there exists the matter multiplet. Stable
branes are those ones with @xmath even for Type-IIA string theory, while
@xmath is odd for Type-IIB. while the complex tachyon appears in a
brane-anti-brane system [ 104 ] . However, the potential of such
Dp-branes does have a minimum [ 105 , 106 ] and at this minimum the
tachyon field behaves like a pressureless gas [ 107 ] . As soon as
tachyon condensation in string theory had been proposed, its role in
cosmology was studied and plenty of works have thenceforth been done. It
was also a dark-energy candidate [ 108 , 109 , 110 ] .

The complex tachyon field @xmath , where @xmath is the absolute value of
the tachyon field and @xmath is a phase, is described by the Born-Infeld
Lagrangian

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the tachyon potential, which depends only on the
absolute value of the scalar field @xmath . For a homogeneous field
@xmath and @xmath , in an expanding universe with
Friedmann-Robertson-Walker metric, the Lagrangian becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the scale factor. The equations of motion for @xmath and
@xmath are, respectively,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the prime denotes time derivative with respect to @xmath . When
the phase @xmath is zero, we recover the well-known equation of motion
for the tachyon field. The interaction between the tachyon and the dark
matter is driven by the phenomenological coupling @xmath , which in turn
we consider that it modifies the right-hand side of Eq. ( 3.22 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

With this form of coupling, the time dependence of the coupling is
implicit in the Hubble parameter @xmath .

The Friedmann equations for the complex tachyon, in the presence of
barotropic fluids, are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

The equation of state for the tachyon field yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

thus the tachyon behavior is between the cosmological constant one (
@xmath ) and matter one ( @xmath ), due to the square root in Eq. ( 3.21
).

We are now ready to proceed the dynamical analysis of the system.

#### 3.2.3 Autonomous system

The dimensionless variables for the case of tachyon field are

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (3.28)
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

Since @xmath and @xmath are dimensionless variables, @xmath has
dimension of time. For a real tachyon field neither the points @xmath
nor @xmath exist. Thus, in what follows the real tachyon case is seen by
just setting @xmath .

The dark energy density parameter is written in terms of these new
variables as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that Eq. ( 3.25 ) can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the matter and radiation density parameters are defined by @xmath
, with @xmath . From Eqs. ( 3.29 ) and ( 3.30 ) we see that @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath are restricted in the phase plane by the relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

since @xmath . In terms of these new variables the equation of state
@xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is clearly a trivial extension for the complex scalar field. The
total effective equation of state is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

with an accelerated expansion for @xmath . The dynamical system for the
variables @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.34a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.34b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.34c)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.34d)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.34e)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.34f)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

##### Critical points

The fixed points of the system are obtained by setting @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath in Eq. ( 3.34 ). When @xmath ,
@xmath is constant the potential has the form found in Refs. [ 111 , 55
] ( @xmath ), known in the literature for both coupled [ 39 , 52 ] and
uncoupled [ 108 , 109 ] dark energy. ⁴ ⁴ 4 The equation for @xmath is
also equal zero when @xmath , @xmath or @xmath , so that @xmath should
not necessarily be constant, for the fixed points with these values of
@xmath or @xmath . However, for the case of dynamical @xmath , the
correspondent eigenvalue is equal zero, indicating that the fixed points
is not hyperbolic. The fixed points are shown in Table 3.3 . Notice that
@xmath and @xmath cannot be negative and recall that @xmath .

The fixed points @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are shown below

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

The eigenvalues of the Jacobian matrix were found for each fixed point
in Table 3.3 . The results are shown in Table 3.4 .

For the real tachyon field the eigenvalues @xmath and @xmath do not
exist. The points (a1)–(a4) correspond to a matter-dominated solution,
since @xmath and @xmath . They are saddle points because at least one
eigenvalue has an opposite sign. The point (a4) is actually the point
(a1), with @xmath . Points (b), (c) and (d) are radiation-dominated
solutions, with @xmath and @xmath . The difference between them is that
(b) and (c) have @xmath , while (d) has @xmath and admits any value for
@xmath . They are unstable [(b)] or saddle points [(c) or (d)].

The point (e) is in principle a dark-energy-dominated solution with
@xmath and @xmath , whose existence is restrict to @xmath . However, a
careful analysis shows that the Jacobian matrix for this critical point
has zero eigenvector, thus the matrix cannot be diagonalized and the
fixed point should not be considered.

Points (f1) and (f2) are also a dark-energy-dominated solution ( @xmath
) whose equation of state depends on @xmath , which in turn can be
either constant or zero. The cases with constant @xmath are shown in
Table 3.3 and an accelerated expansion occurs for @xmath . For @xmath we
have @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , thus we recover the point (e). All the
points shown so far, but (e), were also found in Refs. [ 39 , 111 , 55 ]
. The eigenvalues @xmath , @xmath and @xmath of the fixed point (f1) and
(f2) are always negative. For these points @xmath , then the first
eigenvalue is also negative if @xmath , @xmath or @xmath . Therefore,
the point (f2) describes a dark-energy-dominated universe and can lead
to a late-time accelerated universe if the requirement @xmath is
satisfied. On the other hand, (f1) is a saddle point. The effective
equation of state depends only on @xmath , so the coupling @xmath only
changes the property of the fixed point.

The point (g) is also a saddle point with a matter-dominated solution,
however, different from (a1)–(a4), the equation of state for the dark
energy @xmath is no longer zero but depends on @xmath , leading to a
universe with accelerated expansion for @xmath . For this point the
coupling is restrict to values @xmath .

The last fixed points (h1) and (h2) require more attention. They are
valid solutions for @xmath , ⁵ ⁵ 5 The case for @xmath is the fixed
point (e). for @xmath and for constant @xmath , and its behavior depends
on @xmath . In order to have @xmath , we must have @xmath for the case
with plus sign in @xmath ( 3.36 ), while we have @xmath for the minus
sign case. We restrict our attention for the plus sign case. When @xmath
, ⁶ ⁶ 6 @xmath for the plus sign in @xmath and @xmath for the minus sign
in @xmath . @xmath and @xmath , in agreement with the restriction ( 3.31
). Furthermore, the fixed points exist for some values of @xmath and
@xmath , due to Eq. ( 3.31 ). In Fig. 3.3 , we show the restriction
@xmath as a function of @xmath , for some values of @xmath . As we see,
for @xmath we have @xmath only when @xmath , but this value is never
reached since the fixed points (h1) and (h2) are valid for @xmath . Thus
for @xmath the restriction is not satisfied. From the figure we also
notice that there is a lower bound for @xmath , for which the points
(h1) and (h2) start existing. In Fig. 3.4 we plot @xmath as a function
of @xmath , for the all the values of @xmath but zero, shown in Fig. 3.3
. ⁷ ⁷ 7 We used the plus sign in @xmath ( 3.36 ) for Figs. 3.3 and 3.4 ,
but the minus sign shows similar behavior, with @xmath due to Eq. ( 3.31
), satisfied for @xmath . The graphics for this case are reflections in
the ordinate axis.

As in the case of quintessence and phantom, the fixed points that have
@xmath [(a1), (a2), (a4), (b), (f1), (g) and (h1)] indicate that @xmath
and therefore @xmath as well. However, this limit is in contradiction to
Table 3.3 for @xmath showing that these seven critical points are not
physically acceptable.

All fixed points reproduce the previous results in the literature [ 39 ,
111 , 55 ] and they are generalizations of those analyses, with same
stability behavior for the critical points. This indicates that the
degree of freedom due to the complex scalar has no effect on the
stability and on the evolution of the system of equations, when compared
with the case of real scalar field.

In Figs. 3.5 and 3.6 we show the effective equation of state @xmath and
the density parameter for dark energy @xmath , respectively, as a
function of @xmath for the point (h2) (see Table 3.3 ). Notice that
depending on the value of @xmath , the universe does not exhibit an
accelerated expansion for this fixed point, as we see from the
horizontal line in Fig. 3.5 . The values of @xmath , at which they reach
the upper limits of Eq. ( 3.31 ) and @xmath , are, of course, the same.
This feature can also be checked from Figs. 3.3 and 3.6 . This fixed
point is a tachyonic-dominated universe only for a range of values of
@xmath with specific @xmath . We have @xmath for @xmath and @xmath , and
for @xmath and @xmath , for instance. The effective equation of state
for these two values is @xmath and @xmath , respectively. Thus the
former @xmath implies an accelerated expansion, while the latter @xmath
does not.

The fixed point (h2) is stable. The eigenvalues @xmath and @xmath are
always negative because @xmath is between @xmath and @xmath . The first
eigenvalue is also negative because @xmath , thus @xmath , therefore
@xmath , since @xmath is always positive. Therefore, the point (h2) can
lead to a late-time accelerated universe, depending on the value of
@xmath and @xmath . Its behavior is shown in Fig. 3.7 , for @xmath and
@xmath .

##### Summary

The critical points shown in the tachyonic case describe the three
phases of the universe: the radiation-dominated era, the
matter-dominated era, and the present dark-energy-dominated universe.
The matter-dominated universe can be described by the saddle point (a3).
There are two points that can represent the radiation-dominated era: (c)
and (d). The two are saddle points, with the additional difference that
the point (d) has an equation of state for dark energy equal to @xmath .

A tachyonic-dominated universe is described by the points (f2) and (h2).
The point (f2) can be stable only if the coupling is zero or @xmath .
The last fixed point (h2) is stable and can describe an accelerated
universe depending on the value of @xmath and @xmath .

From all the critical points, the cosmological transition radiation
@xmath matter @xmath dark energy is achieved considering the following
sequence of fixed points: (c) or (d) @xmath (a3) @xmath (f2) [ @xmath
dependent] or (h2) [ @xmath and @xmath dependent]. Although the sequence
is viable, the form of the potential dictates whether the fixed points
are allowed or not. Among several possibilities in the literature, the
potential @xmath , for instance, leads to a dynamically changing @xmath
(either if @xmath for @xmath , or @xmath for @xmath ) [ 110 ] . A
dynamically changing @xmath is allowed for the fixed points (a3), (c)
and (d). On the other hand, points (f2) and (h2) require a constant
@xmath , implying @xmath [ 39 , 52 , 108 , 109 ] .

#### 3.2.4 Overall summary

In this section we presented the coupled dark energy using a complex
scalar field, in the light of the dynamical system theory. There were
analyzed three possibilities: quintessence, phantom and tachyon field.
All three possibilities are known in the literature for the real field [
32 , 39 , 61 ] , and for uncoupled and complex quintessence field [ 56 ]
. Thus a natural question that arises is how a complex scalar field
changes the previous results and if there are new fixed points due to
the complex field. Although some equations for the dimensionless
variables are trivial extensions of the real field case (e.g. the
equation of state for the scalar field), the differential equations were
generalized. All fixed points found here are in agreement with the
previous results, with no new fixed points, however, there are some
crucial differences. For the quintessence and the phantom there is a
contradiction between the fixed points @xmath and @xmath when the latter
is zero. This situation occurs for almost all fixed points and the only
two exceptions are unstable points that represent respectively the
radiation and matter era, so the dark-energy-dominated universe is
absent. Therefore the extra degree of freedom spoils the results known
in the case of real scalar field. For the tachyon field all the critical
points are also similar to the real field case, with same stabilities.
Therefore, the extra degree of freedom due to the complex tachyon field
plays no role on the stability of the critical points. Although the
results presented here enlarge the previous results found in the
literature, with the generalization of the equations of motion, the
dynamical system theory does not provide further information in what is
already known for the case of real scalar field, letting open the
possibility of studying complex scalar fields by other ways of analysis.

### 3.3 Dynamical analysis for a vector-like dark energy

#### 3.3.1 Vector-like dark energy dynamics

The Lagrangian for three identical copies of an abelian field (called
cosmic triad in [ 24 ] ), here uncoupled to matter, is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath is the potential for the vector field, which
breaks gauge invariance, with @xmath . The energy-momentum tensor of the
field is obtained varying the Lagrangian ( 3.38 ) with respect to the
metric and it is @xmath , where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

Varying Eq. ( 3.38 ) with respect to the fields @xmath gives the
equations of motion

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

where from now on we use @xmath .

In an expanding universe, with FLRW metric and scale factor @xmath ,
each one of the three vectors should be along a coordinate axis with
same magnitude. An ansatz for the @xmath components of the vector @xmath
compatible with homogeneity and isotropy is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

where a scalar product with an unit vector is implicit. From Eq. ( 3.40
) the component @xmath is zero and using Eqs. ( 3.41 ) into ( 3.40 ) the
equation of motion becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

The pressure and energy density for the cosmic triad is obtained from
Eq. ( 3.39 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

With this ansatz ⁸ ⁸ 8 In [ 24 ] the author used a comoving vector
ansatz: @xmath . This choice leads, of course, to a different equation
of motion, energy density and pressure. However, the effect due to the
scale factor that here appears in the denominator of @xmath and @xmath ,
for instance, appears as a Hubble friction term ( @xmath ) in the same
expressions. the potential depends now on @xmath and the prime is the
derivative with respect to @xmath . We assume that the potential is
given by @xmath , where @xmath is a constant. With this form the
quantity @xmath will be constant, as we will see soon. Thus, for the
comoving vector @xmath (as used in [ 24 ] ), the potential does not have
an explicit dependence on the scale factor. If the cosmic triad were
massless, we would have @xmath , thus @xmath , as it should be for
relativistic matter.

Inspired by the quintessence case [ 31 , 32 ] , where the coupling is
@xmath , we assume the phenomenological interaction @xmath for the
vector dark energy, where @xmath is a positive constant. The coupling
has this form in order to the right-hand side of the Proca-like equation
( 3.42 ) to be no longer zero but to equal @xmath . The case with
negative @xmath is the same of the case with @xmath but with negative
fixed point @xmath , defined soon. In the presence of a barotropic
fluid, the Friedmann equations are

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.45)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.46)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

We now proceed to the dynamical analysis of the system.

##### Autonomous system

The dimensionless variables are defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

The dark energy density parameter is written in terms of these new
variables as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that Eq. ( 3.45 ) can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the density parameter of the barotropic fluid is defined by @xmath
. From Eqs. ( 3.48 ) and ( 3.49 ) @xmath and @xmath are restricted in
the phase plane by the relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

due to @xmath . The equation of state @xmath becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

Depending on the value of @xmath the equation of state can be less than
minus one.

The total effective equation of state is

  -- -------- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath         (3.52)
  -- -------- -------- -- -- --------

with an accelerated expansion for @xmath . The dynamical system for the
variables @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.53)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.54)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.55)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.56)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where the prime is the derivative with respect to @xmath .

##### Critical points

The fixed points of the system are obtained by setting @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath in Eq. ( 3.53 ). When @xmath , @xmath is constant the
potential is @xmath . ⁹ ⁹ 9 The equation for @xmath is also equal zero
when @xmath or @xmath , so that @xmath should not necessarily be
constant, for the fixed point with this value of @xmath . However, for
the case of dynamical @xmath , the correspondent eigenvalue is equal
zero, indicating that the fixed points are not hyperbolic. Different
from the scalar field case, where @xmath , the exponent of the potential
also depends on the scale factor @xmath . The fixed points are shown in
Table 3.5 with the eigenvalues of the Jacobian matrix. Notice that
@xmath cannot be negative.

The point (a) corresponds to a radiation solution, once @xmath . It can
be a saddle or a stable point, depending on the value of @xmath and
@xmath . However, the universe is dominated by the cosmic triad, as
indicated by @xmath , and therefore the fixed point does not describe a
radiation-dominated universe, since @xmath . The point (b) is valid only
for @xmath and it is a saddle point, since two eigenvalues are negative
and one is positive. Since @xmath for this critical point, @xmath should
be less than or equal to one (since @xmath ), so the coupling should be
@xmath . However, this critical point can describe a matter-dominated
universe only if @xmath or sufficiently small @xmath , so that @xmath ,
as so for @xmath . The last fixed point (c) is an attractor and
describes a dark-energy dominated universe ( @xmath ) that leads to an
accelerated expansion of the universe, since @xmath . It is a stable
spiral if @xmath , otherwise it is a saddle point. The potential for
this condition for @xmath is @xmath and it behaves as the cosmological
constant at the fixed point, since @xmath for (c). Once the coupling is
constant and sufficiently small (to the fixed point (b) describe the
matter-dominated universe), it has the same value, of course, for the
point (c).

We show the phase portrait of the system in Figs. 3.8 ( @xmath ) and 3.9
( @xmath ). The latter case is shown just to illustrate how the
interaction affects the phase portrait, although we expect a very small
@xmath , as discussed for the fixed point (b). We see that all
trajectories converge to the attractor point.

In Fig. 3.10 we show the effective equation of state @xmath ( 3.52 ) as
a function of the dark energy density parameter @xmath ( 3.48 ), where
the blue shaded region represents the allowed values of @xmath and
@xmath . The red line shows the transition from the fixed point (b) (
@xmath ) to the fixed point (c) ( @xmath ).

#### 3.3.2 Summary

In this section we used the dynamical system theory to investigate if a
vector-like dark energy, similar to [ 24 ] , in the presence of a
barotropic fluid can lead to the three cosmological eras, namely,
radiation, matter and dark energy. The analysis was generalized for the
case of coupled dark energy, with a phenomenological interaction @xmath
. There are fixed points that successfully describe the matter-dominated
and the dark-energy-dominated universe. Only the radiation era was not
cosmologically viable, however, if one is interested in the last two
periods of the evolution of the universe, the dynamical system theory
provides a good tool to analyze asymptotic states of such cosmological
models.

## Chapter 4 Supergravity-based models

In this chapter we use supergravity to build dark energy models. In
Sect. 4.1 we review the basics of minimal supergravity, including the
mechanism of spontaneous (local) supersymmetry breaking. We follow the
references [ 112 , 113 , 114 ] in the first section. The new results
presented in Sects. 4.2 and 4.3 are based on [ 83 , 81 ] .

### 4.1 Basics of Minimal Supergravity

#### 4.1.1 From Wess-Zumino to minimal Supergravity model

Supergravity is the supersymmetric theory of gravity, understood also as
the theory with local supersymmetry. In order to see this latter point,
which is deeply related with the former one, we start with the
Wess-Zumino model. A complex scalar field @xmath and its supersymmetric
fermionic field @xmath are described by the following Lagrangian [ 112 ]
in on-shell representation ¹ ¹ 1 The on-shell representation is written
for the sake of simplicity, in the off-shell case it is necessary to
introduce auxiliary fields, in order for the bosonic degrees of freedom
to match the fermionic ones.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is invariant (up to a total derivative) under the supersymmetric
transformations

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.2a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.2b)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a grassmannian parameter associated with the global SUSY
transformations. The generator of these transformations ( 4.2 ) obeys
the relations

  -- -------- -- --------
                 
     @xmath      (4.3a)
                 
     @xmath      (4.3b)
                 
     @xmath      (4.3c)
                 
     @xmath      (4.3d)
  -- -------- -- --------

where Eq. ( 4.3d ) is indicated to complete the SUSY algebra. Capital
indices ( @xmath ) refer to an internal space and run from 1 to @xmath ,
but here we consider @xmath . Indices with the first part of the Greek
symbols ( @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ) run from
one to two and denote two-component Weyl spinors, with the dotted
indices for the complex conjugate components.

When the SUSY tranformations ( 4.2 ) are promoted to be local ( @xmath
), variation of Eq. ( 4.1 ) yields the extra terms

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

which are those ones that survive after using Euler-Lagrange equations,
where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

is the Noether current associated with the invariance of the Lagrangian
( 4.1 ) under SUSY transformations ( 4.2 ).

As usual in quantum field theory, we coupled the current with a gauge
field @xmath , then this contribution is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a generic coupling constant. The field @xmath has both
spinor and vector indices, and it is build from the representation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath represents a vector with total spin 1 and @xmath represents
a right-handed spinor with spin @xmath . The result @xmath has total
spin @xmath and besides the helicities @xmath , it has helicity @xmath
from the spin @xmath , and helicities @xmath from the right-handed
spinor in the right hand side. The same occurs for the right-handed
spinor. As we will see soon, all helicities @xmath vanish with spinor
equations.

The variation of @xmath gives

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then, if the gauge field @xmath transforms as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

the first term in right-hand side of Eq. ( 4.8 ) cancels the same terms
in Eq. ( 4.1.1 ).

The second term will be canceled out as follows. The SUSY algebra ( 4.3
) yields the energy-momentum tensor @xmath as an anticommutator

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the Schwinger terms (S.T.) have zero vacuum expectation value [
112 ] . With this relation, we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

which can be canceled out if we change the Lagrangian ( 4.1 ) by its
version in a curved spacetime

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

With this change, the variation of the Lagrangian has now a component
due to the metric

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

But the second term is what we have found so far, that is, the variation
of @xmath , which is Eq. ( 4.11 ). The energy-momentum tensor can be
defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

thus

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.15)
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

which implies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

The overall result is that when we promote the supersymmetry from a
global symmetry to a local one, we need to introduce the gauge field
@xmath and curvature @xmath in order to cancel out the extra
contribution due to @xmath in the variation of the Lagrangian. A more
convenient treatment is done, actually, in terms of the vielbein @xmath
instead of the metric, whose variation is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since gravity is introduced in a “natural” way, the coupling is expected
to be @xmath , and the theory of local supersymmetry is called
supergravity, whose multiplet is the vielbein @xmath and the gravitino
@xmath .

#### 4.1.2 Minimal Supergravity

The on-shell Supergravity Lagrangian is given by the sum of the
Einstein-Hilbert Lagrangian with the Rarita-Schwinger Lagrangian ² ² 2
In four dimensions @xmath for Majorana spinors. [ 113 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath means the determinant of @xmath . Here, gravitino covariant
derivative is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the spin connection, @xmath and in Eq. ( 4.18 ) @xmath .
The Christoffel connection term @xmath is not included in Eq. ( 4.19 )
because @xmath is symmetric while @xmath is antisymmetric, in such a way
that this term vanishes in the Lagrangian @xmath .

The supersymmetric transformations of @xmath are [ 113 ]

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.20a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.20b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where obviously @xmath . Thus, @xmath is invariant under ( 4.20 ). In
the presence of matter, the gravitino transformation above contains more
terms due to the extra fields.

#### 4.1.3 Super-Higgs mechanism

In this section we present the mechanism of Super-Higgs, in which
gravitino acquires mass by absorving the goldstone fermion. This
mechanism of spontaneous symmetry breaking occurs in much the same way
as the bosons @xmath and @xmath obtain mass in the breakdown of the
gauge symmetry of the electroweak interactions [ 115 ] . In the presence
of matter fields, supergravity Lagrangian has the form shown below [ 112
] , where we consider the supergravity multiplet coupled with “several”
Wess-Zumino multiplet @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.21)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.22a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.22b)
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.22c)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.22d)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.22e)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.22f)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath and lower indices indicate derivatives with respect to
@xmath . The @xmath term means the coupling of four fermions, which does
not play a relevant role for gravitino mass. In the expressions above
@xmath is the Kähler potential, a real function of the scalar and its
conjugate, and @xmath is the superpotential, a holomorphic function of
@xmath . It is interesting to note that when supergravity is unbroken
@xmath , therefore the mixing between gravitino and fermions vanishes.

To realize what is the gravitino mass, the following Kähler
transformation is done

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

This transformation can be done only if @xmath , and this assumption has
a deep meaning. The potential in Eq. ( 4.22 ) is zero if supergravity is
unbroken and @xmath , what does not allow the Kähler transformation (
4.23 ) due to the logarithm, therefore the gravitino remains massless.
In the case of broken supergravity a vanishing cosmological constant is
only achieved if there is a contribution of the negative part in the
potential, therefore the transformation ( 4.23 ) can be done and we go
further.

The kinetic terms in the supergravity Lagrangian and the Kähler metric
are left invariant under a Kähler transformation. The new quadratic part
in Eq. ( 4.22 ) is found performing the following replacements:

  -- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath            (4.24)
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --------

The Christoffel symbol @xmath also does not change. Then @xmath yields

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.25)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where the covariant derivative is @xmath . The potential @xmath becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can see that the mixing still exist, thus, in order to get the mass
of the fermions, the spinor mass matrix can be diagonalized to get rid
of the mixing. A field redefinition play the necessary role as well, and
an easy way to see this is transform @xmath in the Majorana basis

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Goldstone fermion, called goldstino. Using @xmath
and the field redefinition [ 112 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

the mixing is eliminated and the Lagrangian ( 4.27 ) has now only
diagonal terms

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally, the mass of the gravitino and the spinor mass are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

We have seen that gravitino acquires mass by absorbing the goldstino,
with their masses given above. This process is also a gauge choice, in
such a way that goldstino can be eliminated and the gauge invariance no
longer keeps the gravitino massless, bringing back the helicity @xmath
of the gravitino, which is predominant for light gravitino. If the
potential @xmath has an extremum value @xmath and the resulting
cosmological constant is zero, the following conditions come from Eq. (
4.26 )

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.32)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.33)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , which leads to a zero spinor matrix mass ( 4.31 ),
therefore a massless goldstino.

#### 4.1.4 Rarita-Schwinger field equations

##### Massless field

For the massless spin- @xmath particle, Rarita-Schwinger Lagrangian is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the equation of motion

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using @xmath , yields @xmath , and noting that @xmath , Eq. ( 4.35 )
implies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

From the discussion of Eq. ( 4.7 ) we see that since the free spin-
@xmath particle is massless, it has only two degrees of freedom, thus we
can choose a gauge, as the following

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

The @xmath and @xmath components of Eq. ( 4.36 ) are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.38)
     @xmath      (4.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

With this gauge choice, the first equation yields @xmath , so @xmath and
the second one leads to the Dirac equation for the spatial components
@xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is a time evolution equation. However, contracting the equation
above with @xmath yields another constraint @xmath .

Then, from the gauge condition ( 4.37 ) and the equation of motion we
get @xmath independent constraints

  -- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath            (4.41)
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --------

Since @xmath has @xmath components, the number of on-shell degrees of
freedom of the massless Rarita-Schwinger field is @xmath . Thus, in
@xmath the massless field with the gauge condition has only the
helicitites @xmath .

##### Massive field

For the massive spin- @xmath particle, Rarita-Schwinger Lagrangian is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the Euler-Lagrange equation, we get the equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

Operating @xmath in the equation above yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

and if @xmath is massive ( @xmath )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

Applying @xmath on Eq. ( 4.43 ) yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

then, using Eq. ( 4.46 ), for a massive field

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

With this results is possible to write other condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, using Eqs. ( 4.45 ), ( 4.47 ) and ( 4.48 ), Eq. ( 4.43 ) can
be written in the form of a Dirac equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

which shows that this is the free field of a particle of mass @xmath and
spin- @xmath .

We see that the equation of motion ( 4.43 ) splits into three equations:
two spinor constraints ( 4.47 ) and ( 4.48 ), and the Dirac equation
version for spin- @xmath particle ( 4.49 ).

### 4.2 Cosmological tracking solution and the Super-Higgs mechanism

Supergravity with four supercharges exists in four dimensions at most
(that is, @xmath for @xmath in @xmath ), so in higher dimensions (such
as @xmath in superstring theory) one needs more supersymmetries. Thus
minimal supergravity can be seen as an effective theory in four
dimensions, and can be applied to cosmology at least as a first
approximation or a toy model. ³ ³ 3 For some models of extended
supergravities in cosmology, see [ 116 , 117 ] . In the framework of
minimal supergravity, Refs. [ 22 , 23 ] were the first attempts to
describe dark energy through quintessence. Moreover, models of
holographic dark energy were embedded in minimal supergravity in [ 83 ]
.

As usual in minimal supergravity, the scalar potential can be negative,
so some effort should be made in order to avoid this negative
contribution. In [ 22 ] one possibility was to require @xmath , for
instance. ⁴ ⁴ 4 The recent work [ 118 ] shows the explicit de Sitter
supergravity action, where the negative contribution of the scalar
potential is avoided in another way.

Supergravity can provide a candidate for dark matter as well, the
gravitino [ 119 ] . Once local supersymmetry is broken, the gravitino
acquires a mass by absorbing the goldstino, but its mass is severely
constrained when considering standard cosmology. The gravitino may be
the lightest superparticle (LSP) being either stable, in a scenario that
preserves R-parity [ 119 ] , or unstable, but long-lived and with a
small R-parity violation [ 120 , 121 ] . Another possibility is the
gravitino to be the next-to-lightest superparticle (NLSP), so that it
decays into standard model particles or into LSP.

From the cosmological point-of-view, if the gravitino is stable its mass
should be @xmath keV in order not to overclose the universe [ 119 ] .
Thus the gravitino may be considered as dark matter; however such value
is not what is expected to solve the hierarchy problem and the gravitino
describes only hot/warm dark matter; then another candidate is needed.
If the gravitino is unstable it should have @xmath TeV to decay before
the Big Bang Nucleosynthesis (BBN) and therefore not to conflict its
results [ 122 ] .

These problems may be circumvented if the initial abundance of the
gravitino is diluted by inflation, but since the gravitino can be
produced afterward through scattering processes when the universe is
reheated, these problems can still exist. Furthermore, the thermal
gravitino production provides an upper bound for the reheating
temperature ( @xmath ), in such a way that if the gravitino mass is, for
instance, in the range @xmath TeV @xmath TeV, the reheating temperature
should be @xmath GeV [ 123 , 124 ] . Depending on which is the LSP, the
gravitino mass should be even bigger than @xmath TeV [ 125 ] . On the
other hand, thermal leptogenesis requires @xmath GeV [ 126 , 127 ] ,
which leads also to strict values for the gravitino mass. All these
issues regarding gravitino mass are refered sometimes as ‘gravitino
problem’.

In this section we expand the previous results in the literature, taking
the spontaneous breaking of local supersymmetry (SUSY) into account and
regarding quintessence in minimal supergravity. We consider the scalar
potential defined by the usual flat Kähler potential @xmath (which leads
to a flat Kähler metric, thus to a canonical kinetic term) and a
power-law superpotential @xmath , whose scalar field @xmath leads to the
local SUSY breaking. After this mechanism (known also as Super-Higgs
mechanism), the massive gravitino can decay into another scalar field
@xmath . This scalar will play the role of the dark energy and the
potential @xmath will be deduced from the original potential @xmath . It
turns out that the potential @xmath corresponds to the so-called tracker
behavior, whose initial conditions for the scalar field do not change
the attractor solution.

The rest of the section is organized in the following manner. In Sect.
4.2.1 we present the local supersymmetry breaking process, assuming the
flat Kähler potential @xmath and a power-law superpotential @xmath . In
Sect. 4.2.2 we relate the previous scalar potential to a new one,
responsible for the accelerated expansion of the universe. Sect. 4.2.3
is reserved for a summary.

#### 4.2.1 The Super-Higgs mechanism

We start our discussion using a complex scalar field @xmath . We set
@xmath in the following steps for simplicity. The scalar potential in
@xmath supergravity depends on a real function @xmath , called Kähler
potential, and a holomorphic function @xmath , the superpotential. We do
not consider D-terms, so the potential for one scalar field is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Kähler metric, @xmath , @xmath . When supergravity
is spontaneously broken, the gravitino acquires a mass given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath means the vacuum expectation value.

We use the Kähler potential @xmath , which leads to a flat Kähler metric
and the superpotential @xmath , for real @xmath , with @xmath being a
free parameter. For these choices of @xmath and @xmath the potential (
4.50 ) is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the absolute value of the complex scalar field. We found
that Eq. ( 4.52 ) has extremal points at

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.53)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.54)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.55)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

for @xmath , with @xmath being the global minimum, which is also valid
for the case @xmath . For @xmath there are two local minima points (
@xmath and @xmath ) which correspond to @xmath at these values. For
negative @xmath the potential at @xmath corresponds to the true vacuum,
while the potential at @xmath corresponds to the false vacuum. For
@xmath @xmath at the minimum point is negative, but this is not allowed
since @xmath is an absolute value. We consider the case of vanishing
cosmological constant, so Eq. ( 4.52 ) is zero at the global minimum
@xmath for @xmath . This fractional number is the only possibility of
the potential given by Eq ( 4.52 ), which has @xmath at the minimum
point. This case can be seen in Fig. 4.1 . Due to its steep shape, the
potential cannot drive the slow-roll inflation.

SUSY is spontaneously broken at the minimum point @xmath and the
gravitino becomes massive by absorbing the massless goldstino. We
estimate the gravitino mass for different values of @xmath , which are
shown in Table 4.1 . The scalar mass has the same order of magnitude as
the gravitino mass, therefore it may also lead to cosmological
difficulties in much the same way as the Polonyi field does [ 128 ] .
However, such a problem can be alleviated as the gravitino problem is,
i.e., if the scalar mass is larger than @xmath (10TeV) BBN starts after
the decay of the scalar @xmath has finished. From Table 4.1 we see that
@xmath GeV does not spoil BBN. Since the gravitino interactions are
suppressed by the Planck mass, the dominant interaction is the one
proportional to @xmath [ 113 ] , which is, for our purposes, the
gravitino decay only into another complex scalar field ( @xmath ) plus
its spin-1/2 superpartner ( @xmath ). ⁵ ⁵ 5 Although the interaction
with a gauge field is also @xmath we do not consider it for simplicity,
since we have also not considered D-terms in the scalar potential.
Gravitino decay into MSSM particles, such as photon and photino [ 123 ]
or neutrino and sneutrino [ 124 ] , is not considered here. The decay
rate for the gravitino is @xmath , thus for @xmath GeV, the gravitino
time decay is @xmath s, hence it does not conflict BBN results. The
temperature due to the decay is @xmath GeV for @xmath GeV, in agreement
with [ 123 , 124 ] , but with a gravitino mass one order greater than
the range showed in these references. For @xmath GeV we get @xmath GeV.

As a result of the gravitino decay, it also appears a massless spin-1/2
fermion @xmath , which behaves like radiation. The @xmath interactions
are also suppressed by the Planck scale because they are due to four
fermions terms ( @xmath ) or through its covariant derivative, whose
interaction is with @xmath . Since the fermion @xmath has a radiation
behavior, its cosmological contribution is diluted as the universe
expands by @xmath . When the universe is radiation-dominated, @xmath is
small, as so @xmath , which implies that the interaction due to the
covariant derivative is also small. Therefore, the contribution of
@xmath can be ignored and the gravitino can decay into dark energy,
whose associated potential for the scalar is going to be deduced from
Eq. ( 4.52 ).

#### 4.2.2 Dark energy

We first review the complex quintessence as a dark energy candidate,
presented in [ 20 ] . In this section the quintessence field will be
related with the results of the last section and the corresponding
quintessence potential will be deduced from Eq. ( 4.52 ).

As seen in Eq. ( 4.52 ) the scalar potential depends on the absolute
value of the scalar field, as it is in fact for a complex quintessence
field. As in Ref. [ 20 ] , the complex quintessence can be written as
@xmath , where @xmath is the absolute value of the scalar and @xmath is
a phase, both depending only on time. The equations of motion for the
complex scalar field in an expanding universe with FLRW metric and with
a potential that depends only on the absolute value @xmath (as in our
case) has been discussed in Sect. 3.2.1 [ 20 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the scale factor and the first term in the brackets
comes from the equation of motion for @xmath ( 3.5 ), with @xmath being
an integration constant interpreted as angular velocity [ 20 ] . This
term drives @xmath away from zero and the factor @xmath may make the
term decrease very fast, provided that @xmath does not decrease faster
than @xmath . This situation never happens for our model, so that the
contribution due to the phase component @xmath decreases faster than the
matter density @xmath (proportional to @xmath ). Furthermore, if @xmath
is small the complex scalar field behaves like a real scalar. From all
these arguments, we neglect the complex contribution in the following.

After supergravity is spontaneously broken, the scalar field @xmath may
oscillate around @xmath and the massive gravitino can decay into the
scalar field @xmath . Since the scalar @xmath oscillates around @xmath
before decay, we perform the following steps. We assume the dark energy,
given by the field @xmath , has a similar potential to the one in Eq. (
4.52 ). Then, we just shift the scalar potential from @xmath to @xmath ,
thus the minimum point goes from @xmath to @xmath . The Taylor expansion
of @xmath around the new minimum @xmath (for @xmath ) leads to a natural
exponential term @xmath . All these procedures give rise to the
potential @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

The constant @xmath is written in this form for convenience. The
leading-order term of this potential ( 4.57 ) is an example of the
well-known tracking behavior [ 18 , 19 ] .

The parameter @xmath does not have the same order of @xmath , as long as
the original shifted potential was expanded around zero. The order of
magnitude of the potential @xmath ( @xmath ) is determined
phenomenologically and can be as @xmath GeV @xmath . The tracker
condition @xmath (for a generic potential @xmath for @xmath ) is
satisfied in our case, where @xmath .

The dynamical system analysis of the quintessence field shows that the
potential ( 4.57 ) leads to a fixed point in the phase plane, which is a
stable attractor [ 5 , 63 ] . The equation of state for the quintessence
field is given by @xmath , where @xmath decreases to zero for the
tracking solution. The potential Eq. ( 4.57 ) gives an equation of state
@xmath , in agreement with the Planck results [ 3 ] , for @xmath , which
in turn is easily achieved since @xmath decreases to zero.

As is usual in quintessence models in supergravity, such as in [ 22 , 23
] , different energy scales are needed to take both dynamical dark
energy and local SUSY breaking into account. This unavoidable feature is
present in our model in the fact that we have needed two different free
parameters @xmath and @xmath and they are determined by phenomenological
arguments.

#### 4.2.3 Summary

In this section we have analyzed the scalar potential in minimal
supergravity using the traditional flat Kähler potential and the
power-law superpotential, whose single scalar field @xmath is
responsible for the Super-Higgs mechanism. The gravitino decays before
BBN and originates other scalar @xmath , which is regarded as the dark
energy. The scalar @xmath had its potential derived from the potential
@xmath , where the leading-order term of the expanded potential is a
well-known example that satisfies the tracker condition.

### 4.3 Holographic dark energy from minimal supergravity

#### 4.3.1 Holographic dark energy

Another striking attempt to explain the acceleration comes from
holography. An effective quantum field theory in a box of size @xmath
with ultraviolet (UV) cutoff @xmath has an entropy that scale
extensively, given by @xmath [ 129 ] . Based on the peculiar
thermodynamics of black holes [ 130 , 131 , 132 , 133 , 134 ] ,
Bekeinstein proposed that the maximum entropy in a box of volume @xmath
behaves non-extensively [ 130 , 131 , 132 , 134 ] , growing with area of
the box. Moreover, the degrees of freedom of a physical system also
scales with its boundary area rather than its volume [ 135 , 136 ] . A
system satisfies the Bekenstein entropy bound if its volume is limited
according to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the RHS is the entropy of a black hole of radius @xmath . The
length @xmath acts as an infrared (IR) cutoff and from Eq. ( 4.58 ) it
is straightforward that @xmath .

Field theories appear not to be a good effective low energy description
of any system containing a black hole, since infalling particles
experience Planck scale interactions with outgoing Hawking radiation
near the horizon. Therefore, they should probably not attempt to
describe particle states whose volume is smaller than their
corresponding Schwarzschild radius. But an effective theory that
saturates ( 4.58 ) includes states with the Schwarzschild radius much
larger than the box size. This is seen if we recall that effective
quantum field theory is expected to describe a system at a temperature
@xmath , provided that @xmath . Since the thermal energy is an extensive
quantity, it is @xmath with an entropy @xmath . Eq. ( 4.58 ) is
saturated at a temperature @xmath and the corresponding Schwarzschild
radius is @xmath .

To avoid the difficulties pointed above, Cohen et al. [ 129 ] proposed a
stronger constraint on the IR cutoff. Since the maximum energy density
in the effective theory is @xmath , the new constraint is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

A system at temperature @xmath saturates ( 4.59 ) at @xmath and the
corresponding Schwarzschild radius is now @xmath .

Once a relation between the UV and IR cutoff was established, if @xmath
is the vacuum energy density, Eq. ( 4.59 ) becomes @xmath . This last
inequality is saturated at [ 137 , 138 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a constant introduced for convenience.

The first choice for @xmath was the Hubble radius @xmath . With this
choice the Friedmann equation is @xmath , so @xmath and @xmath and
@xmath behave as @xmath . The @xmath scales with @xmath , as so @xmath ,
thus the dark energy is pressureless and its equation of state is @xmath
[ 137 ] . The correct equation of state for dark energy was obtained by
[ 138 ] , when he chose the future event horizon as the IR cutoff. The
future event horizon is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

Assuming that the dark energy @xmath dominates the Friendmann equation
@xmath simplifies to @xmath . Using Eq. 4.61 into @xmath we can write it
as [ 138 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

which has the solution @xmath , with a constant @xmath . The density
energy for HDE becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

hence the equation of state for HDE is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

and can describe the accelerated expansion of the universe. For a IR
cutoff with the particle horizon

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

the equation of state would be @xmath .

The problem with the Hubble radius as the IR cutoff could be avoided
assuming the interaction between dark energy and dark matter (DM) [ 139
] . Such interaction was first proposed in the context of quintessence [
31 , 32 ] , and since the energy densities of the DE and DM are
comparable, the interaction can alleviate the coincidence problem [ 33 ,
34 ] . Taking the coupling @xmath into account, with constant @xmath ,
the HDE with Hubble radius as IR cutoff could lead to an accelerated
expansion of the universe and also solve the coincidence problem [ 139 ]
. To see this fact, consider the ratio of the energy densities

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

whose evolution equation is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

The equation of state for dark energy with this interaction is written
in terms of the ratio @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

and when Eq. ( 4.68 ) is used in Eq. ( 4.66 ), @xmath , alleviating the
coincidence problem.

Li’s proposal could also be generalized assuming the interaction between
the two components of the dark sector as @xmath [ 40 , 41 , 42 , 43 ] .

Due to the prominent role of the AdS/CFT correspondence [ 140 ] to
relate both supergravity and holography concepts, it is natural to ask
if there is any connection between supergravity (even for @xmath ) and
HDE. As showed in [ 141 ] , it is possible to establish a connection
between HDE and different kind of scalar fields, such as quintessence,
tachyon and K-essence, through reconstructed scalar potentials. In
Sects. 4.3.2 and 4.3.3 we show that the HDE in interaction with DM can
be embedded in minimal supergravity plus matter with a single chiral
superfield. The interaction between HDE and DM is taken into account
because they are generalizations of some uncoupled cases, namely, the
models presented in [ 137 , 138 ] , thus the correspondent models are
good choices to analyze whether they can be embedded in minimal
supergravity or not.

#### 4.3.2 HDE with Hubble radius as IR cutoff

We use @xmath from now on for simplicity. First we consider the size
@xmath as the Hubble radius @xmath , thus the energy density for the
dark energy becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

which describes a pressureless fluid [ 137 ] in the absence of
interaction with dark matter. When one considers such interaction [ 139
] , the fluid has an equation of state that can describe the dark
energy. We consider the interaction @xmath , where @xmath is a constant
which measures the strength of the interaction.

In order to reconstruct a holographic scalar field model we should
relate Eq. ( 4.68 ) with the scalar field @xmath . Using the energy
density and the pressure for the scalar field @xmath and @xmath , we
have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using Eqs. ( 4.69 ) and ( 4.68 ) into Eq. ( 4.70 ) we have the potential
[ 141 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath .

On the other hand, the scalar potential in minimal supergravity with no
D-terms is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

for a single complex scalar field. We will use the same choices of Ref.
[ 23 ] for @xmath and @xmath , namely, the string-inspired Kähler
potential @xmath , which is present at the tree level for axion-dilaton
field in string theory, and the superpotential @xmath , where @xmath is
a constant. With these choices, with the imaginary part of the scalar
field stabilized at zero @xmath Im @xmath and the field redefinition Re
@xmath , we get the scalar potential expressed in terms of the canonical
normalized field @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . Comparing Eq. ( 4.71 ) with Eq. ( 4.73 ) we have @xmath
and @xmath , with @xmath . Thus, the two parameters @xmath and @xmath
determine the exponent @xmath of the superpotential and the parameter
@xmath . We notice in this case that @xmath is not an independent
parameter, but it depends on @xmath and @xmath as well. Even if we would
have a way to know what is the value of @xmath or rather, @xmath , we
could not know the specific values of @xmath and @xmath . The opposite
direction is favored, because once one finds out observationally @xmath
and @xmath , the HDE can be embedded in a specific supergravity model.
If there is no interaction ( @xmath ) @xmath , but @xmath .

The kernel used so far simplifies @xmath in such a way that Eq. ( 4.71 )
has been written with no need of any approximation. When one considers
the other possibilities for the interaction @xmath ( @xmath or @xmath ),
the scalar potential cannot be written as easy as it was in Eq. ( 4.71
). We illustrate this possibility now, but with other IR cutoff.

#### 4.3.3 HDE with future event horizon as IR cutoff

We will analyze another possibility of HDE with the kernel @xmath and
with the future event horizon @xmath as the IR cutoff. The choice of
@xmath is done because when @xmath the original Li’s model of HDE [ 138
] is recovered. The energy density for the HDE is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the equation of state for HDE becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the density parameter for DE. Using Eqs. ( 4.74 ) and (
4.75 ) into Eq. ( 4.70 ) we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

From the equations above we see that we have to know the evolution of
@xmath in order to fully determine @xmath as a function of @xmath . The
evolution equation for @xmath was found in [ 40 ] and it is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the prime is the derivative with respect to @xmath . To solve this
differential equation we let @xmath , thus Eq. ( 4.78 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order to have an analytic solution of Eq. ( 4.79 ) we will
investigate the asymptotic behavior of @xmath , for small and large
@xmath . For very small @xmath we have @xmath and @xmath , therefore Eq.
( 4.79 ) is approximately

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

which leads to the solution @xmath , provided that @xmath should be
small [ 40 ] . Since @xmath scales with @xmath , the contribution of the
dark energy in the early universe is negligible. We also see from Eq. (
4.76 ) that the term between brackets should be positive and small, then
@xmath is small. Therefore, we have @xmath . Due to the small
contribution of @xmath , we neglect it at this limit and we will focus
on large @xmath , where HDE is dominant.

For large @xmath we have @xmath , and @xmath . Thus, the last term in
Eq. ( 4.79 ) is the dominant one, so @xmath , and @xmath , where @xmath
is the value of @xmath at @xmath . Since @xmath , we have @xmath which
is very small if we consider the present value of @xmath given by Planck
[ 3 ] . Thus we neglect the last term in Eq. ( 4.76 ) and we assume the
dark energy dominance. We have @xmath at large @xmath and Eq. ( 4.76 )
yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

The equation above implies that @xmath , which is the Li’s proposal [
138 ] . Eq. ( 4.81 ) has the solution

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

The second Friedmann equation at large @xmath leads to @xmath and @xmath
. The scalar potential ( 4.77 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.83)
  -- -------- -- --------

Similarly to before, comparing Eq. ( 4.83 ) with Eq. ( 4.73 ) we see
that both @xmath and @xmath are determined by the constant @xmath . Eq.
( 4.83 ) was deduced for a dark-energy-dominated universe, in such a way
that the interaction with dark matter is absent, as it should be in this
limit.

A more realistic scenario could not be found analytically, in opposite
to the previous case, where the scalar potential was written with no
approximations. Different kernels for the coupling @xmath may be tried,
although the main features of the method were expressed in these two
cases. The other alternatives are similar.

#### 4.3.4 Summary

In this section we embedded two models of HDE in the minimal
supergravity with one single chiral superfield. In the first model we
used the Hubble radius as the IR cutoff and an interaction proportional
to @xmath , while in the second one we used the future event horizon as
IR cutoff and the kernel proportional to @xmath . In both cases the free
parameters of our superpotential could be expressed in terms of the
constants @xmath and @xmath , depending on the model. The second case is
embedded only for a dark-energy-dominated universe, while the first one
is more general. There are other ways to embed HDE in minimal
supergravity, as for instance the choices of Kähler potential and
superpotential made in [ 142 ] for the inflationary scenario. However,
the main results are the same, that is, a way to relate HDE and
supergravity. Due to the nature of the holographic principle and
recalling that extended supergravity is the low-energy limit of string
theory, the relation presented here has perhaps a deeper meaning, when
one takes a quantum gravity theory into account. Such idea was explored
in [ 143 ] .

## Chapter 5 Metastable dark energy

The chapter is structured as follows. In Sect. 5.1 we present a model of
metastable dark energy. It is embedded into a dark @xmath model in Sect.
5.2 and we summarize our results in Sect. 5.3 . This chapter is based on
our paper [ 84 ] .

### 5.1 A model of metastable dark energy

The current stage of accelerated expansion of the universe will be
described by a canonical scalar field @xmath at a local minimum @xmath
of its potential @xmath , while the true minimum of @xmath is at @xmath
. The energy of the true vacuum is below the zero energy of the false
vacuum, so that this difference is interpreted as the observed value of
the vacuum energy ( @xmath GeV @xmath ).

We assume that by some mechanism the scalar potential is positive
definite (as e.g. in supersymmetric models) and the true vacuum lies at
zero energy. As we will see below this value is adjusted by the mass of
the scalar field and the coefficient of the quartic and sixth-order
interaction. The rate at which the false vacuum decays into the true
vacuum state will be calculated.

The process of barrier penetration in which the metastable false vacuum
decays into the stable true vacuum is similar to the old inflationary
scenario and it occurs through the formation of bubbles of true vacuum
in a false vacuum background. After the barrier penetration the bubbles
grow at the speed of light and eventually collide with other bubbles
until all space is in the lowest energy state. The energy release in the
process can produce new particles and a Yukawa interaction @xmath can
account for the production of a fermionic field which can be the
pressureless fermionic dark matter. However, as we will see, the vacuum
time decay is of the order of the age of the universe, so another
dominant process for the production of cold dark matter should be
invoked in order to recapture the standard cosmology.

If one considers a scalar field @xmath with the even self-interactions
up to order six, one gets

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are positive free parameters of the theory and
the coefficient of the @xmath interaction is chosen in such a way that
the potential ( 5.1 ) is a perfect square. This choice will be useful to
calculate the false vacuum decay rate.

The potential ( 5.1 ) has extrema at @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , but it
is zero in all of the minima ( @xmath and @xmath ). In order to have a
cosmological constant, the potential should deviate slightly from the
perfect square ( 5.1 ). Once the coupling present in GR is the Planck
mass @xmath it is natural to expect that the deviation from the
Minkowski vacuum is due to a term proportional to @xmath . Thus we
assume that the potential ( 5.1 ) has a small deviation given by @xmath
. Although the value of the scalar field at the minimum point @xmath
also changes, the change is very small and we can consider that the
scalar field at the true vacuum is still @xmath . The difference between
the true vacuum and the false one is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

As usual in quantum field theory it is expected that the parameter
@xmath is smaller than one, thus, if we assume @xmath , the Eq. ( 5.2 )
gives @xmath GeV @xmath for @xmath . Bigger values of @xmath imply
smaller values of @xmath . Therefore, the cosmological constant is
determined by the mass parameter and the coupling of the quartic
interaction.

The potential ( 5.1 ) with the term @xmath is shown in Fig. 5.1 .

#### 5.1.1 Decay rate

The computation of the decay rate is based on the semi-classical theory
presented in [ 144 ] . The energy of the false vacuum state at which
@xmath is given by [ 145 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the Euclidean action,

  -- -- -- -------
           (5.4)
  -- -- -- -------

The imaginary part of @xmath gives the decay rate ¹ ¹ 1 As we know from
Quantum Mechanics. See for instance the Problem 1.15 from [ 146 ] . and
all the fields @xmath integrated in Eq. ( 5.3 ) satisfy the boundary
conditions

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

The action ( 5.4 ) is stationary under variation of the fields that
satisfy the equations

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

and are subject to the boundary conditions ( 5.5 ). In order to get the
solution of Eq. ( 5.6 ) we make an ansatz that the field @xmath is
invariant under rotations around @xmath in four dimensions, which in
turn is valid for large @xmath [ 147 ] . The ansatz is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

In terms of the Eq. ( 5.7 ), the field equations ( 5.6 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The above equation of motion is analogous to that of a particle at
position @xmath moving in a time @xmath , under the influence of a
potential @xmath and a viscous force @xmath . This particle travels from
an initial value @xmath and @xmath and reaches @xmath at @xmath . The
Euclidean action ( 5.4 ) for the rotation invariant solution becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

The metastable vacuum decay into the true vacuum is seen as the
formation of bubbles of true vacuum surrounded by the false vacuum
outside. The friction term @xmath is different from zero only at the
bubble wall, since the field is at rest inside and outside. The decay
rate per volume of the false vacuum, in the semi-classical approach, is
of order

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is some mass scale. When @xmath is large the barrier
penetration is suppressed and the mass scale is not important. This is
the case when the energy of the true vacuum is slightly below the energy
of the false vacuum, by an amount @xmath , considered here as small as
@xmath GeV @xmath . On the other hand, the potential @xmath is not small
between @xmath and @xmath .

We will use the so-called ‘thin wall approximation’, in which @xmath is
taken to be inside of a four-dimensional sphere of large radius @xmath .
For a thin wall we can consider @xmath in this region and since @xmath
is large we can neglect the viscous term, which is proportional to
@xmath at the wall. The action ( 5.9 ) in this approximation is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a surface tension, given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

for small @xmath . The action ( 5.11 ) is stationary at the radius

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

and at the stationary point the action ( 5.11 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the potential ( 5.1 ) into Eq. ( 5.12 ) we obtain ² ² 2 The term
@xmath is very small and can be ignored.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

which in turn gives the Euclidean action at the stationary point in the
thin wall approximation ( 5.11 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Substituting the action ( 5.16 ) into the decay rate ( 5.10 ) with
@xmath GeV @xmath and the mass scale being @xmath GeV for simplicity, we
have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

The decay time is obtained inverting the above expression,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

The expression for the decay time gives the lowest value of the mass
parameter @xmath for which ( 5.18 ) has at least the age of the universe
( @xmath s). Therefore the mass parameter should be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

for @xmath . Thus, it is in agreement with the values for @xmath at
which the scalar potential describes the observed vacuum energy, as
discussed in the last section. The mass of the scalar field can be
smaller if the coupling @xmath is also smaller than @xmath . The decay
rate ( 5.17 ) is strongly suppressed for larger values of @xmath . The
bubble radius given in Eq. ( 5.13 ) for the mass parameter ( 5.19 ) is
@xmath cm.

Notice that the axion would still be a possibility, although it arises
in a quite different context. We can also consider the gravitational
effect in the computation of the decay rate. In this case the new action
@xmath has the Einstein-Hilbert term @xmath , where @xmath is the Ricci
scalar. The relation between the new action @xmath and the old one
@xmath can be deduced using the thin wall approximation and it gives [
148 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are given by Eqs. ( 5.14 ) and ( 5.13 ),
respectively, in the absence of gravity, and @xmath is the value of the
bubble radius when it is equal to the Schwarzschild radius associated
with the energy released by the conversion of false vacuum to true one.

For @xmath GeV @xmath we get @xmath cm, thus the gravitational
correction @xmath is very small. Larger values of @xmath give larger
@xmath , implying that the gravitational effect should be taken into
account. Even so, the decay rate is still highly suppressed.

### 5.2 A dark @xmath model

As an example of how the metastable dark energy can be embedded into a
dark sector model we restrict our attention to a model with @xmath
symmetry. Both dark energy and dark matter are doublets under @xmath and
singlets under any other symmetry. ³ ³ 3 We assume here only
interactions among the components of the dark sector, leading the
possible interactions with the standard model particles to a future
work. After the spontaneous symmetry breaking by the dark Higgs field
@xmath , the gauge bosons @xmath , @xmath and @xmath acquire the same
mass given by @xmath , where @xmath is the VEV of the dark Higgs. The
dark @xmath model contains a dark matter candidate @xmath , a dark
neutrino @xmath (which can be much lighter than @xmath ), and the dark
energy doublet @xmath , which contains @xmath and @xmath , the latter
being the heaviest particle. After symmetry breaking @xmath and @xmath
have different masses and both have a potential given by Eq. ( 5.1 )
plus the deviation @xmath The interaction between the fields are given
by the Lagrangian

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the currents are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
                       @xmath            (5.23)
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.24)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The currents above are very similar to the ones in the electroweak
theory. The main differences are that there is no hypercharge due to
@xmath and there is a new doublet, given by @xmath and @xmath .

Among the interactions shown in Eq. ( 5.21 ), it is of interest to
calculate the decay rate due to the process @xmath . The three-body
decay leads to a cold dark matter particle whose mass can be
accommodated to give the correct relic abundance, to a dark neutrino
which is a hot/warm dark matter particle, and to a scalar field @xmath .
Similar to the weak interactions, we assume that the energy involved in
the decay is much lower than the mass of the gauge fields, thus the
propagator of @xmath is proportional to @xmath and the currents interact
at a point. We can also define

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the dark coupling.

The Feynman diagram for the decay is shown in Fig. 5.2 and the amplitude
for the decay is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the labels @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are used, respectively, for
the particles @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . The energy-momentum
conservation implies that @xmath , where @xmath is the four-momentum of
the field @xmath and @xmath will be its mass.

The averaged amplitude squared for the decay @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the energy-momentum conservation and defining the invariants
@xmath as @xmath , we can reorganize the amplitude squared. The three
invariants are not independent, obeying @xmath from their definitions
and the energy-momentum conservation. With all these steps we eliminate
@xmath and get

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath               (5.28)
                       @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The decay rate can be evaluated from [ 149 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where for a given value of @xmath , the range of @xmath is determined by
its values when @xmath is parallel or antiparallel to @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.30)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.31)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The energies @xmath and @xmath are the energies of particles 2 and 3 in
the @xmath rest frame [ 149 ] . The invariant @xmath , in turn, has the
limits

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

The plot of the kinetic limits of @xmath and @xmath is shown in Fig. 5.3
and it is called Dalitz plot.

With the limits for @xmath ( 5.32 ) and for @xmath ( 5.30 )–( 5.31 ) and
with the amplitude squared ( 5.28 ) we can integrate Eq. ( 5.29 ) for
different values of masses, in order to get the decay time @xmath .

The plot of @xmath as a function of @xmath is shown in Fig. 5.4 and the
decay rate @xmath is the area under the curve. For illustrative
purposes, we set the mass of the particles as being @xmath GeV, @xmath
MeV, @xmath GeV and @xmath GeV. With these values of masses, the decay
time is of the order of the age of the universe ( @xmath s) with @xmath
GeV @xmath , while with @xmath GeV @xmath the decay time is @xmath s. If
@xmath is for instance of the same order of the fine-structure constant,
the gauge bosons @xmath and @xmath have masses around @xmath GeV in
order to the decay time to be @xmath s. Such decay times are compatible
with phenomenological models of interacting dark energy, where the
coupling is proportional to the Hubble rate [ 47 , 150 ] . In addition,
depending on the values of the free parameters, the mass of the gauge
bosons can be of the same order of the grand unified theories scale.

### 5.3 Summary

In this chapter we presented a model of metastable dark energy, in which
the dark energy is a scalar field with a potential given by a sum of
even self-interactions up to order six. The parameters of the model can
be adjusted in such a way that the difference between the energy of the
true vacuum and the energy of the false one is around @xmath GeV @xmath
. The decay of the false vacuum to the true one is highly suppressed,
thus the metastable dark energy can explain the current accelerated
expansion of the universe. We do not need a very tiny mass for the
scalar field (as it happens for some models of quintessence), in order
to get the observed value of the vacuum energy.

The metastable dark energy can be inserted into a more sophisticated
model for the dark sector. In this paper we restricted our attention to
a Lagrangian invariant under @xmath (before the spontaneous symmetry
breaking by the dark Higgs), in which the dark energy doublet and the
dark matter doublet naturally interact with each other. The decay of the
heaviest particle of the dark energy doublet into the three daughters
(dark energy particle, cold and hot dark matter) was calculated and the
decay time can be as long as the age of the universe, if the mediator is
massive enough. Such a decay shows a different form of interaction
between dark matter and dark energy, and the model opens a new window to
investigate the dark sector from the point-of-view of particle physics.

## Chapter 6 Final remarks

This thesis explored models of the dark sector, in which the dark energy
is described by some candidates other than the conventional cosmological
constant. Scalar fields (real or complex) were mostly used in the
models, although a vector field was taken into account as well. The two
components of the dark sector were assumed to interact with each other,
in different contexts. Equipped with the dynamical system theory we
analyzed the asymptotic states of some cosmological models, in which the
dark energy was either scalar fields or a vector field. Scalar fields
were also used as candidates to explain the accelerated expansion of the
universe using minimal supergravity. Finally, we proposed a model of
metastable dark energy and we inserted it in a dark @xmath model, in
which the dark energy and dark matter doublets naturally interact with
each other.

The results presented here can be extended in several different
directions. The dynamical system theory has shown itself to be a good
tool to analyze asymptotic states of cosmological models and we have
studied other couplings in [ 85 ] . In addition, we obtained an analytic
formula for the growth rate of structures in a coupled dark energy model
in which the exchange of energy-momentum is proportional to the dark
energy density [ 48 ] .

The dark @xmath model opens a new window to investigate the whole dark
sector from the point-of-view of particle physics. We started attacking
this issue here and a natural evolution is to build extensions of the
Standard Model. Furthermore, as part of an extended Standard Model, it
may be expected that a grand unified theory contains the dark @xmath .

## Appendix A Notations and Conventions

We use Planck units @xmath unless where is explicitly written. The FLRW
metric has signature ( @xmath ) and the universe is flat. Weyl spinor
indices are the first part of Greek symbols ( @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath ), run from one to two and are implicit. Second
part of Greek symbols ( @xmath ) indicate Lorentz elements, and in four
dimension they run from 0 to 3.

Generalized Pauli matrices are

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the generators of the Lorentz group are written in terms of ( A.1 )
by

  -- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath            (A.2)
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------

where @xmath . Gamma matrices in the Weyl basis are

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

and @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Majorana spinors contain one Weyl spinor

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Gravitino is written in the following way

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.6)
  -- -------- -- -------