As this century unfolds we will witness the rise of the quantum
computer. A quantum computer is a device that utilizes the laws of one
of the most fundamental theories of physics — quantum mechanics. By
utilizing properties of quantum mechanics a quantum computer is able to
perform certain information processing tasks much more efficiently than
an ordinary classical computer. The last century of modern society was
revolutionized by some of the simplest ideas in quantum mechanics like
energy quantization and quantum tunnelling, which led to technologies
like the laser and the transistor. We can expect to see additional
technological revolutions occur in this century since we are beginning
to build technologies with some of the more complex properties of
quantum mechanics such as quantum entanglement and quantum
superposition. These quantum effects make more radical technologies like
the quantum computer possible.

This thesis is based upon the work I have done during my PhD candidature
at Macquarie University. In this work we develop quantum technologies
that are directed towards realising a quantum computer. Specifically, we
have made many theoretical advancements in a type of quantum information
processing protocol called BosonSampling . This device efficiently
simulates the interaction of quantum particles called bosons, which no
classical computer can efficiently simulate. In this thesis we explore
quantum random walks, which are the basis of how the bosons in
BosonSampling interfere with each other. We explore implementing
BosonSampling using the most readily available photon source technology.
We invented a completely new architecture which can implement
BosonSampling in time rather than space and has since been used to make
the worlds largest BosonSampling experiment ever performed. We look at
variations to the traditional BosonSampling architecture by considering
other quantum states of light. We show a worlds first application
inspired by BosonSampling in quantum metrology where measurements may be
made more accurately than with any classical method. Lastly, dealing
with BosonSampling , we look at reformulating the formalism of
BosonSampling using a quantum optics approach. In addition, but not
related to BosonSampling , we show a protocol for efficiently generating
large-photon Fock states, which are a type of quantum state of light,
that are useful for quantum computation. Also, we show a method for
generating a specific quantum state of light that is useful for quantum
error correction — an essential component of realising a quantum
computer — by coupling together light and atoms.
