One of the most promising platforms for one-dimensional topological
superconductivity is based on semiconducting nanowires with strong
spin-orbit coupling (SOC), where @xmath -wave superconductivity is
induced by proximity effect and an external Zeeman field drives the
system into the topological superconducting phase with Majorana bound
states (MBSs) at the end of the wire. During last years this idea has
led to a great number of important experiments in hybrid
superconductor-semiconductor systems, where the main signature is an
emergent zero-bias peak (ZBP) in the differential conductance as the
Zeeman field is increased.

This thesis focuses on the study of hybrid superconductor-semiconductor
junctions made of semiconducting nanowires with Rashba SOC. In the first
part, we introduce the emergence of one-dimensional topological
superconductivity, and then we show details on modeling one-dimensional
hybrid junctions made of semiconducting nanowires with SOC. Afterwards,
we fully analyse the Andreev spectrum and study phase-biased transport,
which exhibit non-trivial signatures in the topological phase with MBSs.
In the second part, we focus on transport in a voltage-biased short
superconductor-normal-superconductor (SNS) junction made of
semiconducting nanowires with SOC as the applied Zeeman field drives the
system into the topological superconducting phase. We show that the
dissipative multiple Andreev reflection (MAR) current at different
junction transparencies exhibits unique features related to topology
such as gap inversion, the formation of MBSs and fermion-parity
conservation. In the third part, we carried out a detailed study of
helicity and confinement in long SNS junctions based on semiconducting
nanowires. The main conclusion in this part is that a long junction with
a helical normal section but still in the topologically trivial regime,
supports a low-energy sub-gap spectrum consisting of multiple
zero-energy crossings that smoothly evolve towards MBSs as the junction
becomes topological. In the fourth part, we investigate a novel approach
to engineer MBSs in non-topological superconducting wires, where we
propose to create a sufficiently transparent normal-superconductor (NS)
junction on a Rashba wire with a topologically trivial superconducting
side and a helical normal side. We finish with an analysis of screening
properties of proximitized nanowires with SOC and Zeeman fields within
linear response theory, relevant for experiments trying to measure
Majorana bound states and their non-trivial overlap. Along this thesis,
we emphasise the importance of employing hybrids
superconductor-semiconductor nanowire junctions towards the
unambiguously detection of MBSs beyond zero-bias anomalies. Keywords:
Topological superconductivity, Majorana bound states, Andreev bound
states, hybrid NS and SNS junctions, spin-orbit coupling, Zeeman
interaction, @xmath -wave superconductivity
