This thesis focuses on the applications of mathematical tools and
concepts brought from nonequilibrium statistical physics to the modeling
of ecological problems.

The first part provides a short introduction where the theoretical
concepts and mathematical tools that are going to be used in subsequent
chapters are presented. Firstly, the different levels of description
usually employed in the models are explained. Secondly, the mathematical
relationships among them are presented. Finally, the notation and
terminology that will be used later on are explained.

The second part is devoted to studying vegetation pattern formation in
regions where precipitations are not frequent and resources for plant
growth are scarce. This part comprises two chapters.

-    The first one studies the case of mesic savannas. These systems are
    characterized by receiving an intermediate amount of water and by a
    long term coexistence of layer made of grass and shrubs interspersed
    with irregular clusters of trees. A minimalistic model considering
    only long range competition among plants and the effect of possible
    fires is presented. In this later case, adult trees protect the
    growth of juvenile individuals against the fires by surrounding them
    and creating an antifire shell. This introduces a local facilitation
    effect for the establishment of new trees. Despite the range of
    facilitative interactions is taken to its infinitesimally short
    limit, the spectrum of patterns obtained in models with competitive
    and facilitative nonlocal interactions is recovered. Finally,
    considering the stochasticity in the birth and death dynamics of
    trees, the shapes of the structures reproduce the irregularity
    observed in aerial photographs of mesic savannas.

-    The second chapter investigates the formation of patterns in arid
    regions, that are typically more regular than in mesic savannas.
    Previous studies attribute the origin of these structures to the
    existence of competitive and facilitative interactions among plants
    acting simultaneously but at different spatial scales. More
    precisely, to the combination of a short-range facilitation and a
    long-range competition ( scale-depedent feedback ). The findings of
    this chapter are based on the study of a theoretical model that
    assumes only long-range competitive interactions and shows the
    existence of vegetation patterns even under these conditions. This
    result suggests that the role of facilitative interactions could be
    superfluous in the development of these spatial structures. The
    biological concept of exclusion areas is proposed as an alternative
    to conventional scale-dependent feedback .

The third part of the thesis develops a series of mathematical models
describing the collective movement and behavior of some animal species.
Its primary objective is to investigate the effect that communication
among foragers has on searching times and the formation of groups. It
consists of two chapters:

-    In the first one, the model is established and its properties
    studied from a theoretical point of view. The main novelty of this
    work is the inclusion of communication among searchers to share
    information about the location of the targets. Communication and
    amount of shared information are directly connected through the
    range of the signals emitted by successful searchers. In this
    context, searching processes are optimized in terms of duration when
    the individuals share intermediate amounts of information,
    corresponding to mid-range communication. Both a lack and an excess
    of information may worsen the search. The first implies an almost
    uninformed search, while the latter causes a loss in the
    directionality of the movement since individuals are overwhelmed
    with information coming from many targets. Finally, the influence of
    the type of movement on the search efficiency is investigated,
    comparing the Brownian and Lévy cases. Some analytical
    approximations and a continuum description of the model are also
    presented.

-    This part ends with an application of the previous model to the
    foraging behavior of Mongolian gazelles ( Procapra gutturosa ). The
    population of this species has decreased in the last century because
    of massive hunting and a progressive habitat degradation and
    fragmentation caused by human disturbances in the Eastern steppe of
    Mongolia. Studying their mobility patterns and social behavior
    improves the development of conservation strategies. This chapter
    suggests possible searching strategies used by these animals to
    increase their forage encounters rate. The study is supported by the
    use of real vegetation maps based on satellite imagery and GPS data
    tracking the position of a group of gazelles. The main focus is on
    the effect that nonlocal vocal communication among individuals has
    on foraging times and group formation in the areas with better
    resources. According to the results of the model, the searching time
    is minimized when the communication takes place at a frequency that
    agrees with measurements made in gazelle’s acoustic signals. This
    suggests that, through its evolution, Procapra gutturosa may have
    optimized its vocal tract in order to facilitate the communication
    in the steppe.

The fourth part covers the effect of stochastic temporal disorder,
mimicking climate and environmental variability, on systems formed by
many interacting particles. These models may serve as an example of
ecosystems. The temporal disorder is implemented making the control
parameter fluctuating around a mean value close to the critical point.
The effect of this external variability is quantified using passage
times. The results show a change in the behavior of this magnitude
compared with the pure case, that is, in the absence of external
fluctuations. Within a finite region of the phase diagram, close to the
critical point, the passage times scale as a power law with continuously
varying exponent. In the pure model this behavior is only observed at
the critical point. After these results, the concept of Temporal
Griffiths Phases , introduced in the spreading of epidemics, is extended
to a vast range of models.

The thesis ends with a summary and devising future research lines.
