## Chapter 1 Introduction

Just over a century has passed since Einstein first presented his work
on General Relativity (GR) to the Prussian academy, ushering in a new
paradigm for modern physics. In the intervening years, Einstein’s
remarkable theory has withstood the enormous advancements in
experimental physics and observational data - with each new discovery
adding further weight to this colossus of scientific endeavour. General
Relativity is not only considered one of mankind’s greatest scientific
discoveries but one of the most significant intellectual achievements in
human history. Outside of the scientific sphere, the influence of
relativity can be found in the arts – whether it be in the work of
existential playwright Luigi Pirandello, who played with traditional
notions of the observer, or Pablo Picasso, whose distorted perspective
was reportedly inspired by the idea of displaying a fourth dimension on
canvas [ 1 ] . That is not to say, however, that Einstein’s gravity does
not have its shortcomings, specifically in constructing a quantum field
theory of gravity; as well as describing a viable theory of gravity,
which is devoid of singularities.

String theory (ST) remains a popular candidate in formulating a
consistent quantum theory of gravity [ 2 ] , as does Loop Quantum
Gravity (LQG) [ 3 ] , [ 4 ] , to name just two. Whereas string theory
approaches the problem rather grandly, with the intention of unifying
gravity with the fundamental forces of nature, LQG makes no such claim,
with the stated aim of quantizing the gravitational field. Such an
approach centres around the notion of renormalisation , in that unwanted
divergences in the loop Feynman diagrams may be curtailed [ 5 ] , [ 6 ]
. A third course of action can be found in the causal set programme,
which considers the continuous Lorentzian manifold of GR to be an
approximation of a discrete spacetime structure [ 7 ] . A common thread
running through these fundamentally different approaches is the presence
of non-locality , where interactions occur not at a specific spatial
point but over a (finite) region of space [ 8 ] , [ 9 ] [ 10 ] , [ 11 ]
. Indeed, non-locality arising from infinite derivative extensions of GR
has been shown to play a pivotal role in the more classical context of
resolving the cosmological singularity problem, [ 12 ] , [ 13 ] , [ 14 ]
, [ 15 ] , [ 16 ] [ 17 ] , [ 18 ] , [ 19 ] , [ 20 ] [ 21 ] , [ 22 ] ,
which is our focus here.

The concept of singularities is a particularly confounding, yet
intriguing, topic. Often casually referred to as a ‘place’ where
curvature ‘blows up’, or a ‘hole’ in the fabric of spacetime – the
concept of a singular spacetime raises thorny questions for a physicist.
If a singularity is a ‘hole’ in the fabric of spacetime, can it be said
to exist within the framework of spacetime? Could we not simply omit the
singularity from our spacetime manifold? On the other hand, if the
singularity does indeed exist within the spacetime, what does it mean to
have a ‘place’ within this framework where the normal physical laws that
govern the universe no longer apply? The difficulty lies in a unique
characteristic of general relativity in that it is formulated without
stipulating the manifold and metric structure in advance. This is in
contrast to other physical theories, such as special relativity, where
these are clearly defined. As such, without a prescribed manifold, it is
not possible to discuss the concept of ‘outside’ the manifold. Neither
can one consider the notion of a ‘place’ where curvature may ‘blow up’
as this ‘place’ is undefined a priori [ 23 ] , [ 24 ] . Such intuitive
inconsistencies lead many to believe that singularities are not
physically present in our Universe and that GR’s admittance of
singularities is evidence of the need to extend this powerful
gravitational theory. In this way, we see the Einstein-Hilbert action of
GR as a first approximation of a broader theory.

Proposals for modifying general relativity have been put forward since
almost its inception. Early examples include Eddington’s reformulation
of GR in terms of the affine connection instead of the metric tensor or
Kaluza and Klein’s @xmath -dimensional reimagining [ 25 ] . The latter
of these proposals found that the Einstein equation in @xmath dimensions
yielded the @xmath -dimensional Einstein field equations along with
Maxwell’s equations, giving hopes for a unified theory of gravitation
and electromagnetism. While mathematically elegant, the Kaluza-Klein
model predicted an additional massless scalar field which is in conflict
with experimental data. Despite this, the technique of introducing
higher dimensions is considered to be a great influence on the
development of string theory [ 26 ] . Much later, in 1977, Stelle
proposed a fourth order extension of GR [ 27 ] , [ 28 ] , given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Fourth order or four-derivative gravity – so-called as each term in the
resulting field equations contains four derivatives of the metric tensor
– is a somewhat natural extension of gravity, if seen as a
generalisation of the Gauss-Bonnet term, which appears in Lovelock
gravity [ 29 ] , [ 30 ] , and is trivial in four dimensions. We return
to this point briefly in Section 1.2 . What is remarkable, however, is
that Stelle found that such theories are perturbatively renormalizable,
leading to a boon in the field of quantum gravity [ 31 ] , [ 32 ] , [ 27
] , [ 33 ] . A particular instance of fourth order gravity, known as the
Starobinsky model [ 34 ] , with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

created further interest due to its description of successful primordial
inflation. Starobinsky’s initial idea was to formulate a gravitational
theory that mimics the behaviour of the cosmological constant. For
sufficiently large @xmath this model does precisely that through the
@xmath term, leading to the formation of the large scale structures we
see in the Universe today. The quadratic curvature term becomes less
dominant as the theory moves away from the Planck scale, signalling the
end of inflation.

However, finite higher derivative theories, such as fourth-order gravty,
can open the door to ghosts – physical excitations with negative residue
in the graviton propagator. This negative residue presents itself as
negative kinetic energy, leading to instabilities even at a classical
level [ 35 ] , and a breakdown in unitarity when one considers the
renormalization of the theory [ 27 ] , [ 36 ] , [ 37 ] , see Chapter 3
for further details.

Infinite derivative theories, in contrast, have the potential to
describe a theory that is free of ghosts by modifying the graviton
propagator via an exponent of an entire function [ 15 ] , [ 16 ] . This
exponential suppression of the propagator results in an exponential
enhancement of the vertex factors of the relevant Feynman diagrams [ 38
] . Furthermore, the nature of this modification is such that one can
always construct a modified propagator that contains no additional
degrees of freedom, other than the massless graviton, so that negative
residues will not propagate [ 15 ] , [ 16 ] , [ 17 ] , [ 18 ] , [ 19 ] ,
[ 20 ] , [ 21 ] , [ 22 ] . Infinite derivative extensions of relativity
have been shown to display improved behaviour in the UV, in terms of
alleviating the @xmath behaviour of the Newtonian potential [ 16 ] , and
curtailing quantum loop divergences [ 39 ] , [ 40 ] . Recent progess has
also been made in terms of the resolution of the black-hole singularity
problem [ 41 ] and a study of the dynamical degrees of freedom via
Hamiltonian analysis [ 42 ] . Infinite derivatve extensions of
relativity also allow for the formulation of non-singular cosmologies [
18 ] , [ 19 ] , which we cover extensively in Chapter 4 , and forms the
basis of the present work. In simple terms, the objective of this thesis
is

  To present a viable extension of general relativity, which is free
  from cosmological singularities.

A viable cosmology, in this sense, is one that is free from ghosts,
tachyons or exotic matter, while staying true to the theoretical
foundations of General Relativity such as the principle of general
covariance, as well as observed phenomenon such as the accelerated
expansion of the universe and inflationary behaviour at later times [ 43
] .

Several competing theories have been proposed as an alternative to the
Big Bang model of GR. One such example is the Steady State universe.
This approach is based on an extension of the cosmological principle,
which imposes that the universe is homogenous and isotropic at large
scales, to the Perfect Cosmological Principle, which extends this
uniformity to include time as well as space. In this sense, it
conjectures that the universe has and always will exist in a state
statistically similar to its current one [ 44 ] , [ 45 ] . The steady
state model, however, has suffered setbacks following the discovery of
the cosmic microwave background in 1965 [ 46 ] , though some proponents
of “quasi-steady” models remain [ 47 ] .

Another popular resolution to the cosmological singularity problem is
the bouncing universe model, where the Big Bang singularity is replaced
by a Big Bounce [ 48 ] , [ 49 ] . Such a cosmology issues from a scale
factor that is necessarily an even function [ 13 ] , [ 50 ] . Although
the term “Big Bounce” was not popularised until the 1980s [ 51 ] , such
cosmologies have a long history of interest, stretching back to the time
of Willem de Sitter [ 52 ] .

Unlike bouncing models of the universe, we make no such stipulations on
the nature of the cosmological scale factor a priori, preferring to
confront the cosmological singularity problem by employing the
Raychaudhuri equation (RE) [ 53 ] , [ 54 ] , first devised in 1955 [ 55
] . The RE is a powerful identity, which relates the geometry of
spacetime to gravity, so that the behaviour of ingoing and outgoing
causal geodesic congruences can be understood in a gravitational
context. If these geodesics converge to a point in a finite time, they
are called geodesically incomplete , resulting in a singularity in a
geometrically-flat or open cosmology [ 56 ] , [ 57 ] , [ 58 ] , [ 24 ] ,
[ 59 ] , [ 43 ] , [ 60 ] . Similarly, one can deduce the physical
conditions, whereby these causal ‘rays’ diverge, or defocus , as a means
of describing a viable non-singular cosmology.

We will return to these points shortly, but it is perhaps instructive to
first review some of the central tenets that GR relies upon - detailing
what it is about GR that makes it such a special theory, before
expanding on the need to modify or extend GR.

### 1.1 General Relativity

The Weak Equivalence Principle
A key stepping stone in the formulation of GR was Einstein’s Equivalence
Principle, which states that, locally, inertial and gravitational mass
are equivalent. Roughly speaking, this is tantamount to saying that the
physics of a freely falling observer is indistinguishable from the
physics of an observer in the absence of a gravitational field, which is
why this principle is sometimes referred to as the universality of free
fall . In terms of Newtonian gravity, inertial mass @xmath is the form
of mass that makes up Newton’s second law of motion, i.e. @xmath ,
whereas gravitational mass @xmath appears in Newton’s Law of
Gravitation, @xmath . The equivalence of these two forms of mass can be
seen as a direct result of Galileo’s leaning tower of Pisa experiment,
where balls of two different masses reach the ground at the same time,
in that the acceleration due to gravity is independent of the inertial
or gravitational mass of the body in question. This simple insight led
Einstein to formulate a theory where gravity is not described as a force
but by geometry - by the curvature of spacetime [ 61 ] , [ 24 ] , [ 62 ]
.

  “All uncharged, freely falling test particles follow the same
  trajectories once the initial position and velocity have been
  prescribed” [ 25 ]
  - The Weak Equivalence Principle (WEP)

A fine-tuning of the Einstein Equivalence Principle led to the Weak
Equivalence Principle, stated above, which has been tested rigorously
over the years, beginning with the experiments of Loránd Eötvös in 1908.
Current experiments place the constraint on the WEP and therefore any
viable relativistic theory to be

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here, beryllium and titanium were used to measure the relative
difference in acceleration of the two bodies, @xmath and @xmath ,
towards the galactic centre. This is considered to be a null result,
wholly consistent with General Relativity [ 25 ] .
Principle of General Covariance
Another central tenet of General Relativity, which was instrumental in
the formulation of GR and is perhaps more relevant to the present work,
is the principle of general covariance. General covariance insists that
each term making up a gravitational action will transform in a
coordinate-independent way. The principle was first struck upon by
Einstein when formulating the theory of special relativity, where it was
proclaimed that physical laws will remain consistent in all inertial
frames. Furthermore, the universal nature of the tensor transformation
law offered a simple means of rendering physical equations generally
covariant. That is to say that any gravitational action expressed in
terms of tensors (and covariant operators) would be a generally
covariant action. Reformulating gravity in terms of tensors - with the
graviton represented by a type @xmath metric tensor - allowed for a
gravitational theory to be described by curvature alone. This proved to
be the cornerstone of General Relativity and any valid modification or
extension of GR should conform to this principle.
Gravitational Action
We have now established that the central idea behind GR, as opposed to
the Newtonian theory of gravitation, is that what we perceive as the
force of gravity arises from the curvature of spacetime. Mathematically,
this can expressed by the gravitational action which defines the theory

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

known as the Einstein-Hilbert action, where @xmath is the Planck mass,
with @xmath (natural units); @xmath is the curvature scalar, defined in
Appendix A.1 , the determinant of the metric tensor is given by @xmath ;
and the cosmological constant is @xmath , which we take to be of mass
dimension @xmath in our formalism. Variation of the action with respect
to the metric tensor gives rise to the famous Einstein equation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are the Einstein and energy-momentum tensors
respectively.

### 1.2 Modifying General Relativity

Despite the phenomenal success of the theory of relativity, outstanding
issues remain, which suggests that the theory is incomplete. As
mentioned in the introduction, one of these issues concerns the
construction of a theory which marries quantum field theory (QFT) with
GR. This has been an open question in modern physics since almost the
inception of QFT in the 1920s, but gained particular traction with the
rise of string theory in the 1960s and 70s. A more classical shortcoming
of GR arises from its admittance of singularities, where the normal laws
of physics can be said to ‘break down’. We now discuss how GR cannot
describe a viable, non-singular cosmology, in order to motivate the need
to extend the theory.
Singularities
The Cosmological Singularity Problem is the focal point of the present
text, with Chapter 4 devoted to the description of a stable, extended
theory of relativity devoid of an initial singularity. The requirement
of extending GR in order to avoid a Big Bang singularity can be seen by
referring to the Raychaudhuri equation (RE), see Section ( 4.3 ) for
full details. The RE is a powerful identity which relates the geometry
of spacetime to gravity, so that the behaviour of ingoing and outgoing
causal geodesic congruences can be understood in a gravitational
context. From this, one can deduce the necessary conditions whereby
ingoing causal geodesics will converge to the same event in a finite
time. This convergence is known as geodesic incompleteness and a freely
falling particle travelling along this geodesic will, at some finite
point in time, cease to exist. We call such a spacetime singular and the
associated condition is known as the convergence condition [ 23 ] .

Here, we merely outline the convergence conditions in GR, which are
discussed in greater detail in Chapter 4 , as a means of motivating the
need to modify or extend the theory. From the RE, one can deduce that a
spacetime will be null-geodesically incomplete if either of the
following conditions are met [ 58 ] , [ 59 ] , [ 63 ] ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Leaving aside the left hand inequality for the moment, which describes
the convergence condition in terms of geometric expansion, let us focus
on the right hand inequality within the framework of GR. From the
Einstein-Hilbert action ( 1.4 ), we derive the Einstein equation ( 1.5
), while also noting that null geodesic congruences vanish when
contracted with the metric tensor, according to @xmath . Thus,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

must be positive in order to retain the null energy condition (NEC), see
Appendix ( B ), and to avoid the propagation of potentially exotic
matter [ 64 ] , [ 65 ] . Thus, in GR we are left with the choice of
either accepting singularities or accepting potentially non-physical
matter. As neither option is desirable, we conclude that GR must be
extended in order to describe a viable non-singular cosmology.
Lovelock’s Theorem
An important theorem in both the formulation of GR and concerning any
valid extension of the theory is Lovelock’s Theorem [ 25 ] , [ 30 ]

###### Theorem 1.2.1 (Lovelock’s Theorem).

The only possible second-order Euler-Lagrange expression obtainable in a
four-dimensional space from a scalar density with a Lagrangian dependent
on the metric tensor (i.e. @xmath ) is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where both @xmath and @xmath are constants

This is a remarkable result when one considers that by taking @xmath ,
this is precisely the Einstein equation in the presence of the
cosmological constant, modified only by the constant @xmath . What this
theorem says is that any gravitational theory in a four-dimensional
Riemannian space, whose subsequent field equations are of second order
or less will be defined solely by the Einstein equation. As we have
seen, the Einstein Hilbert action ( 1.4 ) produces the the Einstein
field equations ( 1.5 ) precisely, but a more general action does exist
(in four dimensions) that also reproduces the same result, and this is
given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

In four dimensions the final two terms do not contribute to the field
equations. Whereas this is true for the final term in any number of
dimensions, the second term is what as known as the Gauss Bonnet term
and is non-trivial in theories of dimensions higher than four.

What Lovelock’s theorem means for modified theories of gravity is that,
if we assume that we want to describe a generally covariant,
four-dimensional, metric-tensor-based theory of gravity, whilst
retaining the variational principle, we have two options:

1.  Extend our approach into field equations that contain higher than
    second order derivatives and/or

2.  Allow a degree of non-locality to enter the system. [ 25 ]

#### Examples of Modified Theories

Fourth Order Gravity
We have already noted that the action ( 1.9 ) is the most general action
that reproduces the Einstein-field equation. A generalisation of the
Gauss-Bonnet term

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

forms the basis for what is called Fourth Order Gravity ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

As stated in the introduction, Stelle observed that fourth order
theories were perturbatively renormalisable, leading to a great
generation of interest in quantum gravity [ 27 ] . However, such
theories are beset by the presence of ghosts, see Section 3.2 for
further details.
@xmath -gravity
Perhaps the simplest generalisation of the Einstein-Hilbert action ( 1.4
) comes in the form of @xmath -gravity, where the curvature scalar
@xmath is replaced by an arbitrary function @xmath acting on the
curvature @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

By varying with respect to the metric tensor, we can then read off the
@xmath field equations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath and using @xmath .
Starobinsky Model
The Starobinsky model is a particular instance of @xmath -gravity with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

for some real constant @xmath . Recall that Starobinsky’s initial idea
was to formulate a gravitational theory that mimics the behaviour of the
cosmological constant, leading to successful primordial inflation. This
model will be of particular interest when discussing the defocusing
conditions of infinite derivative theory, where it is found that the
Starobinsky model struggles to pair successful inflation with the
avoidance of singularities. See Section 4.4 .

### 1.3 Infinite Derivative Theory of Gravity

The most general infinite derivative action of gravity that is quadratic
in curvature was first derived in [ 15 ] , and was found to take the
form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the form factors @xmath are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath is the scale of non-locality. In this form, we can see this
as a natural generalisation of fourth order gravity to include all
potential covariant operators in accordance with the principle of
general covariance. The above action has been studied extensively in
terms of the modified propagator [ 36 ] ; Newtonian potential [ 66 ] , [
16 ] ; gravitational entropy [ 67 ] , [ 68 ] ; loop quantum gravity [ 39
] , [ 40 ] , [ 38 ] ; and indeed, singularity avoidance [ 18 ] , [ 19 ]
, [ 41 ] . We will summarise some relevant results shortly. Firstly,
however, let us briefly expand on the notion of non-locality, alluded to
in the introductory paragraphs.
Non-locality
We stated earlier that a consequence of Lovelock’s theorem is that a
valid modified theory of gravity must include derivatives that are of
second order or higher and/or allow a degree of non-locality. In this
sense, the action ( 1.15 ) conforms to both of Lovelock’s stipulations
in that it is both of higher order than 2 and non-local, so that ( 1.15
) can be understood as an effective action [ 15 ] , [ 69 ] . A theory
featuring an infinite series of higher-derivative terms, such as the
infinite derivative gravity (IDG) theory introduced above, and derived
in Chapter 2 , yields non-local interactions and a relaxation of the
principle of locality, which, in simple terms, states that a particle
may only be directly influenced by its immediate surroundings.

The quantum interactions of these infinite derivative terms have been
studied and found to potentially alleviate divergences in the UV, by
allowing for the super-renormalizability of the theory [ 70 ] , [ 71 ] ,
[ 39 ] . Non-local objects, such as strings and branes, are a
fundamental component of string theory, while the formulation of Loop
Quantum Gravity is based on non-local objects, such as Wilson Loops [ 40
] . The IDG theory, defined by the action ( 1.15 ) was inspired by the
non-locality that arises from exponential kinetic corrections, common in
string theory, see [ 15 ] , [ 26 ] . In terms of the Feynman diagrams,
non-local interactions result in an exponential enhancement of the
vertex operator, meaning that interaction does not take place at this
point, as in a local theory [ 39 , 27 , 72 ] . Note also, that while a
series of infinite derivatives is a common feature of non-local
theories, it is not true to say that this is a defining characteristic.
For example, massive gravity theories which modify GR in the infrared,
e.g. @xmath , are indeed non-local but have finite orders of the inverse
D’Alembertian [ 73 ] , [ 74 ] , [ 75 ] , [ 76 ] , [ 77 ] .

#### Summary of Results

In this section, we summarise some of relevant results, achieved within
an infinite derivative gravitational framework, that are not explicitly
covered in the subsequent chapters.
Newtonian Potential
In [ 16 ] , the Newtonian potential was studied around the weak field
limit of the action ( 1.15 ). In this case, the modified propagator was
modulated by an overall factor of @xmath , where @xmath is the scale of
modification. The exponential nature of this function was invoked in
order to render the theory ghost and tachyon free, which is covered in
detail in Chapter 3 . For a theory with modified propagator @xmath ,
given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the physical graviton propagator and @xmath in Fourier
space on a flat background, the Newtonian potential @xmath was found to
be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, we observe that the potential contains the familiar @xmath
divergence of GR, modulated by an error function Erf @xmath . At the
limit @xmath ¹ ¹ 1 Alternatively, if we take @xmath , which is the limit
to return IDG to a local theory, we recapture the familiar @xmath
divergence of GR, as expected. , @xmath returning flat space.
Furthermore. at the limit @xmath , the potential converges to a
constant, thus ameliorating the @xmath drop-off of GR and displaying
improved behaviour in the UV. The explicit calculation can be found in
Appendix C . The behaviour of the Newtonian potential in an IDG theory
was further expanded upon in [ 66 ] , where a more general ghost-free
form factor

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

was studied, where @xmath is some entire function. In this case,
identical limits were observed at @xmath . Furthermore, using laboratory
data on the gravitational potential between two masses at very small
distances, the lower limit @xmath was placed on the the scale of
modification.

Entropy
The gravitational Wald entropy for IDG theories was investigated across
two papers in [ 67 ] and [ 68 ] . It was found in [ 67 ] that the
gravitational entropy accounting for the UV-modified sector vanishes
around an axisymmetric black-hole metric when one requires that no
additional degrees of freedom are introduced in the linear regime – a
condition which results in a ghost-free theory. The resulting entropy
was given simply by the famous area law,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

In [ 68 ] , the analysis was extended to consider the gravitational
entropy around an (A)dS metric, where a lower bound on the leading order
modification term was calculated which precludes non-physical spacetimes
characterised by negative entropy. This bound was found to have
cosmological significance in terms of avoiding singularities around a
linearised de Sitter background. See Section D for an outline of this
result.
Quantum Loop Gravity
Quantum aspects have been studied for IDG theories, specifically from
the point of view of a toy model, see [ 39 ] . Here, explicit 1-loop and
2-loop computations were performed where it was found that, at 1-loop, a
divergence arises. However, counter terms can be introduced to remove
this divergence, in a similar fashion to loop computations in GR.
Furthermore, at 2-loops the theory becomes finite. The article [ 39 ]
then suggests a method for rendering arbitrary n-loops finite.
Modifications in the Infrared

The present work focuses solely on modifications to GR in the UV.
Recently, however, interest has been generated in the field of non-local
modifications in the infrared (IR). Such theories are characterised by
the presence of inverse D’Alembertian ( @xmath ) corrections in the
gravitational action. Most notably, recent work has centred on the idea
of constructing a theory of gravity which confers a non-zero mass upon
the graviton, known as massive gravity . Massive gravity theories are
formulated via a @xmath -type extension to the Einstein-Hilbert action,
where @xmath is the mass of the massive graviton. Such theories have
been explored in a number of papers as a means to explain the
proliferation of dark energy in the Universe [ 73 ] , [ 74 ] , [ 77 ] ,
[ 76 ] , [ 78 ] [ 79 ] .

In [ 75 ] , the full non-linear field equations for a generalised action
made up of an infinite series of inverse D’Alembertian operators was
derived for the first time. The gravitational action can be formulated
by replacing the form factors @xmath in ( 1.15 ) with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Similar methods to [ 16 ] were employed in order to derive the modified
Newtonian potentials, with the added complexity that models with an
additional degree of freedom in the scalar propagating mode were not
excluded, i.e. @xmath in Appendix C , resulting in two Newtonian
potentials. An upper bound was placed on the ratio of these potentials,
known as the Eddington parameter, via the Cassini tracking experiment
and various models were analysed as a means of explaining dark energy,
including @xmath -models [ 8 ] and massive gravity. In the context of
massive gravity, the massive graviton was tested and found to fall
within the appropriate limits to be considered a possible dark energy
candidate. Finally, a novel approach to infrared modifications was
introduced, making use of all infinite inverse derivatives, which
displayed a reduction in the gravitational field at large distances – a
common feature of IR extensions to GR.

### 1.4 Organisation of Thesis

The content of the thesis is organised as follows:

1.  This chapter begins with a derivation of the most general, generally
    covariant, infinite derivative action of gravity that is quadratic
    in curvature, before moving on to the main focus of the chapter: the
    highly non-trivial task of attaining the full non-linear field
    equations. The general methodology is outlined before moving on to
    the explicit calculation. Finally the linearised field equations are
    derived around both Minkowski and de Sitter spacetimes for later use
    in the context of ghost and singularity free cosmologies.

2.  The general ghost and tachyon criteria that a viable theory must
    conform to are established, with specific examples of pathological
    behaviour given. The correction to the graviton propagator from the
    infinite derivative extension is attained, as are the ghost-free
    conditions around Minkowski space.

3.  This final chapter is the crux of the thesis, combining the field
    equations (Chapter 2) and the ghost-free conditions (Chapter 3) to
    formulate a viable singularity-free theory of gravity. The chapter
    begins with a discussion on the intriguing topic of defining a
    singularity, before moving on to an outline of the famous
    Hawking-Penrose Singularity Theorem. The Raychaudhuri equation (RE)
    is introduced and derived, with particular attention paid to the RE
    in a cosmological setting. A novel calculation then follows where
    the RE is applied to infinite derivative gravity theory and viable
    defocusing conditions are derived around Minkowski and de Sitter
    spacetimes.

## Chapter 2 Infinite Derivative Gravity

### 2.1 Derivation of Action

Having introduced the concept of infinite derivative gravity theories
and some of the progress made in the area, our goal here is to derive
the most general, generally covariant infinite derivative action of
gravity, with a view to formulating the associated equations of motion.
Following this, in Chapter 3 , we will use the field equations to
understand the nature of the modified propagator.

We begin by inspecting the fluctuations around a given background up to
quadratic order in @xmath , according to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

For presentation purposes, we have restricted the background metric to
that of the Minkowski spacetime as in [ 16 ] , while the derivation has
been repeated in the more general framework of maximally symmetric
spacetimes of constant curvature, i.e. Minkowski or (Anti) de Sitter
space, in [ 80 ] , [ 81 ] . In principle, it should be possible to relax
this restriction on the background metric further to any background
metric with a well-defined Minkowski limit, with this latter point
required to eliminate potentially singular non-local terms.

As noted in [ 36 ] , [ 16 ] , the most general, four dimensional,
generally covariant metric-tensor-based gravitational action, with a
well-defined Minkowski limit, may be expressed in the following generic
form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are functions of Riemannian curvature and the
metric tensor, while the operator @xmath is made up, solely, of
covariant operators, in accordance with general covariance.

Our goal is to inspect fluctuations around Minkowski space up to
quadratic order. To this end, following closely to [ 80 ] , [ 81 ] , [
16 ] , [ 15 ] , we may recast ( 2.2 ) into the following invariant form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the Einstein-Hilbert action and @xmath constitutes the
modification of GR in the ultraviolet (UV). The operator @xmath
represents a general covariant operator, such as the D’Alembertian
operator @xmath ; and the tensor @xmath represents all possible forms of
Riemannian curvature, such as the curvature scalar, Ricci Tensor,
Riemann and Weyl tensors. It is worth noting that while the generic form
( 2.3 ) includes all order of curvature via the commutation relation (
A.1 ), we restrict ourselves to a theory that is quadratic in curvature.

Noting that the differential operator @xmath contains only the Minkowski
metric coupled with covariant derivatives, we may expand the compact
form ( 2.3 ) to the following

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.4)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where we have liberally used integration by parts and the functions
@xmath are defined by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

These functions contain all orders of the D’Alembertian operator @xmath
¹ ¹ 1 Up to quadratic order around Minkowski space, the D’Alembertian
will appear in the action only as @xmath , with each operator modulated
by the scale of non-locality @xmath to ensure that these functions are
dimensionless. The coefficients @xmath , as yet unconstrained, ensure
that these are arbitrary infinite derivative functions.

The action ( 2.4 ) can be reduced upon noting the antisymmetric
properties of the Riemann tensor,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

along with the (second) Bianchi identity

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Example:
Consider the terms

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

These can be expressed as the following

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

by noting the identity @xmath and subsequently @xmath , which results
from a contraction of the Bianchi identity ( 2.7 ). We then perform
integration by parts on the final term, to find that ( 2.9 ) develops as
follows

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
     @xmath      (2.11)
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the last step, we have redefined the arbitrary function @xmath to
incorporate @xmath and @xmath .
Proceeding in a similar manner, we find that the action reduces to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.13)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

A final important reduction comes when one notes that, as we are
considering fluctuations around Minkowski space, the covariant
derivatives commute freely.
Example:
Take, for example, the @xmath term in the above expression. We can
decompose this in to two parts, like so

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

We then commute one pair of derivatives in the first term to find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Relabelling the indices gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

which vanishes due to the antisymmetric properties of the Riemann
tensor, ( 2.6 ).
Taking this into account, we can now express the general form of the
modified action as follows

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

We complete the derivation of the most general, generally covariant
action of gravity that is quadratic in curvature with a little
bookkeeping. First of all, it is preferable to replace the Riemann
tensor in the gravitational action with the Weyl tensor, which is
defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is because the Weyl tensor vanishes precisely in a conformally-flat
background, making calculations less cumbersome in, for example, a
cosmological Friedmann-Robertson-Walker (FRW) setting. This substitution
does not represent any fundamental change to the theory as any change
arising from reformulating the above action in terms of the Weyl tensor
is absorbed by the arbitrary coefficient @xmath contained within the
infinite derivative functions ( 2.5 ). In acknowledgement of this minor
change, we now rename the infinite derivative functions, like so

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

while also renaming the indices for presentation purposes. Finally, we
introduce a dimensionless ‘counting tool’ @xmath which offers a
straightforward limit @xmath to return the theory to that of GR. Taking
this into account, we now arrive at the final form of the modified
action

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

### 2.2 Equations of Motion

Having attained the most general, generally covariant, infinite
derivative action of gravity that is quadratic in curvature, the next
step is to compute the field equations – a highly non-trivial task. We
begin with an overview of the methods involved, largely based upon [ 82
] , before delving into the full technical derivations.

#### 2.2.1 General Methodology

##### Single @xmath

In order to illustrate the methods involved in deriving the field
equations for the action ( 2.20 ), we begin with a simple example, by
way of the action,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the curvature scalar. Varying this, gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we are considering the variation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

and have defined

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.26)
  -- -- -- --------

One can then compute the variation of the determinant of the metric,
which gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath [ 5 ] . We then note that the D’Alembertian operator @xmath
contains within it a metric and must therefore be subjected to
variation. Upon integration by parts, we may express ( 2.22 ) in the
following form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

We will deal with the tricky final term in due course. Firstly, however,
we apply the variational principle in order to compute the variation of
any relevant curvatures. Upon inspection of the definition of the
Christoffel symbol, ( A.2 ), we find the variation to be of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

Similarly, variation of the curvature terms, found in A.1 , give

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

Substitution of the above varied Christoffel symbol ( 2.28 ) allows us
to represent the varied curvature in terms of the perturbed metric
tensor @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

Identities of this type are well known. What is less clear, however, is
the computation of @xmath , which we shall detail below.

##### Computing @xmath

By expanding out the components of the D’Alembertian, we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

We find here some terms that involve the variation of the covariant
operator, which are not so trivial. However, by varying the tensor
@xmath , we may equate these non-trivial terms with the variation of
ordinary tensors, like so

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

Next, we compute the terms on the right hand side by expanding out the
covariant derivative so that, after some cancellation, we get an
identity in terms of the Christoffel symbol

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

We briefly note that the simplicity of this identity is due to the
scalar nature of the curvature involved. Tensors of higher order, such
as the Ricci or Riemann tensor, will result in additional terms. Upon
substitution into ( 2.32 ) in conjunction with the variation of the
Christoffel stated previously in ( 2.31 ), we arrive at a vital result
in computing the field equations for a non-local action of the type (
2.20 ).

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### Multiple @xmath’s

Crucially, however, in order to derive the field equations for an
infinite derivative action such as ( 2.20 ), the above mechanism must be
generalised to encapsulate an arbitrary number of D’Alembertian
operators acting on the curvature. To shed light on this, we consider
the action

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

Varying with respect to the metric tensor gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

analogous to ( 2.22 ). We now turn our attention to the @xmath term.
Repeated application of the product rule reveals the following

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.38)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

It is then straightforward to substitute ( 2.35 ) into this identity,
along with the previously derived varied curvature terms ( 2.31 ) to
reveal the field equations for an action of the type ( 2.36 ).

##### Arbitrary functions of @xmath

We may generalise further by considering actions of the type

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is an arbitrary function of D’Alembertian operators of the
form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath are arbitrary constants and each non-local operator is
modulated by the scale of non-locality, @xmath . For such an action, the
analogue of ( 2.38 ) is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

Furthermore, the prescription

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are arbitrary tensors, allows us to recast the
identity into the following manageable form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

A final important point is that as @xmath is a scalar, so too is @xmath
, and as such the derived identity for @xmath remains valid for our
intentions, where one simply has to substitute @xmath in ( 2.35 ). We
shall see in the subsequent sections, the central role these
observations play in deriving the full field equations for ( 2.20 ).

##### Full Action

We are now ready to compute the variation of our action ( 2.20 ). For
simplicity of presentation, we proceed by decomposing the action into
its constituent parts which we denote @xmath . We define the the
gravitational energy momentum tensor as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the determinant of the metric tensor, and compute the
contribution to @xmath for the individual sectors of the action
separately.

#### 2.2.2 @xmath

@xmath is nothing more than the Einstein-Hilbert action

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

where, in our formalism, we have taken the cosmological constant @xmath
to be of mass dimension @xmath . Varying the action and substituting the
identity for the varied curvature scalar ( 2.31 ), along with ( 2.27 ),
leads to the Einstein equation

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.46)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

#### 2.2.3 @xmath

The next step is to compute the variation of

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

Varying this and substituting values for @xmath and @xmath , given in (
2.31 ) and ( 2.27 ), respectively, we find

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.48)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where we have integrated by parts where appropriate. To calculate the
final term, we employ the identity in ( 2.41 ) and substitute the value
for @xmath given in ( 2.35 ). We then integrate by parts in order to
factor out the perturbed metric @xmath . Further terms will simplify by
noting the double summation relation given by ( 2.42 ), until we arrive
at the energy-momentum tensor contribution, which is given by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.49)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where we have defined the symmetric tensors

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

and have introduced the notation @xmath .

#### 2.2.4 @xmath

We now focus on

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

Varying the action, we find

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.52)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Careful substitution of the identities found in A.3 , accounts for all
but the final term:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.53)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

To compute the final term, we employ the same method outlined in the
general methodology section, albeit with an added degree of difficulty.
Here, we reiterate the main steps. In terms of the Ricci tensor, the
analogous identity of ( 2.38 ) is arrived at by identical means,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

Of vital importance, however, is the form of @xmath . We expand out the
components of the D’Alembertian operator, in the same manner as in the
scalar case, before taking the variation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

As in the scalar case, ( 2.35 ), we compare @xmath with @xmath to find

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

At this point, in order to keep track of the indices, it is convenient
to rewrite the perturbed Christoffel symbol ( 2.29 ), like so

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

We then substitute this into ( 2.56 ) and in turn ( 2.55 ) to find the
relevant identity:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.58)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Having established the form of @xmath , we are now in a position to tame
the troublesome term ( 2.54 ) into something manageable, like so

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have defined the following symmetric tensors,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

This, combined with ( 2.53 ), gives us the contribution of the Ricci
tensor terms to the energy-momentum tensor

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.61)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

#### 2.2.5 @xmath

Finally we focus on the terms involving the Weyl tensors. We proceed in
much the same manner as the previous case, with a further layer of
complexity due to the number of indices involved. The action we wish to
vary is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the Weyl tensor is defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

Varying the action we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

Once again, we intend to arrange the expression in terms of the metric
tensor @xmath . The second term develops as follows

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.65)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Next, using the definition of the Weyl tensor (( 2.63 )), we note that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, we have used the essential property

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is due to the fact that the Weyl tensor is the traceless component
of the Riemann tensor. We then reformulate the variation of the Riemann
tensor ( 2.31 ) like so

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

and substitute to find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have integrated by parts where appropriate. The variation of
the action, thus far, is then given by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.70)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

To compute the final term, we proceed as in the previous cases to derive
@xmath acting upon the Weyl tensor:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.71)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

From this, we deduce

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

by defining

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

As such, the contribution to the energy-momentum tensor is then

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.74)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where we have reintroduced the original @xmath notation by relabelling
the indices.

#### 2.2.6 The Complete Field Equations

We are now in a position to state the full equations of motion for the
action @xmath in ( 2.20 ) as a combination of @xmath and @xmath derived
in the previous sections.

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
                          
              @xmath      (2.75)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the stress energy tensor for the matter components of
the Universe ³ ³ 3 We have lowered an index for convenience when
analysing perturbations later in the text. and we restate the symmetric
tensors, we defined earlier:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

The trace equation is often particularly useful and we provide it below
for the general action ( 2.20 ):

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.77)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

### 2.3 Linearised Field Equations around Minkowski Space

In order to make a step towards understanding the physical implications
of the non-local gravitational theory described by the action ( 2.20 ),
we consider the linear approximation of the theory, by analysing small
fluctuations around Minkowski space, according to the algorithm

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath is the Minkowski metric and @xmath is the variation with
respect to the metric tensor. From ( 2.31 ), we can read off the
relevant curvatures up to linear order

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . Substitution of the above curvatures into ( 2.2.6 )
reveals the linearised equations of motion around a Minkowski background

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.80)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

We may represent the linearised field equations as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.81)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

by defining the following infinite derivative functions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

One can then confirm the following relations

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.83)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

These identities were found by explicit evaluation of the respective
terms, but can be understood, more intuitively, as a consequence of the
Bianchi identities. The stress energy tensor of any minimally coupled
diffeomorphism-invariant gravitational action must be conserved, i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

This applies equally to the linearised equations of motion ( 2.3 ) as it
does to the full non-linear field equations ( 2.2.6 ). Recall that, in
this case, @xmath , so that it suffices to take the partial derivative
of ( 2.3 ) in order to test the Bianchi identity. As such,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have suppressed the argument in the infinite derivative
functions, i.e @xmath , for presentation purposes. This divergence
should vanish identically, and when the coefficients of each independent
term is compared with ( 2.3 ), it is clear that this is the case.
Furthermore, by appealing to the form of the curvature around Minkowski
space ( 2.79 ) and the constraints ( 2.82 ), we may recast the field
equations ( 2.3 ) into the following concise form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this form, it should be immediately apparent that both the tensorial
and scalar sectors of the propagator have undergone corrections by the
non-local operators @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , where @xmath is related
to @xmath and @xmath by @xmath . The trace equation is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

and will play an important role in the derivation of the ghost-free
condition of the IDG theory due to its correspondence to the scalar
sector of the propagator.

### 2.4 Linearised Field Equations around de Sitter Space

#### Reformulation of Equations of Motion

In order to make an infinite series of D’Alembertian operators acting on
the Ricci tensor more tractable in spacetimes other than Minkowski, we
introduce the traceless Einstein tensor [ 81 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.88)
  -- -------- -- --------

and define

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.89)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that we may write the action ( 2.20 ) in terms of the traceless
Einstein tensor

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.90)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the resulting equations of motion given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (2.91)
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

Here, we have defined the symmetric tensors

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.92)
  -- -------- -- --------

while @xmath represents the contribution from the Weyl tensor which
vanishes on the background. The trace equation is obtained by
contracting with @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.93)
                          
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

#### Linear Perturbations and Equations of Motion around de Sitter

In order to understand the cosmological significance of a theory, it is
often revealing to study perturbations around de Sitter (dS) space. To
analyse these fluctuations, we define the algorithm

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.94)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and any subsequent ‘barred’ tensors represent the value of
the tensor on the background of de Sitter space, and as such obeys

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.95)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Hubble parameter (constant) for dS. We then find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.96)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can express the value for @xmath by substituting the above values
into the ‘barred’ trace equation. By ‘barred’ trace equation, we mean,
replacing each curvature term in ( 2.93 ) with a ‘barred’ background
curvature term. Taking these background values for the curvature allows
us to express the cosmological constant as follows

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.97)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

and as dS is a vacuum solution, we may write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.98)
  -- -------- -- --------

As a further check, this may be substituted into the full ‘barred’
equations of motion to find that indeed @xmath . Next, in order to
linearise around the background described by these ‘barred’ quantities,
we return to the variation principle, from which we know that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.99)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is preferable in this instance to vary tensors with an even number of
up and down indices. This makes use of the Kronecker delta @xmath ,
which is invariant under variation. Formulating the variational
identities in this way has the advantage that we may contract tensors in
a straightforward manner. For example, @xmath , whereas in general
@xmath . Substituting the background quantities and expanding the
perturbed Christoffels, we find that the perturbed Ricci tensor and
curvature scalar are given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.100)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Subsequently, the perturbed traceless Einstein tensor becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath               (2.101)
                       @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The general formalism for linearisation we are following is described
below

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.102)
  -- -------- -- ---------

whereas, upon substitution of the background values, we find

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.103)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Taking all this into account, we simply substitute the above values
along with the background quantities ( 2.96 ) into the field equation (
2.91 ), neglecting terms of order @xmath , to return the linearised
equations of motion around de Sitter space. The calculation proceeds as
follows: First, we perturb the field equations according to ( 2.102 ),

  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath            (2.104)
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------

Ignoring, for the moment, the symmetric tensors on the bottom line of
this equation, we reduce all other terms to linear order in @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath            (2.105)
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------

before noting that the background curvature, expressed as the ‘barred’
terms given in ( 2.96 ), are constants. Thus, any derivatives on the
background curvature will vanish, so that the field equations reduce
further,

  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath            (2.106)
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- ---------

Return now to the symmetric tensors on the bottom line. Following the
initial perturbation and taking into account the constant nature of the
background curvature, the symmetric tensors ( 2.92 ) are given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.107)
  -- -------- -- ---------

whereas if we consider only up to linear order in @xmath , we retain
only the solitary term,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.108)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Simple substitution of the background curvature ( 2.96 ), ( 2.98 ), then
reveals the linearised field equations around de Sitter space

  -- -- -------- -------- ---------
        @xmath            (2.109)
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- ---------

We will return to these field equations when discussing the defocusing
conditions around de Sitter space in Section 4.7 .

## Chapter 3 Ghost-free Conditions

Historically speaking, higher derivative theories of gravity have been
beset by the presence of ghosts - free fields bearing negative kinetic
energy. During the process of renormalization, this negative
contribution may be offset by the repeated introduction of derivatives,
via additional curvature terms in the gravitational action. These higher
derivative terms affect the short-range behaviour of the theory
rendering it renormalizable, but with a cost. If a finite number of
higher derivatives are introduced to the theory, so too is a massive
spin-2 ‘ghost’ particle into the propagator, resulting in a break down
of unitarity ¹ ¹ 1 With the exception of @xmath -theories, which we
discuss shortly. [ 54 ] . The aim of this chapter is to provide the
conditions whereby the IDG theory ( 2.20 ) may invoke its infinite
number of derivatives in order to render the gravitational theory ghost
and tachyon-free. We do this by appealing to the form of the modified
graviton propagator around Minkowski space, which we also derive. We
begin with some clarifications.
Ghosts
As opposed to the Faddeev Popov ghosts of field theory, which are added
to gauge field theories in order to absorb non-physical degrees of
freedom, ghosts in relativity are physical excitations which come with a
negative residue in the graviton propagator [ 25 ] , [ 83 ] , which is
defined via

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Classically, the graviton propagator details how a gravitational field
propagates through space when sourced by a current @xmath [ 84 ] . Any
modification to the gravitational action will necessarily modify the
propagator. If this modification comes with the wrong sign, then
implicitly the theory admits physical states of negative energy, or
“ghosts”, leading to an instability, even at the classical level. This
phenomenon, known as the Ostrogradksy instability , results in
perturbations carrying both positive and negative energy modes [ 85 ] .
The Ostrogradsky Instability
A major consequence of Ostrogradsky’s Theorem of 1850 [ 86 ] is that
powerful constraints are placed on the formulation of stable,
higher-derivative theories of gravity ² ² 2 Higher -derivative theories
refers to gravitational theories containing more than two derivatives of
the metric tensor. . We outline the results below before offering a
caveat.

Consider a Lagrangian of the type

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is non-degenerate on @xmath , i.e. @xmath , where dots denote
derivatives with respect to some parameter @xmath . The Euler Lagrange
equation is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Due to the non-degeneracy of the Lagrangian, solutions will depend on
four pieces of initial data @xmath . We then make the following four
canonical choices

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.4)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

One can now express @xmath in terms of @xmath and @xmath , like so
@xmath , so that the Hamiltonian of the theory can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

as in [ 25 ] , [ 87 ] . Now, as this Hamiltonian is linear only in the
canonical momentum @xmath , a system of this form cannot be stable. When
interactions take place in such a system the vacuum decays into both
positive and negative kinetic energy states, which we call the
Ostrogradsky instability .

It is commonly stated that a consequence of Ostragradsky’s theorem is
that gravitational theories containing higher-than-two derivatives in
the action will suffer from this instability. This is generically true
for theories of the type

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is some non-trivial function. An example of such a theory
would be Stelle’s fourth order gravity theory, discussed in the
introduction. However, there is a caveat in that @xmath -theories, given
by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

may avoid this instability and are indeed ghost-free. In terms of the
Hamiltonian, this is due to the fact that one cannot express @xmath as
@xmath for each component of the metric. In terms of the modified
propagator, such theories are characterised by a single additional
scalar degree of freedom which contains all higher-order derivatives. We
will see in Section 3.3.1 that as long as there is at most one
additional pole in the scalar sector, the theory may be considered to be
ghost-free, while in Chapter 4 , we reveal the vital role of this
additional pole in singularity avoidance.
Tachyons
We define tachyons as particles with imaginary mass, i.e. @xmath . In a
classical sense, such a particle will always travel faster than the
speed of light, according to the equation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

As the energy @xmath is real and observable, if a particle has imaginary
mass @xmath , then the denominator must also be imaginary, implying that
the velocity of the particle @xmath is greater than the speed of light
@xmath . It is this behaviour which lends the particle its name -
‘tachy’ ( @xmath ) being the Greek for ‘rapid’.

Gerald Feinberg, who coined the term in the context of Quantum Field
Theory [ 88 ] , proposed that fields with imaginary mass would
necessarily produce physical particles that propagate at speeds faster
than light, however, this was later found to be untrue. Instead, fields
defined in this way, technically suffer from an instability known as
tachyon condensation , where a field is tachyonic and unstable around
the local maximum of its potential, but as the field reaches its local
minimum, its associated quanta are not tachyonic but ordinary particles
with positive mass squared, such as the Higgs boson [ 89 ] .

In the present work, however, we will refer to particles with imaginary
mass as ‘tachyons’, as this notion has no classical interpretation and
represents a pathology in the theory.
Ghost and tachyon criteria
In order to avoid the spectre of ghosts or tachyons, we require that:

1.  The propagator will contain only first order poles at @xmath with
    real mass @xmath so as to avoid tachyons .

2.  Such a pole will not contain any negative residues or ghosts .

### 3.1 Modified Propagator around Minkowski Space

Now that we have established the general ghost-free criteria that the
modified propagator must ascribe to, it is time to derive the precise
form of the propagator for the linearised equations of motion ( 2.3 )
around a Minkowski background. The field equations are expressed in
terms of the inverse propagator @xmath , like so,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath .

###### Derivation

We begin by reminding the reader of the relevant identities concerning
the spin projector operators in @xmath -dimensional Minkowski space, see
[ 36 ] , [ 83 ] , [ 68 ] .

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Combining the final two identities gives the useful relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

We then compute each component making up the linearised field equations
( 2.3 ), while transforming into momentum space with @xmath , such that
@xmath , like so

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath               
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

On inspection of the spin projector operators ( 3.11 ),( 3.12 ), we note
that the multiplets @xmath conform to the following:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using this property along with ( 3.11 ) and ( 3.12 ) allows us to
express the inverse propagator ( 3.10 ) in terms of the projection
operators, like so

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where the coefficients @xmath are dependent only on @xmath in momentum
space. We then find that ( 3.14 ) reduces to

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

In turn, from ( 2.3 ), each identity reduces like so

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Thus, we have succeed in inverting the field equations so that from (
3.1 ), we may read off the non-local, @xmath -dimensional, propagator
around Minkowski space:
Non-local, @xmath -dimensional, propagator around Minkowski

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where, hereafter we shall suppress the indices in the propagator and
projection operators. The first thing to note here is that at @xmath and
@xmath , the theory returns to that of General Relativity. It is
straightforward to confirm, upon reference to ( 2.3 ), that indeed the
physical graviton propagator is recovered at this limit

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

The propagator ( 3.19 ) is the most general form of the D-dimensional
propagator around Minkowski space for an action of the type ( 2.20 ). In
practice, however, we will largely be dealing within a @xmath
-dimensional framework, which is given by:
Non-local Propagator around Minkowski in @xmath -spacetime dimensions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Another interesting variant of the IDG modified propagator occurs when
one requires that no additional degrees of freedom, other than the
massless graviton, are allowed into the system. Upon inspection of (
2.82 ), we note that by choosing @xmath , we do indeed avoid the
introduction of additional scalar degrees of freedom.
Non-local propagator with no additional scalar degrees of freedom (
@xmath )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this case, we note that the derived non-local propagator modifies the
physical graviton propagator by a factor of @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

### 3.2 Examples of Pathological Behaviour

The Benign Ghost of General Relativity
Let us clarify what is sometimes called the benign ghost of General
Relativity. This refers to the appearance of a negative residue in GR,
which does not represent any instability in the theory. The propagator
of the physical graviton in four-dimensional GR is given by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Naively, it appears here as if there is a negative residue at the point
@xmath . However, upon reference to ( 3.11 ), we find that the
coefficients attached to the spin projector operators cancel exactly so
that no such negative residue survives.
@xmath -gravity
As previously discussed, a particular class of extended theory, known as
the @xmath model of gravity, is defined by the action

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is a generalisation of Einstein’s theory where the curvature scalar
is replaced with an arbitrary function of @xmath . The simplest example
of such a theory is known as the Starobinsky Model , defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is an arbitrary constant. A large amount of interest was
generated in theories of this type from Starobinsky’s initial idea that
for a positive constant @xmath , the model would mimic the behaviour of
the cosmological constant for a sufficiently large @xmath . The
curvature squared term of the action leads to a period of exponential
expansion, sufficient for forming the large scale structures we see in
the Universe today. After this period of rapid expansion, the
higher-order curvature terms become less important as the model moves
away from the Planck scale, signalling the end of inflation [ 34 ] . We
have already learned that such theories avoid the Ostrogradsky
instability. The Starobinsky model, however, has proved less successful
in pairing cosmic inflation with a non-singular cosmology. As we shall
see in Section 4.4 , in order to avoid an initial singularity within
this model, we would require the constant @xmath to be negative,
resulting in tachyonic behaviour, outlined below.
Example of Tachyons
Let us consider the action

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

By taking the appropriate limits of ( 2.82 ) and decomposing into
partial fractions, we can read off the propagator of the Starobinsky
model from ( 3.21 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . As the coefficient of the @xmath term is given by @xmath
, the value of @xmath for the spin-0 particle now takes the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is decidedly negative. Thus, the first order pole @xmath in the
scalar mode of ( 3.28 ) contains an imaginary mass @xmath , which is the
very definition of a tachyonic field.
Fourth Order Gravity
A natural generalisation of @xmath -gravity, ( 3.25 ), is to not only
allow scalar modifications to GR but tensorial modifications too. The
gravitational action will then be made up of a an arbitrary function of
the curvature scalar, Ricci tensor and Weyl/Riemann tensor, like so

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

An interesting subclass of this generalisation comes in the form of
Fourth Order Gravity , where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

As you may recall from the introduction, choosing @xmath is nothing more
than the Gauss-Bonnet action of gravity, which reproduces the Einstein
Equation precisely in four dimensions. More generally, in 1977, Stelle
found that fourth-order gravity theories, ( 3.31 ), were perturbatively
renormalizable, raising hopes for a quantum field theory of gravity. As
previously discussed, such theories suffer from the Ostrogradsky
instability. An example of such a pathology comes in the form of the
Weyl Ghost .
The Weyl Ghost
Consider a Lagrangian of the type

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Weyl tensor, lending the name of Weyl squared
gravity to theories of this type. It is straightforward to compute that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

and to note that this is a particular example of a fourth-order theory,
whereas, in terms of the IDG action ( 2.20 ), we simply take @xmath and
@xmath . The relevant functions, @xmath and @xmath , that make up the
propagator can then be read off from ( 2.82 ) so that the propagator for
Weyl squared gravity is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

We see here that there is an additional pole in the spin-2 portion of
the propagator and, moreover, this comes with a negative sign, or
residue. This is known as the Weyl Ghost and in order to avoid such a
situation, we stipulate that the operator @xmath which modifies the
tensorial sector has no roots (to avoid additional poles) and
contributes positively to the propagator (ghost-free). [ 36 ]

### 3.3 Ghost-free Conditions

We have already established that @xmath -theories are the only finite ,
higher-order extension of GR that are potentially stable [ 87 ] ³ ³ 3 We
are considering here only metric-tensor-based extensions of GR. . What
then of infinite derivative extensions of GR? Should such theories lead
to a infinite number of ghosts or can their non-locality be invoked in
some way to curtail these pathologies? One way to shed light on this is
to study the equivalent scalar-tensor action of such a theory, first
discussed in [ 15 ] . As it stands, the general form of the modified
propagator ( 3.21 ) may contain ghosts or tachyons due to the arbitrary
nature of the infinite derivative functions ( 2.82 ) contained within.
The purpose of this section is motivate the constraints that must be
placed on these infinite derivative functions in order to describe a
theory that is free from such infirmities. We will then derive the
precise covariant ghost-free form around Minkowski space. Following an
interesting discussion on the minimal IDG action that can be rendered
singularity-free in Section 4 , we will return to the ghost-free
conditions around de Sitter space.

#### 3.3.1 Motivation from Scalar-Tensor Theory

In order to motivate the methodology for rendering the theory ghost-free
it is instructive to discuss the scalar sector of the action ( 2.20 )
following closely to [ 15 ] . The scalar sector is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

which accounts for the spin-0 sector of the propagator, where @xmath ,
while the equivalent scalar-tensor action takes the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

The equivalence of ( 3.35 ) and ( 3.36 ) can be seen by taking a look at
the equation of motion for @xmath . Varying the action with respect to
@xmath gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that the field equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

Substituting @xmath into ( 3.36 ) then recovers the action ( 3.35 ). The
next step is to invoke the conformal transformation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

Further note that the D’Alembertian transforms as @xmath , while the
metric tensor transforms as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.40)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Subsequently, the square root of the determinant of the metric is given
by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that the relevant form of the curvature scalar transforms as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have defined @xmath , which up to linear order gives @xmath .
Substitution into the action ( 3.36 ) up to quadratic order then gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

By varying with respect to @xmath and @xmath respectively, we can read
off the field equations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

Substitution then reveals

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the scalar sector of the propagator is given by @xmath in momentum
space with @xmath . Further note, upon reference to the trace equation (
2.87 ) and the infinite derivative functions ( 2.82 ), that the left
hand side of ( 3.45 ) conforms to the trace equation of the IDG action (
2.77 ) with @xmath . This is as expected, as we are considering the
scalar sector of the theory, which the trace equation describes. We may
then rewrite ( 3.45 ) as follows

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

We must now examine the restrictions that must be placed on the infinite
derivative functions @xmath and @xmath in order to avoid ghosts and
tachyons. To this end, we express the scalar propagator @xmath as a
finite power series

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath represents the mass of a spin-0 particle, which must be
positive and real in order to avoid the theory becoming tachyonic.

In this power series, each root represents an additional pole in the
scalar section of the propagator. If we were to consider two distinct
poles, i.e. @xmath , then one of these poles will have a negative
residue and therefore be ghost-like. To show this, we assume that there
are two adjacent poles with @xmath , so that the propagator takes the
form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the adjacent roots given by @xmath and @xmath . As these poles are
adjacent, there can be no more zeroes contained within @xmath in the
range @xmath , with the consequence that the sign of @xmath has not
changed within these limits [ 15 ] . We can best illustrate this by
decomposing the inverse propagator into partial fractions like so

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, we can see that two massive spin-0 particles @xmath and @xmath
have been introduced to the propagator, with poles of differing sign.
When the propagator is evaluated at @xmath and @xmath , we observe a
residue of differing signs so that one of these poles must necessarily
be ghost-like.

The upshot is that we must restrict the scalar propagator to at most one
additional pole in order for the theory to remain ghost-free. The scalar
propagator is then given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath contains no roots and @xmath is a constant. In order to
ensure that the propagator is analytic - differentiable across the whole
of the complex plane - and does not contain additional poles, @xmath
must take the form of an exponent of an entire function , i.e

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is an entire function. Finally, if we wish to restrict
ourselves further to a propagator that is proportional to the physical
graviton propagator - with no additional roots - we simply set @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 3.3.2 Entire functions

In the preceding discussion, we made use of the properties of analytic
functions to express @xmath in terms of an exponent of an entire
function. At first glance, this may seem to be a construction or at
least a reduction in the possible forms of @xmath . However, as we shall
see, this is the only form that such a function may take. Formally, an
analytic function is defined as [ 90 ] :

###### Definition 3.3.1.

A function @xmath , where @xmath , is said to be analytic at a point
@xmath if it is differentiable in a neighbourhood of @xmath . Similarly,
a function @xmath is said to be analytic in a region if it is analytic
in every point in that region.

Recall that, the neighbourhood of @xmath is simply the region that
contains all the points within a radius @xmath , excluding the boundary,
where @xmath is a small positive number. From first principles, we know
that we can express the derivative of a function @xmath like so

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

For the function @xmath , the variation is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

while for any function of two variables, we may write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

As such

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus, the real and imaginary derivatives are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

respectively, where the subscript represents partial differentiation,
i.e. @xmath . Requiring that ( 3.57 ) and ( 3.58 ) are equal gives the
Cauchy-Riemann Conditions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

These are the necessary and sufficient conditions that must hold if
@xmath is to be analytic. This leads us neatly to the the definition of
an entire function, alluded to in the previous section.

###### Definition 3.3.2.

A function that is analytic at each point on the “entire” (finite)
complex plane is known as an entire function .

Entire functions encompass a broad range of functions. For instance, the
exponential function @xmath is an entire function as can be seen by
expressing the exponent in terms of trigonometrical functions, like so

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

and differentiating to find that the Cauchy-Riemann criteria are
satisfied (for all @xmath ), according to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

Similarly, @xmath and @xmath are entire functions, as indeed are all
polynomials of @xmath . Herein lies the problem. If in ( 3.50 ), we were
to simply define @xmath as an entire function, this would allow
additional poles to be introduced into the propagator. Consider the
function

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is a polynomial and is indeed an entire function, conforming to (
3.59 ) with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

However, this function comes hand-in-hand with two additional poles at
@xmath and @xmath , which must be ghost-like in terms of the propagator.
The only solution then is to consider entire functions that contain no
roots. One such function is the exponential function, @xmath , which, as
we have already established, is an entire function. Generalising
further, to incorporate all wholly analytic and rootless functions, we
must consider an exponent (contains no roots) of an entire function
(analytic across the entire complex plane), i.e. @xmath . Thus, in (
3.50 ), @xmath must take the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is an entire function.

#### 3.3.3 Ghost-free condition around Minkowski Space

Having resolved the modified form of the propagator for the IDG action (
2.20 ), it is now pertinent to derive the necessary form that the
non-local functions @xmath and @xmath must take so as to render the
propagator ghost-free. We begin by taking the trace of the linearised
field equations ( 2.86 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

As alluded to in the prior discussion on scalar-tensor theory, the trace
equation accounts for the scalar sector of the propagator, which can be
seen by comparing the above trace equation with the modified propagator
( 3.21 ). Furthermore, we have just learned that @xmath can contain a
maximum of one pole. We therefore construct the equality

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is analogous to ( 3.50 ). Here, @xmath is a Brans-Dicke scalar,
@xmath is a constant and @xmath is an exponent of an entire function
with unit dimension, containing no zeros. Substituting the operator
@xmath reveals that the Brans-Dicke scalar @xmath is none other than the
Planck Mass, i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

As such, we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

Furthermore, expanding to first order allows us to express the constant
@xmath as follows

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

This should prove useful as it contains within it the root of the
Starobinsky model as @xmath , with @xmath . It should also be noted that
taking @xmath imposes that the function @xmath contains within it no
roots and so there are no additional poles introduced into the
propagator. The case of @xmath , given by ( 3.22 ), is one such example
whereby @xmath vanishes.
Ghost-free form
Taking into account the value of the Brans-Dicke scalar, and reordering,
allows us to express the necessary ghost-free form of the non-local
function @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have defined a new entire function @xmath , which contains no
roots.
Ghost-free modified propagator
To display the necessary form of the ghost-free modified propagator, we
substitute ( 3.68 ) into ( 3.21 ), before decomposing into partial
fractions.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have defined the spin-0 particle @xmath .
Tachyon criteria
The spin-0 particle @xmath must have real mass to ensure that the
correction is non-tachyonic. Subsequently, @xmath must be positive so
that the condition whereby tachyons are prohibited from the
gravitational theory is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath -Gravity
Taking the limit @xmath effectively removes all non-locality from the
gravitational theory, stripping it back to fourth order gravity. Taking
this limit on the functions ( 2.82 ), when @xmath , reduces the theory
to the Starobinsky model, with @xmath . These functions are then given
by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

Recall, that each D’Alembertian contained within the non-local functions
@xmath is modulated by the scale of non-locality @xmath . Thus

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

Substituting the values ( 3.73 ) into the general form of the propagator
( 3.21 ) (with @xmath in momentum space on a flat background), and
performing the same method of decomposing into partial fractions, allows
us to write the propagator for @xmath -gravity, as was previously stated
in ( 3.28 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . Here, it is simply the scalar sector of the propagator
that is modified and, we note also, in comparison to ( 3.71 ), @xmath at
this limit. Further to this, we remind the reader that the constant
@xmath contains within it the root of the Starobinsky model. By taking
the same limits as described bove, we find from equation ( 3.69 ), that
@xmath is given by @xmath ⁴ ⁴ 4 Here, we have omitted the ‘counting
tool’ @xmath which serves no physical purpose other than offering a
simple means of returning the theory to GR at @xmath . Thus, in order
for the Starobinsky model to avoid becoming tachyonic, from the criteria
described in ( 3.72 ), we require the coefficient attached to the @xmath
term in the action to be positive, i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath returns the theory to GR.

## Chapter 4 Singularity-free Theories of Gravity

### 4.1 What is a Singularity?

One of Einstein’s great insights was to devise a gravitational theory
that is described by curvature alone. As discussed in the introduction,
this insight stemmed from the universality of the tensor transformation
law, which allowed Einstein to formulate a gravitational action made up
of tensors, which would necessarily preserve covariance, universally. As
such the physical laws of any gravitational theory made up of tensors
will remain invariant under arbitrarily differentiable coordinate
transformations. This is the principle of General Covariance.
Unfortunately, however, entailed within this principle is a notorious
difficulty in formulating a precise definition of a singularity. We ask
the question then: What is a Singularity? [ 23 ]

An intuitive answer to this question would be that a singularity is a
‘place’ where the curvature ‘blows up’ [ 24 ] . This response comes with
a number of difficulties, most notably, the idea of a singularity as a
‘place’. What separates GR from other physical theories is that it is
formulated independently of the manifold or a specified metric structure
of the spacetime. Without a manifold or given metric, the very idea of a
‘place’ remains undefined. This is very different to, for instance,
electrodynamics, where the manifold is clearly defined and solutions
exist, such as the Coulomb solution, which render the electromagnetic
field infinite. In this case, the electromagnetic field is undefined and
characterises an electromagnetic singularity.

In GR, as opposed to other physical theories, the goal is to solve for
the structure of spacetime itself. For example, if we consider the
Schwarzschild solution of GR, which is well known to contain an
essential singularity at the point @xmath . It is at this point that the
metric gives way to pathologies. However, without a prescribed manifold,
it is not possible to discuss the concept of ‘outside’ the manifold.

A possible solution to this intransigence lies in considering the
associated geodesic congruences of the theory. If we consider an ingoing
geodesic which extends into past infinity, then one would infer that the
spacetime is non-singular. This is known as geodesic completeness.
Conversely, a spacetime that is defined by converging geodesics would be
said to be beset by spacetime pathologies and indeed ‘holes’ in the
fabric of spacetime, through which the geodesics can not pass. This
intuitive framework is appealing in its simplicity and forms the basis
of the Hawking Penrose Singularity Theorems but comes with a number of
caveats. As a vector field may be timelike, spacelike or null, one would
assume that if a spacetime contains a ‘hole’ in its fabric in one of
these cases, it would be true for all cases. However, this is not the
case as the various forms are manifestly not equivalent and one can
imagine the different possible permutations of completeness and
incompleteness of the three forms, see [ 23 ] and [ 24 ] for specific
examples of these potential contradictions.

Despite geodesic completeness falling short of a satisfyingly precise
mathematical definition of a singularity, the fact remains that a
spacetime which is null or timelike incomplete will contain some serious
physical malady. In such a spacetime, a freely falling particle, will at
some finite time, simply cease to exist and as such can be justifiably
considered to be singular. As a result, throughout this discussion, we
will consider a theory containing causal geodesic congruences, which
focus to a point in a finite time to be singular, as it is this
definition which forms the basis for the Penrose-Hawking singularity
theorems.

### 4.2 Hawking-Penrose Singularity Theorem

We now state the Hawking-Penrose Singularity Theorem, [ 56 ] , [ 59 ] ,
applicable to an open or flat Universe and concerned with null geodesic
congruences.

###### Theorem 4.2.1 (Singularity Theorem 1).

A spacetime @xmath cannot be null-geodesically complete in the past
direction if

1.  @xmath for all null tangent vectors @xmath ;

2.   There is a non-compact Cauchy surface @xmath in @xmath ;

3.   There is a closed trapped surface @xmath in @xmath .

Notes

1.  Here, @xmath is the Ricci tensor and @xmath are null geodesic
    congruences or ‘rays.’ This inequality is known as the null
    convergence condition and describes a spacetime where null rays
    focus or converge to a point in a finite ‘time’ (affine parameter),
    thus describing a singular spacetime, according to our definition
    above. The full significance of this convergence condition will be
    revealed during the subsequent discussion on the Raychaudhuri
    Equation, Section 4.3 .

2.  A Cauchy surface is defined as a closed, achronal set @xmath for
    which the full domain of independence @xmath , where

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (4.1)
      -- -------- -- -------

    and the superscripts @xmath and @xmath refer to the future and past
    domain, respectively, [ 24 ] . More formally, these domains are
    defined as

      -- -------- -------- -- -------
         @xmath   @xmath      (4.2)
                  @xmath      
      -- -------- -------- -- -------

    As @xmath is achronal , we may consider such a surface to be an
    instant of time . A spacetime that possesses a Cauchy Surface is
    called globally hyperbolic . A globally hyperbolic spacetime is
    causally simple in that the entire future or past history of the
    Universe can be predicted from well-defined initial conditions [ 91
    ] or, indeed, a well-defined ‘instant of time.’

3.  A closed trapped surface is a topological space where the
    congruences of null geodesics, orthogonal to the topological space,
    converge. This convergence is typified by negative ingoing and
    outgoing expansion. In a geometrically-flat spacetime or open
    Universe, the convergence condition, denoted as point (1.) in
    Theorem 4.3.1 , necessarily implies a closed trapped surface, point
    (3.) [ 92 ] , [ 56 ] . However, this is not necessarily the case for
    a closed Universe, see Ellis [ 57 ] . We return to the notion of
    trapped surfaces in Section 4.3.5 .

### 4.3 The Raychaudhuri Equation and General Relativity

Before we delve into the derivation of the Raychaudhuri Equation, it is
instructive to define some of the terminology involved. Firstly, we will
often refer to congruences of geodesics , sometimes abbreviated to
simply ‘geodesics’. The tangents to these congruences yield a vector
field, which we refer to as ‘tangent vectors’ or indeed ‘rays’ when
discussing null geodesic congruences. A congruence of geodesics is
simply a bundle or family of geodesics. More formally, this bundle
resides in an open subset of a manifold @xmath , which we may consider
to be our spacetime, such that each point in this spacetime passes
through precisely one geodesic within this bundle. The tangents to such
a congruence yield a causal vector field within the spacetime. Causal
means that these tangents can be timelike or null , by which we denote
the vector fields @xmath and @xmath , respectively [ 24 ] , [ 58 ] .

#### 4.3.1 Normalization of Timelike and Null Geodesics

When analysing the defocusing conditions of a spacetime, we will largely
restrict ourselves to analysing the null vector fields @xmath and their
associated null geodesic congruences. This is because null rays more
readily converge than their timelike counterparts and, as our intent is
to describe the conditions under which a singularity-free cosmology may
flourish, it is more revealing to restrict our discussion to null
geodesic congruences. We will return to this point in a more formal
manner later in this section. In the meantime, however, it is
instructive to contrast some of the differences in behaviour of null and
timelike geodesics, beginning with a discussion on normalization. In
contrast to the timelike case, which can be readily normalized to unit
length, there is no natural way of normalizing a tangent vector field
such as @xmath . In the timelike case, a tangent field @xmath is defined
in terms of proper time @xmath , like so

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

so that the line element @xmath , restricted to a timelike curve @xmath
, gives the straightforward normalization:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

We can then construct a metric @xmath which satisfies, what we shall
call, the spatial condition ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

This is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Similarly, the line element @xmath , restricted to a light-like or null
curve, is given by @xmath . Here, the null tangent field @xmath is
defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is an affine parameter. Thus, the normalization analogous
to the timelike case ( 4.4 ) is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The outstanding task for the null tangent vectors @xmath is to construct
a metric @xmath , which satisfies the spatial condition @xmath along
with the above normalization. Naively, one would assume a choice of
@xmath , would suffice, as this choice worked so well in the timelike
case. However, on quick inspection, we find that this does not satisfy
the spatial condition @xmath . For this choice of @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

A popular resolution, [ 58 ] , of this difficulty is to introduce an
additional null vector @xmath , such that @xmath and @xmath . We can
then construct the two-dimensional metric

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

satisfying the necessary conditions @xmath , as well as @xmath . This is
by no means a unique choice of metric but it is sufficient in the
subsequent derivation of the Raychaudhuri Equation and does not result
in any loss of generality. In practice, the precise form of the metric
will be largely irrelevant for our purposes, so long as one has in mind
a two-dimensional metric that conforms to the spatial condition and
satisfies ( 4.8 ).

#### 4.3.2 Derivation of Raychaudhuri Equation

Let us now give the derivation of what will be the key instrument in our
analysis of singularity-free cosmologies - the Raychaudhuri equation for
null geodesic congruences. Using the aforementioned vector field @xmath
and following closely to [ 24 ] , we define a tensor field

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

which satisfies the spatial condition @xmath , due to the fact that two
vector fields of the same coordinate basis will commute. We then
attribute to it the positive definite, two dimensional, spatial metric
@xmath such that @xmath , as discussed previously. We now define the
expansion , shear [ 93 ] and twist , respectively, as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

To develop an intuitive understanding of these geometric terms, it is
perhaps best to first consider congruences of timelike geodesics. If we
consider a set of test particles, making up a sphere and centred on a
geodesic, the expansion is the change in volume of the sphere; the shear
is the deformation of the geometry of the sphere into an ellipsoid; and
the twist is simply a rotation of the geometry [ 94 ] .

In order to illustrate the analogous evolution of null rays, we must
first introduce the notion of screen space . An observer’s screen space
is a two dimensional space orthogonal to @xmath . Images are carried by
the null rays and are displayed upon the screen space. The shape and
size of these images, which are independent of the observer, are what
concerns us in defining the kinematic quantities of the expansion, shear
and rotation. As such, the null expansion measures the change in area of
the image; the shear distorts the image; and the twist rotates the
image. These quantities make up the kinematic flow , generated by the
tangent vector @xmath [ 54 ] , [ 58 ] .

Returning to mathematical identities for these geometric quantities (
4.12 ), we may now decompose @xmath to the following

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Next, consider the term @xmath , which from ( 4.11 ), becomes

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Recall that the commutator of two covariant derivatives acting upon a
tensor can be expressed in terms of the Riemann tensor, like so

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

so that the term @xmath develops as follows

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The middle term then vanishes as the shear and rotation tensors are
purely spatial as is the metric @xmath , so that from ( 4.13 ), @xmath .
Thus,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

We then take the trace to find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

which upon reference to ( 4.13 ), leads us to the Raychaudhuri Equation
for null geodesic congruences , which we express as follows

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, we have noted that @xmath , with affine length @xmath . Following
the same approach, one may also derive the Raychaudhuri equation for
timelike vectors , which is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

One can immediately see that these two identities take a broadly similar
form with some key differences. The factor of @xmath in the denominator
of the timelike equation arises from the metric ( 4.6 ), which is @xmath
-dimensional as opposed to the @xmath -dimensional null metric ( 4.10 ).
This difference in metric also accounts for the ‘bar’ placed on the
shear and twist tensors in the the timelike case. Finally, the Ricci
tensor is contracted with the null (timelike) vectors fields @xmath (
@xmath ), such that @xmath ( @xmath ) in the null (timelike)
formulation.

#### 4.3.3 Convergence Conditions

By making a number of straightforward observations about the geometric
terms in the Raychaudhuri equation ( 4.19 ), we may reduce this identity
to an inequality, which when satisfied necessitates that the associated
null geodesics cannot be maximally extended in the past direction. This
is known as the null convergence condition and depicts congruences that
converge to meet a singularity in a finite time. As previously
discussed, the shear tensor is purely spatial and therefore contributes
positively to the RHS of ( 4.19 ), whereas the twist tensor vanishes if
we take the congruence of null rays to be orthogonal to a hypersurface.
Applying these constraints to the RE gives us the null convergence
condition (null CC):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

General Relativity
The behaviour of null rays in GR can be discerned by referring to the
perfect fluid equation in Appendix B . The null energy condition (NEC)
requires [ 58 ] , [ 63 ] , [ 59 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus, a spacetime will not be geodesically past-complete and will be
plagued by a singularity if either of the following conditions are met

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus, General Relativity will contain a singularity as long as the
associated energy condition is retained. Another question remains,
however, and that concerns the geometric terms we managed to ‘edit’ out
of proceedings. Is it possible for the shear and the twist to distort
the geometry in such a way that geodesic congruences may be made
past-complete? We discuss this below.

#### 4.3.4 Rotation and Convergence

We may express the null convergence condition of ( 4.19 ), more
generally, without making any refinements to the geometric tensors. In
this case, null geodesic congruences will converge in accordance with [
58 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath [ 58 ] . Thus, the shear induces convergence,
whereas the rotation inhibits it. Upon studying the inequality given in
( 4.24 ), one might think, naively, that as the rotation inhibits
convergence, this may be enough to render the null rays past-complete,
without the aid of gravity.
Shear-free Expansion of Dust
To understand the role of rotation more clearly, let us consider the
simplest case of a rotating and expanding Universe, which is given by
the shear-free expansion of dust. In order to do this, let us first
redefine the expansion as @xmath , where @xmath , and substitute this
into the RE ( 4.19 ) to find [ 95 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the case of shear-free expansion of dust, we have @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath [ 54 ] , whereas from the Einstein field equations
with vanishing pressure, we have @xmath , where @xmath is taken to be
constant along @xmath . The above equation can then be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, we have multiplied by a factor of @xmath on both sides so that we
may integrate in a straightforward manner. Integrating, we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

This equation suggests that there exists a solution to Einstein’s
equations where a period of intense rotation at early times will result
in sufficient centrifugal force so as to cause a bounce in the stead of
the initial singularity of the Universe [ 54 ] . However, it was shown
by Ellis [ 96 ] that no such solution can exist, via the Dust Shear-Free
Theorem:

###### Theorem 4.3.1 (Dust Shear-Free Theorem).

If a dust solution of the Einstein Field Equations is shear-free in a
domain @xmath , it cannot both expand and rotate in @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus, if a dust solution is shear-free and expanding, the rotation must
vanish, so that we may not realise the period of intense rotation
outlined above [ 97 ] , [ 98 ] .
Gödel Universe
Another exact solution of Einstein’s Field Equations is the Gödel
solution [ 99 ] , which can be described by the line element [ 56 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the magnitude of the vorticity. Gödel’s solution has
vanishing expansion and shear but is characterised by a non-zero
rotation and rotational symmetry around every point. In this case, the
Raychaudhuri equation in terms of timelike tangent vectors ( 4.20 ), can
be expressed as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

where in the timelike case @xmath . Comparing these identities in the
absence of pressure reveals @xmath , while substitution into ( 4.30 )
gives @xmath . We may then write the analogous Friedmann equation for
the Gödel Universe as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

Such a Universe is indeed geodesically complete but leads to a breakdown
in causality due to the prevalence of closed timelike curves . Whereas
proper time can be measured consistently along a given world line, there
exists no concept of cosmic time. An observer travelling along such a
closed curve will travel forward in time as measured locally by the
observer but, globally, may return to an event in the past [ 54 ] , [
100 ] , [ 101 ] . While undoubtedly revealing with regards to the role
of rotation in gravitational theories and geodesic-completeness, as well
as offering a tantalising glimpse at the possibility of time travel,
Gödel universe’s violation of causality means that we cannot consider it
to be a viable non-singular theory in the present text.

#### 4.3.5 Cosmological Expansion

In this section, we will build upon the mathematical definition of the
expansion given by ( 4.12 ), by first giving an intuitive picture of the
general concept, before moving on to the details and consequences in a
cosmological setting. Given a sphere of test particles, the expansion is
defined by the change in volume of this sphere and can be subdivided
into ingoing and outgoing expansions , which are delineated by the
respective ingoing and outgoing (timelike) tangent vectors. The type of
surface formed by these ingoing and outgoing tangent vectors can have
profound consequences for the nature of the spacetime, as we shall see
below.

##### Normal, Trapped and Antitrapped Surfaces

In order to gain a better understanding of ingoing and outgoing
expansions, let us, by way of example, consider a two dimensional
spatial sphere @xmath on a curved space [ 94 ] . Let @xmath be the area
of @xmath at cosmic time @xmath . After a small amount of time, @xmath ,
has passed, ingoing geodesics will describe a surface @xmath with area
@xmath , whereas outgoing rays will form a surface @xmath with area
@xmath . The respective expansion rates will then be given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

Conventionally, one would expect the outgoing geodesics to describe a
growing surface and the ingoing geodesics to describe a shrinking one.
This is the behaviour in an asymptotically-flat spacetime and as such
the surfaces formed are known as normal surfaces . An example of such a
surface is depicted in Fig. 4.1 .

However, at points close to a singularity, these expansions can behave
very differently. For example, inside the event horizon of a
Schwarzschild black hole, with @xmath , both sets of geodesics would
form a surface of smaller area, after a given time has passed. The
resulting surfaces are known as trapped surfaces , the existence of
which strongly suggests and, in some case, necessitates the formation of
a singularity. In broad strokes, we may say that singularities are an
inevitable consequence of trapped surfaces, in a geometrically-flat or
open Universe, so long as positive energy density is maintained [ 94 ] .
However, this is not necessarily the case for a closed Universe, see [
57 ] .

There is another type of surface called an antitrapped surface , which
is formed when the expansion is rapid enough that both in- and outgoing
tangent vectors form a surface of a larger area after a given time has
passed. A minimally antitrapped surface (MAS) has vanishing outgoing
expansion and any surface greater in radius to the MAS will necessarily
be antitrapped. Furthermore, an apparent horizon is found on the inner
boundary of the MAS, like so

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the physical size of the minimally antitrapped surface.
We will return to this relation to the the apparent horizon shortly, but
conclude here with a summary of the surfaces we have introduced:

  -- -- -------- -- --------
        @xmath      (4.34)
        @xmath      (4.35)
        @xmath      (4.36)
  -- -- -------- -- --------

Further note that surfaces termed marginally trapped , are those with
negative expansions as opposed to negative definite, i.e. marginally
trapped surfaces include those with vanishing expansion and are defined
by simply replacing the @xmath sign with @xmath , above. Similarly for
marginally antitrapped surfaces, @xmath is replaced with @xmath .

##### Cosmological Expansion

In order to understand more clearly the nature of these surfaces, it is
pertinent to derive the exact form of the ingoing and outgoing
expansions in a cosmological setting. To this end, we invoke the
spatially flat, homogenous and isotropic Friedmann-Robertson-Walker
(FRW) metric

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

Recall from ( 4.12 ), that we may write the expansion @xmath as follows

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

We also note that the two geodesic equations for the time and spatial
coordinate read

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

respectively, where @xmath is an affine parameter. Without loss of
generality, we may consider paths along the @xmath -direction only ¹ ¹ 1
where, at this time, we are considering the isotropic form of ( 4.37 )
with @xmath , with @xmath . For @xmath , we then have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

Substituting this latter identity into the geodesic equation for the
time coordinate gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

One can easily verify that @xmath with constant @xmath is a solution of
this equation. Setting @xmath to unity we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

Due to the isotropic nature of the FRW metric ( 4.37 ), the spatial
components are equal and can therefore be truncated into the index
@xmath ² ² 2 Greek indices indicate spatial and temporal components,
i.e. @xmath , whereas Latin letters indicate the spatial components
@xmath . We may now express @xmath , the tangential vector field to the
congruence of null geodesics, as follows

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the sign attached to @xmath is negative for ingoing rays and
positive for outgoing rays. The final step is to compute the expansion,
itself. To this end, we note that the expansion can be rewritten in the
following form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

For the FRW metric given in ( 4.37 ), we have @xmath , allowing us to
write the ingoing and outgoing expansion for the given cosmological
spacetime

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

[ 102 ] , [ 63 ] .

##### Cosmological Apparent Horizons and Conformal Diagram

The first thing to note from these ingoing and outgoing expansions is
that the term @xmath denotes the physical size of the surface described
by the expansion in a geometrically-flat spacetime. This can be seen by
the general formula for comoving distance of a general FRW metric, which
is given by [ 103 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

As the inner boundary of an antitrapped surface is the region where the
surface becomes marginal , by definition, this region will have
vanishing expansion. Thus, we may justify the assertion ( 4.33 ) that
the minimally antitrapped surface is bounded by an apparent horizon on
its inner margin, upon reference to the ingoing expansion given in (
4.45 ). By setting ( 4.45 ) to zero, we find that for a comoving
distance @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the cosmological apparent horizon of the FRW background
[ 103 ] , [ 63 ] , [ 94 ] , [ 104 ] .

##### Accelerated Expansion of the Universe

Inflation theory suggests a period of rapid expansion soon after the Big
Bang is required for the formation of the large scale structures we see
today. Whereas, expansion slows after this inflationary period,
observational data has found that the Universe is still undergoing
accelerated expansion at present [ 105 ] . In terms of the FRW metric (
4.37 ), accelerated expansion of the universe is defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

On comparing this with the curvature scalar in FRW, @xmath , we find
that in a period of accelerated expansion, the curvature scalar @xmath
is always positive, at least in a geometrically flat or open Universe.
Fig. 4.2 illustrates such inflation within a Big Bang cosmology.

##### Null vs. Timelike Geodesic Congruences

We stated earlier that null geodesic congruences more readily converge
than their timelike counterparts and therefore, an analysis of null rays
is more illuminating in terms of defocusing and past-completeness. In
this section, we will show that if a geometrically-flat spacetime is
singularity-free in the context of null rays, its timelike counterpart
will necessarily be singularity-free. For our purposes here, we begin
with the isotropic form of the FRW metric

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

while following closely to [ 106 ] . We then compute the null and
timelike convergence conditions, which are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

respectively. Here, the timelike vector field is taken to be of the form
@xmath , where @xmath ; and the subscript @xmath refers to the
quantities being evaluated at @xmath . Further details can be found in [
106 ] . For the present discussion, the precise details of these
quantities are not strictly relevant. We simply note that the respective
convergence conditions take the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath , being a positive parameter. The limiting case of the null
convergence condition can be found by framing the left inequality as an
identity and solving the differential equation. We find this to take the
form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

for some integration constants @xmath . Pleasingly, this conforms to the
scale factor in de Sitter space,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Hubble constant [ 106 ] . Comparing this with the
timelike case and we find that of the two convergence conditions, the
null CC is less restrictive. In other words, timelike geodesics are more
easily made past-complete by this condition and so, in a study of
singularity-free cosmologies, it makes sense to study null rays over
their timelike counterparts. To summarise, in a geometrically-flat
cosmology, if a spacetime is non-singular for null rays, it will also be
devoid of singularities for timelike geodesics.

### 4.4 Defocusing Conditions for Infinite Derivative Gravity around
Minkowski Space

In this section, we extend our study of geodesic congruences away from
general relativity into the novel approach of infinite derivative
gravity (IDG), the groundwork of which was laid in Chapter 2 , where the
non-linear and linearised equations of motion were derived and in
Chapter 3 , where the theory was rendered free of ghosts and tachyons.
It is now time to return to the central question of this thesis, first
raised in the Introduction, by asking the question:

  Can null rays defocus in an infinite derivative theory of gravity,
  without introducing ghosts, tachyons or exotic matter?

In essence, we wish to show how infinite derivative extensions of
gravity, in contrast to GR and finite models, have the potential to
describe a stable and singularity-free theory of gravity.
Recall that in Section 2.3 , we derived the linearised field equations
for the infinite derivative action of gravity:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

where, within the form factors @xmath , each D’Alembertian operator is
modulated by the scale of non-locality @xmath . The resulting field
equations are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the infinite derivative functions @xmath are made up of the form
factors @xmath , defined in ( 2.82 ), and conform to the constraint

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

Furthermore, through our lengthy discussion on the Raychaudhuri equation
in General Relativity in Section 4.3 , we learned of its powerful role
in conveying the focusing behaviour of geodesic congruences, where the
sole contribution of gravity stems from the @xmath term, with @xmath
representing a null tangent vector or ray. We may then find the
contribution of gravity to the RE for the infinite derivative theory of
gravity, described by the action ( 4.54 ), by contracting the linearised
field equations ( 4.55 ) with the tangent vectors @xmath . Thus, we
obtain the IDG convergence condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

If a theory satisfies this condition, the associated null rays cannot
start to diverge until they reach the origin. In other words, these null
rays converge towards a singularity in a finite time, as is the
behaviour in GR. However, in contrast to GR, where @xmath must remain
positive so as not to violate the null energy condition ( B ), we have
modified the stress-energy tensor in such a way that it may indeed be
possible to reverse the sign of @xmath whilst retaining the NEC. We call
the inequality @xmath the defocusing condition , as it is the condition
whereby null rays may defocus, suggestive of a singularity-free theory
of gravity.

##### Homogenous Solution.

The linearised field equations ( 4.55 ) describe the curvature of a
spacetime that has been perturbed away from Minkowski space. We begin
our analysis by discussing perturbations that are entirely homogenous,
with all curvature dependent only on the cosmic time @xmath . One could
think of the time-dependent, perturbed metric @xmath which makes up the
curvature, as being closely related to the cosmological scale factor of
FRW, which is useful in this context, as we are considering cosmological
singularities. In the homogenous case, the D’Alembertian simply becomes
@xmath , so that the defocusing condition @xmath reads [ 18 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

where in order to preserve the NEC, we have @xmath . We may then say
that the minimum requirement for such a theory to display the desired
defocusing behaviour is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath set to zero. Immediately, we are confronted with some
important observations, which we outline below.

##### Observations

1.  If we recall the form of the modified graviton propagator from
    Section 3.1

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (4.60)
      -- -------- -- --------

    we find that the condition @xmath necessitates that no additional
    pole, other than the massless graviton, is introduced. In this case,
    the modified propagator is simply the physical graviton propagator
    modulated by an overall factor of @xmath , where the function @xmath
    is an exponent of an entire function, containing no roots:

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (4.61)
      -- -------- -- --------

    The curvature @xmath is positive as a result of accelerated
    expansion of the Universe, Section 4.3 , so that from ( 4.58 ), we
    see that the defocusing condition can only be achieved if @xmath is
    negative when acting on the curvature. As should be apparent from
    the above form of the propagator, such a negative function would
    reverse the sign of the spin-2 component, leading to a negative
    residue and subsequently a ghost. This ghost is known as the Weyl
    ghost and was discussed in Section 3.2 . As a result, we conclude
    that an additional scalar degree of freedom is required in order for
    null rays to display the desired defocusing behaviour.

2.  Having established the need for a departure from the pure massless
    mode of the graviton propagator in ( 4.60 ), we move into the more
    general case of @xmath . This condition tells us that in order for
    the null rays to defocus - a minimum requirement of a
    singularity-free theory of gravity - one requires an additional root
    in the spin-0 component of the graviton propagator. As such, one
    additional scalar degree of freedom must propagate in the spacetime
    besides the massless graviton, if we wish to satisfy the defocusing
    condition. As @xmath does not introduce a new pole, the spin-2
    component of the graviton propagator remains massless.

We have already demonstrated a significant departure from general
relativity, in that IDG corrections have allowed for the possibility of
singularity avoidance, via the defocusing condition ( 4.61 ), without
violating the null energy condition.

Having established the need for an additional pole in the propagator, we
must now take steps to avoid the introduction of ghosts or tachyons. In
Section 3.3.3 , we derived the ghost-free condition around a Minkowski
background. This condition took the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the constant @xmath and @xmath is an exponent of an entire
function, containing no roots. Substitution into ( 4.60 ) reveals the
ghost-free modified propagator for an asymptotically-flat spacetime:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have defined

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath must be positive to ensure that the mass is non-tachyonic and
@xmath positive definite in order to retain the essential new pole, i.e.
the constant @xmath satisfies @xmath . Armed with this, we are now in a
position to describe the defocusing condition which precludes the
existence of ghosts. Substitution of ( 4.62 ) into ( 4.59 ) leads to the
central result

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 4.4.1 Comparison with Starobinsky Model

Taking the limit @xmath , with @xmath , reduces the action ( 2.20 ) to
that of Starobinsky’s model of inflation [ 34 ] . Indeed, a curious
question to ask is, could Starobinsky’s action avoid the cosmological
singularity? At the limit @xmath , the propagator ( 4.60 ) can be
expressed as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is given by ( 4.64 ), with @xmath , and @xmath , to avoid
tachyonic mass. However, the fundamental difference can be seen by
comparing the propagator for @xmath -gravity with the IDG propagator, (
4.63 ). In the local limit, @xmath . Furthermore, as we are making
comparisons with the propagator in momentum space, the D’Alembertian
takes the form @xmath . In this case, the defocusing inequality ( 4.58 )
can only be satisfied for

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this scenario, to avoid focusing we require @xmath , rendering the
theory tachyonic. Alternatively, negative curvature would contradict the
requirement of accelerated expansion of the Universe, see ( 4.48 ),
which is vital to realise primordial inflation, Section 3.2 . As such,
the Starobinsky model cannot pair inflation with resolving the Big Bang
Singularity.

### 4.5 Bouncing Solution

Up to this point, we have not spoken about what replaces the Big Bang
singularity in a non-singular spacetime. This is because, as opposed to
[ 19 ] , [ 107 ] , [ 108 ] , [ 16 ] , [ 85 ] , we have made no
assumptions on the nature of the cosmological scale factor, which is
closely related to the perturbed metric tensor @xmath . The term scale
factor is most often associated with the function @xmath in an FRW
metric ( 4.37 ). However, in an homogeneous and isotropic spacetime such
as the one we are considering around Minkowski space, we note that we
are very closely aligned to the FRW metric, making cosmological
predictions relevant. In this way, the metric can be considered to be of
the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

Bouncing cosmologies replace the initial big bang singularity with that
of a bounce, so that incoming geodesic congruences can be made past
complete - stretching to past infinity, leading to an extension of the
conformal diagram Fig. 4.2 , which is illustrated in Fig. 4.3 .
Although, we do not suppose a priori that the initial singularity is
replaced by a bounce, we would indeed expect cosmologies with a bouncing
scale factor to satisfy the defocusing condition ( 4.65 ).

We illustrate this by way of example.

#### 4.5.1 Integral Form

It may now be illuminating to test our defocusing condition ( 4.65 ). We
proceed, as in the Starobinsky case, by taking our analysis into
momentum space and testing against a well-known bouncing solution , that
is, a cosmology defined by a bouncing scale factor, which is necessarily
an even function. However, due to the infinite derivative nature of the
function @xmath , this comes with an added degree of complexity. One
possibility in analysing the defocusing condition ( 4.65 ) lies in
recasting the defocusing condition into its integral form [ 109 ] .

Integral Form
As discussed in Chapter 3 , we must choose @xmath to be an exponent of
an entire function, the simplest case being ³ ³ 3 We note briefly the
importance of the sign in the exponent of @xmath . In Appendix C , [ 66
] , [ 16 ] , it is shown that for the correct Newtonian potential to be
observed, the non-local function @xmath must be of the form @xmath ,
where @xmath is an entire function. As @xmath is defined as @xmath , and
both are defined as exponents of entire functions, it is reasonable to
expect a difference of a minus sign in the exponent.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

where, again, @xmath is the scale of non-locality. Thus, we wish to
compute @xmath , where @xmath is the curvature scalar, solely dependent
on @xmath . To this end, we reformulate this expression into its
integral form by first defining the Fourier transform and its inverse
like so

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

We may then write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

By using the properties of the Fourier transform and defining @xmath ,
we may express this as follows

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now, in order to compute in terms of the Gaussian integral @xmath , we
rewrite @xmath into the following form

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.73)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

We then compute the Gaussian integral to find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

Similarly,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

The defocusing condition ( 4.65 ) can then be written as

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.76)
  -- -- -- --------

##### Example: @xmath

We now turn to a particular example of a bouncing solution. In this
case, we assume a scale factor of @xmath , where @xmath is a parameter
of mass dimension. Solutions of this type have been studied extensively
in [ 107 ] , [ 108 ] , [ 15 ] and found to be a solution of the field
equations ( 2.2.6 ), via an Ansatz-based approach. In terms of the
perturbed, t-dependent metric @xmath , this scale factor can be written
as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then, from the definition of curvature around Minkowski, ( 2.79 ), we
find the curvature to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

We then substitute this form of the curvature into the defocusing
condition ( 4.76 ) and compute the integral to find that, for any cosmic
time @xmath , defocusing may be realised according to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is satisfied for all real @xmath such that @xmath , so that we have
confirmed that a known bouncing scale factor does indeed display the
desired ghost-free defocusing behaviour, according to the constraint (
4.65 ).

### 4.6 A simpler action of gravity.

From the defocusing condition ( 4.58 ), we can deduce the simplest
infinite derivative action that can describe a singularity-free theory
of gravity. The central components for defocusing are the functions
@xmath and @xmath , which, in order to achieve freedom from ghosts, are
exponents of entire functions with zero roots and one root,
respectively. These functions are in turn made up of the infinite
derivative form factors @xmath with @xmath , which make up the
gravitational action ( 2.20 ), as given by ( 2.82 ). Consequently, upon
inspection of ( 2.82 ), it appears that we may be able to ‘switch off’
one or two of the form factors without changing the nature of the
functions @xmath or @xmath .
Non-linear Regime
For example, by setting @xmath , whilst retaining the infinite
derivative form factors @xmath and @xmath and noting that in a
conformally-flat background, such as FRW, (A)dS or Minkowski, the Weyl
tensor vanishes on the background, the action ( 2.20 ) reduces to the
following

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

This reduced action would clearly prove useful in a non-linear
cosmological analysis, where the contribution of the Weyl tensor would
be precisely zero, even with a non-zero form factor @xmath , but it may
also prove to be of interest in the linearised regime.
Linearised Regime
On inspection of the infinite derivative functions ( 2.82 ) which make
up the field equations in the linearised regime, it should be clear that
it is possible to ‘switch off’ any one of the form factors @xmath ,
whilst still retaining the infinite derivative nature of the functions
@xmath and thus, not adversely affecting the theory. We may extend this
further to switching off two of the form factors @xmath .
Straightforward examples, include: setting @xmath with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

which retain the infinite derivative modification of both the scalar and
tensorial sectors of the propagator. Slightly less clear, however, is
the proposition of setting @xmath . This results in a correction of the
scalar sector of the propagator, while leaving the spin-2 sector of the
propagator unmodified. In this instance the relevant sectors of the
propagator can be obtained from ( 2.82 ) and are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.83)
  -- -------- -- --------

One can easily check, from ( 4.65 ), that this is indeed sufficient to
realise the desired ghost-free defocusing behaviour. It appears then,
that the modification of the spin-2 component of the propagator - which
is rootless and positive so as to avoid the Weyl ghost - does not play a
leading role in singularity avoidance. Furthermore, the simplicity of
this case allows us to more easily convey defocusing conditions in more
complicated scenarios, such as around de Sitter space, which is our next
focus.

### 4.7 Defocusing Conditions around de Sitter Space

Here, we extend our discussion to include ghost-free, defocusing
conditions around the de Sitter spacetime, with the reduced action

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

As we have seen from the previous section on a simpler action of gravity
, this is adequate for our aims of describing a ghost- and
singularity-free theory. This reduced form is equivalent to setting
@xmath in the general action ( 2.20 ) and dropping the remaining
subscript from the function @xmath , for convenience.

From here, we can deduce the expected behaviour of the propagator around
de Sitter space by inspecting the modified propagator around Minkowski (
4.60 ). Upon reference to ( 2.82 ), we find that, by imposing @xmath ,
the spin-2 or tensorial sector of the propagator is no longer modified
and all subsequent corrections take place in the scalar sector. This is
as expected due to the purely scalar modification of the
Einstein-Hilbert action taking place in ( 4.84 ). An exposition of the
ghost-free conditions for the full action ( 2.20 ) has recently been
discussed in [ 80 ] , where the perturbed metric @xmath is decomposed
into its 10 individual degrees of freedom via

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, the transverse and traceless, massless, spin-2 graviton @xmath ,
accounts for 5 degrees of freedom; the transverse vector field @xmath
contributes 3 degrees of freedom; and the two scalars @xmath and @xmath
provide a further 2 degrees of freedom. In this case, transverse simply
refers to a tensor that has vanishing divergence, i.e. @xmath . In the
present discussion, we invoke an alternative method, similar to the
previous discussion around Minkowski space.

Field Equations
The field equations of the action ( 4.84 ) can be read off from ( 2.109
) and are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
                 
     @xmath      (4.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

Upon reflection, we find that these field equations can be recast in
precisely the same form as in the Minkowski case, ( 2.86 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

according to the following definitions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.88)
  -- -------- -- --------

which return ( 2.82 ) at the limit @xmath ⁴ ⁴ 4 provided that @xmath due
to the reduced action ( 4.84 ) . In order to be consistent with the
Minkowski case, we next note that these infinite derivative functions
must conform to the same constraints given by ( 2.3 ), namely that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.89)
  -- -------- -- --------

By taking the trace of the final equation in ( 4.7 ), we find that this
is indeed the case.
Ghost-free Conditions
Having established established consistency with the Minkowski case, in
that the field equations take the same form and obey the same generic
conditions, the propagator will be modified in a similar manner,
according to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.90)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, the subscript @xmath denotes the physical (GR) graviton
propagators around de Sitter space and contain the GR roots of the
propagator via [ 80 ] , [ 110 ] , [ 111 ] , [ 112 ] .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.91)
  -- -------- -- --------

which reduce to the familiar root @xmath at the Minkowski limit @xmath ⁵
⁵ 5 Note that in de Sitter space the D’Alembertian operator acting on a
scalar is given by @xmath In momentum space, we can write this as @xmath
. We note here that the spin-2 sector is modulated by the constant
@xmath . From our discussion on pathologies of the propagator in Section
3.2 , we know that in order to avoid the Weyl ghost, this constant must
be positive definite. In truth, the positive nature of this constant is
determined by fundamental physical constraints. In Appendix D , we
discuss the role of this constant in the gravitational entropy of such
an infinite derivative action around de Sitter space, see also [ 68 ] .
The upshot is that the point @xmath coincides with a physical system
defined by vanishing entropy, while @xmath describes non-physical
spacetimes with negative entropy. Thus, @xmath and as a result, the
tensorial structure of the propagator can not be said to be modified in
any meaningful manner, as the positive constant

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.92)
  -- -------- -- --------

could be normalized to unity, if so desired. This is as expected, as the
modification that is taking place is within a purely scalar modification
of GR.
Ghost-free Conditions
In order to avoid negative residues in the spin-0 component of the
propagator, we proceed in much the same manner as in the Minkowski case,
by relating the trace equation to an exponent of an entire function that
has been furnished with an additional root, like so

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.93)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the trace equation is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.94)
  -- -------- -- --------

As before, the substitution @xmath reveals that the Brans-Dicke Scalar
@xmath , whereas expanding to first order reveals the constant @xmath to
be now given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.95)
  -- -------- -- --------

Again, we check the limit as @xmath returns ( 3.69 ), with @xmath .
Tachyon Criteria
Now, by decomposing the propagator ( 4.93 ) into partial fractions, we
find the modified propagator in dS to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.96)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath . This form of the modified propagator reduces
to the previously derived propagator around Minkowski space ( 3.71 ) at
the limit @xmath , which implies @xmath . Furthermore, the constant
@xmath must be positive definite in order to avoid tachyons and to
retain the additional scalar pole.
Defocusing Conditions
We are now in a position to describe the minimum conditions whereby a
spacetime, linearised around de Sitter, may indeed be considered to be
non-singular, in that it avoids converging null geodesic congruences. We
find the contribution of gravity to the Raychaudhuri equation by
contracting the field equations ( 4.87 ) with the tangent vectors @xmath
, like so

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.97)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that the minimum condition for these null rays to defocus is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.98)
  -- -------- -- --------

Expanding out the covariant derivatives , we may express the defocusing
condition in the following manner

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.99)
  -- -------- -- --------

which can, in turn, be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.100)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Here, we see that at the limit @xmath , the defocusing condition around
Minkowski ( 4.65 ) is recovered. Thus, we have then succeeded in our aim
of deriving the ghost-free, defocusing condition around de Sitter space,
comparable to Section 4.4 .

## Chapter 5 Conclusion

The stated objective of this thesis was to present a viable extension of
general relativity, which is free from singularities, where ‘viable’, in
this case means devoid of ghosts, tachyons or exotic matter. With this
in mind, we outline the results of the present work.

##### Outline of Results

We began in Chapter 2 , with a lengthy computation of the non-linear
field equations for the IDG action ( 2.20 ). First, we outlined the
general methodology and introduced a number of novel techniques, which
proved useful in the explicit calculation that followed. Having attained
the non-linear field equations, we perturbed around both Minkowski space
and de Sitter space up to linear order, for later use in deriving the
modified propagator, ghost-free conditions and defocusing condition,
required to construct a viable non-singular cosmology.

Chapter 3 , focused on the notion of ghosts or tachyons that may appear
at the level of the propagator. First, these manifestations were defined
and illustrated with a number of examples from finite extensions of GR.
The form of the modified propagator was also derived for the IDG action
( 2.20 ). Next, the elimination of ghosts by way of an exponential
correction in the scalar propagating mode was motivated, before being
put to use in a linearised regime around Minkowski space. Typically,
such an exponential function in the propagator weakens the classical and
quantum effects of gravity in the UV. With the precise form of the
modified graviton propagator in hand, the requisite tachyon criteria
were also established by a decomposition into partial fractions.

Having established the foundation for presenting a viable infinite
derivative extension to GR in the preceding chapters, we then turned our
attention to the main crux of the present work – the avoidance of
singularities – in Chapter 4 . The chapter began with a discussion on
the nature of singularities and indeed, the difficulty in defining such
phenomenon, before introducing the Raychaudhuri equation and analysing
its import in the context of GR. Having established the focusing
behaviour of null rays via the convergence condition and Hawking-Penrose
theorems, we turned our attention to spacetimes that do not conform to
this convergent behaviour. By reversing the inequality, we were able to
examine the behaviour of null rays as they diverge or defocus , within a
geometrically flat framework. We dubbed this reversal the defocusing
condition and null rays conforming to this condition will not converge
to a point in a finite time and are said to be null geodesically
complete – stretching to past infinity. This is in direct contrast to
converging rays, where a photon travelling along a geodesic of this type
will cease to exist in a finite time. We illustrated this defocusing
behaviour with a known example of a bouncing cosmology.

From the behaviour around Minkowski space, we were able to deduce a
simpler form of IDG action, which was purely scalar in its modification,
with which one could realise the desired ghost-free, defocusing
behaviour. With this action in hand, it proved quite straightforward to
rearrange the linearised field equations around de Sitter in precisely
the same form as in the Minkowski case. From this vantage point, the
defocusing conditions around de Sitter space, were also derived and
found to conform to the Minkowski case at the limit @xmath , as
expected.

This thesis presents a number of novel results by the author. Firstly,
the calculation of non-linear field equations for the most general,
infinite derivative action of gravity that is quadratic in curvature, (
2.20 ), had never been fully captured before the work that the chapter
is based on, [ 82 ] , was published. Previous work, such as [ 113 ] , [
114 ] , [ 115 ] has centred on finite orders of the D’Alembertian acting
on the curvature scalar.

The form of the IDG-modified propagator around Minkowski space was
established in [ 17 ] , along with the associated ghost-free condition.
The present work reaffirms these results, while also extending them in
to de Sitter space, in a novel approach, by way of a simplification of
the gravitational action - a reduced action that still exhibits the
required defocusing behaviour. This allowed for the extension of the
recent article, [ 18 ] , which detailed the defocusing conditions around
Minkowski space to include defocusing conditions also around de Sitter
space. Comparisons were made with finite derivative extensions of
gravity, where it was found that non-locality plays an integral role in
realising the desired defocusing behaviour.

The methodology used in deriving the defocusing conditions is in stark
contrast to previous work on bouncing solutions in infinite derivative
theories of gravity. In [ 15 ] , [ 107 ] , [ 108 ] , an Ansatz was
invoked as a solution to the field equations, admitting bouncing
solutions, with scale factor @xmath . In the present work, we make no
assumption on the nature of the scale factor a priori, except that it
must conform to the requirement of accelerated expansion of the Universe
within a homogeneous framework. Having acquired the generic ghost-free
defocusing conditions, we do indeed check the bouncing solution @xmath
for consistency and, as expected, it did display the desired behaviour.

##### Future Work

Homogeneous Solutions
Within the context of a homogeneous framework, the defocusing condition
( 4.65 ) could perhaps be analysed for specific restrictions on the
curvature. For example, we analysed a bouncing solution in Section 4.5
and it is perhaps straightforward to generalise this analysis with a
generic bouncing scale factor, using the same integral form method. Such
a scale factor would result in the curvature being given by an even
function, i.e. @xmath . This would have some similarities to the
analysis in [ 19 ] where, similarly, a generic bouncing scale factor was
analysed but through the prism of the diffusion equation method [ 116 ]
.

More illuminating still would be to solve the inequality for all forms
of curvature that may satisfy the defocusing conditions ( 4.65 ) and (
4.100 ) – to see, explicitly, whether there curvature must conform to a
bouncing scale factor or whether other solutions do exist. In this way,
we could conceivably build up a precise form of non-singular metric,
which would always satisfy the desired defocusing behaviour.

Another quite straightforward approach in the homogenous setup would be
to extend the methodology to non-linear FRW. Whereas the generic
defocusing conditions can be derived without difficulty, some issues
remain in terms of the ghost-free conditions. Recall that the ghost-free
conditions and modified propagator were derived within a background of
constant curvature. As the curvature in an FRW background is a
time-dependent function rather than a constant, these conditions must be
generalised to make revealing predictions. One possible method would be
to proceed with an analysis that stipulates slowly varying curvature.

Furthermore, an extension of the progress made in [ 63 ] to include
bouncing cosmologies could be particularly illuminating. Vachaspati and
Trodden found that the convergence condition ( 4.23 ) restricted
trajectories passing from normal regions to antitrapped regions,
detailed in Fig. 4.2 . It would be interesting to see, geometrically, if
a relaxation of the convergence condition allows such behaviour. One
could also trace the trajectories of rays starting out at past infinity
in Fig. 4.3 to shed light on the behaviour at times in and around the
bounce.
Other Solutions
A further avenue of exploration involves extending our defocusing
analysis to include inhomogenous solutions, with spatial as well as
temporal dependencies. This was briefly covered in [ 18 ] , where the
inhomogeneous generic defocusing condition was given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

As before, we required @xmath so as not to violate the NEC. Note also
that @xmath is the Laplace operator. Although, the defocusing condition
can be attained in quite a straightforward manner, a full analysis
remains incomplete, in that the spatial dependencies must be made
tractable. Similarly, we may also wish to consider anistropic
spacetimes, conforming to a general metric of the type

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

as in [ 117 ] , where @xmath is cosmic time and @xmath are linearly
independent at all point in the spacetime. This is an example of an
anisotropic but homogeneous metric in four dimensions, but could
conceivably be generalised further to include spatial dependencies.
This thesis presents a concrete methodology in describing a viable
non-singular theory of gravity within the framework of an homogenous
cosmology. Through the analysis it is clear that non-locality, arising
from IDG, plays a pivotal role, as does an additional degree of freedom
in the scalar propagating sector. Such a methodology can be extended
into more complex pictures of IDG, such as those described above. As we
extend our study, we will understand more about the relationship between
the geometry of spacetime and gravity in a non-singular spacetime. We
may even broaden our analysis into the study of the blackhole
singularity problem, with the overall aim of, perhaps one day,
presenting a definitive picture of a non-singular theory of gravity.

## Appendix A Useful Identities and Notations

### a.1 Curvature

Metric signature

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Christoffel Symbol

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Riemann Tensor

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Ricci Tensor

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Curvature scalar

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Weyl Tensor

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Einstein Tensor

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Traceless Einstein Tensor

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

General formula for commuting covariant derivatives

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (A.13)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

### a.2 Bianchi Identities

The Bianchi identity is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Contracting with @xmath gives the contracted Bianchi identity,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Contracting further with @xmath implies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

which similarly implies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

### a.3 Variation of Curvature

We have from the definitions of the Riemann and Ricci tensor

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Substitution of the varied Christoffel symbol reveals,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

For simplicity, it is often preferable to arrange these identities in
terms of the metric variation @xmath , like so,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can then find the variation of the curvature scalar, @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (A.22)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where we have used the following notations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

In summary, we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### a.3.1 @xmath

Recall

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then we have

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (A.26)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

From the general definition of the covariant derivative of a tensor we
deduce the following

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

The last term vanishes in this case as @xmath is a scalar. This will not
be true for @xmath and @xmath . We then integrate by parts to find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### a.3.2 @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

From the general definition of the covariant derivative of a tensor we
have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

So that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

Expanding using @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (A.35)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

#### a.3.3 @xmath

From the definition of the D’Alembertian operator @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (A.36)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

and from the general definition of the covariant derivative of a tensor
and treating @xmath as a @xmath -tensor, we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (A.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -- -------- -- --------
        @xmath      
        @xmath      
        @xmath      (A.38)
  -- -- -------- -- --------

So that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (A.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then, using @xmath , and the Bianchi identities, we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.40)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

## Appendix B Friedmann-Lemaître-Robertson-Walker Framework

The Friedmann-Lemaître-Robertson-Walker (FRW) metric forms an exact
solution of Einstein’s field equations and can be expressed in terms of
the following isotropic and homogenous metric

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a 3-dimensional maximally symmetric metric of Gaussian
curvature @xmath and the scale factor @xmath is a time-dependent
function of unit dimension which parametrizes the relative expansion of
the Universe. To understand the geometric curvature of the spacetime
more readily, it is perhaps preferable to reformulate the FRW metric in
a spherically symmetric coordinate system, like so

  -- -- -- -------
           (B.2)
  -- -- -- -------

where the spherical coordinates are contained within @xmath . The
spatial curvature, in terms of a hypersurface of cosmic time @xmath , is
given by the real constant @xmath , such that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Exact Solution
As the present work is largely cosmological in focus, we will now go
into some detail to verify that the FRW metric is indeed an exact
solution to the Einstein field equations ( 1.5 ). In order to do this,
we must derive all the relevant components that make up the metric ( B.1
), beginning with the components of the metric tensor

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Next, we move on to the Christoffel symbols

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

of which the non-vanishing components are given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the superscript @xmath denotes a derivative with respect to cosmic
time @xmath . We may then use the remaining Christoffel symbols to
derive the relevant forms of curvature that make up the Einstein
equation, from the general definitions given in Appendix A.1 .
Ricci Tensor

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Curvature Scalar

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Einstein Tensor
The Einstein tensor @xmath is then given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Comparing this with the Einstein Equation ( 1.5 ), we deduce that the
energy-momentum tensor must take the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the energy density and @xmath denotes the pressure.
Thus, the FRW is an exact (fluid) solution of Einstein’s General
Relativity [ 61 , 25 , 24 , 62 ] .
Perfect Fluid
Furthermore, this form of the energy-momentum tensor describes a perfect
fluid . A perfect fluid is one where a comoving observer views the fluid
around him as isotropic [ 46 ] . In terms of the energy-momentum tensor
@xmath , isotropic spacetimes must have vanishing @xmath -components in
order to remain rotationally invariant [ 61 ] . The remaining components
are given as above, which we can express in a covariant form as follows

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath is the fluid four-velocity, i.e. @xmath , such that @xmath
and @xmath . We then perform the operations of (1) contracting with this
fluid four velocity, (2) contracting with the null geodesic congruence
@xmath and (3) taking the trace to express three distinct identities:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

These identities allow us to write the relevant energy conditions for
the present text. The Weak Energy Condition (WEC) states that the energy
density will be positive for an observer along a timelike tangent vector
@xmath . The null energy condition (NEC), given by @xmath , is a special
case of the WEC, where the timelike tangent vector is replaced by a null
ray. In this case, the energy density may conceivably be negative so
long as this is balanced by sufficiently positive pressure. In terms of
the perfect fluid, these are given by

-    Null Energy Condition: @xmath implies @xmath

-    Weak Energy Condition: @xmath implies @xmath and @xmath [ 61 ] .

The NEC, in particular, will play an important role in the later
discussion on singularity-free theories of gravity in Chapter 4 .

## Appendix C Newtonian Potential

In order to compute the Newtonian potential, we must consider the
Newtonian weak field limit of the field equations ( 2.86 ). In a
non-relativistic system, the energy density is the only significant
element of the energy-momentum tensor [ 61 ] , [ 24 ] , [ 62 ] . As
such, we have @xmath , where the energy density @xmath is static.
Recall, from the discussion on the perfect fluid in Section B , that the
trace equation is given by @xmath , while the 00-component is simply
@xmath . Furthermore, the perturbed metric for a static, Newtonian point
source is given by the static line element [ 114 ] , [ 84 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

We turn then to the IDG field equations around Minkowski space ( 2.86 ),
from which we can then read off the trace and 00-component of such a
metric

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.2)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

With the line element in hand ( C.1 ), we first compute the metric
@xmath , using the algorithm ( 2.78 )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

before substituting these values into ( 2.79 ) to find the pertinent
values for the curvature:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Recall that at the linearised limit @xmath which, for a static source,
reduces to @xmath , where @xmath is the Laplace operator. Thus, we find
the energy density ( C.2 ) for the given metric ( C.1 ) to be

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.5)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

By comparing these two expressions for the energy density, we find that
the two Newtonian potentials relate to each like so

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using this identity, we find

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where in the weak-field limit, the energy density is simply the point
source, i.e. @xmath and @xmath refers to the @xmath -dimensional Dirac
delta-function, while @xmath is the mass of the test particle. We
proceed in a manner familiar to that of the Coulomb potential, [ 84 ] ,
[ 32 ] , by performing a Fourier transform in order to express the
Newtonian potential @xmath . Recall that the Fourier transform of the
Dirac delta-function is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Thus, with @xmath in Fourier space on a flat background, we solve for
@xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we have abbreviated the functions @xmath and @xmath for
convenience. It is then straightforward to compute the other Newtonian
potential @xmath , using ( C.6 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath : No additional degrees of freedom in the scalar propagating
sector
Recall that, for the particular case when @xmath no additional poles are
introduced to the scalar sector of the propagator and we retain the
original degrees of freedom of the massless graviton. In this instance,
one would expect the two distinct Newtonian potentials to converge to a
single potential. By substituting @xmath into ( C.10 ) and ( C.9 ), one
can quickly verify that this is the true, with the potential then given
by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

We may then test a particular ghost-free choice of the function @xmath
to see whether it exhibits the expected behaviour of a Newtonian
potential. In Section 3.3.3 , we found that in order for the spacetime
to be ghost-free, @xmath must be an entire function containing no roots.
The simplest choice is then,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus, we find the Newtonian potential to be [ 16 ] ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Observe now that at the limit, @xmath ¹ ¹ 1 Alternatively, if we take
@xmath , which is the familiar limit to return IDG to a local theory, we
recapture the familiar @xmath divergence of GR, as expected. , @xmath
and the metric ( C.1 ) is returned to flat space. On the other hand,
taking the limit @xmath , results in the Newtonian potential converging
to a constant

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

We see here that the Newtonian potentials remain finite with @xmath and,
as such, the linear approximation is bounded all the way to @xmath .

## Appendix D A Note on the Gravitational Entropy

In this section, we give a brief outline of the connection between
Wald’s gravitational entropy and the defocusing conditions around de
Sitter space, derived in Section 4.7 . In a recent work [ 68 ] , Wald’s
gravitational entropy [ 118 ] , [ 119 ] , was computed for a non-local
action of the type

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

This was found to take the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a constant of dimension inverse mass squared. The
primary thing to note here is that a non-physical, negative entropy
state is realised if the following inequality holds:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The action ( D.1 ) is a simple reformulation of ( 2.20 ), where @xmath
and @xmath have been set to zero and we have taken the dimensionless
parameter @xmath to be @xmath .

If we were to now turn our attention to the defocusing condition around
de Sitter space, these may be obtained directly from the linearised
field equations ( 2.109 ) by contracting with the tangent vector @xmath
. Hence, we find that in order for the associated null rays to diverge,
we require,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (D.4)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Here, we have used the fact that in de Sitter space, @xmath , see ( 2.98
). Then, it is straightforward to read off the central conditions for
null rays to defocus

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (D.5)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

From ( D.3 ), we find that the lower signs describe a non-physical
spacetime defined by negative entropy and can therefore me omitted.
Thus, the central constraints are simply

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (D.6)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where we have reintroduced the counting tool @xmath , in accordance with
the general formalism of this work.

Now, if we turn our attention to the defocusing calculation around de
Sitter space given in A.3.2 , we find that, by ( 4.92 ), the left-most
inequality is simply the constant @xmath . In general, the function
@xmath is responsible for modifying the tensorial structure of the
propagator but as the action considered is scalar in its modification, (
D.1 ), the function @xmath reduces to the constant,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

We have already established that this tensorial modification must be
positive in order to avoid negative residues and the Weyl ghost, see
Section 3.2 but the entropy calculation gives an interesting insight
into the physical consequences of introducing ghosts into a theory. In
this case, such an addition would result in a non-physical spacetime,
defined by negative entropy.

A further, intriguing property of the gravitational entropy described by
( D.2 ), is the possibility of realising a zero entropy state by taking
@xmath . Taking this value saturates the defocusing condition ( D.4 ),
meaning little can be inferred from this vantage point. It would be
interesting to pursue this line of enquiry in order to understand if
this zero entropy state is indeed physical; at what cosmic time in a
bouncing cosmology such a state could be realised; and whether there are
any potential implications for the laws of thermodynamics prior to the
bounce.
