In this section, we summarise some of relevant results, achieved within
an infinite derivative gravitational framework, that are not explicitly
covered in the subsequent chapters.
Newtonian Potential
In [ 16 ] , the Newtonian potential was studied around the weak field
limit of the action ( 1.15 ). In this case, the modified propagator was
modulated by an overall factor of @xmath , where @xmath is the scale of
modification. The exponential nature of this function was invoked in
order to render the theory ghost and tachyon free, which is covered in
detail in Chapter 3 . For a theory with modified propagator @xmath ,
given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the physical graviton propagator and @xmath in Fourier
space on a flat background, the Newtonian potential @xmath was found to
be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, we observe that the potential contains the familiar @xmath
divergence of GR, modulated by an error function Erf @xmath . At the
limit @xmath ¹ ¹ 1 Alternatively, if we take @xmath , which is the limit
to return IDG to a local theory, we recapture the familiar @xmath
divergence of GR, as expected. , @xmath returning flat space.
Furthermore. at the limit @xmath , the potential converges to a
constant, thus ameliorating the @xmath drop-off of GR and displaying
improved behaviour in the UV. The explicit calculation can be found in
Appendix C . The behaviour of the Newtonian potential in an IDG theory
was further expanded upon in [ 66 ] , where a more general ghost-free
form factor

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

was studied, where @xmath is some entire function. In this case,
identical limits were observed at @xmath . Furthermore, using laboratory
data on the gravitational potential between two masses at very small
distances, the lower limit @xmath was placed on the the scale of
modification.

Entropy
The gravitational Wald entropy for IDG theories was investigated across
two papers in [ 67 ] and [ 68 ] . It was found in [ 67 ] that the
gravitational entropy accounting for the UV-modified sector vanishes
around an axisymmetric black-hole metric when one requires that no
additional degrees of freedom are introduced in the linear regime – a
condition which results in a ghost-free theory. The resulting entropy
was given simply by the famous area law,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

In [ 68 ] , the analysis was extended to consider the gravitational
entropy around an (A)dS metric, where a lower bound on the leading order
modification term was calculated which precludes non-physical spacetimes
characterised by negative entropy. This bound was found to have
cosmological significance in terms of avoiding singularities around a
linearised de Sitter background. See Section D for an outline of this
result.
Quantum Loop Gravity
Quantum aspects have been studied for IDG theories, specifically from
the point of view of a toy model, see [ 39 ] . Here, explicit 1-loop and
2-loop computations were performed where it was found that, at 1-loop, a
divergence arises. However, counter terms can be introduced to remove
this divergence, in a similar fashion to loop computations in GR.
Furthermore, at 2-loops the theory becomes finite. The article [ 39 ]
then suggests a method for rendering arbitrary n-loops finite.
Modifications in the Infrared

The present work focuses solely on modifications to GR in the UV.
Recently, however, interest has been generated in the field of non-local
modifications in the infrared (IR). Such theories are characterised by
the presence of inverse D’Alembertian ( @xmath ) corrections in the
gravitational action. Most notably, recent work has centred on the idea
of constructing a theory of gravity which confers a non-zero mass upon
the graviton, known as massive gravity . Massive gravity theories are
formulated via a @xmath -type extension to the Einstein-Hilbert action,
where @xmath is the mass of the massive graviton. Such theories have
been explored in a number of papers as a means to explain the
proliferation of dark energy in the Universe [ 73 ] , [ 74 ] , [ 77 ] ,
[ 76 ] , [ 78 ] [ 79 ] .

In [ 75 ] , the full non-linear field equations for a generalised action
made up of an infinite series of inverse D’Alembertian operators was
derived for the first time. The gravitational action can be formulated
by replacing the form factors @xmath in ( 1.15 ) with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Similar methods to [ 16 ] were employed in order to derive the modified
Newtonian potentials, with the added complexity that models with an
additional degree of freedom in the scalar propagating mode were not
excluded, i.e. @xmath in Appendix C , resulting in two Newtonian
potentials. An upper bound was placed on the ratio of these potentials,
known as the Eddington parameter, via the Cassini tracking experiment
and various models were analysed as a means of explaining dark energy,
including @xmath -models [ 8 ] and massive gravity. In the context of
massive gravity, the massive graviton was tested and found to fall
within the appropriate limits to be considered a possible dark energy
candidate. Finally, a novel approach to infrared modifications was
introduced, making use of all infinite inverse derivatives, which
displayed a reduction in the gravitational field at large distances – a
common feature of IR extensions to GR.
