## List of papers

The content of this Thesis is based on results developed in the
following papers:

1.   Characterizing the Performance of xor Games and the Shannon
    Capacity of Graphs
     R. Ramanathan, A. Kay,  G. Murta and P. Horodecki
    Phys. Rev. Lett., 113, 240401, (2014) .

2.   Generalized xor games with @xmath outcomes and the task of nonlocal
    computation
     R. Ramanathan, R. Augusiak, and  G. Murta
    Phys. Rev. A, 92, 022333 (2016) .

3.   Quantum bounds on multiplayer linear games and device-independent
    witness of genuine tripartite entanglement
     G. Murta , R. Ramanathan, N. Móller, and M. Terra Cunha
    Phys. Rev. A, 93, 022305, (2016) .

The author also contributed to the work:

-    Bounds on quantum nonlocality via partial transposition
     K. Horodecki and  G. Murta
    Phys. Rev. A, 92, 010301(R), (2015) .

A summary of the results developed in this work is presented in Appendix
B .

###### Contents

-    List of papers
-    Prologue
-    I Preliminaries
    -    1 Nonlocality
        -    1.1 Local correlations
        -    1.2 No-signalling correlations
        -    1.3 Quantum correlations
        -    1.4 The CHSH scenario
        -    1.5 Multipartite scenarios
    -    2 A glance at Optimization and Complexity theories
        -    2.1 Computability and computational complexity
        -    2.2 Optimization problems
        -    2.3 Duality
        -    2.4 SDP relaxations of hard problems
    -    3 Nonlocal games
        -    3.1 Definitions
        -    3.2 xor games
        -    3.3 Linear games
        -    3.4 @xmath -player games
    -    4 Graph theoretic approach to nonlocality
        -    4.1 A bit of zero-error information theory
        -    4.2 The exclusivity graph
-    II Results
    -    5 xor games with no-quantum advantage and the Shannon capacity
        of graphs
        -    5.1 Motivation
        -    5.2 xor games and their graphs
        -    5.3 No-quantum advantage
        -    5.4 Results
        -    5.5 Discussion and open problems
    -    6 Linear games and the task of nonlocal computation
        -    6.1 Motivation
        -    6.2 An efficiently computable bound to the quantum value of
            linear games
        -    6.3 Applications of the bound
        -    6.4 xor - @xmath games and the task of nonlocal computation
        -    6.5 Discussion and open problems
    -    7 Multiplayer linear games and device-independent witness of
        genuine tripartite entanglement
        -    7.1 Motivation
        -    7.2 An efficiently computable bound to the quantum value of
            multiplayer linear games
        -    7.3 @xmath -player CHSH- @xmath game
        -    7.4 No quantum realization of non-trivial multiparty
            functional boxes
        -    7.5 Device independent witnesses of genuine tripartite
            entanglement
        -    7.6 Discussion and open problems
    -    Final remarks
-    Appendix
    -    A Quantum Mechanics
        -    A.1 A few concepts and definitions
            -    A.1.1 Concepts and axioms
            -    A.1.2 Composite systems
        -    A.2 Entanglement theory
            -    A.2.1 Entanglement criteria
            -    A.2.2 Entanglement quantification
            -    A.2.3 Multipartite entanglement
    -    B State dependent bounds
        -    B.1 Bound on single copy nonlocality
        -    B.2 Bound on the asymptotic scenario
        -    B.3 Examples
        -    B.4 Discussion and open problems
    -    C A group of facts about groups
        -    C.1 Some definitions
        -    C.2 The characters of an Abelian group
        -    C.3 The Fourier transform over finite Abelian groups
        -    C.4 Finite Fields
    -    D Functional boxes and multipartite communication complexity
    -    E Proofs of some results
        -    E.1 Some proofs on xor games
        -    E.2 On DIEWs

### Prologue

One of the most intriguing aspects of quantum theory is the fact that it
is intrinsically probabilistic. This probabilistic character led
Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen, in the remarkable EPR paper of 1935 [ EPR
] , to question whether quantum theory was an incomplete theory, and
therefore this probabilistic character would emerge from our lack of
knowledge of some variables. These questionings were answered in a
negative way by Bell in 1964 [ Bell ] . With a mathematical formulation
of the EPR paradox, Bell showed that if we were able to complete quantum
mechanics in the way proposed by EPR then we should not observe some
phenomenon (the violation of a Bell inequality) that we actually do! The
work of Bell does not imply that quantum theory is the ultimate theory,
however no such refinement as the one pursued by EPR can exist.

Even worse than this probabilistic character, what is really intriguing
about quantum theory is the fact that, up to the moment, there is no set
of physical principles that fully characterizes it. If we consider
special relativity, this theory has some surprising predictions that
goes against our daily life experiences. However as weird as they seem,
all these predictions can be derived from two physical principles: (i)
The laws of physics are the same in all inertial reference frames; (ii)
The speed of light in vacuum is @xmath in all inertial reference frames.
Once we accept these principles (and I do not claim this is an easy
task!) there is no mystery, and we are able to explain all the phenomena
that arise from the theory.

Quantum theory is very well established by a bunch of mathematical
axioms that tells us how to predict the statistics of the results of
experiments. However we still do not have many clues on which are the
physical principles behind this purely mathematical formulation. In his
famous quotation, Feynman (in the prestigious ‘Messenger Lectures’ at
Cornell University [ Feynman ] ) said

  “There was a time when the newspaper said that only twelve men
  understood the theory of relativity. I do not believe there ever was
  such a time. There might have been a time when only one man did,
  because he was the only guy who caught on, before he wrote his paper.
  But after people read the paper a lot of people understood the theory
  of relativity in some way or other, certainly more than twelve. On the
  other hand, I think I can safely say that nobody understands quantum
  mechanics.”

This lack of principles receives a clear formulation in the study of
nonlocality. When defining the sets of local and no-signaling
correlations, we have clear mathematical constraints that delimit them,
and, additionally, these constraints have a physical (information
theoretic) interpretation. For example, the no-signaling principle
states, in an information theoretic language, that if Alice and Bob do
not communicate no information can be obtained about the other party by
analyzing only the local statistics. The additional constraints imposed
to the set of local correlations also have a physical interpretation.
However, when it concerns the set of quantum correlations all that we
know is that the probability distributions can be described by positive
operator valued measures applied to a trace-one positive operator that
acts on a Hilbert space @xmath . Which, definitely, does not sound very
physical! And this is why Feynman says that “nobody understands quantum
mechanics” .

Almost a century has passed since the questionings of EPR and we still
do not have a satisfactory description of quantum theory in terms of
physical axioms. However, in the mean time we have developed
technologies based on quantum effects and explored in many different
ways the novelties brought by quantum theory. In the quantum nonlocality
domain people found a way to explore Bell inequality violations in order
to develop secure cryptographic protocols that do not rely in any
assumption about the specific description of the system, but rather only
on the statistics of the results of experiments, the called
device-independent paradigm. And besides the manipulation of quantum
effects, we have also achieved some understanding on the consequences
and limitations due to the mathematical formulation of the theory.

So at this point I should apologize and warn the reader that
unfortunately the following pages will not make you understand quantum
mechanics . However, if you keep going you might have a glance on the
subject of quantum nonlocality, which highlights one of the weirdest
aspects of quantum theory in a very clear and simple scenario: where
Alice and Bob, space-like separated, perform local measurements on their
systems, and the only thing that matters is the statistics of their
inputs and outputs. This simple scenario opens space for a rich
discussion of the fundamental aspects of quantum theory. The analysis of
the performance of Alice and Bob in some particular tasks when they have
access to quantum resources or not gives us a framework to explore the
extent and limitations of the theory. This thesis is devoted to the
study of the task of evaluating the quantum value of a Bell expression.
We will discuss the difficulty of this problem putting it into the
language of computational complexity and optimization theories. And we
will present our contributions concerning bounds on the quantum value of
a particular class of Bell expressions: the linear games. At the end of
the day, I hope the reader enjoy it !

##### Outline161616This Thesis was revised in March/2017 and Journal
references were updated.

In Part I we introduce the necessary background to follow the results
presented here. In Chapter 1 we present a brief introduction to
nonlocality stating some concepts and general results. Chapter 2
introduces optimization and computational complexity theories. Chapter 3
presents the framework of nonlocal games, which can be seen as a
particular class of Bell expressions, focusing on linear games which are
the main subject of study of this thesis. In Chapter 4 we introduce the
graph-theoretic approach to nonlocality, showing how some graph
invariants are related to the classical, quantum and no-signaling values
of Bell expressions.

Part II is devoted to the results developed by the author, together with
collaborators, during the last four years.

-   In Chapter 5 we focus on xor games. We present a necessary and
    sufficient condition for an xor game to have no quantum advantage
    and, exploring this result, we are able to determine the Shannon
    capacity of a broad new family of graphs.

-   In Chapter 6 we present an efficiently computable upper bound to the
    quantum value of linear games. We explore it re-deriving a recently
    discovered bound to the CHSH- @xmath game. We also show that these
    bounds can exclude the existence of some no-signaling boxes that
    would lead to the trivialization of communication complexity. As the
    main outcome of the introduced bound, we derive a larger alphabet
    generalization of the principle of no-advantage for nonlocal
    computation.

-   In Chapter 7 we extend the previous bound to @xmath -player linear
    games. We also derive an upper bound to the quantum value of a
    multipartite version of the CHSH- @xmath game and we extend the
    result concerning no-quantum realization of no-signaling boxes that
    would lead to the trivialization of communication complexity in a
    multipartite scenario. Finally, we present a systematic way to
    derive device-independent witnesses of genuine multipartite
    entanglement for tripartite systems.

  “So do not take the lecture too seriously, feeling that you really
  have to understand in terms of some model what I am going to describe,
  but just relax and enjoy it.” (Feynman [ Feynman ] )

## Part I Preliminaries

### Chapter 1 Nonlocality

Let us analyze the following story:

Alice and Bob went abroad for their PhD studies and now they are
flatmates. After some months living together Bob noticed a strange
behavior of Alice: every time Bob wakes up looking forward to tell Alice
the news from his hometown, she coincidently wakes up particularly
grumpy, even though in general she is a very easy going and talkative
person. When Bob realizes that this grumpy behavior of Alice is
recurrent, but only happens in the specific days he has some news to
tell, he tries to find out what could be the cause of this strange
correlation.

He is sure that this cannot be caused by himself, since they meet every
evening when they get back home, and everything is fine before they go
to their respective rooms until the next day. Moreover, this situation
happens in random days but coincidently every time Bob wants to tell
news during the breakfast.

After a long analysis he finally finds out the explanation for this
correlation: the phone call to his family the evening before. Every time
he made a phone call, the Internet of the house stopped working. And
this was happening because their wireless router was settled to the same
frequency as the one used by their wireless phone. Alice, on the other
hand, checks her computer simulations at home every evening (accessing
her working computer remotely). Because the internet fails to work for
the hours Bob spend in the phone, she is only able to finish her work
very late at night, which causes a big grump!

By adjusting the router’s frequency, the problem was solved and Alice
and Bob lived happily ever after…

At first the correlation between Alice and Bob may sound very strange,
however when we become aware of the previously “hidden” fact that the
frequency of their wireless router was interfering with the frequency of
their wireless phone, causing all the trouble, everything looks pretty
natural.

That is the idea of a local hidden variable model : To find an
explanation for correlations in terms of some common cause (the term
local will become clear soon). However, as we will see, there exist
correlations in nature which cannot be explained by a local hidden
variable model, these correlations are then called nonlocal correlations
. Nonlocal correlations are one of the most intriguing aspects of
nature. And besides their foundational interest, these correlations have
also shown to be very useful in cryptographic and information processing
tasks as, for example, device-independent randomness amplification and
expansion [ ColbeckRennerAmplify , randexpansion ] , device-independent
quantum key distribution [ Ekert1991 , PAB09 , MPA11 , VV14 ] , and
reduction of communication complexity [ vanDam , noisyPRxCC ,
NLCommCompl ] .

In the study of nonlocality we consider the following scenario: Alice
and Bob are far away from each other ¹ ¹ 1 In technical words, we want
Alice and Bob to be space-like separated. and they are going to observe
things that happen around them, i.e. they are going to ask questions to
their systems (or in a more scientific language, they are going to
perform experiments/measurements in their respective laboratories). The
set of possible questions that Alice can ask to her system is denoted
@xmath and the set of possible questions that Bob can ask is denoted
@xmath . The sets of possible answers (outcomes) to these questions ² ²
2 For simplicity, here we focus on the case where each experiment that
Alice and Bob perform has the same set of outputs, but this need not to
be the case. Nevertheless, most of the results are straightforward
generalized to the asymmetric case. are denoted respectively @xmath and
@xmath . An example of a question that can be asked is ‘Is it raining
now?’ , which has two possible outcomes: ‘yes’ or ‘no’ . They can also
throw a dice and observe the upper face, which has six possible
outcomes: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6.

We also consider that Alice and Bob can ask their systems only one
question at a time ( i.e. Alice is not allowed to check if it is raining
and throw a dice at the same time ³ ³ 3 Of course in a classical world
there is no restriction in performing this task. One can perfectly go
outdoors and trow a dice obtaining at the same time a number and the
answer about the weather. However we cannot assert this for a quantum
system, and there exist pairs of questions such an experiment to
determine the output of one disturbs the output of the other. ). The
motivation for this restriction is that, when we consider quantum
theory, we might deal with incompatible observables, as for example a
measurement of spin in the @xmath -direction and a measurement of spin
in the @xmath -direction, hence we have questions that cannot be asked
together.

Our goal is to analyze the joint probability distribution that Alice
performs the experiment @xmath and obtains the outcome @xmath and Bob
observes @xmath and obtains the outcome @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Since we are only concerned with the statistics of the outputs given the
inputs, and nothing else matters for us, we can model any such
experiment as a black box (see Figure 1.1 ): which has some buttons as
inputs (the possible questions) and a set of light bulbs as outputs (the
possible answers to the question). This is called a device-independent
scenario, where we do not make any assumption over the internal
mechanisms of the devices used for the experiment.

A box @xmath is a vector specifying all the joint probability
distributions of a particular scenario ⁴ ⁴ 4 For the particular case
where Alice and Bob have two possible inputs with two outputs, @xmath ,
@xmath is the sixteen-component vector:

@xmath

. In the following sections we are going to analyze which properties the
set of boxes @xmath satisfies.

In this Chapter we are going to give a brief overview of the concepts
and main results in the study of nonlocality. For an introduction to
nonlocality, with detailed proofs of many results, the reader is
referred to Ref. [ dissertaGlaucia ] (only in Portuguese) or Ref. [
dissertaMT ] . A nice review, from 2014, contains the references for
many important results on the field of nonlocality [ reviewNL ] .

#### 1.1 Local correlations

In the study of nonlocality we are considering a scenario where Alice
and Bob are far away from each other during the course of their
experiments. We also assume that their choices of which experiment they
are going to perform are made when they are already far apart. Our
classical intuition leads us to expect that, whichever correlations they
observe, they have to be explained by a common cause that does not
depend on which experiment they chose to perform (since this choice was
made when they were far apart). The boxes that capture this classical
intuition are called local boxes.

###### Definition 1.1.1 (Local correlations).

Local correlations are the ones that can be explained by a local hidden
variable model, i.e. a box @xmath is local if there exists a variable
@xmath , independent of the choice of inputs of Alice and Bob, such that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a probability distribution.

The definition of a local box states that all the correlations observed
by Alice and Bob in their experiments are due to the lack of knowledge
of some hidden variable @xmath . Note that in Definition 1.1.1 we do not
make any assumption over the nature of the variable @xmath , it can be a
continuous variable, it can be a set of variables and so on …The only
assumption is that @xmath is not correlated with the choices of inputs
of Alice and Bob ⁵ ⁵ 5 This assumption is also referred as free will ,
as, if Alice and Bob can freely make their choices, this assumption will
be satisfied. Since here we do not want to make any metaphysical
discussion, let us just assume that this independence (between the
hidden variable and the choice of inputs) holds, no matter what
justifies it. ( measurement independence ). Another important assumption
in Definition 1.1.1 is that, conditioning on all variables that could
have a causal relation with a particular event, the probability of this
event is independent of any other variable. This is often refereed to as
local causality . Therefore for each value of @xmath the local
probability distribution on Alice’s outcome is independent of Bob’s
experiment, i.e. @xmath , and the same holds for Bob’s local
distribution. This captures the interpretation that the hidden variable
@xmath would be a common cause in the past that is responsible for
generating the correlations.

There are other equivalent ways to formulate Definition 1.1.1 , see, for
example, Ref. [ Fine ] . Moreover, Eq. ( 1.2 ) can be derived from a
slightly different set of assumptions. But it is important to have in
mind that there is always a set of assumptions (measurement independence
and local causality in the previous discussion) present in the
definition of local correlations, and the violation of a Bell inequality
do not tell us which particular assumption is being invalidated. For a
very nice discussion on the assumptions implicit in the definition of
locality we refer the reader to Ref. [ Mateusblog ] ⁶ ⁶ 6 This nonlocal
reference was added in the revised version of the thesis. . Therefore
whenever we use the term nonlocal in this thesis we refer to the
impossibility of writing a joint probability distribution in the form of
Eq. ( 1.2 ).

Definition 1.1.1 reflects the intuition we learn from our daily life
experience and it also expresses the predictions of classical theories
(as classical mechanics and special relativity), which were the theories
that prevailed before the advent of quantum theory.

##### The local polytope

The set of all boxes @xmath that can be written in the form ( 1.2 ) is
called the local set of correlations, @xmath . For any scenario that we
consider, i.e. for any finite set of inputs @xmath and @xmath and any
finite set of outputs @xmath and @xmath , the local set is a polytope .
A polytope is a convex set with a finite number of extremal points. The
extremal points of the local polytope are the deterministic local boxes:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , is a deterministic probability distribution, and
analogously for @xmath . One can actually derive that every box @xmath
that satisfies Eq. ( 1.2 ) can be written as a convex combination of
deterministic probability distributions, Eq. ( 1.3 ) ⁷ ⁷ 7 For this
reason Definition 1.1.1 is also called local realism or local
determinism . .

###### Proposition 1.1.1 (Local polytope).

The local polytope is the convex hull of the deterministic local boxes:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath runs over all possible deterministic
boxes of the scenario.

For a scenario with @xmath and @xmath , the local set is a convex
polytope of dimension ⁸ ⁸ 8 The dimension of the polytope is determined
by taking into account the normalization of the probability
distributions, and the no-signaling condition that we are going to
specify soon. @xmath with @xmath vertices [ PironioPhD ] .

A convex polytope is fully characterized by its vertices, but an
equivalent characterization is given by its facets ⁹ ⁹ 9 This is the
Main Theorem for polytopes , see Theorem 1.1 in Ref. [ Lecpolytopes ] .
. The facets are hyperplanes that delimit the set. The nontrivial facets
¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 The trivial ones are the positivity condition of the
probabilities: @xmath @xmath . of the local polytope are called tight
Bell inequalities [ Bell ] . A Bell inequality is a condition that is
necessarily satisfied by all local correlations. It can be a tight
condition and correspond to a facet of the local polytope, or else it
may correspond to faces of the local polytope with lower dimension, or
may even not touch the polytope.

In the scenario where Alice and Bob each can chose one between two
possible inputs @xmath and each input has two possible outputs @xmath ,
the local polytope has as its unique nontrivial facet (up to relabeling
of inputs and outputs) the notorious CHSH inequality [ CHSH ] .

Consider the following expression:

  -- -- -- -------
           (1.5)
  -- -- -- -------

where @xmath . A substitution of Eq. ( 1.2 ) into the RHS of Eq. ( 1.5 )
shows that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

for any local box.

The CHSH inequality ( 1.6 ) is the simplest and most well explored of
all the Bell inequalities. It was introduced in 1969 by Clauser, Horne,
Shimony and Holt [ CHSH ] . After the work of Bell [ Bell ] , which
finally opened the possibility to formalize in a mathematical way the
concepts of local realism first discussed by Einstein, Podolsky and
Rosen [ EPR ] , the CHSH inequality was proposed as a condition that
could be experimentally tested. Inequality ( 1.6 ) was used in the first
experiment that closed the locality loophole [ expAspect ] , performed
by Aspect’s group, and also in the recent groundbreaking loophole-free
Bell experiment by Hensen et al . [ bellHensen ] . A variant of the CHSH
inequality (the CH-Eberhard inequality ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 The CH-Eberhard
inequality is a reformulation of the CHSH inequality which is more
suitable for taking into account detection efficiencies. [ CH , Eberhard
] ) was used in the subsequent experiments by Giustina et al . [
bellGiustina ] and Shalm et al . [ bellShalm ] . These last three
experiments have finally ruled out local realism in nature ¹² ¹² 12 Up
to some stronger loopholes, as the super-determinism, that by definition
cannot scientifically be ruled out. .

#### 1.2 No-signalling correlations

We may be less picky and not seek a local hidden variable model to
explain our correlations, but we want to keep some minimal assumptions
about the possible boxes: If Alice and Bob are far away from each other
and do not communicate during their experiments, it is reasonable to
expect that Bob can get no information about what happens in Alice’s
laboratory and vice-versa. This is the no-signaling principle and the
most general boxes we are going to deal with are the ones that at least
satisfy this constraint. More formally, the no-signaling principle
states that the marginals of the local experiments do not depend on the
other part’s experiment.

###### Definition 1.2.1 (No-signaling condition).

A box @xmath is no-signaling iff

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.7a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.7b)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Note that the no-signaling condition implies that local marginal
probabilities are well defined:

  -- -------- -- --------
                 
     @xmath      (1.8a)
     @xmath      (1.8b)
  -- -------- -- --------

The boxes that satisfy the no-signaling condition ( 1.7 ) form the set
of no-signaling correlations @xmath . @xmath is also a convex polytope
(as only linear constraints were made to the probability distributions),
which contains the classical polytope. This can be easily seen by
checking that local boxes ( 1.2 ) satisfy the no-signaling condition (
1.7 ), hence

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Later we are going to see (Section 1.4 ) that, in general, this
inclusion can be a strict relation.

The no-signaling polytope is much easier to characterize than the local
polytope since @xmath is fully characterized by Eqs. ( 1.7 ) (and by the
trivial conditions of positivity and normalization of the probability
distributions) which are linear constraints that can be easily checked.
Although @xmath is also delimited by linear constraints, the tight Bell
inequalities are not easy to derive and we are left with a description
in terms of the deterministic points, which is an integer quadratic
problem (see Section 2.2 ).

#### 1.3 Quantum correlations

Quantum correlations are boxes @xmath that can be described as quantum
local measurements being performed in a shared quantum state (see
Appendix A for an overview of concepts and definitions in quantum
theory).

###### Definition 1.3.1 (Quantum correlation).

A box @xmath is quantum if there exist a quantum state @xmath and local
POVMs @xmath and @xmath acting on @xmath and @xmath respectively, such
that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

for arbitrary Hilbert spaces @xmath and @xmath .

The set of all boxes @xmath that admit a description as Eq. ( 1.10 ) is
the set of quantum correlations @xmath . Note that in Definition 1.3.1
we do not put any restriction on the dimension of the system.

The set of quantum correlations contains the local polytope @xmath .
This is expected by the fact that quantum theory is a generalization of
classical theory, hence @xmath . Some facts concerning the relation of
@xmath and @xmath are:

-   Local measurements in separable quantum states only generate
    correlations in @xmath .

-   If the local measurements of one of the parties are jointly
    measurable ¹³ ¹³ 13 Two sets of POVMs @xmath and @xmath are jointly
    measurable if there exists a third POVM @xmath such that

    @xmath

    for every quantum state @xmath . This means that the statistics of
    the original measurements can be obtained by the marginals of the
    statistics for the POVM @xmath . then the correlations generated are
    in @xmath .

Therefore, in order to observe correlations beyond the classical
polytope one necessarily needs entanglement and not joint measurability.
Whether these conditions are sufficient to generate nonlocal
correlations is a fruitful field of research. In the standard Bell
scenario, it is known that some entangled quantum states can only
generate classical correlations [ Werner , Barrett ] (a systematic
method to check whether entangled states admit a local model was
recently derived in Refs. [ LeoLocal , FlavienLocal ] ). Partial results
concerning joint measurability can be found in Refs. [ WPF09 , MTJMlocal
] . More general scenarios were introduced in the study of nonlocality:
The hidden nonlocality scenario [ hiddenPopescu , hiddenZHHH ] where
Alice and Bob are allowed to pre-process one copy of their state by a
local filtering operation before starting the Bell test; The many-copy
scenario where many copies of a state are shared between Alice and Bob [
PalazuelosActivation , DaniActivation ] ; And the network scenario [
DaniNet1 , DaniNet2 ] where copies of a bipartite quantum state @xmath
are distributed in a network of arbitrary shape and number of parties.
These general scenarios were shown to be more powerful than the standard
one [ genuinehidden , DaniNet1 , DaniNet2 ] and even the phenomena of
super-activation of nonlocality was exhibited [ PalazuelosActivation ,
DaniActivation ] . However, whether nonlocality, entanglement and not
joint measurability are equivalent in these general scenarios remains an
open problem.

In Ref. [ GMstatebound ] we show that the value achieved by a quantum
state in a Bell scenario is bounded by a term related to its
distinguishability from the set of separable states by means of a
restricted class of operations. We also propose quantifiers for the
nonlocality of a quantum state in the asymptotic scenarios where many
copies and filter operations are allowed, and we show that these
quantities can be bounded by the relative entropy of entanglement of the
state (or the partially transposed state, in the case of PPT states). A
summary of the results of Ref. [ GMstatebound ] is presented in Appendix
B .

Concerning the relation between @xmath and @xmath , we can
straightforwardly verify that quantum correlations satisfy the
no-signaling condition ( 1.7 ):

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (1.11)
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the reduced state of Alice (as defined in ( A.5 )), and
analogously for Bob’s marginal.

In summary, we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

and we are going to see in the next Section that all these inclusions
can be strict in a general Bell scenario.

Even though the quantum set lies in between two polytopes, in general
@xmath is not a polytope. The characterization of the quantum set of
correlations is the main open problem in the field of nonlocality, and
it is not even known for the simplest scenario of two inputs and two
outputs ¹⁴ ¹⁴ 14 A partial result characterizes the border of the
quantum set in the simplest two-input two-output scenario in the
correlation representation [ chshMasanes ] , i.e. when we consider only
the correlators @xmath instead of the probabilities @xmath . . We know
that @xmath is a convex set ¹⁵ ¹⁵ 15 It is not hard to show that the
convex combination of two quantum boxes can be expressed as a quantum
box with measurements and state in a Hilbert space of higher dimension.
, but it is not known if this set is closed ¹⁶ ¹⁶ 16 A set @xmath is
closed if every converging sequence of points in @xmath converges to a
point of @xmath . . An alternative way to define the quantum set of
correlations is to impose commutativity of every measurement of Alice
with every measurement of Bob, in place of the tensor product structure.
The set of correlations generated by these assumptions is denoted @xmath
. It is clear that @xmath , and for finite dimensional Hilbert spaces we
have equivalence, but whether or not these two sets ¹⁷ ¹⁷ 17 Actually
Tsirelson’s statement is concerned with the equivalence of the closure
of the sets. are equivalent for the infinite dimensional case is known
as the Tsirelson’s problem ¹⁸ ¹⁸ 18 See Tsirelson’s comments on the
problem in: http://www.tau.ac.il/~tsirel/Research/bellopalg/main.html .
[ TsirelsonProblem ] (this problem is equivalent to a long standing open
problem in @xmath -algebra, called the Connes’ embedding conjecture, see
[ Conneembedding ] ). An infinite hierarchy of well characterized sets
that converges to the set @xmath , called NPA hierarchy , was introduced
by Navascués, Pironio and Acín in Ref. [ NPA ] (see more in Section 2.4
). This constitutes one of the most powerful tools to deal with problems
in the field of quantum nonlocality.

When we are dealing with a particular nonlocality scenario and given a
particular Bell expression, as for example @xmath , we might be
interested in knowing which value can be achieved if Alice and Bob have
access to quantum boxes (as we will see later, they can reach @xmath ).
Due to the lack of characterization of the quantum set of correlations,
this is in general a very hard problem. More than that: it is not even
known whether the quantum value of a Bell inequality is computable in
general, since there is a priori no restriction on the dimension of the
Hilbert space for the quantum state and measurements. Only for some
particular instances it is possible to compute the value exactly or to
find efficient approximations. The NPA hierarchy [ NPA ] is typically
used to get upper bounds on the quantum bound of Bell expressions.
However the quality of approximation achieved by these bounds remains
unknown and the number of parameters to be optimized in each level of
the hierarchy increases exponentially. Lower bounds are usually obtained
by the called see-saw iterative method, where we fix the dimension of
the system and recursively optimize over a small set of the variables
(the quantum state or one of the party’s measurements) fixing the value
of the other variables as obtained in the previous step (see Ref. [
refseesaw ] ). Each step of the see-saw is an SDP and can be efficiently
solved, however this procedure is not guaranteed to converge not even to
the global maximum of the fixed dimension. Hence a central problem of
great importance in nonlocality theory is to find easily computable and
good bounds to handle general classes of Bell inequalities. In Chapters
5 , 6 and 7 we present our contributions in this direction.

#### 1.4 The CHSH scenario

We now illustrate the concepts introduced in the previous Sections
exploring the simplest scenario that can exhibit nonlocal correlations:
the CHSH scenario [ CHSH ] . In the CHSH scenario Alice and Bob each has
two possible inputs @xmath and each input has two possible outputs
@xmath .

The local polytope @xmath for this scenario can be characterized by the
16 deterministic local boxes or equivalently by its facets. Up to
relabel of inputs and outputs the only nontrivial facet of the local
polytope is the CHSH inequality @xmath Let us write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

to denote the maximum value attainable by classical (local) theories for
the CHSH expression. We have already introduced the CHSH expression
@xmath in Eq. ( 1.5 ) and now we evaluate it for quantum and
no-signaling boxes.

In quantum theory, in order to calculate the expected values @xmath , we
can associate an observable to the measurements of Alice and Bob in the
following way

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.14)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the POVM elements associated to experiment @xmath
performed by Alice, and analogously for @xmath . Hence we have that the
correlator @xmath is equivalent to the expected value of the operator
@xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now, consider that Alice and Bob share the maximally entangled singlet
state

  -- -- -- --------
           (1.16)
  -- -- -- --------

and they perform the measurements associated with the following
observables:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.17)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

A direct calculation gives @xmath for this experiment.

It was shown by Tsirelson [ Tsirelsonbound ] that this is actually the
maximum value we can achieve with quantum correlations, hence we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the maximum value attainable by quantum theory for
the CHSH expression.

Now let us consider the following box @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

All the marginals are well defined @xmath @xmath and hence this box is
no-signaling. However this box is not quantum since one can
straightforwardly verify that the value achieved in the CHSH expression
is @xmath This is actually the maximum possible value (note that the
expected values @xmath are numbers in the interval @xmath ), therefore

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

The box ( 1.19 ) was first introduced in Ref. [ TsirelsonPRbox ] and it
became well known after the work of Popescu and Rorlich (and hence
denoted PR-box) [ prbox ] , where they discussed whether the
no-signaling principle was sufficient to limit the nonlocality of
quantum theory, showing that actually no-signaling correlations can go
far beyond.

So in the simplest nontrivial scenario we have seen that there exist
quantum correlations that can violate the locality assumption, hence
they cannot be explained by a local hidden variable model. Also we can
conclude that the no-signaling principle ( 1.7 ) is not enough to set
the limits of quantum theory, as it can give rise to correlations much
more general than the ones restricted by the quantum formalism. In
Chapters 6 and 7 we are going to discuss a bit of the implications of
these extremal no-signaling boxes in the scenario of communication
complexity.

#### 1.5 Multipartite scenarios

In the study of nonlocality we can also consider scenarios with many
parties involved, @xmath , all of them performing experiments far away
from each other. In these scenarios, our objects of study are the
multipartite boxes @xmath , where @xmath represent the output of part
@xmath when she/he performs the experiment @xmath

The locality condition is straightforwardly generalized for the case of
@xmath parties:

###### Definition 1.5.1.

A multipartite box @xmath is local if there exists a local hidden
variable model that reproduces the correlations, i.e. if there exists a
variable @xmath , independent of the choice of inputs of the parties,
such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a probability distribution.

The no-signaling condition is a bit trickier, since now we want to
assure no-signaling among all parties.

###### Definition 1.5.2.

A multipartite box @xmath is no-signaling if the no-signaling condition
is satisfied by all bi-partition of the parties. More formally, consider
a subset of the parties @xmath , hence the no-signaling condition states
that

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.22a)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

for all @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and all proper subset @xmath of the
parties, where @xmath and @xmath , for @xmath .

Concerning multipartite nonlocality, we have now different levels of
correlations. Analogously to the case of multipartite entanglement (see
Appendix A.2.3 ), where we have the concept of genuine multipartite
entanglement (GME), for multipartite Bell scenarios we have the concept
of genuine multipartite nonlocality .

###### Definition 1.5.3.

A @xmath -partite box @xmath is genuine @xmath -partite nonlocal if it
cannot be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

for any hidden variables @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath are
probability distributions, and @xmath runs over all proper subset of the
parties. Moreover, each @xmath are no-signaling probability
distributions ¹⁹ ¹⁹ 19 In the first time the concept of genuine
multipartite nonlocality was introduced [ Svetlichny ] no assumptions
was made about the joint probability distributions. Nowadays, different
definitions are considered, see [ GMNL ] for a discussion. .

Bi-separable quantum states (see Eq. ( A.22 )) can only generate
correlations of the form ( 1.23 ), hence if an @xmath -partite quantum
state @xmath exhibits genuine @xmath -partite nonlocality, we can
conclude that @xmath is genuinely @xmath -partite entangled. However the
converse is not true, and there exist genuinely @xmath -partite
entangled states that do not exhibit genuine multipartite nonlocality [
RemikGMExNL , JoeGMExNL ] . In Ref. [ Svetlichny ] Svetlichny proposed a
method of detecting genuine multipartite nonlocality, designing a
tripartite “Bell-like” inequality that was satisfied for all
correlations of the form ( 1.23 ) but could be violated for genuinely
nonlocal correlations. These results were later generalized for
multipartite systems in Refs. [ GMNLnbody1 , GMNLnbody2 ] . Other
references on the subject are [ GMNL , GMNL2 , ACSA10 ] .

Multipartite nonlocality is still poorly explored and the
characterization of these scenarios is less known than the bipartite
case. In Chapter 7 we are going to present bounds for the quantum value
of a particular class of multipartite Bell inequalities and, as an
application of these bounds, we present a systematic way to design
device independent witnesses of genuine tripartite entanglement.

### Chapter 2 A glance at Optimization and Complexity theories

In our daily life we are constantly dealing with constrained
optimization problems. As for example, when we go to the cinema with a
group of friends. We want to have the best seats (the more central ones
in the upper rows of the cinema room, so that we do not have to tilt our
heads to watch the movie), but at the same time we want to seat all
together, so this is not always an easy problem to solve. And while we
choose among the vacant seats, taking into account the pros and cons of
the available options and choosing the one that will give a higher gain
(which can be accounted by the number of happy people minus the number
of unsatisfied people), we are mentally solving this hard optimization
problem.

In science the situation is not different and many of the interesting
problems can be phrased as an optimization problem. In Chapter 1 we have
discussed the concept of nonlocality and how linear expressions (Bell
expressions) can be designed to differentiate classical theories (with a
local hidden variable model), to quantum theory, and these ones from
no-signaling theories. Therefore in the study of nonlocality an
important question we recurrently ask is:

Given a Bell expression, what is the maximum value one can achieve if
subjected to local/quantum/no-signaling correlations?

The answers to these optimization problems have fundamental importance,
since the gaps between the classical and quantum, and the quantum and
no-signaling optimal values show an intrinsic difference between these
theories. Also these gaps have practical applications for the
development of quantum algorithms for information processing tasks.

In this chapter we introduce some concepts and theoretical results in
optimization and computational complexity theories.

#### 2.1 Computability and computational complexity

In this Section we present some basic concepts of computability and
computational complexity. Our goal is only to give an intuitive idea on
the subject. For a formal introduction see [ CompIntract , CCBarak ]
(and also [ defPNP ] for a quick overview).

##### Uncomputability/Undecidability

Given an problem that we want to solve, the first step in computability
theory is to try to design an algorithm which is a systematic way to
deal with the problem. For any instance ¹ ¹ 1 An instance is a
particular input of the problem. In our example of the cinema problem,
the problem itself is specified by the parameters: number of people and
available seats. A particular instance of the cinema problem is, for
example, four people and the two first rows available. (input) of the
problem, the algorithm follows a number of specified steps in order to
reach the final answer. A problem is said to be computable if there
exists an algorithm that, for every input, returns the (approximately)
right answer in a finite number of steps.

###### Definition 2.1.1 (Computability).

A problem (P) is computable if there exists an algorithm such that, for
every instance @xmath and for every @xmath , there exists an integer
@xmath such that for @xmath steps the algorithm returns a value @xmath
-close ² ² 2 By @xmath -close we mean @xmath , where @xmath is the
optimal value and @xmath is the value obtained after @xmath steps. to
the correct value.

In Definition 2.1.1 we consider that the problem might have a continuum
of possible answers. For problems with a finite set of possible
solutions, @xmath -closeness is reduced to exact computation. A very
important class of problems with a finite set of solutions are the
decision problems . A decision problem is a problem with only two
possible answers:“YES” or “NO”.

A remarkable result is that there exist uncomputable/undecidable ³ ³ 3
Decidability is the term used for the particular case of decision
problems. problems, i.e. there exist problems for which it is impossible
to construct a single algorithm that for every input will compute the
answer in a finite number of steps.

One of the first problems shown to be undecidable was the halting
problem . The halting problem is the problem of determining, for a given
algorithm @xmath and input @xmath , whether the algorithm stops ( i.e.
it gives the output in a finite number of steps), or if it continues
running forever. The proof of undecidability was presented by Turing [
Turing1937 ] in the same work where he introduced the idea of a
universal computing machine: the Turing machine (for a nice presentation
and discussion of the halting problem, see [ Penrose ] ).

##### Computational complexity

Computable problems can be classified according to the amount of
resources required to solve them. And by resources we mean time, memory,
energy, and so on. The problems are then classified according to the
minimum amount of resources required by the best possible algorithm that
solves it.

The classes of computational complexity are usually defined in terms of
decisions problems. Every optimization problem has a counterpart
decision problem associated to it, for example, instead of asking ‘What
is the maximum value of a function @xmath ?’ , we could ask ‘Is the
maximum value of @xmath greater than @xmath ?’ . The associated decision
problem can be no more difficult than the optimization problem itself
(since we could simply solve the optimization problem finding the
maximum of @xmath and then compare it with @xmath ), but interestingly
many decision problems can be shown to be no easier than their
corresponding optimization problems [ CompIntract ] . Therefore the
restriction to decision problems does not lose much generality.

Here we are going to consider the classification of the problems in
terms of the time required for the solution of the problem. Given an
input of length @xmath , the time complexity function of an algorithm,
@xmath , is the largest amount of time needed by the algorithm to solve
a problem with input size @xmath . Usually time complexity is expressed
in the ‘big O notation’ which describes the limiting behavior of a
function. We say @xmath if there exists @xmath and a constant @xmath
such that @xmath for all @xmath .

A problem is considered easy , tractable or feasible if there exists an
algorithm that solves the problem using a polynomial in @xmath amount of
time. In case there is no such polynomial time algorithm, the problem is
said to be hard , intractable or infeasible .

The first complexity class we are going to define is the class P , which
is the class of problems that can be solved by an algorithm with time
complexity polynomial in the size of the input.

###### Definition 2.1.2 (The complexity class P).

A decision problem @xmath belongs to the complexity class P if there
exists an algorithm @xmath , with time complexity @xmath (where @xmath
is a polynomial in @xmath ), such that for any instance @xmath of the
problem, @xmath ,

-    if @xmath “YES” then @xmath “YES”,

-    if @xmath “NO” then @xmath “NO”.

The class P was introduced by Cobham in 1964 [ Cobham64 ] and suggested
to be a reasonable definition of an efficient algorithm. A similar
suggestion was made by Edmonds in Ref. [ Edmonds1965 ] . The belief that
the class P constitutes the class of efficiently computable problems ⁴ ⁴
4 Note that a polynomial time algorithm of complexity @xmath seconds
would take many orders of magnitude more than the age of the Universe
for an input of size 10, while the exponential algorithm of complexity
@xmath would take only about 17 minutes for the same input size. However
the Cobham–Edmonds thesis is supported by many examples of natural
problems and how they scale with the input size. Furthermore, polynomial
time algorithms involve a deep knowledge of the structure of the
problem, in contrast with exponential time algorithms which are usually
a mere brute-force search over all possibilities. Here we are just going
to assume that the class P is a reasonable definition of efficient (for
more discussion on this point, see [ CCBarak , CompIntract ] ). is
called the Cobham–Edmonds thesis .

Another important class is the class NP . NP is the class of decision
problems that can be efficiently verified ⁵ ⁵ 5 Originally the class NP
was defined in terms of non-deterministic Turing machines (a very
abstract computational model), and only later it was recognized as the
class of problems that can be easily verified (see [ defPNP ] ). , i.e.
once a proof @xmath is provided together with the input @xmath , one can
check in polynomial time whether the answer is “YES”.

###### Definition 2.1.3 (The complexity class NP).

A decision problem @xmath belongs to the complexity class NP if there
exists an algorithm @xmath , of time complexity @xmath (where @xmath is
a polynomial in @xmath ), such that for any instance of the problem
@xmath , @xmath ,

-    if @xmath “YES” then there is a proof @xmath such that @xmath
    “YES”,

-    if @xmath “NO” then for all proofs @xmath @xmath “NO”,

It is easy to see that P @xmath NP, since for a problem in P one can
simply ignore the proof and solve the problem in polynomial time. But
whether or not P @xmath NP is one of the biggest open problems in
computer science.

##### Complete and hard problems

Many researches believe P @xmath NP, based on the fact that some
problems in NP seems to be intrinsically more difficult than the
problems in P. However up to now no formal proof in any direction was
ever found. An intermediate advance in the classification of NP problems
was made by the introduction of the concept of a polynomial time
reduction , which allowed to select the hardest problems of the class
NP. These hardest problems are the ones for which it is most unlikely to
find an efficient algorithm, and in case P @xmath NP these problems
definitely belong to the non-intersecting region.

###### Definition 2.1.4 (Polynomial time reduction).

A problem @xmath is polynomial time reducible to @xmath , if there
exists a polynomial time algorithm @xmath such that for every input
@xmath of problem @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

and in this case we say @xmath .

The idea of a reduction is to map a problem @xmath into another problem
@xmath , such that by solving @xmath one is able to get the solution of
@xmath . However, since we are concerned with efficiency, a good
reduction is one that can be performed in polynomial time. With that in
mind, by Definition 2.1.4 we see that if problem @xmath is efficiently
solvable then @xmath is also efficiently solvable ⁶ ⁶ 6 We simply have
to apply the reduction algorithm @xmath which takes polynomial time, and
then we solve @xmath which also takes polynomial time. . And if @xmath
is not efficiently solvable, we can conclude that @xmath cannot be
efficiently solvable, otherwise we would have a contradiction. Therefore
if @xmath , then we can say that @xmath is at least as hard as @xmath .

###### Definition 2.1.5 (NP-hard problems).

A problem @xmath is NP-hard if there exists a polynomial time reduction
of every problem @xmath NP to problem @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

###### Definition 2.1.6 (NP-complete problems).

A problem @xmath is NP-complete if @xmath is NP-hard and if @xmath NP.

The NP-complete problems are the hardest problems of the NP class, since
by finding a polynomial time algorithm for solving an NP-complete
problem one automatically solves any problem in NP in polynomial time
(and then would have proved P @xmath NP!).

Note that once we identify an NP-complete problem @xmath , by reducing
it to an NP problem @xmath , we automatically prove that @xmath is also
NP-complete. Hence the concept of reduction opens the possibility of
many proofs of hardness in the field of computational complexity. The
first proof of NP-completeness was given by Stephen Cook in Ref. [
Cook1971 ] , where he showed that the SAT problem ⁷ ⁷ 7 The SAT
(satisfiability problem) is the problem of determining whether there
exists a consistent assignment for the variables of a particular Boolean
circuit such that the whole expression is evaluated as true. For
example, the Boolean circuit @xmath can be evaluated as true with the
assignment @xmath true, @xmath false, and @xmath true. is NP-complete
(known as the Cook-Levin theorem [ Cook1971 , Levin1973 ] ).

In Ref. [ Karp21 ] , Richard Karp uses Cook-Levin theorem in order to
show that there is a polynomial reduction from the SAT problem to each
of 21 combinatorial and graph theoretical computational problems. In
particular a @xmath -integer programming and the calculus of the
independence number of a graph (that we are going to discuss later) are
NP-complete problems.

#### 2.2 Optimization problems

In the previous Section we presented the concepts of computability and
uncomputability. Also, we have seen that the computable problems can be
divided in classes of complexity which classify the problems according
to how many resources are necessary to solve it. In this section we
discuss a bit of the theory of optimization following approaches of
Refs. [ BentalConvexOpt ] and [ Boyd ] .

Let us consider an optimization problem where we want to minimize a
function @xmath subjected to some constraints:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

-   @xmath is the optimization variable ,

-   @xmath is an @xmath -variable real function called objective
    function ,

-   @xmath are @xmath -variable real functions called constraint
    functions .

The set of points for which the objective and constraint functions are
defined is called the domain of the problem @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

A point @xmath is feasible if it satisfy all the constraints, i.e.
@xmath and @xmath . The set of all feasible points is called the
feasible set @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

The optimal value @xmath of problem @xmath is the infimum of @xmath over
the feasible points

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

If the optimal value is achieved by a feasible point then the problem is
said to be solvable . However, for some problems the optimal value may
not be achieved by any feasible point.

The simplest optimization problem is the linear programming (LP) where
the objective and constraints are affine functions ⁸ ⁸ 8 A function
@xmath is affine if @xmath @xmath @xmath . . For an LP the numerical
method of interior-point ⁹ ⁹ 9 For details of the interior-point method
see Ref. [ Boyd ] . , developed in the 1980s, can solve it efficiently
with @xmath operations, where @xmath is the number of variables and
@xmath the number of inequality constraints. Therefore LP @xmath P.

Many advances in numerical methods for solving optimization problems are
due to the recognition that the interior-point method can also be used
to solve other convex optimization problems efficiently. Convex
optimization problems are the ones where the objective and constraint
functions are convex ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 A function @xmath is convex if @xmath
@xmath @xmath , @xmath . . Hence a convex optimization problem is
usually considered a tractable one, whereas non-convex problems are in
general hard. Fortunately many interesting problems in many areas:
physics, mathematics, engineering and so on, can be phrased as a convex
optimization problem.

A particular case of convex optimization problem is the semidefinite
programming (SDP). For SDPs, algorithms which utilize the method of
interior-point are well established, therefore, these problems can also
be solved efficiently (in polynomial time in the number of variables).
For more general convex problems the numerical methods are not so well
established as for LP and SDP, still the interior-point methods work
well in practice.

As nicely pointed by Boyd and Vandenberghe [ Boyd ] these numerical
methods for solving these problems are so well structured that they can
be considered a technology:

“Solving [LP and SDP] is a technology that can be reliably used by many
people who do not know, and do not need to know, the details.”

In this Section, we present the formal definitions of linear programming
(LP), semidefinite programming (SDP), and integer programming (IP).

##### Linear optimization

A linear programming (LP) is an optimization problem ( 2.3 ) where the
objective and constraint functions are affine. An LP can be expressed as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where all the constraint functions are expressed in a unique vector
inequality ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 And remember that an equality constraint @xmath can
always be expressed as two inequality constraints: @xmath and @xmath . ,
@xmath , which represents a component-wise relation @xmath . @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , and @xmath is a @xmath matrix. We are making use of
Dirac’s notation ¹² ¹² 12 The called “braket” notation, used in quantum
theory, was introduced by Dirac in Ref. [ braket ] . for consistency
with the other chapters.

##### Semi-definite programming

In order to generalize an LP one can relax the linearity condition of
the objective or the constraint functions. However another way to
generalize an LP that leads to a class of very interesting problems is
to keep the objective and constraint functions linear but to relax the
meaning of @xmath in the inequality constraints.

The order relation @xmath in an LP, Eq. ( 2.7 ), is a coordinate-wise
relation where @xmath and @xmath satisfy

  -- -- -- -------
           (2.8)
  -- -- -- -------

However a partial order relation @xmath can be defined in a more general
framework. A good partial ordering is completely determined by a subset
@xmath , of a vector space @xmath , where the relation @xmath is defined
as:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

and @xmath determines the set of positive elements:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order to satisfy some expected properties (see [ BentalConvexOpt ]
for more details) the set @xmath cannot be arbitrary and it has to be a
pointed cone , i.e.

1.  @xmath is nonempty and closed under addition: @xmath .

2.  @xmath is a conic set: @xmath .

3.  @xmath is pointed: @xmath and @xmath .

An optimization problem whose constraints are defined by the partial
ordering @xmath , for a set @xmath satisfying properties ( i )-( iii ),
is called a conic problem .

Now let @xmath be the cone of symmetric positive semidefinite @xmath
matrices @xmath , this defines a semidefinite programming (SDP):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a linear map from vectors in @xmath to the space of
symmetric @xmath matrices @xmath . @xmath , and @xmath and @xmath are
vectors in @xmath .

The standard form of an SDP (and the one we are going to deal with in
the following chapters) is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath .

The formulations ( 2.11 ) and ( 2.12 ) are equivalent, and a problem in
form ( 2.11 ) can always be rephrased into the from ( 2.12 ) and
vice-versa [ Boyd ] .

From now on we are going to omit the subscript in the ordering relation
@xmath , but from the context it will be clear which ordering relation
is being applied.

##### Integer programming

An integer programming (or integer linear programming) is a problem
where the objective and constraint functions are affine functions but
the variables are restricted to be integers ¹³ ¹³ 13 This restriction
can be seen as a non-linear constraint, for example, if @xmath is
restricted to assume values @xmath , this is equivalent to require the
quadratic constraint @xmath to be satisfied. . @xmath -integer
programming is the particular case of integer programming where the
variables are restricted to assume the values 0 or 1. A general @xmath
-integer programming (IP) can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath is an @xmath real matrix.

Problems of the form ( 2.13 ) appear in the study of nonlocality, in the
calculus of the classical value of a Bell expression. Note that a Bell
expression is a linear function of the joint probability distributions
@xmath , and one can easily check that imposing no-signaling constraints
(which are linear constraints) together with determinism, i.e. @xmath ,
is equivalent to impose deterministic locality: @xmath . Consequently,
the search over all deterministic local boxes, which is sufficient to
obtain the classical value of a Bell expression (see Chapter 1 ), is a
@xmath -integer programming.

As previously mentioned, @xmath -integer programming was shown to be an
NP-complete problem [ Karp21 ] , therefore the task of obtaining the
classical value of a Bell inequality is hard in general.

#### 2.3 Duality

The idea of the dual of a problem @xmath is to play with the constraint
inequalities (summing equations, adding trivial inequalities @xmath and
so on) in order to obtain a quantity that is always smaller then the
optimal value of problem @xmath . In this Section we will study the
theory of Lagrange duality [ Boyd ] .

Given an optimization problem @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

the Lagrangian function , @xmath , is defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath . Note that if @xmath , for every feasible point
@xmath of @xmath we have @xmath .

Now we define the dual function , @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

The dual function @xmath is the point-wise infimum of a family of affine
functions of the variables @xmath , and hence @xmath is always concave
¹⁴ ¹⁴ 14 A point-wise infimum of an affine function over variable @xmath
can in general be written as @xmath . Now, taking @xmath , @xmath we
have

@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath

even though no structure was assumed about the problem @xmath .

Let @xmath be the optimal solution of the problem @xmath . By
construction we have that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

And therefore @xmath is always a lower bound to the value of problem
@xmath . One can then look for the best lower bound that can be obtained
from @xmath , and that is the idea of the Lagrange dual problem @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that the Lagrange dual problem is the maximization of a concave
function subjected to linear constraints. The maximization of @xmath is
equivalent to the minimization of @xmath , which is then a convex
function. Therefore @xmath is a convex optimization problems.

###### Theorem 2.3.1 (Weak duality).

Let @xmath be the optimal value of a problem @xmath , and @xmath be the
corresponding Lagrange dual problem with optimal value @xmath . It holds
that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Where @xmath is the duality gap .

The Weak duality Theorem follows by construction of the dual problem.
Weak duality holds in general for any kind of optimization problem, as
no restriction on the nature of the objective and constraint functions
was made for the construction of the Lagrangean. However for many convex
problems an even stronger result holds, that the optimal value of the
dual is actually equal to the optimal value of the problem @xmath . This
is stated by Slater’s condition.

###### Theorem 2.3.2 (Strong duality- Slater’s condition).

Given a convex optimization problem @xmath of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a convex function bounded below and @xmath are @xmath
-convex functions ¹⁵ ¹⁵ 15 A function @xmath is @xmath -convex if @xmath
, for @xmath . . If there exists a strictly feasible point ¹⁶ ¹⁶ 16 A
point @xmath belongs to the relative interior of a set @xmath , @xmath
if

@xmath (2.21)

where @xmath .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

then @xmath .

There are other results which establishes conditions for strong duality
for non-convex problems. These conditions are in general called
constraint qualifications [ Boyd ] .

#### 2.4 SDP relaxations of hard problems

The idea of a relaxation is the following: In an optimization problem
@xmath we want to find the optimum value of a function @xmath searching
over the domain @xmath , which is determined by the constraints of the
problem. However even when the function @xmath is simple (a linear
function for example), it might be the case (and it is the case in many
interesting problems) that the domain @xmath is extremely hard to
characterize. An alternative way to deal with this difficulty is to
consider the problem @xmath , where, instead of searching for the
minimum of @xmath over the set @xmath , we make the search over a bigger
(relaxed) set @xmath (see Figure 2.1 ), @xmath , which is simpler to
describe.

Since @xmath , the optimal value obtained for problem @xmath is smaller
than or equal the optimal value obtained for problem @xmath . Hence a
relaxation is a way to get lower bounds for an optimization problem
@xmath .

A relaxation is wanted to satisfy two features: it should be efficiently
solvable ( i.e. the relaxed set has to be nicely characterized), and at
the same time it should be good meaning that the value obtained in the
relaxation is close to the actual value (we do not want a relaxation
that gives a completely non-informative result).

As an example let us consider the problem of finding the independence
number of a graph @xmath ¹⁷ ¹⁷ 17 The independence number of a graph is
the maximum number of vertices such that no two of each are connected by
an edge (see Chapter 4 ). with @xmath vertices, which can be formulated
as the following @xmath -integer programming:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

As we have argued before, this is an NP-complete problem and hence
considered intractable for large @xmath . A simple relaxation can be
derived by just turning the nonlinear constraint @xmath into a linear
one

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

We have that @xmath for every graph @xmath , since we now allow @xmath
to assume all the values between 0 and 1. Moreover, problem ( 2.24 ) is
a linear program which can be efficiently solved.

For a long time the only known practical relaxations were the LP ones.
However, with the advent, over the last decades, of techniques for
efficiently solving semidefinite programs, it came the possibility of
exploring semidefinite relaxations, which has become a fruitful area of
research ¹⁸ ¹⁸ 18 For a detailed discussion see the Preface of Ref. [
BentalConvexOpt ] . . Semidefinite relaxations have been shown to be
particularly useful for combinatorial problems. We are going to see, in
Section 4.1 , an SDP relaxation for the independence number problem (
2.23 ) (the Lovász number).

##### NPA hierarchy

We have stated that calculating the classical value of a Bell inequality
is a @xmath -integer programming, and thus it is NP-hard. For the
quantum value the situation is even worse! Note that in Chapter 1 , when
we define the quantum boxes, we make no restriction over the dimension
of the system, and hence to obtain the quantum value one should optimize
over all possible states and measurements in all possible dimensions.
There is no known algorithm to determine the quantum value of a general
Bell inequality ¹⁹ ¹⁹ 19 We are going to see in Chapter 3 that for a
particular class of Bell inequalities, the xor games, the quantum value
can be determined efficiently by an SDP. in a finite number of steps and
therefore this problem may even be uncomputable (In Ref. [
BelenCombinatorial ] the authors conjecture that it is actually
non-computable.).

The most general method known to deal with this intractable problem was
introduced by Navascués, Pironio and Acín, in Ref. [ NPA ] : the NPA
hierarchy . The NPA hierarchy is a hierarchy of semidefinite programs
where each level corresponds to an optimization over a tighter
relaxation of the quantum set of correlations. These sets are nicely
constrained by a @xmath relation and therefore calculating the optimal
value of a Bell inequality over a level of the hierarchy is a
semidefinite program. The hierarchy is proved to converge to the set
@xmath which is defined as following:

###### Definition 2.4.1.

The set @xmath is the set of boxes @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

for some state @xmath and projective measurements ²⁰ ²⁰ 20 Since we do
not fix dimension, there is no loss of generality in restrict to pure
states and projective measurements. This is due to Naimark’s Theorem,
see https://cs.uwaterloo.ca/~watrous/CS766/LectureNotes/05 . @xmath and
@xmath , acting on @xmath , satisfying

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that the set of quantum correlations @xmath is contained in @xmath
, since all local measurements of Alice commutes with local measurements
of Bob. But whether or not @xmath is an open problem known as
Tsirelson’s problem [ TsirelsonProblem ] (see discussion in Section 1.3
).

The NPA hierarchy constitutes one of the most powerful tools in the
field of nonlocality, and it has led to the derivation of innumerous
results. However the quality of the approximation achieved by these
bounds remains unknown in general. Moreover for a Bell inequality with
@xmath inputs and @xmath outputs per party, the @xmath -th level of the
hierarchy involves a matrix of size @xmath as an SDP variable, so, in
general, the complexity increases exponentially with the level of the
hierarchy.

### Chapter 3 Nonlocal games

Some Bell inequalities can be naturally phrased in the framework of a
game. A nonlocal game is a cooperative task where the players receive
questions from a referee and they are supposed to give answers in order
to maximize some previously defined payoff function. Upon starting the
game, the players are not allowed to communicate anymore, therefore any
strategy has to be agreed in advance.

Nonlocal games have a wide range of applications. They play an important
role in the study of communication complexity [ NLCommCompl ,
BruknerCommComplexPhys ] (and vice-versa) and in the formulation of
device-independent cryptographic protocols [ Ekert1991 ,
ColbeckRennerAmplify ] .

In a computer science language, a nonlocal game with @xmath players can
be seen as the particular case of multiprover interactive proof systems
with @xmath provers and one round. An interactive proof system consists
of an all powerful ¹ ¹ 1 Powerful in a computational sense, meaning that
the prover has unbounded resources, although only classical resources,
and unlimited computational power. , but untrusted, prover who wants to
convince a verifier, who has limited computational power, of the truth
of some statement by exchanging messages in many rounds. A multiprover
interactive proof system is an interactive proof system with many
provers, who may be bounded not to communicate during the proof.
Multiprover interactive proof systems were introduced in Ref. [ MIP88 ]
as an alternative to allow for the performance of some cryptographic
tasks without relying on extra assumptions, such as the existence of
one-way functions ² ² 2 A one-way function @xmath is a function that can
be computed in polynomial time for any input @xmath , however the
function @xmath is hard to invert. The existence of one-way functions
would imply that P @xmath NP. or limitations on the computational power.
With the introduction of many provers these extra assumptions can be
replaced by the condition of physical separation of the provers during
the course of the protocols. For further remarks on the connection of
interactive proof systems with entangled provers and the quantum value
of nonlocal games see Ref. [ CleveNLgames ] .

In this chapter we present definitions and results on nonlocal games. In
the first sections we restrict the presentation to the case of @xmath
-player games. The case of @xmath -player games is discussed in Section
3.4 . For a nice introduction to nonlocal games see Ref. [ CleveNLgames
] .

#### 3.1 Definitions

###### Definition 3.1.1 (Nonlocal Game).

A nonlocal game @xmath is a cooperative task where @xmath players, Alice
and Bob, who are not allowed to communicate after the game starts,
receive respectively questions @xmath and @xmath , chosen from a
probability distribution @xmath by a referee. Upon receiving the
questions, Alice is supposed to give an answer @xmath and Bob @xmath .
The winning condition of the game is defined by the payoff function
@xmath which assumes value @xmath to indicate when the players win and
value @xmath to indicate when they lose.

Given a particular strategy applied by the players, which is specified
by a box @xmath , the figure of merit that we are interested in
analyzing is the average probability of success given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note that @xmath can be regarded as a Bell expression, since it is a
linear function of the joint probability distributions @xmath .

##### Classical strategies

The maximum average probability of success optimizing over all possible
classical strategy is the classical value of the game, denote @xmath .
In order to obtain @xmath we have to optimize over the local boxes of
the particular Bell scenario defined by the game. As we argued before,
the maximum value of @xmath is attained by a deterministic strategy,
hence:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are deterministic probability distributions. The
number of possible deterministic strategies for a particular game is
@xmath , which increases exponentially with the number of inputs.

##### Quantum strategies

A general quantum strategy is described by the players sharing a
bipartite quantum state @xmath of arbitrary dimension and giving their
answers according to the result of local measurements, @xmath and @xmath
, that they perform in their systems:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Since we do not make any restriction on the Hilbert space dimension of
the system we can actually restrict ourselves to pure states and
projective measurements ³ ³ 3 It is a consequence of Naimark’s Theorem
that an arbitrary POVM on a system of Hilbert space @xmath is equivalent
to a global projective measurement in @xmath , where @xmath is the
Hilbert space of an auxiliary system. See
https://cs.uwaterloo.ca/~watrous/CS766/LectureNotes/05 . . Therefore,
the quantum value of the game, @xmath , which is the maximum average
probability of success of players applying a quantum strategy, is given
by:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , for arbitrary Hilbert spaces @xmath and @xmath , and
@xmath and @xmath are projective measurements.

As discussed before, we do not put any restriction on the dimension of
the system and, as a particular class of Bell inequalities, it is not
known if the quantum value of a nonlocal game is computable in general
(see Section 2.4 ).

##### No-signaling strategies

We also define the no-signaling value of the game, denoted @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

The no-signaling value is easily calculated by a linear programming,
since we have a linear function of the variables @xmath , subjected to
linear constraints given by the no-signaling conditions ( 1.7 ).

#### 3.2 xor games

In this Section we focus on the so-called xor games, introduced in Ref.
[ CleveNLgames ] . xor games are the simplest class of nonlocal games
where the players have two possible answers, @xmath , and the payoff
function only depends on the sum modulo two ⁴ ⁴ 4 The sum modulo 2 is
equivalent to the logical operation exclusive or, also denoted xor ,
that is the reason for the name of the games. of their outputs:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

for some function @xmath .

###### Definition 3.2.1 (xor games).

An xor game, @xmath is a nonlocal game where Alice and Bob receive
respectively questions @xmath and @xmath , chosen from a probability
distribution @xmath by a referee. Upon receiving the questions, Alice
outputs a bit @xmath and Bob outputs bit @xmath . The players win the
game if @xmath .

The average probability of success ( 3.1 ) for an xor game can be
written as ⁵ ⁵ 5 Where we have used the fact that

@xmath (3.7)

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The first @xmath on the RHS of Eq. ( 3.8 ) can be interpreted as the
probability of success of the players when they apply a totally random
strategy ( i.e. if upon receiving her input Alice tosses a coin to
determine her output @xmath , and Bob does the same).

The bias of the game represents how much a particular strategy is better
(or worse) than the completely random strategy, and is defined as:

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.9)
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

In expression ( 3.8 ) we see that @xmath is related to the expected
value of binary observables (see Eq. ( 1.15 )), @xmath . Therefore xor
games are equivalent to the important class of Bell expressions that
involve only terms with correlators @xmath , the full-correlation Bell
inequalities , which is a widely studied class of Bell inequalities [
StephanieSDP , WWfullcorre ] . The CHSH inequality ( 1.5 ) being the
most remarkable example of a full-correlation Bell inequality.

##### The game matrix

To every xor game we can associate a @xmath matrix, the game matrix
@xmath , which carries all the information necessary to describe the
game: the inputs’ probability distribution and the winning condition
specified by @xmath :

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.10)
  -- -- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath define orthonormal basis and @xmath and @xmath
run over the inputs of Alice and Bob respectively.

##### SDP characterization of the quantum value of an xor game

For the particular class of bipartite xor games, a theorem due to
Tsirelson [ Tsirelsonthm1 , Tsirelsonthm2 ] , leads to the result that
the quantum value of these games can be computed efficiently by a
semidefine program [ CleveNLgames , StephanieSDP ] .

###### Theorem 3.2.1 (Tsirelson [Tsirelsonthm1]).

Let @xmath and @xmath be observables with eigenvalues in the interval
@xmath acting on @xmath and @xmath respectively. Then, for any state
@xmath , there exist unit vectors @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Conversely, let @xmath , @xmath be unit vectors. Then, for the maximally
entangled state @xmath , with @xmath , @xmath , there exist @xmath
-observables, @xmath acting on @xmath and @xmath acting on @xmath , such
that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Tsirelson’s Theorem establishes a one-to-one relation between quantum
strategies and the inner product of real vectors.

From now on let us set @xmath and @xmath . The optimal quantum strategy
of an xor game is given, in general, by Alice and Bob measuring @xmath
observables @xmath and @xmath on a shared pure quantum state @xmath of
arbitrary dimension. By Tsirelson’s theorem 3.2.1 the expected value of
these observables can be replaced by the inner product @xmath of unit
vectors in @xmath . This implies that calculating the quantum value of
an xor game can be formulated as a semidefinite program @xmath [
StephanieSDP ] .

###### Theorem 3.2.2.

The optimal quantum bias, @xmath , of an xor game with game matrix
@xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a vector whose entries are the diagonal elements of
matrix @xmath , @xmath is the all 1’s vector, @xmath and @xmath . @xmath
is the strategy matrix defined as @xmath . The matrices @xmath with
@xmath and @xmath represent local terms.

###### Proof.

Let us consider an xor game with @xmath questions for Alice, @xmath
questions for Bob, associated game matrix @xmath , and winning condition
determined by function @xmath . We have that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

and for a quantum strategy where Alice and Bob perform the measurements
@xmath and @xmath , respectively, in a quantum state @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are defined as in Eq. ( 1.14 ). Hence

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now we can define the vectors

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (3.17)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

so that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

be the strategy matrix that represents this particular strategy.
Together with the game matrix given by Eq. ( 3.10 ) we have that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now let us define the matrix whose columns are composed by the vectors
@xmath and @xmath :

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.21)
  -- -- -- --------

and set @xmath . @xmath is the so-called Gram matrix of the set of
vectors @xmath , and @xmath . Note that if the vectors @xmath are
normalized, all the diagonal elements of @xmath are equal to 1. By
defining @xmath we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally, we use the fact that @xmath iff it is the Gram matrix of a set
of vectors [ matrix ] , in order to guarantee that, for every feasible
@xmath in problem @xmath , there exist a set of normalized vectors
@xmath , @xmath @xmath , for some @xmath . And by Tsirelson’s theorem
3.2.1 , each solution @xmath can then be described by @xmath
-observables applied to a quantum state @xmath . Which ends the proof. ∎

For a classical deterministic strategy, all vectors @xmath and @xmath
are equal to @xmath , for a single unit vector @xmath , since the
expected values @xmath assume values @xmath . The strategy matrix @xmath
of a classical deterministic strategy is thus a matrix with @xmath
entries with all columns (and rows) being proportional to each other.

##### An upper bound to the quantum value of xor games

We now show that the quantum value of an xor game can be upper bounded
by a quantity related to the spectral norm of the game matrix @xmath .

###### Theorem 3.2.3.

Given a bipartite xor -game, with @xmath inputs for Alice, @xmath inputs
for Bob, and an associated game matrix @xmath , the quantum value is
upper bounded by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the maximum singular value, or the spectral norm, of the
matrix @xmath .

###### Proof.

We follow the approach of Ref. [ NLC ] . Given a bipartite xor -game,
@xmath , its quantum value is given by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Note that we have replaced the supremum of Eq. ( 3.4 ) by a maximum,
since Tsirelson’s Theorem 3.2.1 guarantees that the optimal quantum
value for xor games is always achieved by a quantum strategy (and even
more, that this strategy involves a finite dimensional system).

Now let @xmath be the quantum state and observables corresponding to the
optimal strategy for the game @xmath , and let us define the unit
vectors

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.25a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.25b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

So that we have

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.26)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

∎

The bound ( 3.23 ) was also derived and studied in details in Ref. [
Epping ] , where the authors provide necessary and sufficient conditions
for the bound to be tight. For the case of @xmath , Theorem 3.2.3 can be
derived from the dual @xmath of problem ( 3.13 ). One can show that
@xmath is a feasible solution to the dual problem @xmath , and hence, by
the weak duality theorem 2.3.1 , it is an upper bound on the quantum
bias @xmath [ StephanieSDP ] (see Appendix E.1 ).

##### No-signaling value of an xor game

An xor -game can always be won with certainty by a no-signaling
strategy, i.e. @xmath .

In order to see that, consider the strategy defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

This strategy is no-signaling, because all the marginals are uniform

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

and by construction it wins the game with certainty. The no-signaling
boxes defined by Eq. ( 3.27 ) are the generalization of the PR-boxes
(Eq. ( 1.19 )), introduced in Chapter 1 , for the case of more inputs
per party.

#### 3.3 Linear games

Another class of games that we are going to consider are the called
linear games . They are a generalization of xor games to a larger
alphabet output size. Linear games constitute a particular case of a
more general class of nonlocal games, the unique games .

Unique games have been extensively used in the study of hardness of
approximation of some NP-complete problems, in attempts to identify the
existence of polynomial time algorithms to approximate the optimal
solution of the problem to within a constant factor [ Hastad , Khot ] .
Unique games is the class of nonlocal games where for each pair of
questions, @xmath , there is an associated permutation and the players
win the game iff Bob’s output corresponds to the permutation of Alice’s
output. Linear games constitute the particular case of unique games
where all the associated permutations commute and therefore it can be
defined in terms of an Abelian group @xmath .

###### Definition 3.3.1.

A two-player linear game @xmath is a nonlocal game where two players
Alice and Bob receive questions @xmath , @xmath from sets @xmath and
@xmath respectively, chosen from a probability distribution @xmath by a
referee. They reply with respective answers @xmath where @xmath is a
finite Abelian group with associated operation @xmath . The winning
condition of the game is defined by a function @xmath , such that @xmath
if @xmath and 0 otherwise.

Some concepts and formal definitions on groups are stated in Appendix C
.

The average probability of success of the players in a linear game
@xmath can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

An xor game can be seen as a linear game with @xmath . We can also
define the generalized xor games, xor - @xmath games , denoted @xmath ,
as the class of linear games associated to the cyclic group @xmath (the
set @xmath with the operation of addition modulo @xmath ).

##### Perfect no-signaling strategy for linear games

The existence of a perfect no-signaling strategy that wins the game with
probability 1 also holds for linear games. For every linear game @xmath
there exist a no-signaling strategy that perfectly wins the game:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

Such a strategy is defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

The strategy ( 3.31 ) clearly wins the game, and also it is no-signaling
since all the marginals are fully random:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

and analogously for @xmath .

#### 3.4 @xmath-player games

In this Section we present the generalization of the previous
definitions for games with @xmath players.

###### Definition 3.4.1 (@xmath-player nonlocal Game).

An @xmath -player nonlocal game @xmath is a cooperative task where
@xmath players @xmath , who are not allowed to communicate after the
game starts, receive respectively questions @xmath , where @xmath ,
chosen from a probability distribution @xmath by a referee. Upon
receiving question @xmath player @xmath is supposed to answer @xmath .
The winning condition of the game is defined by a payoff function @xmath
which assumes value @xmath to indicate when the players win and value
@xmath to indicate when they lose.

The probability of success of the players for a particular strategy
defined by the box @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the input string, @xmath and analogously for @xmath
and @xmath .

The definition of linear games can be straightforwardly generalized for
an @xmath -player game in the following way:

###### Definition 3.4.2.

An @xmath -player linear game @xmath is a nonlocal game where the
players answer with @xmath , where @xmath is a finite Abelian group with
associated operation @xmath , and the predicate function @xmath only
depends on the sum of the players outputs:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

for @xmath .

The probability of success of a particular strategy in a @xmath -player
linear game @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### The classical value of an @xmath-player game

The classical value of an @xmath -player nonlocal game @xmath is
obtained by an optimization over deterministic local strategies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath represents a deterministic probability distribution.

The number of possible deterministic strategies also increases
exponentially with the number of parties. For a game with @xmath
players, @xmath questions per player and @xmath outputs per question,
the number of deterministic strategies is @xmath .

##### The quantum value of an @xmath-player game

A general @xmath -partite quantum strategy can be described by the
players sharing an @xmath -partite pure state @xmath of arbitrary
dimension and performing local measurements @xmath on it. The quantum
value of the @xmath -player game @xmath is then given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

The case of multiplayer games is even more challenging than the
bipartite case. For bipartite XOR games, we have seen that Tsirelson’s
theorem (Theorem 3.2.1 ) guarantees that the best performance of quantum
players can be calculated exactly and efficiently using a semidefinite
program, Eq. ( 3.13 ). For three players, even for the case of xor games
the quantum value is known to be NP-hard ⁶ ⁶ 6 In terms of the number of
possible questions. to approximate [ Vidick3xorhard ] .

In chapter 5 we deal with bipartite xor games and present results of
Ref. [ GMxorShannon ] concerning games with no-quantum advantage and
results on the Shannon capacity of xor -game graphs. In Chapter 6 we
provide an upper bound to the quantum value of a 2-player linear game
and present results of Ref. [ GMxord ] . In Chapter 7 we generalize the
results for @xmath -player linear games presenting the results of Ref. [
GMmultiplayer ] .

### Chapter 4 Graph theoretic approach to nonlocality

The graph theoretic approach to quantum correlations was introduced by
Cabello, Severini and Winter [ csw0 , csw ] in the framework of
contextuality scenarios ¹ ¹ 1 In a contextuality scenario we do not
necessarily have parties. The hypothesis in question is whether an
observable @xmath that belongs to two different sets of mutually
commuting observables, called the contexts , @xmath and @xmath , can
have a description independent of the context. In a Bell scenario the
commutation of observables that form each context is guaranteed by the
tensor product structure of the parties’ experiments. , where Bell
scenarios can be seen as a particular case of it. Further refinements to
the particular case of nonlocality scenarios where made in Refs. [
BelenCombinatorial , xorgraphs , multilovasz ] . In this chapter, we
will see how the classical, quantum, and no-signaling values of a Bell
expression can be associated to graph parameters.

#### 4.1 A bit of zero-error information theory

In 1956 Shannon [ Shannon0Error ] studied the concept of zero-error
capacity of a communication channel. The zero-error capacity @xmath is
defined as the maximum rate at which it is possible to transmit
information with zero probability of error through a channel @xmath .

A channel is described by a set of input letters @xmath , a set of
output letters @xmath , and the transition probabilities @xmath that
represents the probability that an input @xmath will generate an output
@xmath . In the analysis of zero-error capacity we are not interested in
the particular values of the transition probabilities but only whether
they are zero or not. In order to deal with the important properties of
the zero-error capacity @xmath , we can associate a graph @xmath to the
channel in consideration.

###### Definition 4.1.1 (Confusability Graph).

The confusability graph associated to a channel @xmath is a graph @xmath
where each input letter of the channel corresponds to a vertex

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

and there is an edge connecting two vertices @xmath and @xmath if these
inputs can be confused by the channel

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

An alternative quantity that carries all the information contained in
the graph @xmath is the adjacency matrix .

###### Definition 4.1.2 (Adjacency Matrix).

The adjacency matrix @xmath associated to a graph @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The maximal number of 1-letter messages, @xmath , which can be sent
through a channel @xmath without confusion can be extracted directly
from a graph invariant. A bit of thinking ² ² 2 Or maybe a few bits. But
note that since the independence number picks the maximum number of
vertices such that no two of which are adjacent, this represents the
maximum number of letters such that none of them can be confused. leads
us to conclude that @xmath is equal to the independence number of the
confusability graph @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The independence number of a graph is the cardinality of the maximal
independent set, which is a subset of vertices such that none of which
are adjacent . It is described by the optimization problem ( 2.23 ).

Formally, the zero-error capacity @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the largest number of @xmath -letter messages that can
be sent through the channel without confusion. The number of
non-confusable @xmath -letter messages is given by the independence
number of the graph @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath denotes the strong product of graph @xmath with itself
@xmath times.

###### Definition 4.1.3.

The strong product @xmath of graphs @xmath and @xmath is such that

-   @xmath ,

-   @xmath and @xmath .

In terms of a channel @xmath , Definition 4.1.3 captures the idea that
two 2-letter words are confusable if they are confusable in the first
and in the second letter.

So we have that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

From now on we refer to @xmath as the Shannon capacity of graph ³ ³ 3
The supremum in Eq. ( 4.5 ) can actually be replaced by a limit, since
the strong product satisfies

@xmath (4.9)

which can be proved by noting that given an independent set @xmath of
graph @xmath , one can generate an independent set for @xmath by taking
@xmath . @xmath .

As an example let us consider the channel with confusability graph given
by the pentagon @xmath :

[]

The maximum number of 1-letter messages we could send through this
channel without confusion is 2, and we have @xmath . We could for
example send letter @xmath or @xmath . Now, considering 2-letter
messages, we could obviously make the four non-confusable words: @xmath
, and @xmath . However one can check that the following five words of
size two: @xmath , are such that no two of them can be confused, and
actually @xmath . Therefore, we conclude that @xmath .

In contrast to the ordinary channel capacity where a vanishing
probability of error is allowed [ Shannon1948 ] and the capacity can be
efficiently calculate, it is not know whether the zero-error capacity is
computable. By the definition given in Eq. ( 4.8 ), we have a supremum
over @xmath and at the moment there is no algorithm to decide the value
of @xmath in a finite number of steps for an arbitrary graph.

In 1979 Lovász [ Lovasznumber ] introduced an efficiently computable
upper bound to the Shannon capacity @xmath (and therefore also for the
independence number @xmath ). The Lovász number @xmath is a graph
invariant defined as follows:

###### Definition 4.1.4 (Lovász Number).

Consider an @xmath -vertex graph @xmath . Let the set of vectors @xmath
be an orthonormal representation of @xmath and @xmath be a unit vector.
The Lovász number is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

An orthonormal representation of the complementary graph @xmath is a set
of real vectors @xmath associated to the vertices of graph @xmath such
that @xmath and @xmath .

By calculating @xmath , Lovász proved [ Lovasznumber ] that the
previously known lower bound for the Shannon capacity of the pentagon,
@xmath , is actually the exact value: @xmath .

There are many equivalent characterizations of the Lovász number [
LovaszNotes , KnuthlovaszS ] , here we consider one that will be useful
in Chapter 5 :

###### Theorem 4.1.1 ([Lovasznumber]).

Given a graph @xmath , consider the family of @xmath symmetric matrices
@xmath such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Lovász number is the minimum of the maximum eigenvalue of such
matrices:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Theorem 4.1.1 can be formulated as the semidefinite program @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath imposes that @xmath is greater than or equal to the maximum
eigenvalue of a symmetric matrix @xmath satisfying ( 4.11 ), and the
minimization picks the smallest of the maximum eigenvalues.
Characterization ( 4.13 ) makes it clear (see Section 2.2 ) that the
Lovász number can be efficiently determined.

#### 4.2 The exclusivity graph

The graph theoretic approach to contextuality and nonlocality, that we
call CSW approach, was first introduced in Ref. [ csw0 ] (and published
later in Ref. [ csw ] ). The idea is to associate with a given Bell
scenario a graph called the exclusivity graph . The exclusivity graph
has the vertices labeled by the events ⁴ ⁴ 4 By event @xmath we denote
the occurrence of Alice measuring @xmath and obtaining outcome @xmath ,
and Bob measuring @xmath and obtaining outcome @xmath . of the
particular Bell scenario @xmath , and the edges connect vertices which
correspond to exclusive events ( e.g. , Alice measuring @xmath and
obtaining @xmath is exclusive with any event where Alice measures the
same @xmath and obtains @xmath ). The idea of the CSW approach is to
take into account that the probabilities of exclusive events should sum
up to no more than one.

###### Definition 4.2.1 (Exclusivity graph).

The exclusivity graph associated to a Bell scenario is a graph @xmath
with vertices representing the possible events: @xmath , and adjacencies
defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath denotes respectively the logical operations AND
and OR.

Given a Bell scenario with boxes @xmath , we denote a Bell expression by
@xmath such that its value for a particular box is given by @xmath .
Note that every Bell expression can be written with non-negative
coefficients only ⁵ ⁵ 5 One just has to use the normalization condition
of probability distributions, @xmath @xmath , in order to avoid the
negative coefficients. , @xmath .

Now, given a Bell expression with positive coefficients @xmath , we can
consider the weighted exclusivity graph @xmath , where the weight @xmath
is attributed to each vertex @xmath of the exclusivity graph @xmath .
What is shown in the CSW approach [ csw ] is that the local, quantum and
no-signaling values of a Bell expression @xmath , respectively @xmath ,
@xmath , and @xmath , are related with invariants of the associated
weighted exclusivity graph.

###### Theorem 4.2.1 ([csw]).

Given a Bell expression @xmath , and the weighted exclusivity graph
@xmath , it holds that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are respectively the weighted
independence number, the weighted Lovász number, and the weighted
fractional packing number.

The graph invariants that appear in Theorem 4.2.1 are defined bellow.

###### Definition 4.2.2.

The weighted version of the independence number @xmath , the Lovász
number @xmath , and the fractional packing number @xmath of the weighted
graph @xmath are defined by the following optimization problems:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order to understand Theorem 4.2.1 , note that the weighted
independence number ( 4.16 ) captures the idea that a deterministic
probability @xmath is associated to vertex @xmath , and therefore @xmath
gives the classical value of a Bell inequality @xmath . Concerning the
Lovász number ( 4.17 ), the term @xmath can be interpreted as the
probability resultant of a projective measurement (determined by the
vector @xmath ) in the quantum state @xmath . However note that no
tensor product structure was imposed for these measurements and state,
which justifies the upper bound @xmath . For the fractional packing
number ( 4.18 ), the constraint that @xmath for all clique ⁶ ⁶ 6 A
clique in the graph @xmath is a subset of vertices @xmath such that
every two vertices in @xmath are adjacent. @xmath captures the
no-signaling conditions ( 1.7 ) and normalization of the probabilities (
@xmath ), and therefore it justifies @xmath .

The weighted Lovász number ( 4.17 ) was introduced and studied in Ref. [
KnuthlovaszS ] , and it also admits an SDP characterization. The
weighted independence number ( 4.16 ) is a @xmath -integer program which
is in general NP-complete, and the weighted fractional packing number ⁷
⁷ 7 The fractional packing number is easy to determine once the cliques
of the graph are known, however if this is not the case, the problem of
finding the cliques of a graph is also NP-complete. ( 4.18 ) is defined
by an LP.

The CSW approach had great impact in the field of nonlocality and
contextuality, allowing us to use techniques of combinatorics to derive
many results in these fields (see for example [ barbaragraph , xorgraphs
] and references therein). The CSW approach was further refined in Ref.
[ BelenCombinatorial ] where the authors consider hypergraphs from which
it is possible to extract information about the complete
nonlocality/contextuality scenario, and not only about the Bell
inequalities.

For contextuality it holds that given an exclusivity graph @xmath there
always exists a contextuality scenario and an inequality whose quantum
value is equal to the Lovász number of the graph @xmath . This can be
seen by the definition ( 4.10 ), where one can interpret the vectors
@xmath as projective measurements being performed on the quantum state
@xmath . However for nonlocality, equality does not hold in general
since the tensor product structure is not captured by the Lovász number.
In Ref. [ multilovasz ] the authors introduce the exclusivity multigraph
with the aim to capture the structure presented in the nonlocality
scenario. In the exclusivity multigraph, exclusive events are connected
by colored edges, which make explicit if the exclusivity is due to
Alice’s measurement or due to Bob’s measurement. They defined the
multigraph Lovász number @xmath which satisfies @xmath for some Bell
inequality @xmath . Therefore, @xmath is a quantity that may be
uncomputable, but an hierarchy of SDPs (based on the NPA hierarchy [ NPA
] ) can be used to derive upper bounds on @xmath .

## Part II Results

### Chapter 5 xor games with no-quantum advantage and the Shannon
capacity of graphs

In this chapter we present results of Ref. [ GMxorShannon ] :

Characterizing the Performance of xor Games and the Shannon Capacity of
Graphs R. Ramanathan, A. Kay, G. Murta and P. Horodecki Phys. Rev.
Lett., 113, 240401, (2014) .

Our main result is to use insights from the field of nonlocality in
order to derive a result in classical information theory. More
specifically: We study the performance of quantum players in two-player
xor games, and we derive a set of necessary and sufficient conditions
such that quantum players cannot perform any better than classical
players. We then consider the exclusivity graph associated to an xor
game and examine its Shannon capacity. This allows us to specify new
families of graphs for which the Shannon capacity can be determined.

#### 5.1 Motivation

In Chapter 4 we have seen that, according to the CSW approach [ csw ] ,
we can associate a weighted graph @xmath to a Bell inequality @xmath
such that the classical, quantum, and no-signaling values of @xmath are
related to graph invariants.

For an xor game with @xmath questions per player, uniformly chosen by
the referee, @xmath , we can associate the non-weighted graph @xmath
which only contains the vertices representing events satisfying the
winning condition ( @xmath s.t. @xmath ), and we have the relation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

At the same time we have seen that the confusability graph @xmath
associated to a classical channel @xmath satisfies

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

In what concerns the Shannon capacity of a graph @xmath , very few
classes of graphs are known for which @xmath has been established
analytically. Among these classes are:

-   perfect graphs ¹ ¹ 1 A graph is perfect if the chromatic number of
    every induced subgraph equals the size of the largest clique of that
    subgraph. : have @xmath (see [ Cabelloperfectgraph ] ).

-   Kneser graphs ² ² 2 Kneser graphs @xmath are graphs whose vertices
    correspond to @xmath -element subsets of a set of @xmath elements (
    @xmath , @xmath ), and vertices @xmath and @xmath are adjacent
    @xmath . @xmath : satisfy @xmath [ Lovasznumber ] .

-   vertex-transitive self-complementary graphs: satisfy @xmath [
    Lovasznumber ] .

-   König-Egerváry graphs ³ ³ 3 A graph @xmath is a König-Egerváry graph
    if it satisfies @xmath , where @xmath is the maximum size of a
    matching (for the definition of a matching, see footnote 7 ). :
    satisfy @xmath [ KEgraphs ] .

In Section 5.4 we are going to discuss a bit more about some properties
of these families of graphs. However we are not going to give any
detailed presentation, but rather state only the properties that will be
useful for our discussion. For the reader interested in learning more
about graphs we refer to Ref. [ Diestelgraph ] .

Note that, except for the vertex-transitive self-complementary graphs,
all the classes satisfy @xmath . And actually this constitutes a simple
way to determine the Shannon capacity of a graph: to prove that @xmath .
From Eq. ( 5.1 ), we see that for an xor -game exclusivity graph @xmath
this is only possible if @xmath . Our goal in this chapter is to
characterize xor games with no-quantum advantage, @xmath , and, with
their corresponding graphs in hand, to study the value of @xmath .

#### 5.2 xor games and their graphs

Let us consider an xor game @xmath where each player receives one among
@xmath possible questions, @xmath , chosen by the referee with
probability @xmath . The associated game matrix ( 3.10 ) is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the winning condition of the game, and @xmath denotes
the set @xmath .

If the referee choses questions with uniform distribution, @xmath , we
can simply consider the non-normalized game matrix:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath .

Following the CSW approach [ csw ] , every xor game has an associated
graph @xmath [ xorgraphs , csw , BelenCombinatorial ] , where the
vertices are the events @xmath that satisfy the winning condition ⁴ ⁴ 4
Note that we could include in the graph all the events @xmath and just
give a weight zero to the ones that do not satisfy @xmath . of the game
( i.e. such that @xmath ), and the edges are determined by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now, by making use of the winning relation @xmath , we can parameterize
the vertices of an xor -game graph with only three parameters @xmath .

###### Definition 5.2.1.

The graph @xmath associated to the xor game with game matrix @xmath
consists of @xmath vertices, which can be labeled as @xmath where @xmath
and @xmath . Two vertices @xmath form an edge of the graph iff

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Some properties of the xor -game graphs are given in the following
proposition.

###### Proposition 5.2.1.

An xor game-graph @xmath has the following properties:

-   @xmath is @xmath -regular ⁵ ⁵ 5 A graph @xmath is said to be @xmath
    -regular if every vertex has degree @xmath , i.e. every vertex is
    connected to @xmath other vertices. .

-   @xmath is triangle-free ⁶ ⁶ 6 A triangle is a set of three vertices
    such that all of them are connected. A graph is triangle-free if it
    has no subset of vertices forming a triangle. .

-   @xmath has perfect matching ⁷ ⁷ 7 A matching in @xmath is a set of
    edges such that no two of them have a vertex in common. A perfect
    matching is a matching that covers all the vertices of the graph. .

Moreover, the adjacency matrix of @xmath can be expressed as

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.7)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the Pauli- @xmath matrix, @xmath is the all-ones vector
@xmath , and the matrix @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

In order to see that an xor -game graph @xmath is @xmath -regular note
that every vertex has @xmath neighbors due to exclusivity with respect
to Alice’s measurement, and @xmath neighbors due to exclusivity with
respect to Bob’s measurement, where one of these neighbors is exclusive
due to both. Therefore, each vertex has @xmath neighbors.

By taking two adjacent vertices @xmath , a straightforward analysis
shows that if there exists a third vertex @xmath which is adjacent to
@xmath and to @xmath that would lead to a contradiction, hence there can
be no triangle in @xmath .

A perfect matching for @xmath is obtained by taking the edges
corresponding to the same inputs for both parties @xmath .

Concerning the adjacency matrix ( 5.7 ), the first term, @xmath ,
accounts for the edges representing exclusivity only due to Alice’s
measurement since it corresponds to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

The remaining terms, @xmath , accounts for exclusivity due to Bob and
due to both, and corresponds to:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally we present the spectrum of the adjacency matrix, which will be
very important in the proof of the main result of this chapter.

###### Theorem 5.2.1.

The adjacency matrix of an xor -game graph @xmath , @xmath , has the
following spectrum and corresponding degeneracies:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the @xmath singular values of @xmath .

The proof of Theorem 5.2.1 is presented in Appendix E .

#### 5.3 No-quantum advantage

We have seen in Chapter 1 that quantum mechanics can lead to the
violation of Bell inequalities, contradicting the hypothesis of local
realism (Definition 1.1.1 ). This fact opens the possibility to explore
quantum systems in many tasks, going beyond what can be achieved with
classical systems. In the framework of nonlocal games, quantum theory
can make the players to succeed with higher probability. However, it is
not only the tasks in which quantum theory brings advantage that are of
interest. The tasks in which quantum systems can perform no better than
classical systems also tell us something about nature. Most of the
proposed principles to explain the set of quantum correlations were
based on tasks where quantum theory brings no advantage, as for example
the principle of Information Causality [ IC ] and the principle of Local
Orthogonality [ LO ] (which was based on the guess your neighbor’s input
(GYNI) multiplayer game [ GYNI ] ). Another task which brings no quantum
advantage, and also constitutes a class of xor games, is the Nonlocal
Computation (NLC) task investigated in Ref. [ NLC ] .

###### Definition 5.3.1 (Nonlocal computation).

Consider that the referee picks a string of @xmath bits @xmath with an
arbitrary probability distribution @xmath , and for each bit @xmath he
chooses randomly @xmath and @xmath such that @xmath . Then the referee
gives the input bit string @xmath for Alice and @xmath for Bob. Upon
receiving their inputs, Alice and Bob give respective binary outputs
@xmath and @xmath . Their goal is to satisfy the winning condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

for an arbitrary function @xmath .

The constraint that the function @xmath depends only on the bits @xmath
, which are distributed between Alice and Bob by the relation @xmath ,
gives to this game the interpretation of a distributed computation of
function @xmath (nonlocal computation). Moreover, given a string @xmath
, the referee chooses with uniform distribution, among the @xmath ’s and
@xmath ’s that satisfy @xmath , i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, even upon receiving their respective inputs Alice and Bob get
no information about the string @xmath .

In Ref. [ NLC ] , the authors have shown that no matter with which
probability distribution the referee chooses among strings @xmath , the
players sharing quantum resources cannot perform any better in the
computation of function @xmath than players with only classical
resources. Interestingly enough, as this is an xor game, there always
exist a no-signaling strategy which can compute @xmath perfectly. Given
the lack of advantage even with the freedom of the referee’s choice, and
by the fact that more general probabilistic theories can perform this
task perfectly, the no-advantage for nonlocal computation was also
considered one of the principles to distinguish the quantum set of
correlations.

It was known that the nonlocal computation inequalities, for 2-bit and
3-bit input strings, do not constitute facets of the local polytope [
GYNI ] , and recently it was proved that this is also the case for any
number of inputs [ GMfaces ] ⁸ ⁸ 8 This result was derived before the
conclusion of this Thesis, but the full work was completed and published
only a few months later. However I am allowing myself to violate
causality and include the journal reference here. . Therefore, all the
non-local computation inequalities are faces of lower dimension. A facet
defining Bell inequality with no-quantum advantage would also be a facet
of the set of quantum correlations. It is an open problem whether there
exist such facets in the set of bipartite quantum correlations (for
multipartite scenarios the GYNI game constitutes facets of @xmath [ GYNI
] ).

#### 5.4 Results

We now present the main results derived in Ref. [ GMxorShannon ] .

##### xor games with no quantum advantage

We are interested in characterizing xor games which have the property of
no quantum advantage. In the following we present a necessary and
sufficient condition for @xmath , and a very simple sufficient condition
to guarantee no-quantum advantage.

###### Theorem 5.4.1.

Consider a two-party xor game with game matrix @xmath (with no all-zero
row or column) for which @xmath represents the optimal classical
strategy matrix. Let @xmath and @xmath . There is no quantum advantage
for @xmath if and only if @xmath and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the spectral radius ⁹ ⁹ 9 The spectral radius is
the maximum eigenvalue in modulus of a matrix. .

###### Proof.

We have seen in Chapter 3 that the quantum bias @xmath of an xor game
can be calculated by the semidefinite program @xmath ( 3.13 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a vector whose entries are the diagonal elements of
matrix @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . @xmath is the strategy matrix,
@xmath , and @xmath are local terms, @xmath and @xmath .

By the Lagrange duality theory, the bias can be bounded from above by a
feasible solution of the Lagrange dual problem @xmath . The application
of Lagrange duality, presented in Section 2.3 , leads us to:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the @xmath are @xmath variables and Diag( @xmath ) denotes the
diagonal matrix with entries @xmath .

Problem @xmath satisfies strong duality (Theorem 2.3.2 ) since @xmath is
a strictly feasible point and, therefore, Slater’s conditions ( 2.22 )
are satisfied. As such, we need to derive the conditions under which the
solution of @xmath ( 5.16 ) achieves the classical value @xmath , which
may also be written as @xmath , for @xmath being the direct sum of
vectors @xmath and @xmath . So we require that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

By the semi-definite condition @xmath , this means that @xmath is an
eigenvector, with zero eigenvalue, of @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now, since @xmath is a vector of @xmath entries (as it corresponds to a
classical deterministic strategy), we have that

  -- -- -- --------
           (5.19)
  -- -- -- --------

Therefore, an element by element comparison in Eq. ( 5.18 ) gives us

  -- -- -- --------
           (5.20)
  -- -- -- --------

from which we can derive that whenever a classical strategy achieves the
optimal quantum value, we have:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

The constraint @xmath can be rewritten as @xmath . And since @xmath has
no all-zero row or column, this condition is satisfied only if @xmath
(see observation 7.1.10 in Ref. [ matrix ] ). Theorem 7.7.9 in Ref. [
matrix ] states that in these conditions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally, when the optimal solution of the dual problem is given by the
classical strategy, the inequality on the LHS of Eq. ( 5.22 ) is
saturated. Therefore, condition @xmath can be replaced by equality. ∎

When @xmath and @xmath , the condition of Theorem 5.4.1 reduces to
@xmath and @xmath .

###### Corollary 5.4.1.

If the (non-normalized) singular vectors corresponding to the maximum
singular value of @xmath can be written with entries @xmath , then there
is no quantum advantage for players of the game @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let the (unnormalised) maximum singular vectors with @xmath elements be
@xmath and @xmath such that @xmath , where @xmath is the maximum
singular value of @xmath and @xmath is the square of the norm of @xmath
. In this case, @xmath . Then @xmath such that @xmath . Evidently, these
are positive and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

∎

This is only a sufficient condition and not a necessary one. For
example, the maximum eigenvector of

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

does not consist of @xmath elements, and yet it can be verified that
@xmath .

##### Examples of no-quantum advantage

Corollary 5.4.1 gives us a simple way to construct games with no quantum
advantage. In the uniform probability case, it suffices to construct any
symmetric matrix @xmath for which the total of every row is the same,
and at least @xmath , which ensures that the all 1’s vector @xmath is a
maximum eigenvector.

The NLC game (Definition 5.3.1 ) is a trivial example of Corollary 5.4.1
because the associated game matrix @xmath is diagonal in the Hadamard
basis for any number of input bits [ NLC ] . So now we address the
question posed in Ref. [ NLC ] : ‘Finding families of xor games that
differ from NLC, but with no quantum advantage’ . Let us consider an
anti-circulant matrix ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 An anti-circulant matrix is a matrix
where each row has the same elements, but shifted one position to the
left, with respect to the previous row. @xmath , then for any @xmath ,
@xmath is an eigenvector, and if @xmath is even, so is the alternating
signs vector. All we have to do is to restrict the matrix elements to
guarantee that one of these two eigenvectors yields the eigenvalue of
maximum modulus. For @xmath , let @xmath , subject to @xmath , specifies
the first row of @xmath . If

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

we have a game for which there is no quantum advantage. A sufficient
condition for this to happen is that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

Many different patterns for the probability distribution satisfy
condition ( 5.26 ), as for example

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath . Which leads to matrices that (except for the
uniformly distributed case) are not diagonal in the Hadamard basis.

In order to construct a new families of games with no quantum advantage,
we can base on the following observation:

1.  If @xmath and @xmath are two game matrices satisfying Corollary
    5.4.1 , then it follows that @xmath also satisfies Corollary 5.4.1 .

This observation allows us to extend any examples for small input size
to examples with an arbitrarily large number of inputs.

Actually observations (*) can be extended for any two games satisfying
Theorem 5.4.1 by the additivity property of the quantum value of these
games. In Ref. [ parallelrep ] , it was shown that the quantum value of
xor games satisfy additivity: Consider two xor games @xmath and @xmath ,
the sum of these games is the xor game

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the referee picks questions @xmath with probability @xmath and the
winning condition of the game is defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

The game is said to be additive if the optimal strategy is achieved when
the players play each game individually and Alice outputs bit @xmath and
Bob outputs bit @xmath . The classical value does not satisfy additivity
in general, however the quantum value does [ parallelrep ] . And the
game matrix of game @xmath is the tensor product of the individual game
matrices @xmath .

##### Shannon capacity of game graphs

Game graphs for which @xmath are good candidates to have a Shannon
capacity @xmath . We now prove that it is the case for games @xmath
satisfying the hypothesis of Corollary 5.4.1 .

###### Theorem 5.4.2.

Every two-party xor game with @xmath uniformly chosen inputs for each
party and satisfying the hypothesis of Corollary 5.4.1 has a game graph
for which @xmath .

###### Proof.

To establish the Shannon capacity, our strategy is to find both @xmath
and @xmath , and to show that they are equal. @xmath is straightforward,
it coincides with the optimal strategy, and by Corollary 5.4.1 it is
specified by the maximum singular value ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 In terms of the
normalized game matrix @xmath we have @xmath . Note, however, that we
are using the unnormalized game matrix @xmath . of @xmath :

  -- -- -- --------
           (5.30)
  -- -- -- --------

In order to compute @xmath , we use the characterization of the Lovász
number given by Theorem 4.1.1 [ Lovasznumber ] , in which @xmath is
upper bounded by the largest eigenvalue of any symmetric matrix @xmath
such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

Our goal is to find a symmetric matrix @xmath whose maximum eigenvalue
matches @xmath and since @xmath we would finish the proof.

Consider the matrix

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

The matrix @xmath satisfies the conditions ( 5.31 ), and moreover, all
of the three terms in @xmath commute with each other. Therefore, the
diagonalization is the same as for the adjacency matrix @xmath , and the
eigenvalues can be readily obtained: (see proof of Theorem 5.2.1 in
Appendix E ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is now our task to select @xmath such that the largest eigenvalue is
@xmath . If we set @xmath and @xmath , this yields a maximum eigenvalue
equal to @xmath . We conclude then that @xmath , and therefore @xmath .
∎

This proof automatically covers all NLC games, but also includes many
other XOR games (Eq. ( 5.27 ), for example). A further consequence that
follows from the proof of Theorem 5.4.2 is that whenever @xmath , we
know that @xmath . The CHSH game [ CHSH ] is an example of this.

##### Previously known families of graphs with @xmath

We now come back to the previously known families of graphs for which
the Shannon capacity is equal to the independence number, and we compare
it with the graphs specified by Theorem 5.4.2 :

-   For Perfect graphs , it was shown in Ref. [ Cabelloperfectgraph ]
    that the classical value coincides with the no-signalling value of
    any Bell expression associated to a perfect graph, this implies
    @xmath for xor games associated to perfect graphs.

-   For Kneser graphs on @xmath vertices it holds that [ Lovasznumber ]

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (5.34)
      -- -------- -- --------

    where @xmath are the corresponding maximum and minimum eigenvalues
    of the adjacency matrix. From Eq. ( 5.11 ), we have that

      -- -- -- --------
               (5.35)
      -- -- -- --------

    and from the hypothesis of Corollary 5.4.1 @xmath . So we have that
    in this case @xmath , which again implies @xmath .

-    König-Egerváry (KE) family satisfies @xmath . Since the xor game
    graphs have a perfect matching, @xmath , they can only belong to the
    KE family in the case of @xmath .

So we see that the previously known families of graphs for which @xmath
could only correspond to an xor game in the trivial case where @xmath .
Therefore the non-trivial xor games satisfying Corollary 5.4.1 define
new families of graphs for which @xmath , the NLC class [ NLC ] being a
remarkable example.

#### 5.5 Discussion and open problems

We have presented a necessary and sufficient condition for a bipartite
xor game to have no quantum advantage. And with this characterization we
could single out new families of games with no quantum advantage, even
when the referee has some freedom in the probability of choosing the
inputs. However, the generated examples (based on condition ( 5.26 ) and
observation (*)) rely on ensuring that the optimal classical strategy
coincides with the vectors of the maximum singular value of the game
matrix. It would be interesting to know whether there exists any such
classes which do not require this condition.

We have also shown that for games satisfying the condition of Corollary
5.4.1 , the associated graphs have @xmath . This is an entirely
classical result derived as a consequence of insights provided from the
study of quantum nonlocality. The proof of this result required
Corollary 5.4.1 to hold. However, we believe that this restriction can
be dropped, and that a necessary and sufficient condition for a game
graph to have @xmath is given by Theorem 5.4.1 . So far, the proof of
this statement remains an open point.

A more challenging goal would be to prove similar results concerning no
quantum advantage and the Shannon capacity of the corresponding graphs
for games with more outputs and more players. However, the difficulty in
extending the techniques used here relies mainly on the fact that there
is no equivalent of Tsirelson’s Theorem 3.2.1 for these more general
scenarios. In Ref. [ GMxord ] we were able to find a generalization of
the principle of no-advantage for nonlocal computation for a class of
functions with @xmath possible values. This result will be presented in
the next Chapter.

Finally, we want to remark that relations ( 5.1 ) and ( 5.2 ) show that
the quantum value of a Bell inequality and the Shannon capacity of the
corresponding exclusivity graph are both bounded by the same graph
parameters ( @xmath and @xmath ). Moreover, as we have discussed
previously, both quantities fall into the class of problems not known to
be computable. We point out as an interesting question whether there is
a fundamental relation between the quantum value of a Bell inequality
and the Shannon capacity of the corresponding graph. In the affirmative
case, the physical interpretation of this relation can shed light on
foundational aspects of quantum theory.

### Chapter 6 Linear games and the task of nonlocal computation

In this chapter we present results of Ref. [ GMxord ] :

Generalized xor games with @xmath outcomes and the task of nonlocal
computation R. Ramanathan, R. Augusiak, and G. Murta Phys. Rev. A, 92,
022333 (2016) .

We now focus on bipartite linear games, @xmath . Our main result is to
prove an efficiently computable upper bound to the quantum value of a
linear game. We then use the bound to derive, in a straightforward way,
an upper bound to the quantum value of the CHSH- @xmath game. We also
show that boxes that would lead to trivialization of communication
complexity are not realized in quantum theory. As the main application
of the bound, we prove a larger alphabet generalization of the principle
of no-advantage for nonlocal computation discussed in Section 5.3 .

#### 6.1 Motivation

As we have discussed in Chapters 2 and 3 , it is not known, in general,
whether the quantum value of a Bell inequality is computable or not
(since there is a priori no restriction on the dimension of the Hilbert
space for the quantum states and measurements). Only in some instances
it is possible to compute the value efficiently, as it is the case for
2-player xor games. Apart from this, typically the NPA hierarchy [ NPA ]
is used to get upper bounds to the quantum value. However, the quality
of the approximation achieved by these bounds is not known in general,
and the size of these programs increases exponentially with the level of
the hierarchy.

In Ref. [ UGeasy ] it was shown that the quantum value of unique games
can be efficiently approximated. Formally, the authors present an
efficient algorithm such that, given a unique game with quantum value
@xmath , it outputs a specific quantum strategy that achieves a value
@xmath . This remarkable result was very useful to prove parallel
repetition for the quantum value of this class of games [ UGeasy ] .
However, this approximation is only good when the quantum value of the
game is close to unity, which is not the case for simple examples like
the CHSH- @xmath game that we are going to discuss here.

Recently, there has been an increasing interest in developing
applications of higher-dimensional entanglement (see, for example, [
BT00 , angularmomentEntang , qutritcrypto , WL06 , Qudit-randomness ,
q16dit-key-dist ] ) for which Bell inequalities with more than two
outcomes are naturally suited. Moreover, in Ref. [ MatthiasAdan ] it was
shown that, in general, @xmath -chotomic measurements cannot be
explained as a classical selection of intrinsically dichotomic
measurements. Therefore, both for fundamental reasons as well as for
these applications, the study of Bell inequalities with more outcomes is
crucial.

#### 6.2 An efficiently computable bound to the quantum value of linear
games

Let us recall that a linear game @xmath is defined by Alice and Bob
answering with elements of an Abelian group @xmath , @xmath , and the
winning condition depending only on the group operation @xmath of their
outputs (Definition 3.3.1 ). In order to obtain the main result of this
Chapter, which is an upper bound to the quantum value of a linear game,
we are going to make use of the Fourier transform on finite Abelian
groups [ FourierTerras ] and introduce the generalized correlators .

###### Definition 6.2.1 (Generalized correlators).

Let @xmath be elements of a finite Abelian group @xmath , where @xmath
is the associated group operation. The generalized correlators @xmath
are defined via the Fourier transform of the probabilities @xmath as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are the characters of the Abelian group @xmath and @xmath
is the conjugate character.

The characters of an Abelian group are complex numbers which satisfy the
following relations (see Appendix C ):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

More details on groups and the Fourier transform on Abelian groups are
presented in Appendix C (see also Ref. [ FourierTerras ] ).

Given Definition 6.2.1 , the probabilities are recovered by the inverse
Fourier transform:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

And in terms of the correlators, normalization is expressed as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The one-party correlators @xmath are defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath denotes the identity element of the group with @xmath being
the trivial character ( @xmath ) and we have used the no-signaling
condition @xmath . An analogous expression holds for @xmath .

In order to determine the success probability in a linear game, we are
only interested in terms of the form @xmath . Consequently, we can use
the characters’ properties in order to get a very simplified expression.

###### Lemma 6.2.1.

The average probability of success for a particular box @xmath , in a
linear game @xmath , can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

###### Proof.

In order to prove the lemma we start by evaluating the probability:

  -- -------- -- -- -------
     @xmath         (6.7)
  -- -------- -- -- -------

where we have used the characters’ properties ( 6.2 ).

Finally, taking the average sum over the inputs @xmath and @xmath , and
using normalization ( @xmath ), we have the desired result. ∎

Lemma 6.2.1 inspire us to define a set of @xmath game matrices
associated to the linear game @xmath which carry information about the
probability distribution of the inputs and the winning condition of the
game. These matrices are the analogue of the xor game matrices, Eq. (
3.10 ), to the case of linear games.

###### Definition 6.2.2 (Linear game matrices).

Given a linear game @xmath , the associated game matrices are

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are orthonormal basis in @xmath and @xmath
respectively.

Now, let us analyze the meaning of the generalized correlators for a
quantum strategy. In a quantum strategy, local projective measurements
@xmath and @xmath are performed by each player in a shared quantum state
@xmath . Now if we define the (in general non-Hermitian) ‘observables’

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

we have that the generalized correlators correspond to:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

And therefore, the average success probability of a quantum strategy,
specified by @xmath , is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now we are ready to state the main result of this Chapter.

###### Theorem 6.2.1.

The quantum value of a linear game @xmath , with input sets @xmath and
@xmath , can be bounded as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the game matrices, @xmath are the characters of the
group @xmath , and @xmath denotes the maximum singular value of matrix
@xmath (the spectral norm).

###### Proof.

In order to derive the upper bound to @xmath , let us consider a quantum
strategy given by the measurements @xmath and @xmath , from which we
derive the observables @xmath and @xmath , being applied to the pure
state @xmath . Now, let us define the unit vectors:

  -- -- -- -- --------
              (6.13)
  -- -- -- -- --------

By substituting into Eq. ( 6.11 ) we have

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (6.14)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

where the supremum in the first equation is taken over all vectors
@xmath and @xmath that can be expressed as in Eq. ( 6.13 ). ∎

The particular case of linear games corresponding to the cyclic group
@xmath (the set @xmath with the operation of sum modulo @xmath ) we
denote by generalized xor games , or simply xor - @xmath games. The
characters of the cyclic group @xmath correspond to the @xmath -th roots
of unity @xmath , where @xmath . For an xor - @xmath , the Eq. ( 6.12 )
reduces to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### The computational complexity of our bound

Theorem 6.2.1 states an upper bound to the quantum value of linear games
based on the spectral norm of the game matrices. Although we still do
not know how good the bound is in general, it satisfies one of the
requirements of a good relaxation: the bound is easy to compute.

The spectral norm of a matrix @xmath , @xmath , is equal to its maximum
singular value. The singular value decomposition (SVD) of an @xmath
matrix @xmath is the decomposition of @xmath into the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

-   @xmath : is an @xmath matrix whose columns are composed by a set of
    orthonormal vectors which are called the left singular vectors of
    @xmath .

-   @xmath : is an @xmath matrix whose columns are composed by a set of
    orthonormal vectors which are called the right singular vectors of
    @xmath .

-   @xmath : is an @xmath matrix with nonnegative elements in the
    principal diagonal, the singular values of @xmath , and zero
    elsewhere.

Many algorithms are known for the singular value decomposition (see Ref.
[ SVDcomplex ] ). The best known SVD algorithms have polynomial
complexity in terms of the size of the matrices. If one is interested in
determining only the singular values of an @xmath matrix, there exists
an algorithm with time complexity @xmath [ SVDcomplex ] . In a linear
game @xmath with @xmath possible outcomes and @xmath questions per
player, we have @xmath @xmath game matrices. Therefore the time
complexity of computing our bound is @xmath , which increases
polynomially in the number of inputs and outputs.

#### 6.3 Applications of the bound

##### The CHSH-@xmath game

As a direct application of Theorem 6.2.1 , we consider a @xmath -output
generalization, for @xmath prime or power of a prime, of the CHSH game.
The CHSH- @xmath game is defined with the operations of sum and
multiplication over the finite field @xmath (For more details on finite
fields see Appendix C.4 ).

###### Definition 6.3.1.

The CHSH- @xmath game is a linear game with @xmath inputs and @xmath
outputs per player, defined for @xmath prime or power of a prime. In the
CHSH- @xmath game, Alice and Bob receive questions @xmath and @xmath and
output answers @xmath and @xmath respectively, @xmath , with the goal to
satisfy

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are operations defined over the field @xmath .

Definition 6.3.1 is the generalization of the CHSH game for more outputs
considered in Ref. [ Bavarian ] . Similar definitions were previously
considered in Refs. [ chshmodd , chshcorre , Liangchshd ] . It is
interesting to note that these games have recently found application in
the security analysis of a relativistic bit commitment protocol [
BCJedrelativistic ] .

In Ref. [ Bavarian ] , an intensive study of this game was performed.
The authors present results on the asymptotic classical and quantum
values of the game. They also prove, for the first time, an upper bound
on the quantum value of the CHSH- @xmath game. Their proof is based on
reducing these games to other information theoretic principles like
no-advantage for nonlocal computation [ NLC ] and information causality
[ IC ] . We now apply Theorem 6.2.1 to re-derive in a different way the
upper bound for the quantum value of the CHSH- @xmath game obtained in
Ref. [ Bavarian ] .

###### Theorem 6.3.1 (see also [Bavarian]).

The quantum value of the CHSH- @xmath game, for @xmath prime or power of
a prime, is upper bounded by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Proof.

The proof follows from the explicit analysis of the game matrices for
the CHSH- @xmath game. For the CHSH- @xmath game, the inputs are
uniformly distributed and the winning condition is defined by @xmath .
Therefore the game matrices are:

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.20)
  -- -- -- --------

where @xmath is the character of the additive group formed by the
elements of the field @xmath .

Now we evaluate @xmath using the characters relations ( 6.2 ):

  -- -- -- -- --------
              (6.21)
  -- -- -- -- --------

Therefore @xmath , so that @xmath . Substitution into Eq. ( 6.15 ), with
@xmath , yields the desired result. ∎

Comparison with the numerical results of Ref. [ Liangchshd ] (see Table
III in Ref. [ Liangchshd ] ) indicates that the bound ( 6.19 ) is not
tight in general ¹ ¹ 1 For @xmath , results of Ref. [ Liangchshd ] show
that the optimal value is smaller than the bound ( 6.19 ). And moreover
it is attained with the maximally entangled state of dimension 3. but
might correspond to the value obtained for the first level of the NPA
hierarchy. Note that in Ref. [ Liangchshd ] the authors only present the
value attained at the first level of the hierarchy up to @xmath . This
is probably due to the fact that the NPA hierarchy becomes impractical
for dealing with Bell inequalities with high number of inputs and
outputs, which shows that our simple bound can be very powerful for
these cases.

##### No trivialization of communication complexity

We now address the question of whether there exist linear games that can
be won perfectly with a quantum strategy, i.e. if there exist games
@xmath for which @xmath . The interest in this question comes from
communication complexity. In Ref. [ vanDam ] it was shown that if Alice
and Bob had unlimited access to PR-boxes ( 1.19 ), they could compute
any distributed Boolean function with only one bit of communication.
This result was later generalized [ PRd ] to functions with @xmath
possible values. In Ref. [ PRd ] it was shown that the called functional
boxes , which are no-signaling boxes that win perfectly some xor -
@xmath games, would lead to a trivialization of communication
complexity, where a distributed function could be computed with a single
@xmath it of communication (See Appendix D for more details).

The xor - @xmath games for which a perfect no-signaling strategy can
trivialize communication complexity are the uniformly distributed total
function games with the winning condition given by a
non-additively-separable function. A total function game is one for
which all inputs have a probability strictly greater than zero to be
chosen by the referee, @xmath . And a function @xmath is additively
separable if it can be decomposed into the form @xmath .

We now make use of Theorem 6.2.1 to show that, for xor - @xmath games
with uniformly chosen inputs, there is a quantum strategy that wins the
game with probability one if and only if this game is trivial, i.e. when
@xmath .

###### Theorem 6.3.2.

For xor - @xmath games @xmath with @xmath questions per player and
uniformly distributed inputs, @xmath , @xmath iff @xmath .

###### Proof.

The constraint of uniformly distributed questions, @xmath for all @xmath
, is equivalent to @xmath since both the maximum absolute value column
sum and row sum of the matrix are equal to @xmath . Hence, from our
bound, Eq. ( 6.15 ), we have that

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.22)
  -- -- -- --------

Now, let us consider the matrix @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . Let @xmath be an eigenvector corresponding to the maximum
eigenvalue @xmath of @xmath , with complex entries @xmath . Assume,
without loss of generality, that the entries of the eigenvector are
ordered by absolute value, @xmath . From the eigenvalue equation
corresponding to the first entry of @xmath we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath , the above equation can only be satisfied when

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.25a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.25b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

in particular choosing @xmath we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where all the operations are modulo @xmath . With all @xmath equal, the
rest of the eigenvalue equations (for @xmath ) lead to similar
consistent constraint equations. We then deduce that @xmath only when
the columns of the game matrix @xmath are proportional to each other,
the proportionality factor between columns @xmath being @xmath , and
therefore the game matrix has @xmath . Now consider @xmath and @xmath
satisfying @xmath , by setting

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.27)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.28)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

we have a classical strategy that wins the game with probability 1. ∎

A more general result was recently proved in Ref. [ Ravinoextpoint ] ,
showing that all the extremal points of the no-signaling polytope, in
any Bell scenario, cannot be realized within quantum theory. Here, by a
direct application of the norm bound (Theorem 6.2.1 ) we are able to
exclude the quantum realization of those boxes corresponding to xor -
@xmath games that would lead to trivialization of communication
complexity.

#### 6.4 xor-@xmath games and the task of nonlocal computation

In Section 5.3 we have introduced the principle of no-advantage for
nonlocal computation proposed in Ref. [ NLC ] , which corresponds to a
class of xor games for which @xmath . The question of the generalization
of this class to a larger alphabet size was also left posed as an open
question in Ref. [ NLC ] . Here we use Theorem 6.2.1 in order to
characterize a class of xor - @xmath games, that resembles NLC, for
which there is no quantum advantage.

Consider the following generalization of the non-local computation task
to the computation of a particular function @xmath on @xmath @xmath its,
@xmath for @xmath prime.

###### Definition 6.4.1 (@xmath).

The generalized nonlocal computation of a @xmath -nary function, @xmath
, for @xmath prime, is the task where Alice and Bob each receives a
@xmath - @xmath it string from a referee, @xmath and @xmath , @xmath ,
which obey @xmath . They output respectively dits @xmath with the goal
to satisfy

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

for a previously agreed function @xmath , where @xmath are sum and
multiplication modulo @xmath . Moreover, the input strings are chosen by
the referee according to the distribution

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

for @xmath being an arbitrary probability distribution.

We now prove that the games @xmath , as defined above, exhibit no
quantum advantage. The idea behind the proof is to show that the
matrices @xmath for these games are diagonal in a basis composed of
tensor products of the Fourier vectors of dimension @xmath . We then
present a classical strategy which achieves the quantum value, which is
essentially given by the maximum singular vectors of @xmath .

###### Theorem 6.4.1.

The games @xmath for arbitrary prime @xmath and input distribution
satisfying ( 6.30 ) have no quantum advantage, i.e., @xmath .

###### Proof.

We first consider the case of uniformly chosen inputs. The games @xmath
consider functions of the following form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are sum and multiplication modulo @xmath , and
@xmath is an arbitrary function. Given the winning condition ( 6.31 ),
the game matrices of @xmath are composed of “building-block games"
@xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath , i.e., @xmath .

There are @xmath different games @xmath , each with a single @xmath it
input for each party (which we will take to be @xmath and @xmath ).
Every game @xmath has the classical value @xmath . Explicitly, the
classical strategy

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

wins the game @xmath with probability one. The corresponding
(non-normalized) game matrices @xmath for game @xmath are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . Here the superscript @xmath denotes that these matrices
correspond to the @xmath game matrices for @xmath .

Let us state some properties of the matrices @xmath :

1.  @xmath for any @xmath is diagonal in the Fourier basis defined by
    the Fourier vectors @xmath with

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (6.35)
      -- -------- -- --------

    with @xmath .

2.  Each @xmath has only one eigenvalue (= @xmath ) different from zero
    and this corresponds to the eigenvector @xmath .

Properties (i) and (ii) imply the orthogonality

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since, we will be concerned with finding the maximum singular vectors
corresponding to a fixed @xmath , we can encapsulate the above
properties by the equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now we use the properties of @xmath in order to analyze the game
matrices @xmath for the general @xmath games with @xmath - @xmath it
strings of input. Due to the structure of the function in Eq. ( 6.29 ),
namely the fact that the winning condition depends only on the @xmath
it-wise sum of the @xmath dits, and moreover the dependence on the last
@xmath its, @xmath , is given by the games @xmath , we see that @xmath
acquires a block circulant structure (for @xmath the corresponding
matrices @xmath for each @xmath are block-wise circulant matrices). For
example, if for @xmath an unnormalized game matrix @xmath has the form

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.38)
  -- -- -- --------

with @xmath defined as in Eq. ( 6.34 ), we would have @xmath equals to

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.39)
  -- -- -- --------

which is a block-wise circulant matrix. In general, the entries of
@xmath are explicitly given by

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (6.40)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

Due to this block circulant structure, we have that @xmath for any
@xmath and @xmath is diagonal in the basis formed by the tensor products
of the Fourier vectors @xmath with @xmath .

We now proceed to find the eigenvector corresponding to the maximum
eigenvalue of @xmath among the basis formed by @xmath . Using the
properties of the game matrices @xmath encapsulated by Eq. ( 6.37 ), one
can see that for any fixed @xmath , the eigenvalue corresponding to
@xmath cannot be smaller than that corresponding to any other @xmath .
Therefore we can concentrate only on the vectors @xmath .

Let us compute the eigenvalues corresponding to @xmath for @xmath . To
do this, let us fix an input string @xmath (say @xmath ) and vary over
@xmath , in other words we consider the first row block of @xmath
corresponding to the game blocks @xmath , with @xmath . Denote by @xmath
the number of times the game @xmath appears for this choice of @xmath in
the matrix @xmath . Due to the symmetry of the winning condition, @xmath
is independent of the choice of row @xmath so we may drop the
superscript. Moreover, since @xmath is a symmetric matrix, we also have
@xmath for an analogously defined @xmath .

Let us define @xmath and let @xmath for the value of @xmath for which
the maximum of @xmath is achieved. Using Eq. ( 6.37 ), we have that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

from which we obtain that @xmath .

For prime @xmath , multiplication (mod @xmath ) by @xmath maps each game
@xmath into a game @xmath such that if @xmath then @xmath . Therefore
the maximum number of elementary games of the same type composing matrix
@xmath is the same for all @xmath , @xmath . Hence we obtain the
following bound on the quantum value of @xmath for the uniformly
distributed inputs case

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

We now consider the classical deterministic strategy where Alice outputs
@xmath independently of her inputs @xmath and Bob outputs @xmath
independently of his input @xmath . Note that for the @xmath blocks
described by the game @xmath all the @xmath constraints will be
satisfied. On the other hand, for the blocks described by @xmath for
@xmath , only @xmath constraints are satisfied (when @xmath . Therefore
the score achieved by this strategy is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

which equals the upper bound on the quantum value in Eq. ( 6.42 ). This
completes the proof for uniformly chosen inputs.

Now we consider the case of input probability distributions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

For this input distribution, the matrix @xmath is still composed of the
elementary games @xmath that can be classically saturated. The
difference is that a weight @xmath is now attributed to each @xmath
block

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

This preserves the block-wise circulant structure of @xmath ensuring
that these matrices are still diagonal in the basis formed by the tensor
product of Fourier vectors. As in the case of uniformly distributed
inputs, the properties of @xmath in Eq. ( 6.37 ) imply that the maximum
eigenvalue corresponds to one of the vectors @xmath .

To compute the eigenvalues corresponding to @xmath , we now have to take
into account the number of times a game @xmath appears in a given row
block as well as the respective weights. Let us denote by @xmath the
weighted sum of the times the game @xmath appears in a row block, i.e.,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

As before, let us define @xmath and let @xmath for the @xmath which
achieves the maximum. For the game matrix @xmath we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

We therefore obtain that @xmath .

Again, for prime @xmath , the maximum of @xmath is independent of @xmath
. Therefore, we obtain the following upper bound on the quantum value of
a general @xmath game

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

Consider the classical deterministic strategy where Alice outputs @xmath
independently of @xmath and Bob outputs @xmath independently of @xmath .
Analogously to the uniformly distributed inputs case, the score achieved
by this strategy is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

which again equals the upper bound on the quantum value in Eq.( 6.48 ).
This completes the proof that quantum strategies cannot outperform
classical strategies in the @xmath game. ∎

Note that our proof relies on the assumption that the winning constraint
function has the form @xmath , which seems more restrictive than stated
for the binary @xmath [ NLC ] . Now, let us consider the 3-input and
3-output game @xmath , i.e. @xmath and @xmath , whose winning condition
is specified by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the associated game matrices are @xmath and @xmath . An SDP
optimization over measurements for the maximally entangled state in
dimension 3 shows that the quantum value overcomes the classical value
of the game ( 6.50 ). Therefore Theorem 6.4.1 cannot be extended to an
arbitrary function @xmath .

#### 6.5 Discussion and open problems

In this chapter, we have presented an upper bound to the quantum value
of linear games. The bound is not tight in general but it is very simple
and, as we have shown by examples, it allowed us to derive several
results: We have used the bound to rule out from the quantum set a class
of no-signaling boxes that would result in trivialization of
communication complexity; Also, we have shown that the recently
discovered bound on the quantum value of the CHSH- @xmath game, obtained
in Ref. [ Bavarian ] , can be derived in a simple manner using our
bound; And finally, we have extended the principle of no-advantage for
nonlocal computation to a class of functions with prime @xmath possible
values.

Moreover the derived bound is efficiently computable since, for a linear
game with @xmath outcomes, it requires the spectral norm of @xmath game
matrices, where the size of these matrices grows polynomially with the
number of questions in the game (a game with @xmath question per player
has game matrices of size @xmath ).

As a future direction, it would be particularly interesting to
investigate if one can extend the result of Theorem 5.4.2 to the graphs
associated to @xmath . As a more challenging next step, we point to the
generalization of the technique of norm bounds to classes of Bell
inequalities beyond linear games. Due to its simplicity, it could lead
to general results of fundamental and practical interest.

### Chapter 7 Multiplayer linear games and device-independent witness of
genuine tripartite entanglement

In this chapter we present results of Ref. [ GMmultiplayer ]

Quantum bounds on multiplayer linear games and device-independent
witness of genuine tripartite entanglement G. Murta , R. Ramanathan, N.
Móller, and M. Terra Cunha Phys. Rev. A, 93, 022305, (2016) .

Now we consider the case of linear games with @xmath players. We
generalize the bound obtained in the previous Chapter [ GMxord ] to the
quantum value of an @xmath -player game. We extend the examples of the
2-player case, deriving an upper bound to the quantum value of a
generalization of the CHSH- @xmath game for @xmath players, and also we
exclude the possibility of quantum realization of multipartite
functional boxes that would lead to trivialization of communication
complexity in a multipartite scenario. As our main result for the
multipartite scenario, we use the bounds to design devide-independent
witnesses of genuine multipartite entanglement for tripartite systems.

#### 7.1 Motivation

Multipartite scenarios bring fundamental and practical new features.
From the fundamental point of view, the possibility of having more
parties interacting with each other brings the novelty of different
classes of correlations (now all the parties can share nonlocal
correlations or, else, only a subgroup of the parties can be
non-classically correlated), and therefore we can have a much richer
nonlocality structure. Moreover, as shown in Ref. [ NoBiPrinciple ] , no
bipartite principle is sufficient to single out the set of quantum
correlations for an arbitrary number of parties, and hence the study of
the intrinsically multipartite features is necessary. From the practical
point of view, multipartite scenarios allow for the realization of many
cryptographic tasks whose unconditional security cannot be guaranteed in
a bipartite scenario [ MIP88 ] . A remarkable example is the task of bit
commitment for which no-go theorems [ BCMayers , BCLoChau ] state the
impossibility of having an unconditionally secure bipartite protocol.
This impossibility was circumvented by Kent [ Kent11 , Kent12 ] who
proposed the idea of adding multiple space-like separated agents for
each party (what is called a “relativistic protocol”), allowing
unconditional security as long as the agents remain separated. In Ref. [
BCJedrelativistic ] a relativistic protocol was proposed, where the
commitment can be made arbitrarily long by the introduction of a
rounding procedure. Interestingly, the security against classical
adversaries is guaranteed by a mapping to the problem of estimating the
performance of the players in a multiplayer game.

Besides its undeniable importance, very few results are known for
multipartite Bell scenarios. We now extend the techniques presented in
Chapter 6 [ GMxord ] and provide an upper bound to the quantum value of
multiplayer linear games based on game matrices.

#### 7.2 An efficiently computable bound to the quantum value of
multiplayer linear games

Our goal in this Section is to bound the performance of players sharing
quantum resources in an @xmath -player linear game @xmath (Definition
3.4.2 ).

A generalization of Lemma 6.2.1 also holds for multiplayer games, and
the average probability of success on the game, @xmath , can be written
in terms of the generalized correlators. The multipartite generalized
correlators @xmath are defined as the Fourier transform of the
probabilities

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the inverse Fourier transform gives us

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

###### Lemma 7.2.1.

Given a particular strategy @xmath , the average probability of success
in an @xmath -player linear game @xmath can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

For the particular case of a 3-player linear game @xmath , Lemma 7.2.1
gives us

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

###### Proof of Lemma 7.2.1.

We present the proof for the case of 3 players. The case of @xmath
players follows in an analogous way.

Given the probabilities in terms of the generalized correlators:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

we can proceed to calculate @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -- -------
     @xmath         (7.6)
  -- -------- -- -- -------

where we have used the characters’ properties ( 6.2 ).

The weighted sum over the inputs, gives us the desired result. ∎

Considering a particular quantum strategy given by the set of projective
measurements @xmath , @xmath , @xmath performed on the tripartite
quantum state @xmath , the tripartite correlators correspond to

  -- -- -- -------
           (7.7)
  -- -- -- -------

where, as defined in the previous Chapter:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

and analogously for @xmath and @xmath .

Motivated by Lemma 7.2.1 , for tripartite linear games we can also
associate a set of @xmath (rectangular) matrices which carry information
about the probability distribution with which the referee picks
questions and also the winning condition of the game.

###### Definition 7.2.1 (Multiplayer linear game matrices).

Given a linear game @xmath the associated @xmath game matrices are
defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath form orthonormal basis in @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath respectively, and @xmath .

Note that in Definition 7.2.1 we have chosen to write the game matrices
in terms of the partition @xmath of the inputs. However, we could
equally chose any other partition @xmath or @xmath and define the
respective game matrices in an analogous way. If the winning condition
of the game @xmath is not invariant over the permutation of parties,
each partition would give rise to different matrices.

Given all these definitions we are ready to state the main result of
this Chapter which generalizes the norm bound presented in Chapter 6 for
multiplayer linear games. We start with a 3-player game.

###### Theorem 7.2.1.

The quantum value of a tripartite linear game, @xmath , where players
@xmath , and @xmath receive respectively questions @xmath and answer
with elements of an Abelian group @xmath , is upper bounded by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the maximum singular value of the matrix, @xmath is
the identity element of the group G, and @xmath are the game matrices.

###### Proof.

The proof follows analogously to the 2-player case. Consider a quantum
strategy where measurements @xmath , @xmath , @xmath are performed on
the tripartite quantum state @xmath , hence we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

And we can define the normalized vectors

  -- -- -- -- --------
              (7.12)
  -- -- -- -- --------

Now by making use of the game matrices @xmath ( 7.9 ) we have the
desired result:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (7.13)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

∎

The generalization for @xmath -player games is given by the following
Theorem.

###### Theorem 7.2.2.

Consider an @xmath -player linear game, @xmath . Let @xmath be a proper
subset of the parties, @xmath . The quantum value of an @xmath -player
linear game, @xmath , is upper bounded by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the maximum singular value of matrix @xmath and the
game matrices for partition @xmath are defined as

  -- -- -- --------
           (7.15)
  -- -- -- --------

@xmath denotes the vector of inputs of the players that belong to set
@xmath , and @xmath is the complement of @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be a proper subset of the parties @xmath , and the associated
game matrices be defined as

  -- -- -- --------
           (7.16)
  -- -- -- --------

Now by defining the normalized vectors

  -- -- -- -- --------
              (7.17)
  -- -- -- -- --------

where @xmath , and @xmath for @xmath , we have that

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (7.18)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

By the construction of the proof we see that for all subset @xmath we
have a valid upper bound to the quantum value. ∎

In Theorem 7.2.2 each partition @xmath of the set of parties provides an
upper bound to the quantum value, the minimum in Eq. ( 7.14 ) selects
the most restrictive one. In Definition 7.2.1 we have chosen @xmath for
the 3-player game, but writing the game matrices with @xmath or @xmath
can lead to tighter bounds than the one derived from Eq. ( 7.9 ).

##### The computational complexity of our bound

Theorem 7.2.2 states an upper bound to the quantum value of @xmath
-player linear games in terms of the spectral norm of the game matrices
@xmath , whose dimension depends on the number of players and the number
of questions per player. Given an @xmath -player linear game @xmath with
@xmath questions per player and @xmath possible outcomes, the game
matrices have dimension @xmath (where the number of rows and columns
depends on the subset @xmath chosen to construct the matrix). The
singular value decomposition of these matrices has time complexity at
most ¹ ¹ 1 In Ref. [ SVDcomplex ] , an algorithm for finding the
singular values of an @xmath matrix, @xmath , in time @xmath is
presented. Therefore, for the worst case of @xmath containing @xmath
elements, @xmath is an @xmath matrix, and @xmath . @xmath [ SVDcomplex ]
. Therefore, for a particular subset @xmath , an upper bound to the
quantum value of game @xmath can be obtained with time complexity @xmath
. So we see that the complexity increases exponentially with the number
of players. Moreover if we want to obtain the smallest of the upper
bounds we would have to run the algorithm an exponential number of
times, since there are @xmath possible subsets ² ² 2 Note that @xmath
which therefore leads to the same bound. @xmath . Nevertheless, for
particular problems (as for example the @xmath -player CHSH- @xmath game
that we are going to discuss in the next Section) the bound may be
easily calculated analytically by using the symmetries of the game
matrix, without the need to perform an explicit numerical calculation.

#### 7.3 @xmath-player CHSH-@xmath game

In Section 6.3 we considered a @xmath -output generalization of the CHSH
game, for @xmath prime or power of a prime. Here we generalize this game
for @xmath players following an expression first introduced by
Svetlichny [ Svetlichny ] in the context of detecting genuine
multipartite nonlocality.

###### Definition 7.3.1.

The @xmath -input and @xmath -output per player, @xmath -player CHSH
game, the CHSH @xmath - @xmath game, for @xmath prime or a power of
prime, is a linear game with the winning condition given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where addition and multiplication are operations defined over the finite
field @xmath .

In order to exemplify, let us consider the CHSH @xmath - @xmath game,
where the inputs and outputs are elements of @xmath , @xmath , and
@xmath are sum and multiplication modulo 3. The winning condition ( 7.19
) reduces to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

The game matrix @xmath for the CHSH @xmath - @xmath is then given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is explicitly written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a 3rd root of unity.

Now we use Theorem 7.2.2 to prove an upper bound on the performance of
quantum players in the CHSH @xmath - @xmath game.

###### Theorem 7.3.1.

The quantum value of the CHSH @xmath - @xmath game, for @xmath prime or
a power of a prime, obeys

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Proof.

The proof follows from a direct calculation of @xmath with the partition
@xmath . The game matrices associated to partition @xmath are the
following:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

By making use of the characters relations, Eq. ( 6.2 ), we have

  -- -- -- -- --------
              (7.25)
  -- -- -- -- --------

where in the second step we have used the fact that @xmath . Therefore,
@xmath for all @xmath . Finally, by applying Theorem 7.2.2 we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

∎

Interestingly these bounds are independent of the number of parties
showing that by increasing the number of players the performance is
still limited. Note that in order to derive Theorem 7.3.1 we have used
@xmath . For the 3-player case all the other possible partitions of the
players would lead to the same result since the winning condition of the
game, Eq. ( 7.19 ), is invariant under the permutation of parties.
However for games with @xmath players it is possible that exploring
partitions with more players @xmath can lead to a better bound.

#### 7.4 No quantum realization of non-trivial multiparty functional
boxes

In Ref. [ vanDam ] it was shown that the possibility of existence of
strong correlations known as PR-boxes [ prbox ] would lead to the
trivialization of communication complexity. As Alice and Bob would be
able to compute any distributed Boolean function with only one bit of
communication, by sharing a sufficient number of PR-boxes. Therefore,
the belief that communication complexity is not trivial ( i.e. , some
distributed functions require more than one bit of communication in
order to be computed) is viewed as a principle that should be respected
by nature.

As we discussed in Section 6.3 , this result was later generalized [ PRd
] to the so-called functional boxes, i.e. a @xmath -output
generalization of PR-boxes for @xmath in @xmath arithmetic, with d prime
and @xmath any non-additively separable function ( i.e. @xmath ). Any
functional box which cannot be simulated classically would also lead to
trivialization of communication complexity [ PRd ] . Furthermore, a
generalization to multiparty communication complexity scenarios for
binary outcome was considered in Ref. [ BP05 ] . In the multipartite
problem, @xmath parties are each given an input @xmath and must compute
a function @xmath of their joint inputs with as little communication as
possible. If the parties share a sufficient number of boxes with
input-output relation satisfying @xmath , then any @xmath -party
communication complexity problem can be solved with only @xmath bits of
communication (from @xmath parties to the first party who then computes
the function) [ BP05 ] .

In Appendix D , we analyze the task of computing a multipartite function
with @xmath possible values, and show that multipartite functional boxes
associated to non-trivial xor - @xmath games with uniformly distributed
inputs, for @xmath prime, lead to a trivialization of communication
complexity in this scenario. Here we use Theorem 7.2.2 to show that an
@xmath -party functional box which maximally saturates these games
cannot be realized in quantum theory.

###### Theorem 7.4.1.

For an @xmath -player xor - @xmath game @xmath , with @xmath questions
per player and uniform input distribution @xmath , @xmath iff @xmath .

###### Proof.

We start by proving the result for 3 players. We first chose the
partition @xmath to write the game matrices.

The constraint that the input distribution is @xmath for all @xmath
implies @xmath since @xmath is an @xmath matrix with the absolute value
of all elements @xmath (and then @xmath ). For the particular case of
3-player xor - @xmath games, the bound ( 7.10 ) is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

So we see that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let @xmath be the eigenvector corresponding to the maximum eigenvalue
@xmath of @xmath . Consider @xmath and assume @xmath . Then we have

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath               (7.30)
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (7.31)
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

By analyzing the first component of the eigenvalue equation @xmath we
have

  -- -- -------- -- --------
        @xmath      (7.32)
  -- -- -------- -- --------

In order to satisfy this equation we need to have

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (7.33a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (7.33b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

The equations for the other components of the eigenvalue equation imply:

  ------------------------------------------ -------- -- ---------
                                                         
                                             @xmath      (7.34a)
  where the operations are modulo @xmath .               
  ------------------------------------------ -------- -- ---------

We can do the same argument for the other partitions, @xmath and @xmath
, and the hypothesis of @xmath implies that @xmath for all @xmath , and

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (7.34b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (7.34c)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

By the relations ( 7.34a ), ( 7.34b ) and ( 7.34c ) we deduce that

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (7.35)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Now, consider @xmath such that @xmath , the classical strategy

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (7.36)
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

wins the game with probability 1.

The proof for an @xmath -player game follows in the same way.
Considering the partition @xmath . The constraint of equally distributed
inputs implies @xmath is an @xmath matrix with the absolute value of all
elements equal to @xmath (and then @xmath ). Now considering the bound

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

we see that @xmath requires @xmath for all @xmath .

Following the same argument as for the 3-player game, we conclude that
in order to satisfy @xmath all the rows of the game matrix have to be
proportional to each other and then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

Running the analysis over the partitions @xmath for @xmath we can
specify a classical strategy, given by @xmath , that wins the game with
probability 1. ∎

Note that the no-signaling boxes that win some of these @xmath -player
xor - @xmath games with probability one correspond to nontrivial
functional boxes, hence our bound excludes the possibility of quantum
realization of functional boxes that trivialize communication complexity
in the multiparty scenario.

#### 7.5 Device independent witnesses of genuine tripartite entanglement

We now present a systematic way to derive device-independent witnesses
for genuine tripartite entanglement.

The characterization of entanglement is a very challenging task (see
Appendix A.2 ). For bipartite systems, positive maps which are not
completely positive constitute a powerful tool for generating simple
operational criteria for detecting entanglement in mixed states [
HorodeckiCPmaps ] . The most celebrated example is the Peres-Horodecki
criterion [ PeresPPT ] (Proposition A.2.2 ), also known as PPT
criterion. The characterization of multipartite entanglement, however,
is much more challenging since inequivalent forms of entanglement
appear. When we are considering correlations among many parties it can
happen that all of the parties share quantum correlations, in which case
we say that we have genuine multipartite entanglement , or it can be the
case that the state is composed by quantum correlations only between
subsets of the parties, in which case the state of the system is said to
be biseparable ³ ³ 3 This concept can be refined to many levels which is
denoted @xmath -separability. An @xmath -partite state is @xmath
-separable (see [ ksep ] for more detailed definition) if it can be
write as a convex combination of states that are products of @xmath
subspaces:

@xmath

where @xmath . An @xmath -partite state is separable if it is @xmath
-separable. . Formally, a biseparable state of three parties is a state
that can be decomposed into the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath . If a tripartite quantum state cannot be written
as Eq. ( 7.39 ), it is said to be genuinely tripartite entangled.

For the detection of genuine multipartite entanglement there is no known
direct criteria like the PPT-criterion. For this reason, the development
of device-independent entanglement witnesses (DIEW) for genuine
multipartite entanglement brings together with all the advantage of
distinguishing the type of entanglement in a multipartite system, the
possibility of performing this task in a scenario where we do not have
full trust in our devices, which is of extreme importance for
cryptographic tasks.

Device independent witnesses of genuine multipartite entanglement were
introduced in Ref. [ DIEW ] . The idea of a DIEW for genuine
multipartite entanglement is to find the maximal value that a
biseparable quantum state (Eq. ( 7.39 ) for 3 parties) can achieve in a
Bell expression (which in general is in between the classical and the
quantum value of this expression). Therefore, in a Bell experiment, if a
quantum state overtakes the biseparable bound we can assert that this
state is genuinely multipartite entangled.

It is important to note that a DIEW is a weaker condition than the
Svetilichny inequalities [ Svetlichny ] . Svetlichny inequalities were
introduced in multipartite Bell scenarios in order to detect the
existence of genuine multipartite nonlocality (see Section 1.5 ). The
violation of a Svetlichny inequality guarantees that even if some
parties are allowed to perform a joint strategy (which includes a global
quantum measurement in their systems) they are not able to simulate the
exhibited multipartite correlations. The violation of a DIEW guarantees
that the parties share a genuinely multipartite entangled state but not
necessarily that they are able to exhibit genuine multipartite
nonlocality.

Concerning previous works in the subject of DIEWs of genuine
multipartite entanglement: A tripartite 3-input 2-output inequality
which is able to detect genuine tripartite entanglement in a noisy
three-qubit GHZ state, @xmath , for parameter @xmath , was presented in
Ref. [ DIEW ] . This result was later [ DIEWPalVertesi ] generalized for
multisetting Bell inequalities that in the limit of infinitely many
inputs are able to detect genuine tripartite entanglement for @xmath
with parameter as low as @xmath , which is the limiting value for which
there exist a local model for the noisy GHZ state for full-correlation
Bell inequalities [ DIEWPalVertesi , DIEW ] . Other examples of DIEWs
with binary outcomes can be found in Ref. [ egDIEW ] .

Let us consider that Alice, Bob, and Charlie are playing a 3-player
linear game, @xmath , and they have access to the shared biseparable
quantum state:

  -- -- -- --------
           (7.40)
  -- -- -- --------

In that case Alice and Bob can take advantage of a quantum strategy
using their shared entangled state @xmath . However, the best Charlie
can do is to apply a classical (deterministic) strategy, since he shares
no resources with Alice and Bob. For this case, their probability of
success will be given by

  -- -- -- --------
           (7.41)
  -- -- -- --------

where @xmath represents the deterministic strategy performed by Charlie,
where upon receiving input @xmath he outputs @xmath .

Now we have essentially a bipartite expression to evaluate, and by
making use of the theorem 6.2.1 we can bound the performance of the
players sharing a state biseparable with respect to the partition @xmath
. We denote by @xmath the maximum value the players can achieve in the
game @xmath when they share a state of the form ( 7.40 ):

  -- -- -- --------
           (7.42)
  -- -- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us denote by @xmath the maximum probability of success in the game
@xmath that can be achieved with a biseparable state. In Eq. ( 7.42 ) we
have derived an upper bound for @xmath , which is the performance when
the players share a quantum state biseparable with respect to the
partition @xmath . In the case of Bell expressions which are invariant
under the permutation of the parties, it is sufficient to consider Eq. (
7.42 ) in order to bound @xmath . For general Bell inequalities, an
upper bound on the biseparable bound, that holds for any state of the
form given by Eq. ( 7.39 ), can be obtained by taking the maximum over
all bipartitions, since

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath .

In general we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

and then, for games where the strict relation @xmath holds, by violating
the biseparable bound @xmath we can certify in a device-independent way
that Alice, Bob and Charlie share a genuine tripartite entangled quantum
state.

By using our norm bounds, Eq. ( 7.42 ), we have a simple way to upper
bound the biseparable value of a Bell expression. Hence, our techniques
of bounding the quantum value of linear games open the possibility of
exploring higher dimensional device-independent witnesses of genuine
tripartite entanglement.

We now exemplify the method by deriving a DIEW from a 3-input 3-output
tripartite Bell expression.

##### Example:

Inspired by the Mermin’s inequality [ Mermin ] for the GHZ paradox, we
consider the following game that we denote @xmath : A referee picks
questions @xmath with the promise that @xmath . The players are supposed
to give answers @xmath in order to satisfy

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the operations @xmath , @xmath are sum and multiplication modulo
3.

Substituting the winning condition of the game, Eq. ( 7.46 ), into Eq. (
7.42 ) (note that the constraints of the game are invariant under the
permutation of the parties), allows us to derive

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

with RHS approximated up to the third decimal.

On the other hand, the @xmath state defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

can win the game @xmath with probability @xmath .

Consequently, we have a device-independent witness of genuine tripartite
entanglement: @xmath .

The explicit measurements that lead the @xmath to reach value one in the
@xmath game are presented in Appendix E . However, an important property
of these measurements is that they define traceless ‘observables’ (by
the relation @xmath ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, we can easily calculate the success probability one can
achieve with a noisy @xmath state

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

when these measurements are performed:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
                          
              @xmath      (7.51)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Hence, by using the optimal measurements for the @xmath state we are
able to witness genuine multipartite entanglement on noisy @xmath state
for parameter @xmath .

This example also stresses the difference between genuine multipartite
entanglement and genuine multipartite nonlocality. Since the Svetlichny
bound [ Svetlichny ] for this game is @xmath , it cannot be used as a
witness of genuine tripartite nonlocality, despite being a good witness
for genuine tripartite entanglement.

The 3-input 2-output witness presented in Ref. [ DIEW ] can detect
genuine multipartite entanglement in @xmath for @xmath , however the
two-outcome DIEW involves the calculation of 18 expected values whereas
for the @xmath game, only 9 expected values are involved.

#### 7.6 Discussion and open problems

In this Chapter we have extended the bound presented in Chapter 6 to
@xmath -player linear games. As for the bipartite case, the bound
derived for multiplayer games is not tight in general, nevertheless we
could apply it to derive non-trivial results. It would be interesting to
characterize the classes of linear games for which the norm bound is
tight. This could lead us to understand a bit more about the structure
of the set of quantum correlations. In addition, the characterization of
multiplayer games with no quantum advantage is interesting to highlight
the limitations of quantum theory in the multipartite scenario. For
multipartite Bell scenarios it is known that the quantum set of
correlations contains facets [ GYNI ] , it would be interesting to
investigate if a multiplayer linear game can constitute a facet of the
quantum set.

By using Theorem 7.2.2 , we have proved upper bounds to the quantum
value of a multipartite generalization of the CHSH- @xmath game, for any
number of players. Also, we have shown that boxes that trivialize
communication complexity in the multipartite scenario cannot be realized
in quantum theory. An important question for further investigation would
be to analyze the relation between the bounds on linear games (bipartite
and multipartite) we presented here and the communication complexity of
the associated functions.

Finally, we have presented a systematic way to derive device independent
witnesses of genuine tripartite entanglement. The method is very general
and can be applied to any tripartite linear game in order to derive a
DIEW of genuine tripartite entanglement with many inputs and outputs. We
exhibited an example were a DIEW involving only @xmath expected values
is able to detect genuine tripartite entanglement in a noisy @xmath
state. It remains an open point whether these DIEWs with @xmath outcomes
are optimal in terms of the number of inputs to detect genuine
tripartite entanglement of @xmath -dimensional systems. The search for
optimal witnesses with few inputs per player can lead to feasible
applications and experiments.

It is important to stress that the bound derived in Theorem 7.2.2
involves the norm of matrices, which is an object with an intrinsic
bipartite structure. A possible future direction would be to explore the
use of tensors, which have a natural multipartite structure, in order to
describe the games.

### Final remarks

In this Thesis we have studied nonlocality focusing on the quantum value
of a Bell expression. In particular, we took the approach of stressing
how difficult is the problem of determining the quantum value of a Bell
expression by situating it in the framework of computational complexity.
In this framework, the main result of this Thesis can be summarized as:
efficiently computable upper bounds to the quantum value of linear games
(a particular class of Bell inequalities).

Those bounds are based on the spectral norm of some matrices associated
to the games. The major advantage of our bounds is that they are easy to
compute analytically for games with a small number of inputs and they
can be implemented numerically by efficient algorithms. The drawback,
however, is that the bounds are not tight in general and the quality of
approximation is not known. Besides that, we could explore the bounds
deriving several non-trivial results.

For the case of xor games, the SDP characterization of the quantum
value, due to Tsirelson’s theorem, allowed us to derive necessary and
sufficient conditions for a game to have no quantum advantage. This led
to the characterization of a new family of graphs for which the Shannon
capacity is equal to the independence number.

Concerning linear games with more outputs we could easily re-derive a
recently discovered upper bound to the quantum value of the CHSH- @xmath
game, and we also extended it to the case of @xmath players, the CHSH
@xmath - @xmath game. Also, we have shown that the norm bounds can
exclude the existence of some boxes that would lead to trivialization of
communication complexity in the bipartite and the multipartite case.

Furthermore, we defined an extension of the no-advantage for nonlocal
computation principle, introduced in Ref. [ NLC ] , to functions with
@xmath prime possible values. And finally, as the main outcome of
exploring the norm bounds in the multipartite scenario, we presented a
systematic way of deriving device-independent witnesses of genuine
multipartite entanglement for tripartite systems.

In conclusion, we had a glance in the intricacy of quantum nonlocality
by phrasing the problem of finding the maximal quantum violation of a
Bell inequality in the framework of computational complexity. At the end
of the day, I hope I have convinced the reader that finding simple
bounds to this problem is a good game to play, or, at least, I hope the
reader enjoyed it!

## Appendix

### Appendix A Quantum Mechanics

In this Appendix we give an overview of Quantum theory, introducing the
main concepts and properties discussed along the text. For an excellent
introduction to the quantum theory formalism with an information
theoretic approach the reader is referred to the book of Nielsen and
Chuang [ N&C ] .

#### a.1 A few concepts and definitions

In the study of nonlocality we usually adopt a minimalistic view of
quantum theory: We do not exploit particular interactions among systems,
or how is the dynamics of the systems and so on, other than that, we
only capture the fundamental features and consequences of the
mathematical formulation of quantum theory.

##### a.1.1 Concepts and axioms

Every quantum system has an associated complex Hilbert space @xmath (
i.e. a complete vector space with inner product). The system is
mathematically described by a quantum state , which is an operator
acting on @xmath . The quantum state contains all the information
necessary to predict the statistics of the results of measurements
performed in the system.

###### Definition A.1.1.a (Quantum state).

A quantum state (also called density operator) is an operator @xmath
with the following properties:

1.  @xmath ,

2.  @xmath .

We denote the set of positive trace-1 operators acting on @xmath by
@xmath .

A very important particular case of quantum states are the pure states .

###### Definition A.1.1.b (Pure state).

A pure state is a quantum state of rank 1, which means that they are
one-dimensional projections ¹ ¹ 1 Note that the two vectors @xmath and
@xmath give rise to the same density operator, therefore pure quantum
states are defined up to a global phase. , @xmath . A pure state can be
represented by a vector @xmath .

If a state is not pure we call it a mixed state .

Given that we know the quantum state of a physical system, quantum
theory tells us how to predict the statistics of results of any
experiment performed in the system. An experiment is a question that we
are asking about our system and each experiment has its set of expected
outcomes ( e.g. when tossing a coin we have two possible outcomes: head
or tail). In the quantum theory formalism, the experiments are described
as following:

###### Definition A.1.2.a (Quantum measurements).

A quantum measurement is described by a ‘Positive Operator-Valued
Measure’ POVM, i.e. a set of @xmath operators acting on @xmath , @xmath
such that

1.  @xmath ,

2.  @xmath ,

The @xmath ’s are denoted elements of POVM and @xmath is the number of
possible outcomes of the measurement.

A particular case of POVM are the Projective measurements .

###### Definition A.1.2.b (Projective measurements).

A projective measurement is the particular case of measurements where
the all the POVM elements, @xmath , are orthogonal projectors i.e.

1.  @xmath ,

2.  @xmath .

The recipe for obtaining the probabilities of outcomes of experiments
given these mathematical objects is state by Born’s rule, introduced by
Max Born in [ Bornrule ] .

###### Definition A.1.3 (Born rule).

If an @xmath -outcome measurement, described by the POVM set @xmath , is
performed in a system described by a quantum state @xmath , then the
probability of obtaining the outcome @xmath is given by

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------- -- --------
                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                    @xmath      (A.1a)
  And for the particular case of projective measurement @xmath in a pure state @xmath the probability of obtaining the outcome @xmath is given by               
                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                    @xmath      (A.1b)
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------- -- --------

##### a.1.2 Composite systems

When dealing with more than one system, or systems with many degrees of
freedom, we have to establish a way to describe these systems in the
formalism of quantum theory.

Given two single systems, @xmath and @xmath , with respective associated
Hilbert spaces @xmath and @xmath , the composite system @xmath has an
associated Hilbert space:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now, a very interesting phenomenon arises from this mathematical
structure: the quantum states associated with system @xmath are still
described by Definition A.1.1 and hence every positive operator of trace
one acting on @xmath is an allowed quantum state. But not all quantum
states of @xmath have the product structure:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and hence we have a rich structure arising from multipartite systems.

A quantum state of a bipartite system @xmath is a separable state if it
can be approximated by a state of the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a probability distribution, and @xmath , @xmath are
quantum states of single systems. Formally:

###### Definition A.1.4 (Separable states).

A quantum state @xmath is separable if for every @xmath , there exist
@xmath such that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the trace norm.

Given a system with Hilbert space @xmath , the set of all separable
states is denoted @xmath , and it is a closed convex set. For finite
dimensional systems, @xmath , Carathéodory’s theorem guarantees that
every separable state can be written as a convex combination of at most
@xmath pure separable states ( i.e. states of the form @xmath ), and
therefore every finite dimensional separable state has the for of Eq. (
A.3 ).

If a quantum state is not separable, i.e. if it cannot be approximated
by a separable decomposition ( A.4 ), it is called an entangled state .
Entanglement is in the core of the novelties brought by quantum theory.
It gives rise to totally new phenomena with no classical analogue. As a
remarkable example: the existence of entangled states gives rise to the
quantum nonlocality.

##### Reduced state

When in possession of a multipartite system we might be interested in
describing only part of it (or only few degrees of freedom). For that
task we have the concept of reduced state .

###### Definition A.1.5 (Reduced state).

Given a bipartite system in state @xmath , the reduced state of system
@xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

and analogously for the reduced state of system @xmath . @xmath denotes
partial trace ² ² 2 The partial trace is a linear map, @xmath , defined
by

@xmath

and extended by linearity. with respect to subsystem @xmath . @xmath is
a positive operator with trace one acting on @xmath , and hence is a
quantum state of system @xmath .

The reduced state is the best description we can give for a subsystem,
in case we ignore completely what is happening with the other
subsystems. It is sufficient to describe the statistics of all local
measurements (measurements performed only in the subsystem). If we have
a composite system @xmath and we want to perform a POVM @xmath in the
system @xmath , this is equivalent to performing the measurement @xmath
in the system @xmath , and the probability of getting an outcome @xmath
is given by

  -- -- -- -------
           (A.6)
  -- -- -- -------

A very interesting fact is that the complete knowledge of the state of
the parties do not allow us to recover the global state of the system,
as in general

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

For a separable state of the form @xmath we have that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

but the reduced state ( A.8 ) does not uniquely recover the global state
@xmath , and it could even correspond to the reduced state of a global
entangled state.

#### a.2 Entanglement theory

We have presented the definition of an entangled state as the one which
is not separable. However given a quantum state, checking whether or not
it satisfies Eq. ( A.4 ) is not an easy problem. In this section we
briefly discuss entanglement detection and quantification.

##### a.2.1 Entanglement criteria

In general, given a finite dimensional quantum state, it is hard to
conclude whether or not it can be written as Eq. ( A.3 ). For pure
states, however, the situation is much simpler, and we just have to look
at the rank of the reduced state.

###### Proposition A.2.1.

A pure state @xmath is separable iff @xmath .

Proposition A.2.1 follows from the fact that @xmath is a @xmath one
operator, and if it is separable it has to be written as the tensor
product of @xmath one operators in @xmath and @xmath .

For mixed states the situation is way harder, since a reduced state with
@xmath greater than one leads us to no conclusion. Nevertheless it is
possible to derive simple criteria that gives sufficient conditions for
a state to be entangled. One of the most remarkable of these criteria
was introduced by Peres in Ref. [ PeresPPT ] . Let us consider the
partial transposition map, which is a linear map

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.9)
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath denotes the partial transposition of state @xmath . The
action of @xmath is to transpose the matrix @xmath with respect to
subsystem @xmath ( @xmath and extended by linearity).

Let us look at the application of this map to a separable state ( A.3 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes transposition. Since transposition is a trace
preserve positive map we have that @xmath are quantum states, hence
@xmath is also a quantum state ( i.e. it is a positive operator with
trace one).

So we have seen that the application of the partial transposition map
into a separable state results in a positive operator. But that is not
true for every quantum state! Let us consider the maximally entangled
2-qubit state @xmath , @xmath . A direct calculation shows that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

And we have just demonstrated our first entanglement criteria:

###### Proposition A.2.2 (The PPT criteria).

If @xmath then @xmath is entangled.

In Ref. [ HorodeckiCPmaps ] the Horodeccy showed that the PPT criteria
(also know as Peres-Horodecki criteria) is a necessary and sufficient
condition for systems with Hilbert space @xmath or @xmath , but only a
sufficient condition for higher dimensional systems.

An interesting feature of the transposition is that it is a positive map
that is not completely positive ³ ³ 3 A completely positive map is a
positive map @xmath such that any trivial extension @xmath is also a
positive map. . In Ref. [ HorodeckiCPmaps ] it was shown that this is
the main property that leads to an entanglement criteria. The same
argument as above, applied to a generic map, implies that every
separable state should remain positive under the application of a
generic positive but not completely positive linear map. Hence each
non-completely positive map can give rise to an entanglement criteria (a
sufficient condition for a state to be entangled). But the breakthrough
of Ref. [ HorodeckiCPmaps ] comes with the proof that actually the
formalism of positive but not completely positive maps can fully
characterize the set of bipartite entangled states.

###### Theorem A.2.1 ([HorodeckiCPmaps]).

A quantum state @xmath is separable iff

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

for any positive map @xmath .

##### a.2.2 Entanglement quantification

Let us start by the two most common operational ways to quantify
entanglement: distillable entanglement , @xmath , and entanglement cost
, @xmath . In the operational paradigm the unit of bipartite
entanglement is the maximally entangled two qubit state, @xmath . And
the operations that are considered free are the local operations and
classical communication (LOCC). Hence the @xmath and @xmath are defined
in terms of how many resources, @xmath states, one need or one can
obtain out of a state @xmath , when only LOCC operations are applied.

The paradigm of LOCC as free operations in entanglement theory is
justified by the fact that entanglement cannot be created if only local
operations and classical communication are available. LOCC operations
can only generate a separable states ( A.4 ). Conversely, any separable
state can be created using LOCC.

Let us represent a general protocol ( i.e. a set of maps/operations that
take quantum states into quantum states) by @xmath .

###### Definition A.2.1 (Distillable entanglement).

A distillation protocol is an LOCC map that takes a certain number
@xmath of copies of a state @xmath and turn it into another number,
@xmath , of copies of @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath means that the states are asymptotically close in trace
distance:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

The distillable entanglement is defined as the best rate at which one
can distil singlets out of the state @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

In a similar way we have the cost of entanglement.

###### Definition A.2.2 (Entanglement cost).

A creation protocol is a map that takes a certain number @xmath of
copies of the singlet state @xmath and turn in into @xmath copies of the
state @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath means that the states are asymptotically close in trace
distance:

  -- -- -- --------
           (A.17)
  -- -- -- --------

The entanglement cost is defined as the best rate at which one can
generate the state @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

In general @xmath , with equality carrying a meaning of reversibility.
For pure states @xmath , but for mixed states the strict relation can
hold @xmath . The entanglement cost is always strictly positive for an
entangled state, however the distillable entanglement can be zero even
though the state is entangled. There exist entangled states which cannot
be distillable [ PPTbound ] , these are called bound entangled states.
In particular it is known that states which do not violate the PPT
criteria (Proposition A.2.2 ), i.e. states which are positive under
partial transposition (that we call PPT states), cannot be distilled [
PPTbound ] . Whether these are the only non-distillable states, or if
there exists NPT states (states which are not positive under partial
transposition) for which @xmath , is one of the big open problems in
quantum information theory.

##### a.2.3 Multipartite entanglement

Multipartite systems have a much richer structure them the bipartite
ones. Already in the tripartite case we have example of two inequivalent
maximally entangled states. The states:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.19)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.20)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

cannot be taken one into the other by any SLOCC protocol ( i.e. an LOCC
protocol that has a probability of success) [ WGHZ ] , whereas in the
bipartite case, all the maximally entangled states are equivalent.

The generalization of separability for multipartite systems is
straightforward. A finite dimensional ⁴ ⁴ 4 Separability of infinite
dimensional systems are defined analogously to Eq. ( A.4 ). @xmath
-partite state is separable if it can be written as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

But when it concerns entanglement in a multipartite system the situation
is not so simple. It can be the case that all the parties share quantum
correlations, in which case the state is said to be genuinely
multipartite entangled (GME), or else, we can have a combination of
states where only subsets of the parties share entanglement, which is
called a biseparable state .

###### Definition A.2.3 (Biseparable state).

Let @xmath . An @xmath -partite state @xmath is biseparable if it can be
decomposed into the form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath is the complement of @xmath .

A state which is not biseparable is genuinely multipartite entangled.
One can also define intermediate classes between biseparable and fully
separable states, which are basically characterized by the number of
subsystems that share entanglement.

In the tripartite case we have three possible bipartitions of the set of
parties: @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , and a general biseparable state is
written as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order to explore a multipartite scenario in its full extent, one is
usually interested in having a GME state. Detection of genuine
multipartite entanglement is a fruitful area of research, but, for this
task, there is no such direct criteria like the PPT-criteria. A
connexion between positive maps and witnesses of genuine multipartite
entanglement was established in Ref. [ gmePositMaps ] . There, a
framework to construct witnesses of genuine multipartite entanglement
from positive maps was derived. Other criteria to detect genuine
multipartite entanglement were proposed in Refs. [ Marcus1 , Marcus2 ] .
And a device-independent witness of GME, based on Bell inequalities was
proposed in [ DIEW ] . A systematic method to derive device-independent
witnesses of genuine tripartite entanglement was presented in Chapter 7
.

### Appendix B State dependent bounds

In this Appendix we briefly describe the main results of Ref. [
GMstatebound ] :

Bounds on quantum nonlocality via partial transposition K. Horodecki and
G. Murta Phys. Rev. A, 92, 010301, (2015) .

The quantitative study of quantum nonlocality has two opposite
approaches: One is to ask, for a fixed Bell scenario, what is the
highest violation one can obtain optimizing over all possible quantum
resources (states and measurements); Another is to fix the quantum
state, or a class of states, and ask what is the best one can achieve
using this state as a nonlocal resource, i.e. optimizing over all Bell
scenarios. In this thesis we have focused on the first approach,
deriving bounds on the quantum value of a particular classes of Bell
inequalities: the linear games. In Ref. [ GMstatebound ] we have taken
the opposite direction and asked ‘How much nonlocality one can extract
from a particular quantum state?’ .

#### b.1 Bound on single copy nonlocality

In this section we consider a standard Bell scenario where Alice and Bob
share a single copy of a quantum state @xmath and perform local
measurements on it, and we want to bound, for an arbitrary Bell
inequality, the violation Alice and Bob can achieve by using @xmath .

Some previous results in this direction include the seminal work of
Werner [ Werner ] showing that some entangled quantum states cannot
violate any Bell inequality ¹ ¹ 1 The result of Werner [ Werner ]
concerns only projective measurements. It was extended for POVMs in Ref.
[ Barrett ] . . Another general result shows that typically the
violation of correlation Bell inequalities by multipartite qudit states
is very small [ Drumond2012 ] . And also an hierarchy of semidefinite
programs that allows one to bound the violation achievable by a PPT
state was developed in Ref. [ hierarchyPPT ] .

Our goal is to derive a state dependent bound for the violation of a
particular Bell inequality. In order to achieve this goal, we explore
the link between two concepts: the level of violation of a Bell
inequality by a quantum state and discrimination between two states by
means of a restricted classes of operations. Note that since only
entangled quantum states can exhibit nonlocality, Bell inequalities can
be viewed as particular cases of entanglement witnesses [
Hyllus-Bell-wit , Terhal-Bell-wit ] . Moreover, the test of a Bell
inequality can be seen as the application of a separable operator to the
quantum state. Therefore, we can say that a Bell inequality is an
entanglement witness which only involves a restricted class of
operations, the separable ones.

###### Definition B.1.1.

A separable operation is a quantum operation that can be written in the
form:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

The class of separable operations includes the LOCC operations, and they
are a subset of a larger class called @xmath operations.

###### Definition B.1.2.

A PPT operation is a quantum operation that can be written in the form:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is easier to impose the constraint that an operator is PPT compared
to imposing separability. For this reason, PPT operations are used many
times to upper bound results concerning separable and LOCC operations [
Duan-discrim ] .

The first surprising result concerning distinguishability of quantum
states by a restricted class of operations was obtained in Ref. [
Bennett-nlwe ] , where the authors showed the existence of a set of
separable orthogonal states which cannot be perfectly distinguishable by
any sequence of LOCC operations. Later, it was shown that there exist
pairs of states which are hardly distinguishable from each other by
means of LOCC, although being almost orthogonal. This gave rise to the
quantum data hiding , which is the task of hiding classical bits in a
quantum state [ hiding-prl , hiding-ieee , WernerHide ] . In Ref. [
karol-PhD ] it is shown that there exist even entangled states
containing a bit of private key, which are almost indistinguishable by
LOCC operations from some separable (insecure) states. This fact has
been shown recently to rule them out as a potential resource for
swapping of a private key, in the so called quantum key repeaters [
BCHW-swapping ] .

Given a Bell expression @xmath , we denote by @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
respectively the classical, quantum and no-signaling value of this
expression. For a particular bipartite state @xmath and local POVMs
@xmath and @xmath , we represent the corresponding box by @xmath . The
value of the Bell expression @xmath for these particular POVMs and state
is denoted

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

is the Bell operator for POVMs @xmath and @xmath . Note that the Bell
operator @xmath is a separable operator (Definition B.1.1 ), so,
intuitively, we expect that if a given state is hardly distinguishable
from some separable one by means of separable operations, it cannot
exhibit large violation in any Bell scenario, or else, one could use the
procedure of checking the violation of a Bell inequality to discriminate
between these two states. We now make this idea quantitative and state
our first result, relating the value of a Bell expression on two
bipartite states to the their distinguishability by means of @xmath
operations.

###### Lemma B.1.1.

Given two states @xmath , a Bell expression @xmath and a set of POVMs
@xmath , it holds that:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath denotes the trace norm, @xmath is the largest eigenvalue in
modulus of operator @xmath (which is equivalent to the spectral norm),
and @xmath denotes partial transposition.

Note that @xmath is also a Bell operator, since partial transposition
maps the POVMs @xmath into another set of allowed measurements @xmath ,
and @xmath is nothing but the largest quantum value of the Bell
expression @xmath given the particular measurements @xmath . The second
term on the RHS represents the distinguishability of these two states by
means of PPT operations. Calculating distinguishability by separable
operations is a hard problem since there is no simple description for
the set of separable operations. A relaxation of this problem is to
consider the set of PPT operations which is much simpler to characterize
[ RainsPPToperations ] . A weaker form of Lemma B.1.1 , concerning
distinguishability under general measurements, was similarly derived in
Ref. [ BrunnerVertesiTh1 ] .

###### Proof.

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.6)
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

In the first and second equality we used the linearity of the trace,
then the identity @xmath . In the fourth step we used the triangle
inequality, and the last step follows from Hölder’s inequality for
@xmath norms, which states that @xmath . ∎

As we have discussed in Chapter 1 , separable states can only generate
local boxes. Therefore, we have that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Given this observation, we can derive the main result of this Section.

###### Theorem B.1.1.

For any bipartite Bell expression @xmath , and state @xmath , it holds
that:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

with supremum taken over all POVMs @xmath and @xmath .

###### Proof.

By substituting any separable state @xmath in Lemma B.1.1 , and using
the fact that @xmath we have:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now taking supremum over POVMs @xmath , @xmath on both sides, and
infimum over all separable states @xmath , we have the desired result .
Note that @xmath , and that @xmath is upper bounded by @xmath . ∎

Theorem B.1.1 shows that, given a Bell inequality @xmath , the best
violation one can achieve with a particular quantum state @xmath cannot
outperform the classical bound by the quantum value of the Bell
inequality shrunk by a factor reporting the distinguishability of state
@xmath from the set of separable states by means of @xmath operations.
Since the bound ( B.8 ) only depends on the distance to the set of
separable states, every state which is distinguishable from a separable
state by the same content @xmath will exhibit the same limitations in a
Bell scenario. Hence we can define the sets

  -- -- -- --------
           (B.11)
  -- -- -- --------

Observe that @xmath is a convex set, which includes the set of separable
states @xmath for any @xmath . Due to Theorem B.1.1 , we have the
following dependence (see Fig. B.1 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### b.2 Bound on the asymptotic scenario

In the previous section we have considered the standard Bell scenario,
where a single copy of a bipartite state is shared between Alice and
Bob. However, if the state @xmath is distillable, as it was noted by
Peres [ Peres1996 ] , a pre-processing of many copies of a state by
LOCC, before the Bell test, could lead to the violation of a Bell
inequality, even for states that have local model in the standard
scenario. Here we quantify the asymptotic nonlocality by defining the
asymptotic relative entropy of nonlocality and applying methods of Ref.
[ BCHW-swapping ] to bound it. In the first step, we will bound this
quantity by a function of the relative entropy distance under
restrictive measurements introduced by Piani in Ref. [ Pianirelentropy ]
.

In Ref. [ vDamGrunwaldGill ] a nonlocality quantifier, based on the
relative entropy, was introduced. The relative entropy between two
probability distributions, @xmath and @xmath , is defined as @xmath .
The statistical strength of nonlocality defined in Ref. [
vDamGrunwaldGill ] captures quantitatively how “similar” a given
probability distribution is to a local one: Given a box @xmath , where
for fixed @xmath we have distribution @xmath , its nonlocality is
quantified by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where infimum in the above is taken over all local boxes, @xmath , for
the particular scenario and @xmath is the relative entropy.

Now, we are interested in quantifying how much nonlocality @xmath one
can obtain from @xmath copies of a given state @xmath , per number of
copies, in the asymptotic limit, after processing it by LOCC. For that
we introduce the asymptotic relative entropy of nonlocality .

###### Definition B.2.1.

For a bipartite state @xmath its asymptotic relative entropy of
nonlocality, @xmath , is given by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the supremum limit, and @xmath denote local POVMs @xmath
.

The asymptotic relative entropy of nonlocality captures the idea of an
optimization over all Bell scenarios after a pre-processing of many
copies of a quantum state @xmath by LOCC operations.

We want to set bounds for the nonlocality attainable in the asymptotic
scenario. In order to state the bound, we will need a well known
entanglement measure called relative entropy of entanglement [ DefER ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the quantum relative entropy.

Now we are ready to state the main result of this Section.

###### Theorem B.2.1.

For any bipartite state it holds that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

For @xmath a PPT state, it holds that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

The upper bound @xmath gives meaningful results only when the state is
close to separable states under global operations. More important is the
second bound, which can give meaningful results even for some states
which are highly distinguishable from separable states by global
operations, but cannot be distinguished if only PPT operations are
allowed. We refer the reader to Ref. [ GMstatebound ] for the proof of
Theorem B.2.1 .

We can also extend Theorem B.2.1 to asymptotic scenarios where the
parties can perform a ‘filtering’ operation (a non-trace-preserving map)
before the Bell test: the so called hidden nonlocality scenario,
introduced by Popescu in Ref. [ hiddenPopescu ] . Popescu showed that by
performing a ‘filtering’ operation it is possible to obtain a much
larger violation of a Bell inequality on the resulting state. However,
we note that, in order to quantify nonlocality in this scenario, it is
important to take into account the probability of obtaining the
‘filtered’ result. For this reason, we propose to consider the
asymptotic relative entropy of hidden-nonlocality , @xmath , defined as
follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Where we can see a filtering process @xmath as an operation that takes
the state @xmath to a flag form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

and later erasures all other results except the “good” one, that leads
to the highest violation of the Bell inequality. The probability that
the filter results in the desired outcome is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can have the same bound for @xmath , as for @xmath .

###### Theorem B.2.2.

For any bipartite state @xmath it holds that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

For a bipartite PPT state @xmath it holds that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### b.3 Examples

In Ref. [ pptkey ] , it was shown that the general form of a quantum
state from which it is possible to extract one bit of classical private
key, a private bit , is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is an arbitrary operator with trace norm 1 acting on @xmath
. .

Consider a private state defined by @xmath being the (normalized) swap
operator. Then for the CHSH inequality we have the following bound [
karol-PhD ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

In [ PrivateNonlocality ] it was shown that all perfect private states
violate the CHSH inequality. With our techniques we can bound this
violation and also analyze PPT approximate private states.

Consider the following PPT approximate private state:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath and @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . By Theorem B.1.1 , we
have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

In Ref. [ pptkey ] , it was shown that there exists a family of states
invariant under partial transposition for which the distillable key can
be made arbitrarily close to one, @xmath . By applying Theorem B.1.1 to
this family of states we obtain the following proposition.

###### Proposition B.3.1.

There exist bipartite states @xmath with @xmath , @xmath satisfying
@xmath with increasing @xmath , such that:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

Proposition B.3.1 shows that for the class of states in consideration,
although the rate of distillable key can be made arbitrarily close to
one by increasing the dimension of the systems, the possibility of
violating any Bell inequality is bounded by an amount vanishing with the
dimension of the system. For a bipartite Bell inequality with @xmath
inputs and @xmath outputs it holds that @xmath , up to some universal
constant independent of the parameters of the scenario [ Palazuelos2011
] . Therefore, Theorem B.1.1 ensures that for any fixed Bell scenario,
as we wish to increase the key rate obtained from the exhibited family
of states, the possibility of observing a violation of a Bell inequality
vanishes.

An application of Theorems B.2.1 and B.2.2 follows from the fact that
the relative entropy of entanglement, @xmath , is asymptotically
continuous ² ² 2 A function @xmath is asymptotically continuous if

(B.27)

where @xmath is a constant and @xmath . [ Asympcontinuous ] . Generally,
for @xmath , and @xmath , we have:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence, if @xmath decreases with @xmath faster than @xmath , the
asymptotic relative entropy of nonlocality vanishes with increasing
dimension The family of states shown in Eq. ( B.24 ) have this property.

#### b.4 Discussion and open problems

We have presented bounds on the quantum nonlocality of a bipartite
state, both, in the single copy case, as well as in the asymptotic
scenarios. Although we use partial transposition techniques for
obtaining nontrivial results, our method is based on the concept of
state discrimination via a restricted classes of operations: the
separable ones.

As future directions exploring the bounds: For the single copy scenario,
instead of discrimination from separable states, a refinement would be
to consider the distance from states admitting a local hidden-variable
model, which could possibly lead to tighter bounds; For the asymptotic
scenarios, it would be interesting to find nontrivial upper bounds on
the asymptotic relative entropy of (hidden) nonlocality of NPT states.
Note that, for these states, we only have @xmath as an upper bound,
which is small only for the cases where the state is almost
indistinguishable from a separable state under global operations.

In Refs. [ HHHLO:unco-pbit , HLLO-PRL ] it was shown that one can launch
quantum key distribution (QKD) protocols based on shared private bits.
However, if we are interested in device-independent quantum key
distribution (DI QKD) protocols we need to have a violate of some Bell
inequality. A DI QKD protocol is based on some Bell inequality @xmath ,
and admits some level of violation, say @xmath , below which it aborts.
Now, due to Eqs. ( B.25 ) and ( B.26 ) there are (approximate) private
bits, which exhibit violation of inequality @xmath only up to @xmath ,
and hence will be aborted. This rules out such states from usage in this
particular DI QKD protocol. Moreover, every realization of a DI QKD has
inevitable errors. In such a case, the level of violation @xmath can be
even below the precision of the experiment. An interesting question for
further investigation is the difference in terms of key rates between
QKD and DI QKD protocols.

It is worth noting, that our results are strongly related to the so
called Peres conjecture [ Peres-conjecture ] , recently disproved in [
Vertesi-Brunner-disproving ] . Namely, we have asked a quantitative
rephrasing of the original question posed by Asher Peres: how much one
can violate a Bell inequality with PPT states? We have shown that, for
certain PPT states, the level of violation, both for single copy as well
as in terms of the relative entropy of (hidden) nonlocality in the
asymptotic cases, can be negligible. Notably, as we showed in the
examples, even some states containing privacy admit such limited
nonlocality content.

### Appendix C A group of facts about groups

In Chapters 6 and 7 we have discussed a class of games associated to
finite Abelian groups. Here we state some results and properties of
finite Abelian groups. For more details the reader in referred to the
book [ FourierTerras ] .

#### c.1 Some definitions

###### Definition C.1 (Group).

A group @xmath is a set of elements @xmath with the associated operation
@xmath satisfying

1.  @xmath , @xmath ,

2.  @xmath s.t. @xmath ,

3.  @xmath s.t. @xmath ,

4.   Associativity holds: @xmath

      -- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- --

###### Definition C.2 (Abelian group).

An Abelian group @xmath is a group with associated operation denoted by
@xmath that, additionally to properties @xmath - @xmath , also satisfies
commutativity:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

###### Definition C.3 (Cyclic group).

A group is called cyclic if it can be generated by a single element
@xmath , called the generator of the group.

A finite cyclic group is a group with the property that all the elements
can be obtained by starting with the generator @xmath and applying the
group operation to it many times, i.e. @xmath . This makes it clear that
all finite cyclic groups are Abelian groups.

###### Definition C.4 (Homomorphism).

An homomorphism of a group @xmath into a group @xmath is a function
@xmath such that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

A remarkable example of these concepts is given by the cyclic group
@xmath , for which:

-   @xmath .

-   The associated operation @xmath is the sum modulo @xmath .

-   The identity element is @xmath .

-   The inverse element of @xmath is @xmath .

-   @xmath is a generator ¹ ¹ 1 A cyclic group can have more than one
    generator. For example, for prime @xmath , every element of @xmath
    is a generator. for all @xmath .

-   An homomorphism from @xmath to the group @xmath of unitary complex
    numbers with the product operation is given by

      -- -- -- -------
               (C.3)
      -- -- -- -------

#### c.2 The characters of an Abelian group

###### Definition C.5.

A character @xmath of a finite Abelian group @xmath is a group
homomorphism from @xmath to the group @xmath of unitary complex numbers
with the product operation:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

By Definition C.5 we have that the characters of an Abelian group are
complex numbers satisfying the properties:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

For the cyclic group @xmath , the characters are the @xmath roots of
unit

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath .

A very interesting result is the called fundamental theorem of finite
Abelian groups (see Ref. [ FourierTerras ] ), which states that any
finite Abelian group @xmath can be seen as a direct product of cyclic
groups

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where every element @xmath is as a @xmath -tuple @xmath with @xmath and
the operation in @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

With this characterization, the characters @xmath of the Abelian group
@xmath , can be written as the product of the characters of the cyclic
groups that compose @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a @xmath -th root of unity, and @xmath .

#### c.3 The Fourier transform over finite Abelian groups

A Fourier transform can be seen as a change of basis, where we pass from
a description of a function @xmath in terms of a set of variables to a
description in terms of different variables, but keeping all the
information about @xmath . When we have a function of the elements of a
finite Abelian group, the Fourier transform can be expressed in terms of
the characters of the group.

Let @xmath be a complex valued function on the finite Abelian group
@xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The Fourier transform of @xmath is defined as :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the inverse given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

For non-Abelian groups the characters are more subtle, and the Fourier
transform uses the irreducible representations of the group. For the
reader interested in a further reading about Fourier transform on groups
we refer to Ref. [ FourierTerras ] .

#### c.4 Finite Fields

Fields are sets which have more structure than an Abelian group. While
for an Abelian group @xmath we only have the associated sum operation
@xmath , a field @xmath has two associated operations @xmath and @xmath
satisfying the properties specified bellow.

###### Definition C.6 (Finite Field).

A finite field @xmath is a set of @xmath elements with the operations
sum @xmath and multiplication @xmath such that

1.  @xmath , @xmath @xmath , @xmath ,

2.  @xmath s.t. @xmath ,

3.  @xmath s.t. @xmath ,

4.  @xmath s.t. @xmath ,

5.  @xmath s.t. @xmath ,

6.   Associativity: @xmath

      -- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- --

7.   Commutativity: @xmath

      -- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- --

8.   Distributivity: @xmath

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (C.12)
      -- -------- -- --------

Finite fields can only be defined for a set of @xmath prime or a power
of prime elements. For @xmath prime all the conditions @xmath - @xmath
can be satisfied by arithmetic modulo @xmath . For @xmath the arithmetic
operations ² ² 2 See
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Finite_field_arithmetic . can be defined
by addition and multiplication of polynomials of degree @xmath over
@xmath , @xmath . In order to construct a field @xmath one can start by
choosing an irreducible polynomial of degree @xmath over @xmath , this
polynomial will define the zero of the field by the so called quotient.

As an example for the field @xmath with @xmath we can pick the
polynomial @xmath from which we can obtain the relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now the elements of the field can be represented by strings @xmath ,
with @xmath , and we can associate each string with the polynomial
@xmath . Given that, addition and multiplication will be taken as
addition and multiplication of polynomials reduced by the relation (
C.13 ).

### Appendix D Functional boxes and multipartite communication
complexity

Here we discuss functional boxes and the communication complexity task
in the multipartite scenario. These results were also presented in Ref.
[ GMmultiplayer ] .

We start by defining the @xmath - @xmath boxes, a generalization of
@xmath boxes [ prbox ] for @xmath parties and prime @xmath outputs.

###### Definition D.1.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is prime and sum @xmath and multiplication @xmath are
operations modulo @xmath .

A multipartite communication complexity scenario consists of @xmath
parties, denoted @xmath , where each party @xmath receives an input
@xmath , and their goal is to exchange the least number of classical
messages in order to compute the value of a global function of their
inputs @xmath .

In what follows we prove that if the @xmath parties have access to a
sufficient large amount of @xmath - @xmath boxes, they can compute any
function @xmath with only @xmath dits of communication: where each
player @xmath communicate one dit to player @xmath which them computes
the function.

###### Theorem D.1.

If @xmath parties are allowed to share an arbitrary number of @xmath -
@xmath boxes, any @xmath -partite communication complexity problem can
be solved with only @xmath dits of communication.

###### Proof.

Our proof is a straightforward generalization of Ref. [ PRd ] . We prove
for the case @xmath . The proof for general @xmath follows directly.

Let us consider that Alice receives input string @xmath , Bob receives
@xmath and Charlie receives @xmath . We start by observing that any
function @xmath , @xmath , can be written as a multivariate polynomial
with degree at most @xmath in each variable @xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . And analogously
for @xmath and @xmath . Now if the players have access to @xmath @xmath
- @xmath boxes they can execute the following protocol in order to
compute @xmath :

1.  For each @xmath the players picks one @xmath - @xmath ,

2.  Alice inputs @xmath . Bob inputs @xmath . Charlie inputs @xmath .
    And they get respectively the outputs @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

3.  Bob sets @xmath and send @xmath to Alice. Charlie sets @xmath and
    send @xmath to Alice.

4.  Alice sets @xmath and she computes @xmath .

where only 2 dits were communicated in order to compute the function.

The generalization for @xmath -party function follows in analogous way,
where any function @xmath will be written as a multivariate polynomial
with degree at most @xmath in each variable and using an analogous
protocol, with @xmath parties communicating only one dit to the first
party, the computation of function @xmath will be performed. ∎

Now we consider a natural generalization of bipartite functional boxes,
introduced in Ref. [ PRd ] , to the multipartite case:

###### Definition D.2.

For any function @xmath , the multipartite functional box corresponding
to @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now we argue that all @xmath -partite functional box with @xmath
non-additively separable ( @xmath is additively separable if @xmath )
would lead to some kind of trivialization of communication complexity.

###### Theorem D.2.

All @xmath with @xmath such that there exists a partial derivative of
some order equals to @xmath can be used to simulate a @xmath - @xmath ,
and then can be used to solve any @xmath -partite communication
complexity problem with only @xmath dits of communication.

###### Proof.

First let us consider

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

So by using box @xmath Alice, Bob and Charlie can input @xmath and
@xmath respectively and get outputs @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Now
following Ref. [ PRd ] Alice sets @xmath , Bob sets @xmath and Charlie
sets @xmath , so that we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

In order to randomize the results they can randomly chose @xmath and
output @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , so that they perfectly simulate a
@xmath - @xmath box.

Now for other functions @xmath we can use the method of Ref. [ PRd ] of
applying partial derivatives to the function. The partial derivative of
@xmath with respect to @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

and it generates a polynomial with the degree in @xmath reduced by 1,
while the degree in @xmath and @xmath remains the same or is smaller.
And note that with two boxes @xmath we can simulate the box @xmath .

Then if by partial derivatives we can reduce function @xmath to the form
( D.4 ) we have a protocol using a finite number of boxes @xmath to
simulate @xmath - @xmath . By the result of Theorem D.1 , with an
arbitrary finite number of @xmath , we can solve any @xmath -partite
communication complexity problem with only @xmath dits of communication.
∎

If a function @xmath is not additively separable it will contain at
least one term involving product of two variables, for example @xmath
and this box can be reduced, by derivatives, into a box of the form
@xmath . Now using the results for the bipartite case [ PRd ] , if
Charlie always inputs @xmath , with only 2 dits of communication they
can compute any function of two variables @xmath .

### Appendix E Proofs of some results

#### e.1 Some proofs on xor games

In this Section we prove some of the results stated in Chapters 3 and 5
.

###### Theorem E.1.

Given a bipartite xor -game, with @xmath inputs for Alice, @xmath inputs
for Bob, and an associated game matrix @xmath , the quantum value is
upper bounded by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

###### Proof.

We now prove this result using Lagrange duality. Let us consider the SDP
characterization given by Theorem 3.2.2 :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

By weak duality (Theorem 2.3.1 ), every feasible solution to the dual
Lagrange problem provides an upper bound to the quantum bias @xmath . So
let us consider the dual problem of ( E.2 ):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note that @xmath for all @xmath is a feasible solution to problem @xmath
, since @xmath and then

  -- -- -- -------
           (E.4)
  -- -- -- -------

Therefore we have that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

which ends the proof. ∎

For the case where @xmath and @xmath , the same analysis results in the
upper bound

  -- -- -- -------
           (E.7)
  -- -- -- -------

which is worse then the bound given by Theorem 3.2.3 .

###### Theorem E.1.1.

The adjacency matrix of an xor -game graph @xmath

  -- -------- -- -- -------
     @xmath         (E.8)
  -- -------- -- -- -------

has the following spectrum and corresponding degeneracies:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath denotes the @xmath singular values of @xmath .

###### Proof.

We start by nothing that the adjacency matrix, Eq. ( E.8 ), can be
written in the form

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (E.10)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

which allows us to write it as a direct sum

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (E.12)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

Therefore we can proceed to diagonalize @xmath and @xmath separately.

Let us start with the eigenvalues of @xmath . Note that @xmath contains
only the identity and the all 1’s matrix @xmath , therefore an
eigenbasis for @xmath is formed by the @xmath Fourier vectors @xmath ,
where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath , where @xmath . Since @xmath we have that

-   @xmath is an eigenvector of @xmath with eigenvalue @xmath ,

-   @xmath and @xmath are eigenvectors with eigenvalue @xmath ,

-   @xmath are eigenvectors with eigenvalue -1.

which completes the diagonalization of @xmath .

Now let us proceed to find the eigenvalues of @xmath . First, note that,
if @xmath and @xmath are the singular vectors of the game matrix @xmath
, corresponding to the singular value @xmath , then, by using the
relation @xmath , we can derive that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

By using relation ( E.14 ) one can verify that the following @xmath
vectors

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

are eigenvectors of @xmath , with respective eigenvalues @xmath .

The remaining eigenvalues of @xmath are all equal to 1. This can be
shown by the fact that subtracting an appropriate amount of the
projector into the eigenvectors @xmath leaves us with identity, i.e. the
following equality holds

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

This completes the proof. ∎

#### e.2 On DIEWs

Bellow we list the projective measurements @xmath , @xmath , @xmath that
allow the players to win the generalized Mermin game discussed in
Section 7.5 , Eq. ( 7.46 ), with probability 1 when they share the
@xmath state:

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (E.17a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (E.17b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (E.17c)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (E.18a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (E.18b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (E.18c)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (E.19a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (E.19b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (E.19c)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath .