Nonlocality is one of the most intriguing aspects of quantum theory
which reveals that nature is intrinsically different than our classical
view of the world. One of the main goals in the study of quantum
nonlocality is to determine the maximum violation achieved by quantum
correlations in a Bell scenario. However, given a Bell inequality, there
is no general algorithm to perform this task. As an intermediate step,
the development of efficiently computable bounds has played an important
role for the advance of the field. In this thesis we present our
contributions exploring efficiently computable bounds, based on a norm
of some matrices, to the quantum value of a particular class o Bell
inequalities: the linear games. In the first part of the thesis we
introduce the necessary background to follow the main results: Concepts
and results of optimization and computational complexity theories,
focusing on nonlocality problems; The framework of nonlocal games as a
particular class of Bell inequalities; And the graph-theoretic approach
to nonlocality. In the second part we present our main results
concerning the characterization of necessary and sufficient conditions
for an XOR game to have no quantum advantage, and we prove an
efficiently computable upper bound to the quantum value of linear games.
The main outcomes of the research presented in this thesis are: (i) The
determination of the Shannon capacity for a new family of graphs; (ii) A
larger alphabet generalization of the principle of no-advantage for
nonlocal computation; (iii) And a systematic way to design
device-independent witnesses of genuine multipartite entanglement for
tripartite systems.
