[z-pi]GRGeneral Relativity \nomenclature [z-pi]NRNumerical Relativity
\nomenclature [z-pi]AMRAdaptive Mesh Refinement \nomenclature
[z-pi]MPIMessage Passing Interface - parallel programming method
Einstein’s field equation of General Relativity (GR) has been known for
over 100 years, yet it remains challenging to solve analytically in
strongly relativistic regimes, particularly where there is a lack of a
priori symmetry. Numerical Relativity (NR) - the evolution of the
Einstein Equations using a computer - is now a relatively mature tool
which enables such cases to be explored. In this thesis, a description
is given of the development and application of a new Numerical
Relativity code, @xmath .

@xmath uses the standard BSSN formalism, incorporating full adaptive
mesh refinement (AMR) and massive parallelism via the Message Passing
Interface (MPI). The AMR capability permits the study of physics which
has previously been computationally infeasible in a full @xmath setting.
The functionality of the code is described, its performance
characteristics are demonstrated, and it is shown that it can stably and
accurately evolve standard spacetimes such as black hole mergers.

We use @xmath to study the effects of inhomogeneous initial conditions
on the robustness of small and large field inflationary models. We find
that small field inflation can fail in the presence of subdominant
scalar gradient energies, suggesting that it is much less robust than
large field inflation. We show that increasing initial gradients will
not form sufficiently massive inflation-ending black holes if the
initial hypersurface is approximately flat. Finally, we consider the
large field case with a varying extrinsic curvature @xmath , and find
that part of the spacetime remains inflationary if the spacetime is
open, which confirms previous theoretical studies.

We investigate the critical behaviour which occurs in the collapse of
both spherically symmetric and asymmetric scalar field bubbles. We use a
minimally coupled scalar field subject to a “double well” interaction
potential, with the bubble wall spanning the barrier between two
degenerate minima. We find that the symmetric and asymmetric cases
exhibit Type 2 critical behaviour with the critical index consistent
with a value of @xmath for the dominant unstable mode. We do not see
strong evidence of echoing in the solutions, which is probably due to
being too far from the critical point to properly observe the critical
solution.

We suggest areas for improvement and further study, and other
applications.

LaTeX PhD Thesis Physics King’s College London

\setstretch

1.5 \makenomenclature \subtitle 3+1D code development and applications
\dept Department of Physics \university King’s College London \crest []
\supervisor Dr Eugene Lim \degreetitle Doctor of Philosophy \subject
LaTeX

{declaration}

I hereby declare that except where specific reference is made to the
work of others, the contents of this dissertation are original and have
not been submitted in whole or in part for consideration for any other
degree or qualification in this, or any other university. This
dissertation is my own work and contains nothing which is the outcome of
work done in collaboration with others, except as specified in the text
and Acknowledgements. This thesis contains fewer than 100,000 words
excluding the bibliography, footnotes, tables and equations.
