We present a theoretical study of light-induced phenomena in gas-phase
molecules, exploring the physical phenomena arising in two distinct
contexts: using synchrotron radiation and ultrashort laser pulses. This
work has been done in close collaboration with Piero Decleva (Università
degli Studi di Trieste).

We first present our work on inner-shell photoionization of diatomic
(CO) and small polyatomic (CF @xmath , BF @xmath ) molecules at high
photoelectron energies performed in collaboration with the experimental
the groups of Edwin Kukk (Turku University), Catalin Miron (Synchrotron
SOLEIL), Kiyosi Ueda (Synchrotron SPring-8) and Thomas Darrah Thomas
(Oregon State University). The combination of state-of-the-art Density
Functional Theory (DFT)-like calculations, capable to describe
photoionization accounting for the nuclear degrees of freedom, together
with high-resolution third-generation synchrotron facilities, has
enabled the investigation of non-Franck-Condon effects observable in
vibrationally resolved photoionization measurements. We demonstrate that
the nuclear response to intramolecular electron diffraction is
observable and can be used to obtain structural information. As a
proof-of-principle, by using the DFT calculations as an analysis tool to
fit the experimental data, we have accurately determined the equilibrium
distance of the CO molecule and the bond contraction that takes place
upon C 1s ionization. This is a surplus of photoelectron spectroscopy
with respect to more conventional spectroscopic techniques, which
usually can only provide structural information of neutral molecular
species. Furthermore, we have explored the different phenomenon arising
when an electron is emitted from a delocalized orbital: multicenter
emission. The results on molecular fluorine coming from our numerical
simulations are in good qualitative agreement with those provided by the
simple formula proposed by Cohen and Fano in the sixties.

We have employed the same DFT-based methodology together with time \hyp
dependent first-order perturbation theory and a reduced density matrix
formalism to report the first demonstration of purely electron dynamics
in a biological molecule: the amino acid phenylalanine, in collaboration
with the experimental groups of Mauro Nisoli (Politecnico di Milano),
Luca Poletto (Istituto Nazionale di Fotonica - Consiglio Nazionale delle
Ricerche) and Jason Greenwood (Queen’s University). The use of
attosecond pulses in combination with novel detection techniques has
enabled the capture of purely electron motion at its intrinsic time
scale. Because of their wide energy bandwidth, attosecond pulses are
ideal sources to generate coherent superpositions of states, triggering
an ultrafast electronic response that can be later tracked with
attosecond resolution. Our theoretical study enabled to interpret the
experimental findings in terms of charge migration, thus confirming the
first observation of purely electron dynamics in a biomolecule. The work
presented here has been extended to treat the amino acids glycine and
tryptophan, which has allowed the investigation of radical substitution
effects in the charge migration mechanism.
