## Resumen

Esta tesis doctoral constituye un estudio teórico de procesos
ultrarrápidos que ocurren en moléculas aisladas cuando son expuestas a
radiación electromagnética. En particular, hemos investigado los
fenómenos físicos que surgen en dos contextos diferentes: (i) cuando la
energía de los fotones incidentes está bien definida, como ocurre en
experimentos que hacen uso de radiación sincrotrón, y (ii) cuando la
duración de la interacción radiación-materia es extremadamente corta, lo
cual es posible gracias al desarrollo de pulsos láser ultra-cortos, del
orden de tan solo unos pocos cientos de attosegundos (1 as = 10 @xmath
s). Este trabajo ha sido supervisado por Fernando Martín y Alicia
Palacios (Universidad Autónoma de Madrid), y ha sido realizado en
estrecha colaboración con Piero Decleva (Universitá degli Studi di
Trieste) y con varios grupos experimentales de distintos países, como se
indica a continuación.

En primer lugar, presentamos un estudio sobre fotoionización de capa
interna de moléculas diatómicas (CO) y poliatómicas (CF4, BF3) con
radiación sincrotrón a altas energías del fotoelectrón, que ha sido
realizado en colaboración con los grupos experimentales de Edwin Kukk
(Turku University), Catalin Miron (Synchrotron SOLEIL), Kiyosi Ueda
(Synchrotron SPring-8) y Thomas Darrah Thomas (Oregon State University).
El uso de instalaciones sincrotrón de tercera generación, en combinación
con técnicas de detección avanzadas de alta resolución en energía, nos
ha permitido observar claras violaciones del principio de Franck-Condon
(FC) en espectros fotoelectrónicos resueltos vibracionalmente. Nuestro
trabajo teórico, basado en la aplicación de la Teoría del Funcional de
la Densidad (DFT, del inglés, “Density Functional Theory”) para
describir procesos de fotoionización en sistemas multielectrónicos, ha
sido esencial para guiar las campañas experimentales, así como para
interpretar los resultados de las mismas. Para ello, ha sido necesario
tener en cuenta en nuestras simulaciones computacionales los grados de
libertad adicionales debidos al movimiento nuclear. Nuestro estudio
conjunto demuestra que las violaciones del principio de FC observadas
son consecuencia de un fenómeno de difracción electrónica: cuando se
emite un electrón desde una región bien localizada en el centro de una
molécula poliatómica, como el orbital 1s del átomo de carbono en la
molécula CF4, éste puede ser difractado por los átomos circundantes,
originando interferencias constructivas y destructivas en los espectros
fotoelectrónicos. La respuesta nuclear al fenómeno de difracción
electrónica es observable, y los espectros fotoelectrónicos contienen
información estructural del sistema. Sin embargo, la extracción de esta
información puede llegar a ser todo un desafío. En esta tesis doctoral
proponemos un método de determinación estructural, basado en el uso de
cálculos DFT como herramienta de análisis para el ajuste de datos
experimentales. Como prueba de concepto, hemos determinado con
precisión, y simultáneamente, la distancia de equilibrio de la molécula
de CO y la contracción de enlace que tiene lugar tras la extracción de
un electrón del orbital 1s del átomo de carbono. Nuestro método presenta
una clara ventaja frente a técnicas espectroscópicas más convencionales
que, en general, tan solo son capaces de proporcionar información
estructural de la especie neutra.

Cuando el electrón no se emite desde una región bien localizada en el
centro de la molécula, sino desde un orbital deslocalizado entre varios
átomos, tiene lugar un fenómeno físico diferente: emisión multicéntrica.
Nuestras simulaciones en la molécula de flúor muestran que este fenómeno
es experimentalmente observable en espectros fotoelectrónicos, y
nuestros resultados coinciden, de forma cualitativa, con los predichos
por la sencilla fórmula propuesta por Cohen y Fano en los años 60.

Poder observar y controlar el movimiento de los electrones en moléculas
biológicas es uno de los principales objetivos de la ciencia de
attosegundos (attociencia). El uso de pulsos laser ultra-cortos permite
inducir corrientes electrónicas ultra-rápidas en la materia mediante la
creación de superposiciones coherentes de autoestados del sistema.
Además, estos pulsos tienen la duración adecuada para visualizar las
corrientes creadas con la resolución temporal requerida. En colaboración
con los grupos experimentales de Mauro Nisoli (Politecnico di Milano),
Luca Poletto (Instituto Nazionale di Fotonica – Consiglio Nazionale
delle Ricerche) y Jason Greenwood (Queen’s University), hemos reportado
la primera observación de dinámica puramente electrónica en una molécula
biológica: el amino ácido fenilalanina. Esto ha sido posible gracias a
la creación y aplicación de pulsos laser de tan solo 300 attosegundos de
duración, en combinación con novedosas técnicas de detección de
fragmentos iónicos doblemente cargados (formados tras la ionización de
la biomolécula). La migración de carga observada precede cualquier
reordenamiento estructural y es la base de un gran número de procesos
biológicos. Nuestras simulaciones computacionales, basadas en DFT junto
con teoría de perturbaciones a primer orden y un formalismo de matriz de
densidad reducida, han sido esenciales en la interpretación de los
hallazgos experimentales en términos de migración de carga ultra-rápida.
Para ello, ha sido necesario describir de forma precisa la interacción
de la molécula con el pulso laser empleado en los experimentos, así como
la respuesta molecular inducida. Nuestro trabajo ha revelado, de manera
inequívoca, que las variaciones de carga observadas se deben única y
exclusivamente al movimiento ondulatorio de los electrones en la
biomolécula. Hemos descubierto que la migración de carga desde un
extremo a otro del amino ácido tarda entre 3 y 4 femtosegundos (1 fs =
10 @xmath s). Merece la pena señalar que, hasta entonces, ningún trabajo
teórico había sido capaz de describir el proceso de ionización por un
pulso de attosegundos y el posterior reordenamiento electrónico en una
molécula compleja, de relevancia biológica.

En esta tesis doctoral presentamos un estudio completo que incluye los
amino ácidos glicina y triptófano. Esto nos ha permitido generalizar los
resultados obtenidos a otras moléculas biológicas, así como investigar
cómo afecta la sustitución del radical al mecanismo de migración de
carga ultra-rápida en un amino ácido. Nuestros resultados demuestran
que, modificando las características el pulso laser (amplitud y fase de
sus componentes espectrales) es posible modificar la respuesta
electrónica inducida, permitiendo controlar a la carta el movimiento de
los electrones en sistemas de relevancia biológica.

### Publications

The work presented in this PhD thesis has lead to the following
publications peer reviewed journals (inverse chronological order):

1.   Ultrafast Charge Dynamics in an Amino Acid Induced by Attosecond
    Pulses . F. Calegari, D. Ayuso, A. Trabattoni, L. Belshaw, S. De
    Camillis, F. Frassetto, L. Poletto, A. Palacios, P. Decleva, J. B.
    Greenwood, F. Martín, and M. Nisoli. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics
    in Quantum Electronics 21 , 5, 8700512 (2015). Attached in appendix
    G .

2.   Vibrationally Resolved B 1s Photoionization Cross Section of BF
    @xmath . D. Ayuso, M. Kimura, K. Kooser, M. Patanen, E. Plésiat, L.
    Argenti, S. Mondal, O. Travnikova, K. Sakai, A. Palacios, E.
    Kukk, P. Decleva, K. Ueda, F. Martín and C. Miron. The Journal of
    Physical Chemistry A 119 , 5971-5978 (2015). Attached in appendix B
    .

3.   Ultrafast electron dynamics in phenylalanine initiated by
    attosecond pulses . F. Calegari, D. Ayuso, A. Trabattoni, L.
    Belshaw, S. De Camillis, S. Anumula, F. Frassetto, L. Poletto, A.
    Palacios, P. Decleva, J. B. Greenwood, F. Martín and M. Nisoli.
    Science 346 , 6207, 336 (2014). Attached in appendix F .

4.   Vibrationally resolved C 1s photoionization cross section of CF
    @xmath . M. Patanen, K Kooser, L. Argenti, D. Ayuso, M. Kimura, S.
    Mondal, A. Palacios, K. Sakai, O. Travnikova, P. Decleva, E.
    Kukk, E. Plésiat, C. Miron K. Ueda and F Martín. Journal of Physics
    B: Atomic, Molecular and Optical Physics 47 , 124032 (2014).
    Attached in appendix C .

5.   Dissociative and non-dissociative photoionization of molecular
    fluorine from inner and valence shells . D. Ayuso, A. Palacios, P.
    Decleva and F. Martín. Journal of Electron Spectroscopy and Related
    Phenomena 195 , 320-326 (2014). Attached in appendix E .

6.   Intramolecular photoelectron diffraction in the gas phase . K.
    Ueda, C. Miron, E. Plésiat, L. Argenti, M. Patanen, K. Kooser, D.
    Ayuso, S. Mondal, M. Kimura, K. Sakai, O. Travnikova, A.
    Palacios, P. Decleva, E. Kukk, and F. Martín. The Journal of
    Chemical Physics 139 , 124306 (2013). Attached in appendix A .

7.   Effects of molecular potential and geometry on atomic core-level
    photoemission over an extended energy range: The case study of the
    CO molecule . E. Kukk, D. Ayuso, T. D. Thomas, P. Decleva, M.
    Patanen, L. Argenti, E. Plésiat, A. Palacios, K. Kooser, O.
    Travnikova, S. Mondal, M. Kimura, K. Sakai, C. Miron, F. Martín,
    and K. Ueda. Physical Review A 88 , 033412 (2013). Attached in
    appendix D .

### Acknowledgements

I would like to express my gratitude to the people that have made this
work possible:

-   To Alicia, for guiding me during these four years, for her constant
    support and her very useful advice.

-   To Fernando, for giving me the opportunity to join this wonderful
    group, for his support and for being a constant source of
    inspiration.

-   To Piero, for being so accessible, for his clear explanations, for
    his support and for being the perfect host every time I had the
    opportunity to visit him in Trieste.

-   To the experimental collaborators I had the opportunity to work
    with, in Milan, Belfast, Oregon, Turku, Sendai and Saint Malo, for
    allowing me to be part of amazing projects.

-   To Álvaro, Oriana, Lara and Darek, for all the good moments shared
    during these four years and for their constant support.

-   To Inés, Jesús, Luca, Sergio and Selma, for their useful advice and
    for sharing a bit of their knowledge with me.

-   To my office mates, and to everyone in the department, because it
    has been wonderful to spend these four years with them.

-   And to my family and friends, and to Steven.

The research leading to these results has received funding from European
Union’s Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013) projects
ERC-AdG-XChem (GA 290853) and MC-IRG ATTOTREND (GA 268284).

###### Contents

-    Introduction
-    Theory
    -    1 Light-matter interaction
        -    1.1 Time-dependent Schrödinger equation
        -    1.2 Time-dependent perturbation theory
        -    1.3 Photoionization cross section
    -    2 Molecular structure
        -    2.1 The molecular Hamiltonian
            -    2.1.1 The Born-Oppenheimer approximation
        -    2.2 Evaluation of electronic states
            -    2.2.1 Density functional theory
            -    2.2.2 Static-exchange DFT
            -    2.2.3 Time-dependent DFT
        -    2.3 Inclusion of the nuclear motion
            -    2.3.1 The nuclear Hamiltonian
            -    2.3.2 Evaluation of vibrational eigenstates
            -    2.3.3 Vibrationally resolved cross sections
    -    3 Electron dynamics initiated by attosecond pulses
        -    3.1 Wave packet dynamics
        -    3.2 Evolution of the ionic subsystem
-    Results
    -    4 Interferences in molecular photoionization
        -    4.1 Intramolecular scattering in inner-shell
            photoionization
        -    4.2 Photoionization of F @xmath : multicenter emission
        -    4.3 Conclusions
    -    5 Ultrafast electron dynamics in aminoacids
        -    5.1 Evaluation of electronic states
        -    5.2 Photoionization cross sections
        -    5.3 Ultrafast electron dynamics initiated by attosecond
            pulses
            -    5.3.1 Fourier analysis on the amino group
            -    5.3.2 Fourier analysis on different atoms
            -    5.3.3 Comparison with the experiment: Gabor profiles
            -    5.3.4 What about molecular conformation?
        -    5.4 Time-evolution of the full electron system
    -    Conclusions
    -    Conclusiones
-    Appendices
    -    A Intramolecular photoelectron diffraction in the gas phase
    -    B Vibrationally resolved B1s photoionization cross section of
        BF @xmath
    -    C Vibrationally resolved C1s photoionization cross section of
        CF @xmath
    -    D Effects of molecular potential and geometry on atomic
        core-level photoemission over an extended energy range: The case
        study of the CO molecule
    -    E Dissociative and non-dissociative photoionization of
        molecular fluorine from inner and valence shells
    -    F Ultrafast electron dynamics in phenylalanine initiated by
        attosecond pulses
    -    G Ultrafast charge dynamics in an amino acid induced by
        attosecond pulses @xmath

### Introduction

Chemical reactions occur as a result of bond breaking and formation, a
dynamical process that, in general, is initiated by changes in the
electronic structure of a molecule and followed by the subsequent
nuclear rearrangement. The study of the dynamics associated to the
nuclei belongs to the realm of femtochemistry, a well \hyp established
field that for more than twenty years has been able to capture and even
control the nuclear motion in chemical reactions and intramolecular
processes [ 1 , 2 ] . The field obtained an important recognition in
1999, when Ahmed Zewail was awarded the Nobel prize in Chemistry “for
his studies of the transition states of chemical reactions using
femtosecond spectroscopy” [ 3 ] . One of the most common techniques to
investigate the dynamics of a chemical reaction constitutes the
well-known pump-probe spectroscopy: a short pulse of light (pump) is
used to induce a process in a molecular target and, after some time, the
dynamical response of the system is monitored with a second pulse
(probe). By performing measurements with different time delays between
the two pulses, it is possible to take “snapshots” of a chemical
reaction. Of course, the duration of the light pulses employed needs to
be (at least) of the same order of magnitude (or shorter) than the
dynamics to observe. For instance, in order to monitor a process of
charge transfer mediated by the nuclear motion in organic molecules [ 4
] , pulses in the femtosecond time domain were needed. This is the
reason why purely electron motion, occurring in the attosecond time
domain, has remained hidden from direct experimental observation until
very recently, when pulses with durations as short as a few tens of
attoseconds became available.

###### Attosecond science

The experimental demonstration of attosecond pulses was achieved in 2001
[ 5 , 6 ] using high harmonic generation (HHG) techniques, which opened
a new era of time resolved experiments. HHG is a non-linear process
occurring when an atomic or molecular gas is irradiated with an intense
femtosecond laser, usually a Ti:sapphire laser with a central wavelength
of 800 nm. The target will then emit XUV light with frequencies that are
high odd multiples of the driving field [ 7 , 8 ] . An interpretation of
this phenomenon was given in 1993 [ 9 ] by Paul Corkum by means of a
three-step model. Due to the distortion of the Coulomb potential
generated by the strong IR field, the electron is ionized by tunneling
through the electric barrier (see fig. 1 ). Then (second step), the
electron is accelerated by the laser field and driven back towards the
parent ion. In the last step, the recombination, the energy that the
electron has accumulated during its journey is released as an energetic
XUV or X-ray photon [ 9 ] . Since the first step (tunnel ionization) is
a non-linear process that requires the absorption of several photons, it
is more likely to occur at the maxima of the laser field, when the
tunneling picture is valid. Thus, electrons are released and recombined
in ultrashort intervals, leading to the formation attosecond laser
pulses [ 10 ] .

According to the three-step model, an attosecond pulse is generated
every half a cycle of the driving femtosecond pulse, which leads to the
production of attosecond pulse trains (APTs) rather than single
attosecond pulses (SAPs). A lot of work has been directed towards the
generation of SAPs [ 11 ] . The first SAP was produced in 2001 by the
group of Ferenc Krausz by using the selection of cutoff harmonics
generated with a 7 fs IR pulse [ 5 ] . This short duration made that the
highest harmonics were produced only during one half-cycle, thus
generating a SAP. In order to characterize a SAP, one can use a
co-propagating IR laser pulse by means of the attosecond streak camera [
12 ] : the photoelectron emitted by the XUV pulse is driven by the
presence of the IR field and its momentum is modified in a extent that
depends on the relative time delay between the two pulses. The first
fully-characterized few-cycle SAP was generated in 2006 in the group of
Mauro Nisoli [ 13 ] , with a duration of 130 as and a central frequency
of 35 eV. Only two years later, an even shorter pulse was produced, with
duration of 80 as and 80 eV of central energy [ 14 ] . To date, the
shortest XUV pulses ever produced and characterized were 67 as-long and
their central energy was 90 eV [ 15 ] .

These impressive achievements have enabled the real-time observation and
control of electron motion in atoms, molecules and condensed phases [ 16
, 11 , 17 , 18 ] . The observation of the femtosecond Auger decay in
krypton in 2002 was the first application of isolated attosecond pulses
[ 19 ] . This demonstration was followed by other important experimental
results in the field of ultrafast atomic physics, such as the real-time
observation of electron tunneling [ 20 ] and the measurement of temporal
delays of the order of a few tens of attoseconds in the photoemission of
electrons from different atomic orbitals of neon [ 21 ] and argon [ 22 ]
. The unprecedented time resolution offered by attosecond pulses has
also allowed quantum mechanical electron motion and its degree of
coherence to be measured in atoms by using attosecond transient
absorption spectroscopy [ 23 ] . Attosecond techniques have also been
applied in the field of ultrafast solid-state physics, with the
measurement of delays in electron photoemission from crystalline solids
[ 24 ] and the investigation of the ultrafast field-induced
insulator-to-conductor state transition in a dielectric [ 25 ] .

The application of attosecond techniques to molecules offers the
possibility of investigating primary relaxation processes, which involve
electronic and nuclear degrees of freedom and their coupling [ 26 , 27 ,
28 , 29 , 30 ] . In the case of large molecules (e.g., biologically
relevant molecules), prompt ionization by attosecond pulses may produce
ultrafast charge migration along the molecular skeleton, preceding any
nuclear rearrangements. This phenomenon has been predicted by various
authors [ 31 , 32 , 33 , 34 , 35 ] , whose work was stimulated by
pioneering experiments performed by R. Weinkauf, E. W. Schlag and
collaborators on fragmentation of peptide chains [ 36 , 37 , 38 ] .
Ultrafast electron dynamics evolving on an attosecond or few-femtosecond
temporal scale can determine the subsequent relaxation pathways of a
molecule [ 30 ] . The process is induced by sudden generation of an
electronic wave packet, which moves across the molecular chain and
induces a site selective reactivity, which is related to charge
localization in a particular site of the molecule [ 31 ] . Although the
study of complex molecules is challenging, a formative measurement of
the amino acid phenylalanine has shown that ionization by a short APT
leads to dynamics on a temporal scale of a few tens of femtoseconds.
This has been interpreted as the possible signature of ultrafast
electron transfer inside the molecule [ 39 ] . Even though picosecond
and femtosecond pulses are suitable for the investigation of nuclear
dynamics, the study of electronic dynamics with these pulses has been
made possible by slowing down the dynamics through the use of Rydberg
electron wave packets [ 40 ] . However, in order to study the electron
wave packet dynamics in the outer-valence molecular orbitals, relevant
to most chemical and biological systems, attosecond pulses are required.

Despite the impressive progress made in the last decades, attosecond
pulses generated via HHG still have two main constraints: their
relatively low intensities, which can make some attosecond pump-probe
experiments quite challenging, and the limited range of photon energies
in which they can be produced. These limitations are overcome in the
recently operating XUV/X-ray free-electron laser (FEL) facilities, which
can already produce bright few-femtosecond pulses based on synchrotron
light.

###### Synchrotron light

Synchrotron radiation is emitted when charged particles moving at
velocities close to the speed of light are forced to change direction by
a magnetic field, as dictated by the fundamental laws of electrodynamics
[ 41 ] . The first observation of artificial synchrotron light occurred
at the General Electric Research Laboratory in New York in 1947 [ 42 ] ,
opening a new era of accelerator-based light sources. Synchrotron light
sources rapidly evolved ever since through up to four different
generations [ 43 ] .

The so-called first-generation light sources were high-energy physics
facilities were synchrotron radiation was generated as a byproduct. The
interest for the use of synchrotron light increased over the years,
motivating a series of pioneering advances. The most important was the
development of storage rings [ 44 ] , the basis for all of today’s
synchrotrons. A storage ring is a type of circular accelerator in which
the beam of particles can circulate at a fixed energy during several
hours, providing stable beam conditions and reducing the radiation
hazard. In 1975, the Synchrotron Radiation Source (SRS) at the Daresbury
Laboratory in the UK, the first synchrotron exclusively designed to the
production of light, began to be constructed [ 45 , 46 ] . It became
operational in 1981 [ 47 ] , the same year as the BESSY synchrotron [ 48
] in Berlin, giving birth to the second-generation light sources. Over
the years, some facilities that were originally developed to high-energy
physics, such as the HASYLAB (Hamburger Synchrotronstrahlungslabor) at
DESY, or the Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Laboratory at the SLAC
National Accelerator Laboratory at Standford, were upgraded to
second-generation status and gradually started to dedicate more
operating time to light production.

The development of insertion devices [ 49 ] lead to the advent of
third-generation light sources. Insertion devices are arrays of magnets
with alternating polarity that, located into the straight sections of
the storage rings, generate very bright beams and allow to shift the
light spectrum towards higher photon energies. These devices were
quickly incorporated into existing the synchrotron facilities.
Third-generation facilities, designed with insertion devices in place
from the beginning, saw the light in the 90s. The first of them was the
European Synchrotron Radiation Facility (ESRF), located in Grenoble,
France, which started operating in 1994 [ 50 , 51 ] .

To date, there are more than 50 dedicated second- and third-generation
light sources all over the world serving many areas of science. The
BESSY II in Berlin, the ELETTRA in Trieste, the National Synchrotron
Light Source in the USA, Spring-8 in Japan or SOLEIL in France are just
a few examples. All of them present similar structures, with a storage
ring having many ports connected to the beamlines, which are small
stations where the experiments are performed. The configuration of the
different beamlines, however, can be more different, depending on the
kind of experiments they have been designed for.

Synchrotron radiation spans a wide energy range, from infrared light up
to hard X-rays. It is characterized by its high brightness, being orders
of magnitude brighter than that produced in conventional light sources.
Synchrotron light is also highly polarized (linearly, circularly or
elliptically), tunable, collimated (consisting of almost parallel rays)
and concentrated over a small area. These properties make of synchrotron
radiation one of the most important and universal research tools, with a
steadily increasing number of applications [ 43 , 52 , 53 ] .

The brightness of the light beams produced these facilities and the use
of efficient X-ray monochromators [ 54 ] have brought unprecedented
energy resolution to X-ray spectroscopy. This has lead to major advances
in X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) that include the development of
the near edge X-ray absorption fine structure spectroscopy (NEXAFS) and
the X-ray absorption fine-structure spectroscopy (EXAFS) [ 55 , 56 ]
techniques. In addition to conventional XAS, ion-yield spectroscopy
techniques, in which the yield of ionic fragments is recorded as a
function of the photon energy, can provide useful information about
photodissociation dynamics occurring in highly excited states [ 57 , 58
] . By recording fragmentation yields for different ejection angles one
can also gain information about the symmetry of the states involved in
the fragmentation dynamics [ 59 ] .

Photoelectron spectroscopy has allowed to measure core-hole lifetime
widths of molecular species [ 60 , 61 , 62 ] as well as their
corresponding vibrational structures [ 63 ] . Recent work [ 64 ] has
demonstrated that high-resolution resonant photoelectron spectroscopy
can be applied to image molecular potentials of excited states and to
identify new states that are invisible in conventional photoelectron
spectroscopy techniques. The combination of high-resolution
photoelectron spectroscopy with normal Auger electron spectroscopy has
allowed to obtain information about potential energy curves of two-hole
states in diatomic molecules [ 65 ] . By recording photoelectrons, Auger
electrons and ionic fragments in coincidence, it has been possible to
get a deeper insight into the Auger decay process [ 66 , 67 , 68 , 69 ,
70 , 71 ] .

The application of angle-resolved photoelectron spectroscopy to
gas-phase molecules can reveal structural details about the target. By
measuring the photoemission intensity over a hemispherical region, it
has been possible to reconstruct molecular orbital densities of large
@xmath conjugated molecules [ 72 ] . When an electron is emitted from an
inner shell of a molecule, the outgoing wave can be coherently scattered
by the surrounding atomic constituents. Therefore, molecular-frame
photoelectron angular distributions (MFPADs) are sensitive to molecular
potentials and can thus be used to image molecular structures. MFPADs
can be measured by registering photoelectrons in coincidence with ions [
73 ] or with Auger electrons [ 74 , 75 ] . It has been shown that in the
case of small polyatomic molecules in which the central atom is bonded
to hydrogens, such as CH @xmath , photoelectrons with low kinetic energy
are emitted along the chemical bonds [ 76 , 77 , 78 ] . Although this
assumption is no longer true when hydrogens are replaced by heavier
fluorine atoms [ 78 ] , MFPADs can still retrieve information about the
tridimensional structure of the molecular target. Measuring MFPADs
requires the use of rather sophisticated coincidence setups with high
angular resolution and high detection efficiency [ 79 , 80 ] , which are
not always available or applicable. Alternatively, recent work on the
photoionization of diatomic and small polyatomic molecules by
synchrotron radiation [ 81 , 82 ] has shown that, under some
circumstances, photoelectron spectra integrated over electron ejection
angle can also be a valuable tool for structural determination.

Free-electron lasers (FELs) constitute the fourth generation of light
sources, being able to generate ultrashort and ultrabright pulses of
coherent light by using powerful linear accelerators which are several
kilometers long. The underlying principle behind FELs is the
self-amplified spontaneous emission (SASE). As in third-generation
facilities, FELs make use of insertion devices to generate synchrotron
light. This radiation interacts with the oscillating electrons, making
them drift into microbunches, which are separated by a distance that is
equal to one radiation wavelength. Through this interaction, the
electrons start to emit coherent light. The emitted radiation can
reinforce itself, leading to high beam intensities and laser-like
properties.

The first FEL to become operational was the Tesla Test Facility in
Hamburg in 2000, that was replaced by FLASH in 2005, the first soft
X-ray FEL [ 83 ] , where the first experiments on coherent diffractive
imaging were performed [ 84 , 85 , 86 ] by means of the so-called
diffraction-before-destruction [ 87 ] technique. In 2009, the Linac
Coherent Light Source (LCLS) in Stanford became the first hard X-ray
FEL, improving the resolution of coherent diffractive imaging
experiments [ 88 , 89 ] . Other FEL facilities such as FERMI [ 90 ]
(2010), at the Elettra Sincrotrone in Trieste, or SACLA (2011), embedded
in the Spring-8 complex [ 91 ] , have recently become operational, and
new facilities are being designed or under construction.

###### Theoretical methods

Advances in synchrotron- and HHG-based light sources have opened the
door for structural determination of single isolated molecules, as well
as for imaging and even controlling electron and nuclear dynamics, with
exciting applications in physics, chemistry and biology. In order to
guide and to understand these new generation of experiments, theoretical
calculations are crucial. As we have seen, the development of
high-resolution third-generation synchrotron light sources enabled the
application of traditional photoelectron X-ray diffraction techniques to
small molecules in the gas phase. However, solid theoretical support
combining state-of-the-art calculations with the use of simple models
was needed to understand and interpret the diffraction patterns arising
in the photoelectron spectra. Moreover, theoretical predictions have
guided and motivated a large number of attosecond experiments, such as
the recent observation of ultrafast charge migration in a biomolecule [
92 ] . The first theoretical prediction of charge migration in complex
systems came from Lorenz S. Cederbaum and J. Zobeley more than 15 years
ago [ 32 ] , demonstrating that electron correlation can drive purely
electron dynamics in a sub-femtosecond time scale, faster than the onset
of the nuclear motion. Over the years, they have investigated this
phenomenon in a large number of organic molecules, ranging from small
amino acids such as glycine [ 93 , 94 ] to larger systems containing
aromatic rings [ 95 ] , using ab initio approaches that accurately
account for electron correlation. Charge migration has become a hot
topic, attracting the interest of a number of researchers and giving
rise to exciting theoretical predictions [ 96 ] . In 2006, Françoise
Remacle and Raphael D. Levine showed that a positive hole could migrate
from the amino to the carboxyl terminal of a tetrapeptide in just one
and a half femtosecond [ 31 ] by using Density Functional Theory. These
predictions have motivated recent experimental observations [ 39 , 92 ,
97 ] with attosecond pulses generated via HHG as well as the design of
nobel experiments based on FELs [ 98 ] . In these theoretical works, the
initial wave packet was prepared by removing an electron from a given
molecular orbital, creating a hole in the electronic structure of the
molecule. Then, since the ionized state is not a stationary state of the
ionic Hamiltonian but a linear superposition of several of them, the
hole moves through the molecular skeleton with a velocity that is
dictated by the energy spacing between the interfering states. Although
approaches accounting for the interaction with experimentally realistic
attosecond pulses have been recently developed [ 99 , 100 , 101 , 92 ,
97 ] , the evaluation of electronic wave packets in the continuum is
still challenging, especially in the case of complex molecules.

The so-called fixed-nuclei approximation has been assumed in the works
above mentioned. Although it is a reasonable approach because the
nuclear motion usually comes into play in a longer time scale, some
influence cannot be completely excluded. For instance, it has been shown
that stretching a few picometers of carbon bonds can occur in a few
femtoseconds and can modify the charge dynamics in organic molecules [
95 ] . Semi-classical approaches have been recently applied to the
description of coupled electron-nuclear dynamics in complex molecules.
An implementation of the Ehrenfest method within the Complete Active
Space Self Consistent Field (CASSCF) formalism has allowed to explore
the damper effect of the nuclear dynamics in the charge migration
mechanism [ 102 , 103 , 104 ] . Another recent work [ 105 ] has shown
that attosecond hole migration in a benzene cation can survive the
nuclear motion for more than 10 fs. However, despite these advances, a
full description of charge migration in a complex molecule including the
nuclear degrees of freedom in which the photoionization step is property
accounted for is yet to be done.

The theoretical description of electron and nuclear dynamics in which
all degrees of freedom are fully correlated is very difficult even for
the case of small molecules. In this context, the multi \hyp
configurational time \hyp dependent Hartree \hyp Fock (MCTDHF) method [
106 , 107 , 108 , 109 , 110 , 111 , 112 , 113 ] has been proved to be a
powerful tool. Also, approaches based on Density Functional Theory (DFT)
can be very useful because of their good compromise between accuracy and
computational effort. Our group, in collaboration with Piero Decleva in
Trieste, is pioneer in the use of the static-exchange DFT method and a
more elaborate time-dependent version together with new approaches to
include the nuclear motion at the Born-Oppenheimer level in diatomic
molecules [ 81 , 82 , 114 , 115 , 116 ] and for the symmetric stretching
mode in molecules with a small number of atoms [ 117 , 118 , 119 , 120 ,
121 , 122 ] , finding very good agreement with recent experimental
results obtained with synchrotron radiation. These studies have been
partially developed during this PhD thesis. Nevertheless, it should be
mentioned that the inclusion of more vibrational degrees of freedom
while keeping a reliable description of electron correlation remains a
challenge.

###### Outline

The aim of this work is to investigate light-induced phenomena in simple
isolated systems, with especial emphasis in the theoretical description
of processes that can be traced and manipulated using synchrotron
radiation and ultrafast laser pulses. In particular, we have focused on
the investigation of (1) photoionization of small molecules using
methods that account for both nuclear and electronic degrees of freedom,
and (2) ultrafast electron dynamics in larger molecules initiated by
attosecond XUV pulses. All the work presented in this PhD thesis has
been done in collaboration with Piero Decleva, from Università degli
Studi di Trieste.

The theoretical methods employed in this work are described in chapters
1 , 2 and 3 . Chapter 1 reviews the general concepts to treat
light-matter interaction. How to apply these concepts to the special
case of molecules interacting with synchrotron radiation and attosecond
pulses is presented in chapters 2 and 3 . In this work we have employed
the static-exchange DFT method, developed by Mauro Stener, Piero Decleva
and collaborators, briefly described in chapter 2 , to evaluate bound
and continuum electronic stationary states. The nuclear motion has been
accounted for within the Born-Oppenheimer approximation in the case of
diatomic and small polyatomic molecules. This has allowed for the
computation of vibrational excitations upon ionization and the
investigation of non-Franck-Condon effects. Results are presented in
chapters 4 and 5 . Chapter 4 is devoted to our study of small molecules
with synchrotron radiation, while chapter 5 is focused on the
investigation of electron dynamics upon photoionization with ultrashort
pulses in amino acids.

We have first investigated the interferences arising in the
photoionization of small molecules (BF @xmath , CF @xmath , CO and F
@xmath ) at high photoelectron energies by analyzing the role of the
nuclear motion. In collaboration with the experimental groups of Edwin
Kukk (Turku University), Catalin Miron (Synchrotron SOLEIL), Kiyosi Ueda
(Synchrotron SPring-8) and Thomas Darrah Thomas (Oregon State
University), we have found evidence of intramolecular scattering
occurring in the inner-shell photoionization of CO, CF @xmath and BF
@xmath imprinted the collective vibrational excitation that accompanies
1s ionization from the C (CO, CF @xmath ) or the B (BF @xmath ) atom at
high photoelectron energies. The ratios between vibrationally resolved
photoionization cross sections ( @xmath -ratios) show pronounced
oscillations as a function of the photon energy which are the
fingerprint of electron diffraction by the surrounding atomic centers
and therefore carry information of the molecular target as well as of
the ionization process. As a proof of principle, we have illustrated how
to retrieve the structural information encoded in the @xmath -ratios by
determining the internuclear distances of the CO molecule and of the
core-hole species generated upon C 1s ionization. A different scenario
occurs when the electron is emitted not from a well confined region in
the molecule but from a delocalized orbital. In these situations, double
(triple…) slit-like interferences are expected to arise. We have
investigated this phenomenon in the F @xmath molecule, where, due to
symmetry, the orbitals are delocalized between the two atomic centers.
By analyzing the role of the nuclear motion upon photoabsorption, we
have found experimentally measurable evidence of double slit-like
interferences in the angle-integrated photoelectron spectra. All these
results are summarized in chapter 4 and the published manuscripts are
attached in appendices A , B , C , D and E .

We then move to more complex molecules, where we restrict ourselves to
frozen nuclei, although applying time-dependent treatments for electron
dynamics. Ultrashort light pulses can create coherent superpositions of
electronic states, triggering electron motion at a speed that is
determined by the energy spacing between the interfering states. We have
investigated the ultrafast electronic response of large biological
systems to attosecond XUV pulses, in collaboration with the experimental
groups of Mauro Nisoli (Politecnico di Milano), Luca Poletto (Istituto
Nazionale di Fotonica - Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche) and Jason
Greenwood (Queen’s University). Our study, presented in chapter 5 and in
appendices F and G , includes the amino acids glycine, phenylalanine and
tryptophan, with the aim of understanding the influence of the different
radicals in the charge migration mechanism. For each molecule, we have
evaluated the electronic wave packet generated by an attosecond XUV
pulse by means of the static-exchange DFT method and time-dependent
first-order perturbation theory. The Fourier analysis of the hole
density over different portions of the molecule reveals ultrafast
beatings that are in very good agreement with the oscillations found in
a XUV/NIR pump-probe experiment where the yield of different fragments
is measured as a function of the pump-probe time delay.

## Theory

### Chapter 1 Light-matter interaction

The aim of this chapter is to review the general concepts on
light-matter interaction and the expressions that we employ to describe
the behavior of atomic and molecular systems in an electromagnetic
field. We focus on the interaction with “weak” radiation, which can be
accurately described using perturbative approaches.

#### 1.1 Time-dependent Schrödinger equation

The evolution of a quantum system is fully determined by the
time-dependent Schrödinger equation (TDSE) [ 123 ] :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the wave function of the system and @xmath is the
Hamiltonian operator. For the sake of simplicity, nor spatial or spin
coordinates are explicitly indicated here. The formal solution of the
TDSE is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the so-called evolution operator, which propagates the
wave function from an initial time @xmath to @xmath , @xmath being the
reduced Planck constant. Eqs. 1.1 and 1.2 are general and, in principle,
applicable to any system. Our goal is to investigate the behavior of
matter upon interaction with bright light. Specifically, we are
interested in exploring molecular targets subject to ultrashort laser
pulses and synchrotron radiation. These light sources are usually
intense enough so that one can describe the flux of photons as a
continuum variable, i.e., by means of Maxwell equations [ 41 , 123 ] .
Furthermore, magnetic interactions are usually weak in these contexts
and light can be modeled as an oscillating electric field. Neglecting
spin orbit couplings, mass polarization and relativistic effects, the
Hamiltonian operator of a set of @xmath charged particles may be written
as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are the position, momentum,
mass and charge of the @xmath -th particle, respectively, and @xmath is
the electric field of the electromagnetic wave in the dipole
approximation [ 41 , 123 ] , which neglects the spatial dependence of
the field across the system. This is usually a good approach for long
and medium wavelength fields and for small atomic systems as long as the
wavelength is significantly larger than the dimensions of the system.
For our purposes, it is convenient to split @xmath into two parts (see
eq. 1.3 ): the field-free Hamiltonian, @xmath , and a term accounting
for the interaction with the radiation, @xmath . Note that the
interaction term in eq. 1.1 has been written in the length gauge.

###### Spectral methods

Even though eq. 1.1 does not have an exact analytical solution in most
cases, it can be solved, for instance, by defining an initial wave
function in a grid of points and then propagate it numerically. However,
grid-based methods are typically expensive since one has to use large
numbers of grid points in order to get accurate results. In quantum
chemistry, it is more efficient to use spectral methods, in which the
wave function is expanded onto a complete basis set of functions. Of
course, the efficiency and accuracy here depend on the adequate choice
of the basis set for the particular problem. It is usually a good
approach to use the eigenstates of the field-free Hamiltonian, which are
the solutions of the the eigenvalue problem given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are the eigenfunctions of @xmath , which form a complete
basis set, and @xmath are the corresponding eigenvalues. The total wave
function can be expanded as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the time dependence is contained in the spectral coefficients
@xmath , which satisfy

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

due to the orthogonality of the basis. Inserting the spectral expansion
of the wave function (eq. 1.5 ) into the TDSE (eq. 1.1 ), we obtain

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we have made use of eq. 1.4 . By left-side projecting onto @xmath
and applying the orthogonality relation @xmath , eq. 1.7 reads

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

We have obtained a set of coupled equations that describe the
time-evolution of the spectral coefficients. A more compact version of
eq. 1.8 can be obtained by performing the change of variables

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are the coefficients in the interaction picture [ 123 ] ,
which are equivalent to those in the Schrödinger picture @xmath except
for the corresponding stationary phases. Applying eq. 1.9 to the
coefficients in eq. 1.8 and multiplying both sides of eq. 1.8 by @xmath
, we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have introduced the Bohr angular frequency @xmath . This set of
coupled equations is completely general and rigorously equivalent to eq.
1.1 . The coupling between different states arises from the existence of
the external potential @xmath , which relates the evolution of @xmath to
that of all the other coefficients. In general, eq. 1.10 can be solved
numerically by breaking the time domain into small steps @xmath and the
set @xmath is obtained from @xmath through iterative procedures [ 124 ,
17 , 125 ] . However, this approach might become computationally
expensive in some situations. If the external potential @xmath is weak,
the time-evolution of the wave function can be evaluated more
efficiently making use of perturbation theory, as we explain in the next
section.

#### 1.2 Time-dependent perturbation theory

Perturbation theory provides a useful approach to solve the TDSE when
the field applied to the system is weak and therefore @xmath can be
treated as a perturbation. Under this assumption, the set of
coefficients @xmath hardly vary in time and their zero-th order solution
is given by their initial values:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Solutions of higher order ( @xmath ) can be evaluated using the
recurrence relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

which enables to obtain the @xmath -th order solution from the @xmath
-th order one. We are interested in situations in which non linear
processes are negligible and can thus be accurately described using
first-order perturbation theory , which approximates the exact wave
function to its first-order solution. If the system is assumed to be in
the ground state at @xmath , that is, @xmath , the zero-th order
solution is given by @xmath . Inserting it into the right side of eq.
1.12 , we can evaluate the first-order solution

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

By integrating in time and making use of the initial condition @xmath we
obtain:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

In our particular case @xmath , where @xmath is the dipole moment
operator. Then, for @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the component of the dipole operator along @xmath , the
polarization direction of the field and @xmath . Eq. 1.15 can provide
accurate values of the time-dependent coefficients upon interaction with
an ultrashort laser pulse provided only linear effects come into play.
We can retrieve the set of coefficients in the Schrödinger picture using
using eq. 1.9 . The corresponding transition probabilities are given by
the square of the spectral amplitudes:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where one can use @xmath or @xmath since they are equal except for a
stationary phase.

###### The special case of a sinusoidal perturbation

Let us consider the case of monochromatic light in the dipole
approximation, i.e.,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the frequency of the radiation. This is a reasonable
approach to model an experiment with synchrotron radiation, where the
photon energy is well defined [ 43 ] . Inserting eq. 1.17 into eq. 1.15
, we obtain:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.18)
              @xmath      (1.19)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

By making use of eq. 1.16 we can evaluate the transition probability:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

For a fixed value of @xmath , the transition probability is a function
of @xmath having two pronounced maxima for @xmath and @xmath due to the
two terms inside the bracket. The first term, which maximizes for @xmath
, accounts for transitions from the initial to lower energy states
occurring through induced photoemission. Here we seek to describe
excitations that take place upon photoabsorption from the ground state.
These are accounted for in the second term, which maximizes for @xmath .
Removing the induced photoemission term in eq. 1.20 and making use of
the identity @xmath , we obtain:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

We are interested in finding the transition probability upon a long-time
interaction. In the limit @xmath , the function @xmath can be
approximated by @xmath . Then, in the long-time limit, we have:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that this limit corresponds to the case of perfectly monochromatic
light, where the photon energy is well defined and given by @xmath .
Therefore, a transition from the ground to an excited state @xmath will
only occur if @xmath . The transition rate, i.e., the transition
probability per unit of time can be obtained by integrating over a range
of frequencies @xmath containing @xmath and derivating with respect to
time:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

Although transition rates are experimentally measurable quantities, in
practice, it is more convenient to measure photoionization cross
sections since they are independent of the experimental conditions, as
we explain in the next section.

#### 1.3 Photoionization cross section

The cross section is defined as the hypothetical surface of effective
interaction between a flux of particles and their targets. In the
particular case of photoionization, it refers to the probability of an
electron to be emitted from the target upon interaction with the field.
The cross section corresponding to a transition from the ground state
@xmath a to a final @xmath state is given by [ 123 ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the flux of photons per unit of area and time, which is
related to the amplitude of the electric field @xmath according to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath is the speed of light. Inserting 1.23 and 1.25 into 1.24 , we
obtain the photoionization cross section for a given orientation of the
system with respect to the field:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

As can be seen in eq. 1.26 , the cross section does not depend on the
parameters of the field. For this reason, it is a very useful quantity
to compare results obtained under different experimental conditions.

###### Randomly oriented targets

In the case of randomly oriented molecules, the total cross section can
be retrieved by averaging incoherently over three orthogonal directions
of @xmath , let us call them @xmath , @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

Eq. 1.27 allows to reproduce experimental results in which targets
without spherical symmetry are are not aligned with the field.

### Chapter 2 Molecular structure

The present chapter describes the methodology employed to include the
electronic and nuclear degrees of freedom in the theoretical description
of molecular photoionization. Ionization of molecules is more complex
than in the case of atoms because of the lack of spherical symmetry and
due to the added degrees freedom of the nuclear motion. Thus, one has to
assume certain approximations that simplify the full problem which, as
the number of degrees of freedom increases, becomes computationally
intractable. In this work we have evaluated the electronic structure of
the molecules we have investigated using methods based on the Density
Functional Theory (DFT), which can account for electronic exchange and
correlation effects in medium and large size systems using reasonable
computational resources. The nuclear motion has been included at the
Born-Oppenheimer level in the case of diatomic and small polyatomic
molecules, allowing to evaluate vibrationally resolved photoionization
cross sections.

#### 2.1 The molecular Hamiltonian

The Hamiltonian operator representing the energy of the electrons and
the nuclei in a molecule, the field-free molecular Hamiltonian, can be
written as [ 126 ] :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath and @xmath stand for the coordinates of the electron @xmath and
nuclei @xmath , respectively, @xmath and @xmath are the mass and the
absolute value of the charge of the electron, and @xmath and @xmath are
the mass and the atomic number of the nuclei @xmath . In order to find
the eigenstates of @xmath , which constitute the set of stationary
solutions of the molecular system, one can take advantage of the fact
that since nuclei are more massive than the light electrons, their
motion is slower, as we explain in the following.

##### 2.1.1 The Born-Oppenheimer approximation

Since the electromagnetic forces acting on electrons and nuclei have
similar intensity, one might assume their momenta to be of the same
magnitude. Then, as the nuclei are significantly heavier, they must
accordingly have much smaller velocities. Based on this idea, Max Born
and J. Robert Oppenheimer proposed a way to decouple electron and
nuclear dynamics by splitting the total wave function into two parts [
127 ] . Within the Born-Oppenheimer approximation, the stationary states
of the full-system can written as product of an electronic stationary
state @xmath , depending on both the electronic and the nuclear
coordinates, and a nuclear stationary state @xmath , which only depends
on the nuclear degrees of freedom:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are indexes (in general, sets of indexes) over
the electronic and nuclear eigenstates labeling the vibronic state
@xmath , where @xmath is a vector containing the spin and spatial
coordinates of all electrons and @xmath contains all nuclear spatial
coordinates (nuclear spin coordinates have been dropped). Electronic
stationary states satisfy the electronic time \hyp independent
Schrödinger equation:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the electronic Hamiltonian and @xmath is the energy of
the electronic state @xmath , which depends on the nuclear coordinates
@xmath . Eq. 2.3 can be solved parametrically in a grid of nuclear
geometries. By doing so, one obtains the potential energy surfaces
@xmath in which the nuclei move. Note that, in each electronic
calculation, the nuclear repulsion energy term ( @xmath in eq. 2.3 ) is
just a constant value and thus its only effect is increasing the
electronic eigenvalue. The nuclear stationary states @xmath associated
to a given electronic state @xmath can be obtained by solving nuclear
time-independent Schrödinger equation:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is energy of the vibronic state defined by the quantum
numbers @xmath and @xmath . The Born-Oppenheimer approximation assumes
that @xmath varies very smoothly with @xmath and therefore that the
electrons rearrange instantaneously as the nuclei move. This assumption
is valid as long as the energy spacing between electronic states, i.e.,
@xmath , is sufficiently large and, in a photoionization process, as
long as the photoelectron is not emitted very slowly, that is, with very
low kinetic energy. The Born-Oppenheimer approximation provides a
powerful tool for the accurate evaluation of vibronic stationary states
of diatomic and small polyatomic molecules, and also of larger systems
in situations in which reduced-dimensionality models are applicable.

###### Potential energy curves

As already indicated, the eigenvalues of eq. 2.3 , when solved in a grid
of molecular geometries, constitute a set of potential energy surfaces
(PESs) or curves (PECs) in the monodimensional case. In this work we
have employed the static-exchange DFT method and also the more elaborate
time-dependent DFT to evaluate the electronic stationary states of the
molecules we have investigated, as we explain in section 2.2 . Although
these methods can accurately describe transitions to the electronic
continuum, essential in order to describe photoionization, the energy
values they provide might not be accurate enough in some situations. In
general, ab initio multi-reference methods can produce accurate PESs of
medium-size systems [ 126 ] . In the case of a core-hole species, the
situation is more challenging since one needs to develop specific
approaches to avoid the variational collapse of the wave function while
keeping a good description of electron correlation [ 128 , 129 ] . We
have investigated the role of the nuclear motion in the photoionization
of diatomic (CO, F @xmath ) and small polyatomic (BF @xmath , CF @xmath
) molecules under conditions in which only one vibrational mode is
active. In these situations, the harmonic and the Morse approximations
provide a good alternative for the evaluation of the PECs:

-    The harmonic oscillator models an ideal system that when taken away
    from the equilibrium position @xmath experiences a restoring force
    that is proportional to the extent of the displacement. It allows to
    write the potential energy as

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (2.5)
      -- -------- -- -------

    where @xmath is the mass of the system, @xmath is the angular
    frequency and @xmath is the nuclear coordinate. This simple formula
    can provide a good representation of the PEC around the equilibrium
    geometry, but it cannot describe molecular dissociation since it
    does not take into account the anharmonicity of the chemical bonds.
    Consequently, it allows to evaluate low-energy stationary
    eigenstates with accuracy [ 118 , 120 ] , but it should not be used
    to describe the high-energy region.

-    The Morse potential [ 130 ] provides a valid description of the PEC
    in a larger range of internuclear distances in terms of a simple
    analytical formula that takes into account the anharmonicity of the
    chemical bonds:

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (2.6)
      -- -------- -- -------

    where @xmath is the equilibrium distance, @xmath is the depth of the
    potential energy well and @xmath is a parameter controlling its
    width. The Morse parameters are related to the usual spectroscopic
    ones (the oscillator strength, @xmath , and the anharmonicity
    parameter, @xmath ) by the formulas

      -- -------- -------- -- -------
         @xmath   @xmath      (2.7)
         @xmath   @xmath      (2.8)
      -- -------- -------- -- -------

    Although eq. 2.6 was designed for studying diatomic molecules, it
    can still provide accurate results for the totally-symmetric
    stretching mode of small polyatomics [ 82 , 118 , 119 , 122 ] .

###### The fixed-nuclei approximation

Some purely electronic processes can occur before the onset of the
nuclear motion and can thus be described in the framework of the
fixed-nuclei approximation (FNA), in which the nuclei are assumed to
remain frozen at their equilibrium positions ( @xmath ). Within the FNA,
electronic stationary states satisfy:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

The fixed-nuclei approximation can provide accurate values of total
photoionization cross sections (see, for instance [ 131 , 132 , 133 ] )
when the variation of the electronic structure with the internuclear
distances is smooth around the Franck-Condon region. The FNA has also
been successfully applied to time \hyp dependent problems in large
systems. For instance, most theoretical work on charge migration [ 32 ,
93 , 31 , 94 , 99 , 96 ] relies on the validity of the FNA to propagate
electronic wave packets. Of course, its applicability depends on the
characteristics of each particular problem and, in general, the nuclear
motion is expected to play a role in the femtosecond time domain.

#### 2.2 Evaluation of electronic states

As we discussed, the electronic eigenvalue problem given in eq. 2.3 does
not have an exact analytical solution in most cases. A widely used
approach is given by the Hartree @xmath Fock (HF) method, that can
provide a first approximation to the “exact” ground state solution in
terms of a Slater determinant constructed from HF molecular orbitals,
which are obtained within the mean field approximation through a self
consistent field procedure. However, it is well known that HF solutions
are usually rather poor since the mean field approximation cannot
describe electron correlation properly [ 126 ] . Post-HF methods manage
this problem by expanding the total wave function as a linear
combination of Slater determinants (electronic configurations), being
able to yield accurate solutions for the ground and for excited states
of few-electron systems. Yet, the number of configurations one might
need to include in the expansion to reach the desired accuracy can make
these methods extremely costly. In this sense, DFT constitutes a useful
alternative to ab initio methods, providing an excellent compromise
between accuracy and computational effort for medium and large size
systems [ 134 ] .

##### 2.2.1 Density functional theory

Density functional theory (DFT) is widely used in physics, chemistry and
materials science to investigate the ground state electronic structure
of atoms, molecules and condensed phases. According to DFT, the energy
(or any other observable) of a many-electron system in the ground state
can be determined by using functionals which solely depend on the
electron density. The most essential concepts of the method are given
here; for a deeper insight, see, for instance [ 134 ] , [ 135 ] or [ 136
] .

DFT is supported on the theorems proposed by Pierre Hohenberg and Walter
Kohn in 1964 [ 137 ] , namely:

1.  “Any observable of a stationary non-degenerate ground state can be
    calculated, exactly in theory, from the electron density of the
    ground state”.

2.  “The electron density of a non-degenerate ground state can be
    calculated, exactly in theory, determining the density that
    minimizes the energy of the ground state”.

The use of the electron density @xmath instead of the wave function
@xmath is the foundation of DFT. Both entities are related through the
equation:

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.10)
  -- -- -- --------

where @xmath gathers the spatial @xmath and spin @xmath coordinates of
the @xmath th electron ¹ ¹ 1 For the shake of simplicity, the parametric
dependence on the nuclear coordinates has been dropped. . In 1965,
Walter Kohn and Lu Jeu Sham provided a systematical approach to evaluate
the ground state electron density of a many-body system by introducing
the so-called Kohn-Sham equation [ 138 ] .

###### The Kohn-Sham equation

The Kohn-Sham equation is the time-independent Schrödinger equation of a
fictitious system of non-interacting particles that generates the same
density as a given system of interacting particles. It can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the so called Kohn-Sham orbitals, @xmath are the
corresponding energies and @xmath the fictitious effective potential in
which the non-interacting particles move:

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.12)
  -- -- -- --------

where @xmath is the Hartree (Coulomb) potential:

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.13)
  -- -- -- --------

and @xmath is the exchange-correlation potential:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath is the exchange-correlation energy. If the exact forms of @xmath
and @xmath where known, the Kohn-Sham strategy would provide the exact
ground state energy. Unfortunately, this is not the case and the
exchange-correlation energy (potential) needs to be approximated through
empirical formulations. The central goal of modern DFT is finding better
approximations to these two quantities. As the particles of the
Kohn-Sham system are non-interacting fermions, the ground state wave
function can be written as a Slater determinant of the lowest energy
solutions of eq. 2.11 :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

By using eq. 2.10 , we can evaluate the ground state electron density:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the spatial part of the spin orbital @xmath , that is,
@xmath or @xmath . In practice, since the Kohn-Sham Hamiltonian depends
on the Kohn-Sham orbitals (solutions of the eigenvalue problem) through
the electron density, they are numerically found by performing a
self-consistent field procedure.

##### 2.2.2 Static-exchange DFT

Standard DFT methods can accurately represent the electronic ground
state of many-electron systems. In order to describe photoionization
processes one also needs to describe the electronic continuum. In this
work we have employed the static-exchange DFT method [ 139 , 140 , 141 ,
142 , 143 ] , developed by Mauro Stener, Piero Decleva and
collaborators, to evaluate transitions to continuum states. The method
makes use of the Kohn-Sham formalism to describe bound states and of the
Galerkin approach to evaluate photoelectron wave functions in the field
of the corresponding Kohn-Sham density. Over the last decades, this
methodology has provided accurate values of photoionization cross
sections of small molecules as well as of medium and large size systems
within the fixed-nuclei approximation [ 140 , 144 , 145 , 146 , 147 ,
148 ] , from small diatomic molecules such as N @xmath to fullerenes.
More recently, the method was extended in collaboration with the group
of Fernando Martín to include the nuclear degrees of freedom,
successfully evaluating vibrationally resolved cross sections of
diatomic [ 81 , 114 , 115 , 116 , 121 ] and small polyatomic [ 117 , 82
, 118 , 119 , 120 , 122 ] molecules, providing results which are in good
agreement with experimental data. In this section we explain the most
relevant characteristics of the method.

###### Electronic states within the static-exchange approximation

The static-exchange DFT method makes use of single Slater determinants
to define bound and excited (continuum) electronic states, ensuring that
the Pauli exclusion principle is fulfilled. The ground state wave
function may be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the number of electrons, @xmath if @xmath is odd and
@xmath if @xmath is even. For a closed-shell system, @xmath , … , @xmath
. Continuum states are defined by promoting one electron from a bound
spin orbital @xmath to a continuum orbital @xmath with kinetic energy
@xmath and angular quantum numbers @xmath and @xmath , and can be
written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Bound and continuum orbitals are expanded in a multicentric basis set of
B-splines, as we explain as follows.

###### Multicentric B-spline basis set

Traditional basis sets make use of Gaussian or Slater type orbital
functions, which provide fast convergence for the lowest bound states
with a reduced number of basis functions [ 126 ] . However, these
expansions are not adequate for the description of the rapidly
oscillating continuum states, since numerical linear dependences rapidly
come up as the basis set is increased due to the large overlap between
functions with different centers. In this context, basis sets of
B-spline functions, which are piecewise polynomials, constitute a very
powerful tool [ 142 ] . B-spline functions are very flexible and due to
its local nature they can describe accurately both bound and continuum
orbitals without running into numerical dependencies [ 142 ] . The
present method evaluates bound and continuum orbitals in a multicentric
basis set of B-splines, using symmetry-adapted [ 149 ] linear
combinations of real spherical harmonics with origin over different
positions in the molecule:

-   A large one-center expansion (OCE) over the center of mass provides
    an accurate description of the long-range behavior of the continuum
    states.

-   Small expansions, called off-centers (OC), located over the
    non-equivalent nuclei, complement the OCE. They improve dramatically
    the convergence of the calculation, allowing to reduce the angular
    expansion in the OCE, since they can effectively describe the Kato
    cusps [ 150 ] at the nuclear positions.

In the case of symmetric molecules, a large amount of computational
effort can be saved by making use of point group symmetry and dividing
the three-dimensional space into equivalent regions. The basis set
elements may be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath represents a shell of equivalent centers ( @xmath refers to
the OCE), @xmath runs over the centers in the shell, @xmath is an index
over the B-spline functions @xmath , whose order is @xmath , @xmath are
the indexes of the irreducible representation (see [ 143 ] ), @xmath
runs over the linearly independent angular functions, which are
constructed as linear combinations of real spherical harmonics
associated to a fixed angular quantum number @xmath , and the
coefficients @xmath are determined by symmetry [ 149 ] , defining the so
called symmetry-adapted spherical harmonics @xmath , which are invariant
under the symmetry operations of a given point group. For instance, in
the case of BF @xmath (in the ground state equilibrium geometry), @xmath
would represent the shell of equivalent F atoms ( @xmath since there are
3 equivalent F atoms) and no more OC expansions would be required since
the OCE would be located at the B atom (center of mass).

In each center @xmath , the B-spline expansion reaches a maximum value
@xmath , which can be different for non-equivalent centers (different
value of @xmath , see eq. 2.19 ). A large vale of @xmath is required in
the OCE in order to provide a good description of the oscillatory
behavior of the continuum states. One can control the overlap between
the basis elements, avoiding running into linear dependences, by keeping
small OC expansions ( @xmath a.u.) since the Kato cusps are usually well
localized at the atomic positions. Angular expansions are truncated so
@xmath takes values up to a maximum @xmath , which can also be different
for the non-equivalent centers. In general, one can keep small values of
@xmath in the OCs to complement the OCE in the description of the bound
states, but a large angular expansion is usually required in the OCE,
especially in the case of complex molecules and for the evaluation of
continuum states with high kinetic energy.

###### Evaluation of bound orbitals

There are several quantum chemistry packages available which can
efficiently perform DFT calculations. In this work, we have employed the
Amsterdam Density Functional (ADF) program [ 151 , 152 , 153 ] to
evaluate the ground state electron density of the molecules we have
investigated using a double or a triple @xmath -polarization plus basis
set (taken from the ADF library). Electronic exchange and correlation
effects have been accounted for with the VWN [ 154 ] local density
approximation functional in some cases, or with the LB94 [ 155 ] ,
depending on the characteristics of particular problem. Besides
providing a reliable description of bound states, these two functionals
have been found to be suitable for the description of the long range
behavior of the continuum states. The electron density provided by the
ADF calculation is projected into a multicentric B-spline basis set like
the one described in the previous section. Then, the corresponding
Hamiltonian @xmath and overlap @xmath matrices are constructed:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.20)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

By definition, both @xmath and @xmath are symmetric matrices. Since the
OC expansions cannot overlap, @xmath and @xmath are zero if @xmath ,
unless @xmath or @xmath (elements of the OCE). By solving the eigenvalue
problem given by the secular equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

we obtain the set coefficients @xmath that define the bound orbitals in
the B-spline basis. Of course, both the basis set employed in the ADF
calculation and the B-spline basis set need to be dense enough so the
two calculations provide the same sets of orbitals.

###### Evaluation of continuum orbitals

The continuum spectrum of an operator constitutes a family of
eigenfunctions whose eigenvalues are a continuum variable. The set of
discrete solutions of eq. 2.22 whose energy is higher than the
ionization threshold can be interpreted as a representation of the
continuum, but with a different (arbitrary) normalization condition:
@xmath , and normalized at the same level as the bound states: to a
Kronecker delta. Of course, the characteristics of these solutions
depend on the numerical expansion and one needs to use a dense basis set
and a large value of @xmath so their asymptotic behavior is properly
represented. In order to compute measurable quantities such as
photoionization cross sections, one has to set the proper normalization
of the continuum states: to a Dirac delta, and impose the adequate
scattering boundary conditions, in the case of a molecule, of a
multichannel problem. Here we have employed the Galerkin [ 142 ]
approach to evaluate photoelectron states at different energies and the
correct boundary conditions have been imposed to the solutions, as we
explain in this section.

###### The Galerkin approach.

The present method can yield the continuum wave function at any
photoelectron energy using a fixed basis set. The traditional eigenvalue
problem given by eq. 2.22 does not admit non-trivial solutions ( @xmath
) for an arbitrary value of energy @xmath . However, one can obtain
approximate solutions by finding the coefficients that minimize the
residual vector @xmath , with @xmath by solving the eigenvalue problem

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . The eigenfunctions corresponding to the lowest
eigenvalues @xmath can be taken as approximate solutions with energy
@xmath if their eigenvalues are close to zero. It has been observed
that, for @xmath partial waves, one can always find a set of @xmath
eigenvalues @xmath whose moduli are sufficiently small and well
separated from the others, provided that the basis set is dense and
flexible enough. Due to the lack of boundary conditions, @xmath is not a
Hermitian matrix and therefore its eigenvalues @xmath and eigenvectors
@xmath are, in general, complex. Nonetheless since @xmath is real they
appear in conjugate pairs, i.e., for each pair @xmath that satisfies
2.23 , so does @xmath . This later property makes possible to avoid
complex representations just by taking @xmath and @xmath as independent
solutions. Although these solutions do not satisfy the adequate boundary
conditions of a multichannel scattering problem, they constitute a
complete set and therefore can be combined to provide linear
combinations that do. In the next lines we explain how the Galerkin
solutions can be renormalized so they accurately describe an electron
being scattered from the molecular potential.

###### Renormalization of continuum sates.

Photoelectron wave functions describe a particle being ejected from an
atom or a molecule. Therefore, they must be solutions of the scattering
Schrödinger equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the scattering Hamiltonian:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath is the potential generated by the residual ion. In our case,
electronic exchange and correlation effects are included in the
potential through the use of a functional. At long distances, the ionic
potential can be approximated by that of a positive charge, i.e.:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . The scattering Hamiltonian (eq. 2.24 ) does not admit
analytical eigenfunctions in the case of complex potentials. However, as
@xmath increases, it tends to the Coulomb Hamiltonian, @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

which does have analytical solutions: the regular @xmath and the
irregular @xmath Coulomb functions. At long distances, they can be
written as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.28)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the momentum and @xmath is the Coulomb phase shift:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath is the Euler’s Gamma function. The asymptotic boundary
conditions of the photoelectron scattering wave functions can be written
in terms of the Coulomb functions:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the @xmath matrix is related to the usual scattering matrix @xmath
[ 156 ] by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

The set of continuum states provided by the Galerkin approach in the
basis set of B-splines, however, satisfy arbitrary boundary conditions
of the form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the sets of coefficients @xmath and @xmath can be obtained by
comparing the radial part of the wave functions @xmath and its first
derivatives at @xmath with those of the Coulomb functions. They define
two matrices @xmath and @xmath that can be used to obtain the correct
wave functions:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

The resulting wave functions @xmath have the proper @xmath -matrix
normalization, with @xmath .

###### Dipole-transition matrix elements

As explained in the previous chapter, in order to evaluate the
electronic wave packet generated in a molecule upon ionization by
ultrashort laser pulses (eq. 1.15 ) or to compute photoionization cross
sections (eq. 1.24 ), the dipole-transition matrix elements are
required. Here we indicate how to evaluate the element corresponding to
a transition from the electronic ground state @xmath (eq. 2.17 ) to a
continuum state @xmath (eq. 2.18 ) upon interaction with linearly
polarized light. In our description of the wave function, the residual
ion remains frozen (static-exchange approximation), which reduces the
problem to the calculation of the coupling between the bound orbital
where the electron is taken from @xmath and the continuum orbital where
is promoted to @xmath , that is,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the polarization vector of the electric field. Dipole
transition elements can be used to evaluate cross sections.

###### Photoionization cross section within the fixed-nuclei
approximation

Making use of eqs. 1.26 and 2.35 and summing incoherently over all
photoelectron symmetries (all possible values of @xmath and @xmath ), we
can evaluate total photoionization cross sections in the framework
first-order perturbation theory within the fixed-nuclei approximation:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

As indicated in section 1.3 , for the case of randomly oriented
molecules, one needs to compute @xmath for three orthogonal directions
of the polarization vector of the field @xmath and then average the
results incoherently.

##### 2.2.3 Time-dependent DFT

An improvement of the static-exchange DFT method described in the
previous section in order to describe the coupling between different
photoionization channels is the time-dependent DFT approach. The method
uses many concepts from the static-exchange version. Here we present the
most relevant concepts, for a more complete description, see [ 157 ] .

The linear response of the electron density to an external field can be
evaluated using the scheme proposed by Zangwill and Soven by defining an
effective self-consistent field potential:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the frequency of the radiation, @xmath is the external
dipole potential and @xmath is the induced potential, which is given by
the sum of the Hartree and exchange-correlation screening due to the
redistribution of the electrons:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath is the unperturbed electron density and @xmath denotes the
induced density in the adiabatic local density approximation [ 158 ] ,
which can be expressed in terms of the dielectric susceptibility @xmath
and the self-consistent field potential:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

By inserting eq. 2.39 into eq. 2.38 , we obtain:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath represents the Hartree and exchange-correlation kernel:

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.41)
  -- -- -- --------

Eq. 2.40 is solved with respect to @xmath in a basis set of B-splines
basis as the one employed in the static-exchange DFT approach and the
adequate boundary conditions for the photoelectron wave functions are
imposed. Then, the electronic dipole-transition matrix elements are
evaluated using @xmath instead of the dipole operator. The
time-dependent DFT method can accurately describe interchannel coupling
effects and autoionization resonances at the linear-response level. For
this reason, it is more suitable than the static-exchange version for
the description of correlation effects due to the coupling between
different ionization channels.

#### 2.3 Inclusion of the nuclear motion

The nuclear motion may play an important role in molecular
photoionization since the energy of the incident photon is usually
distributed between electrons and nuclei. In general, molecules undergo
vertical transitions upon photoionization because the electronic
emission occurs suddenly and the nuclei have no time to rearrange. This
can lead to (several) vibrational excitations in the parent ion, thus
generating superpositions of vibronic states @xmath , where @xmath are
the (final) vibrational wave functions, @xmath and @xmath being the
vibrational and electronic quantum numbers, respectively, and the
expansion coefficients @xmath are approximately given the overlaps with
the initial wave function @xmath , i.e., the Franck-Condon factors
@xmath . Vibrational excitations in the parent ion are experimentally
observable even in the case of inner-shell photoionization, thanks to
the advent of the third generation of synchrotron radiation sources and
high-energy-resolution detection techniques [ 43 ] . Of course, in order
to describe these situations, the nuclear degrees of freedom must be
taken into account. Here we present a method for including the nuclear
motion at the Born-Oppenheimer level applicable to diatomic molecules
and to small polyatomics in situations in which only one vibrational
mode is active.

##### 2.3.1 The nuclear Hamiltonian

Within the Born-Oppenheimer approximation, the nuclear Hamiltonian (see
eq. 2.4 ) of a diatomic AB molecule in a given electronic state @xmath
can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the total and the reduced mass of the
system, respectively, @xmath is the relative distance between the two
nuclei, @xmath is the position of the center of mass and @xmath is the
potential energy curve associated to the electronic state @xmath in the
Born-Oppenheimer approximation. In this formulation, it is clear that
the total kinetic energy is composed by a translational motion of the
center of mass (first term in the left side of eq. 2.42 ) and an
internal motion (second term). The translational motion is not quantized
and just contributes to the total energy by adding a constant energy to
the eigenvalues. For this reason, here we will focus on finding the
eigenstates of the internal Hamiltonian @xmath , which in polar
coordinates is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the square of the total angular momentum operator. The
eigenfunctions of @xmath can be written as a product of a radial part
@xmath , describing the vibrational motion, and a spherical harmonic
@xmath that accounts for the molecular rotation. Since the rotational
energy is significantly smaller than the vibrational quantum, we can
neglect this term and describe the nuclear motion in terms of
vibrational states @xmath , which are the eigenfunctions of the
vibrational Hamiltonian:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

Vibrational eigenfunctions can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

which simplifies the eigenvalue problem to

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.46)
  -- -- -- --------

Vibrational eigenstates are evaluated in a basis set of B-spline
functions, as we explain in section 2.3.2 .

###### Polytomic molecules.

The motion of a set of particles can be decomposed into translation and
rotation of the center of mass and vibration of its particles. A @xmath
particle system has @xmath vibrational degrees of freedom (vibrational
modes) if it is linear and @xmath otherwise [ 134 ] . A complete
description of molecular vibration within the Born-Oppenheimer
approximation would require including in the total wave function the
corresponding vibrational eigenfunctions depending on all vibrational
degrees of freedom. In this work we have investigated inner shell
photoionization of polyatomic AB @xmath molecules, A being the central
atom and B the surrounding atomic centers, symmetrically displaced
around A. Recent experimental data [ 159 , 160 ] has shown that, in this
scenario, the totally symmetric stretching mode (TSSM), that in which
the B atoms move symmetrically towards A, is the most affected by the
structural rearrangement that accompanies core ionization. For this
reason, in this work we have restricted nuclear motion to the TSSM
coordinate. The dynamics of the B atoms along the TSSM can be understood
in terms of a virtual particle moving in a monodimensional well @xmath ,
defined by the @xmath chemical bonds, with a reduced mass ² ² 2 The mass
of the central atom ( @xmath ) does not contribute to @xmath since it
remains frozen along the TSSM coordinate. @xmath . Then, eq. 2.43
remains valid with @xmath , the TSSM coordinate.

##### 2.3.2 Evaluation of vibrational eigenstates

Vibrational eigenstates are evaluated by solving the eigenvalue problem
given by eq. 2.46 in a basis set of B-splines

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the electronic and vibrational quantum
numbers, respectively, and @xmath is an index going over the @xmath
B-spline functions @xmath , which are defined up to a value of @xmath .
The corresponding secular equation in its matrix form, @xmath , where
@xmath and @xmath are the Hamiltonian and the overlap matrices in the
B-spline basis set, is solved using a standard diagonalization
procedure. Since B-spline functions are piecewise polynomials, the
elements of @xmath and @xmath are computed exactly using a
Gauss-Legendre integration method.

###### Bound states

The resolution of the secular equation provides an orthonormal set of
stationary states. Those whose energy is lower than the molecular
dissociation limit constitute the bound part of the spectrum. Of course,
the number of bound states and the energy spacing depends on the shape
of the potential well (depth and width) and on the reduced mass of the
system, but not on the parameters of the B-spline expansion, provided
the basis set has been wisely chosen.

###### Continuum states

The stationary solutions of the secular equation with energy higher than
the dissociation limit constitute a discretized representation of the
vibrational continuum with the arbitrary boundary condition @xmath . As
in the case of the electronic states (section 2.2.2 ), the number of
continuum states and their energy spacing depend on the parameters of
the numerical expansion and one needs to employ a large value of @xmath
and a dense grid of B-splines so the asymptotic behavior of the
continuum wave functions can be properly described. However, the
situation here is more simple since this is a mono-channel scattering
problem and the adequate normalization of the true continuum states
@xmath can be set by multiplying the solutions coming from the
diagonalization procedure by a factor:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the density of states [ 142 ] . Working with discretized
states in a box, @xmath can be approximated by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

which has been proved to be a good approximation [ 142 ] .

##### 2.3.3 Vibrationally resolved cross sections

Let us consider a transition from the ground state @xmath , with @xmath
, to a state @xmath in which an electron has been emitted from the
@xmath molecular orbital with @xmath kinetic energy and @xmath symmetry,
leaving the residual ion in the @xmath vibronic state. These are
Born-Oppenheimer states and can be written as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.50)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.51)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The corresponding dipole transition matrix element upon interaction with
linearly polarized light is given by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the total dipole operator ( @xmath is the polarization
vector of the field), which is the sum of two contributions:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

Inserting eqs. 2.50 , 2.51 and 2.53 into eq. 2.52 , we have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where the second term is zero due to the orthogonality of electronic
states. Then, the vibronic dipole-transition matrix element can be
written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

An expression for the photoionization cross section upon interaction
with monochromatic light is obtained inserting eq. 2.54 into eq. 1.26
and summing incoherently over all photoelectron symmetries (all values
of @xmath and @xmath ):

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.55)
  -- -- -- --------

where @xmath is the photon energy, which is related to the photoelectron
energy @xmath through the equation @xmath , where @xmath is the energy
required to produce the ion in the @xmath vibronic state. For the case
of randomly oriented molecules, one can compute @xmath for three
orthogonal directions of @xmath and then the results incoherently (eq.
1.27 ).

### Chapter 3 Electron dynamics initiated by attosecond pulses

The development of attosecond technology has enabled the real-time
observation of electron motion in atoms, molecules and solids [ 11 ] .
Experimentally, it is now possible to generate laser pulses of durations
of a few tens of attoseconds. These durations are of the order of the
period of revolution of the first Bohr orbit, which is 150 attoseconds,
thus opening the way to track and to manipulate electron dynamics at its
natural time scale. Due to their wide spectral bandwidth, attosecond
pulses create coherent superpositions of electronic states, inducing an
ultrafast response in the target. In this chapter we present a method to
evaluate the electronic wave packet generated in a molecule upon
attosecond ionization and the subsequent charge redistribution, applying
the concepts that have been previously introduced in chapters 1 and 2 .

#### 3.1 Wave packet dynamics

Attosecond XUV pulses can efficiently ionize molecules from several
shells, creating coherent superpositions of electronic states, i.e.,
electronic wave packets. In general, the ultrafast electronic response
to prompt ionization can be described in the framework of the
fixed-nuclei approximation since it usually precedes the onset of the
nuclear motion. In this work we have employed the static-exchange
Density Functional Theory method, explained in section 2.2.2 , to
evaluate the electronic structure of molecules. The electronic wave
packet generated by attosecond ionization can be written as:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath stands for the spatial and spin coordinates of the @xmath
electrons in the molecule, @xmath is the electronic ground state, @xmath
represents a continuum state in which an electron has been promoted from
the @xmath orbital to a continuum orbital with kinetic energy @xmath and
angular quantum numbers @xmath and @xmath and the time-dependence of the
wave function is included in the spectral coefficients @xmath and @xmath
, which satisfy the normalization condition:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

At @xmath the system is assumed to be in the ground state, i.e., @xmath
and @xmath . If the attosecond pulse is weak, most of the population
will remain in the ground state, i.e., @xmath , and the time-dependent
coefficients can be evaluated using first-order perturbation theory, as
explained in section 1.2 . We can thus make use of eq. 1.15 to evaluate
the continuum spectral coefficients which, for our particular case,
reads:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the polarization direction of the electric field and
@xmath is the energy of an ion with a hole in the @xmath molecular
orbital. After the interaction with the pulse ( @xmath ), the integral
in eq. 3.3 can be substituted by the Fourier transform of the electric
field @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the dependence on time is that of the stationary phases @xmath as
the wave packet evolves freely. The interferences between the spectral
components of the wave packet can be imprinted in different observables.

###### Electron density

As explained in section 2.2.2 , we employ a discretization technique to
describe the electronic continuum. The perturbed part of the
time-dependent wave function, that is, the part of the wave function
that does not contain the ground state (see eq. 3.1 ), can be
approximated by:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the integral has been replaced by a discrete sum, @xmath is an
index on the discretized photoelectron energies @xmath and the
coefficients of the discretized expansion @xmath are related those in
eq. 3.1 by:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the density of states [ 142 ] , which, as discussed in
section 2.3.2 , can be approximated as @xmath . The time-dependent
electron density can be evaluated by inserting eq. 3.5 into eq. 2.10 :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the number of electrons in the neutral molecule. After
some rearrangement, eq. 3.7 can be written as:

  -- -------- -- -- -------
     @xmath         (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -- -------

where we have taken into account that for @xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Eq. 3.8 can be simplified by making use of the following relations:

-   The integral of the absolute square of a stationary state is given
    by

      -- -- -- --------
               (3.10)
      -- -- -- --------

-   If @xmath , then

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (3.11)
      -- -------- -- --------

-   If @xmath , then

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (3.12)
      -- -------- -- --------

    provided the ionic substates @xmath and @xmath have the same spin,
    otherwise the integral given in 3.12 is zero.

Making use of these properties (eqs. 3.10 , 3.11 and 3.12 ), eq. 3.8 can
be simplified to:

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (3.13)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

We can see that the electron density is the sum of three contributions.
The first term is a stationary term that does not depend on time. The
second is constructed using continuum orbitals and thus describes the
emission of the photoelectron wave. The third term, built from bound
(Kohn-Sham) orbitals, accounts for the charge redistribution along the
molecular skeleton. The evaluation of the full electron density might
become tedious in some situations due to the large number of continuum
orbitals one may need to employ to describe the photoelectron wave (term
2 in eq. 3.7 ). Al alternative approach to evaluate the ultrafast charge
redistribution occurring in the residual ion upon attosecond ionization
is to employ the reduced density matrix of the ionic subsystem, as we
explain in the next section.

#### 3.2 Evolution of the ionic subsystem

We seek to analyze the evolution of the hole generated in the molecular
target upon attosecond ionization. The residual ion is an open system
that remains coupled to the emitted electron. Therefore, it can be fully
characterized in terms of its reduced density matrix, whose elements can
be constructed from the spectral coefficients (eqs. 3.3 and 3.4 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the double sum runs over the ionic states from which the electron
has been emitted with the same spin. The trace of the reduced density
matrix contains the population of each ionic state and the off-diagonal
terms provide the coherence between pairs of states. In the case of
ionization with monochromatic light, all off-diagonal terms would be
zero (except those involving degenerate states) since the parent ion
would be in an incoherent superposition of states. This is the situation
one would expect to find in experiment with synchrotron radiation where
the energy of the incident photons is well defined [ 43 ] . Due to their
wide spectral bandwidths, attosecond XUV pulses can generate coherent
superpositions of electronic states, allowing to investigate ultrafast
dynamics with the required time resolution [ 11 ] .

###### Electron density of the residual ion

The reduced density matrix (eq. 3.14 ) contains all the information
about the ionic subsystem and therefore can retrieve any observable
depending on its coordinates. In particular, the time-dependent electron
density is given by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Where the first term is time-independent since the trace of the reduced
density matrix is constant. By comparing eq. 3.15 with the electron
density of the full system including the photoelectron (eq. 3.7 ) we can
see that the former contains all the terms describing the ultrafast
dynamics occurring in the parent ion upon ultrafast ionization. Only the
terms describing the photoelectron emission, i.e., those containing
continuum orbitals @xmath , are not included in eq. 3.15 .

###### Hole density

An interesting observable is the density of the hole generated upon
ionization, defined by Lorenz S. Cederbaum and coworkers [ 32 ] as the
difference between the electron density of the ion, @xmath , and that of
the (initial) neutral molecule, @xmath , which does not depend on time:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the ground state density is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

and we have assumed that the reduced density matrix of the ionic
subsystem is normalized to unity, i.e.,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Fluctuations in the hole density might arise if several ionic states are
populated coherently, that is, if off-diagonal elements of the reduced
density matrix are not zero. Although, up to now, no experiment has been
able to measure the hole density of an isolated molecule directly, the
ultrafast charge redistribution accompanying sudden ionization can be
imprinted in observables that are experimentally accessible. For
instance, some fragmentation channels may be sensitive to the
localization of the hole created in the molecule upon attosecond
ionization [ 92 , 97 ] .

## Results

### Chapter 4 Interferences in molecular photoionization

X-rays can ionize matter from their inner and valence shells, producing
short \hyp wavelength electrons that can be diffracted by the
surrounding atomic centers. Consequently, scattered photoelectrons
convey structural information about the system, which can be extracted
by fitting experimental photoelectron spectra to analytical formulas.
Based on this principle, the NEXAFS (near-edge X-ray absorption fine
structure) and the EXAFS (extended X-ray absorption fine structure)
techniques [ 161 , 162 ] can retrieve structural information of crystals
and of bulk amorphous materials [ 163 , 164 , 165 , 166 , 167 , 168 ,
169 ] , where the relatively low intensity of standard X-rays is
compensated by the large number of particles in the sample. However,
obtaining structural information of isolated molecules is more difficult
because of the low densities of the gas phase. To overcome this
difficulty, in addition to the development of the gas-phase EXAFS
technique [ 170 , 171 , 172 ] , other methods are being explored. One of
them takes advantage of the high brightness of the X-ray free electron
lasers (XFEL), which can take time-resolved “pictures” through the
so-called photoelectron holography [ 173 ] . However, its practical
applications are still very limited due to the complexity and large
dimensions of the recently operating XFEL facilities. A more traditional
method consists of measuring molecular-frame photoelectron angular
distributions in photoionization with synchrotron radiation [ 174 , 175
, 76 , 77 ] . Also, recent work on diatomic molecules [ 176 , 81 , 82 ,
114 ] has shown that even the angle-integrated photoelectron spectra
might be a valuable tool for structural determination. Here we present
an overview of our most significant results on photoionization of
diatomic (CO, F @xmath ) and small polyatomic (BF @xmath , CF @xmath )
molecules with synchrotron radiation. We show that the interferences
arising between different ionization paths may encode structural
information that can be extracted by analyzing the role of the nuclear
motion. This chapter constitutes only a summary of the work attached in
appendices A , B , C , D and E , performed in collaboration with Piero
Decleva (Università degli Studi di Trieste) and with the experimental
groups of Catalin Miron (Synchrotron SOLEIL), Kiyosi Ueda (Synchrotron
SPring-8), Edwin Kukk (University of Turku) and Thomas Darrah Tomas
(University of Oregon).

#### 4.1 Intramolecular scattering in inner-shell photoionization

We have investigated inner-shell photoionization of small molecules,
where an electron is ejected from a 1s orbital of a first-row atom. Fig.
4.2 shows the photoelectron spectra of CO, BF @xmath and CF @xmath taken
at photon energies of 425, 383 and 518 eV, respectively, at PLEIADES
beamline [ 177 ] at SOLEIL Synchrotron. The experimental spectrum of BF
@xmath and CF @xmath (fig. 4.2 ) shows several vibrational excitation
peaks in the the totally-symmetric stretching mode (TSSM), which is the
most affected by the electronic rearrangement accompanying core
ionization [ 159 , 160 ] . Potential energy curves of the electronic
ground state and of the core-hole species generated upon C 1s and B 1s
ionization of CO, CF @xmath and BF @xmath , repectively, are shown in
fig. 4.2 , as well as the relevant vibrational eigenfunctions. They have
been evaluated using the harmonic (CF @xmath ) and the Morse (CO, BF
@xmath ) approximations using reliable spectroscopic parameters
available in the literature (CO: [ 178 , 179 ] , CF @xmath : [ 180 , 160
] , BF @xmath : [ 181 , 182 , 183 , 184 , 159 ] ). Photoionization of BF
@xmath leads to a large progression of vibrational levels @xmath ,
reaching up to @xmath , as a consequence of the favorable Franck \hyp
Condon (FC) overlap between the initial and several final-state
vibrational wave functions due to the large bond contraction
accompanying core-ionization ( @xmath [ 159 ] ). The progression is
limited to only two vibrational levels in the spectrum of CF @xmath
because the potential energy curves of the neutral and the ionic species
(fig. 4.2 ) are very similar in the region close to the equilibrium
geometry ( @xmath [ 160 ] ). The spectrum of CO shows an intermediate
situation: 4 vibrational excitations in the only vibrational mode of the
parent ion ( @xmath [ 178 ] , see fig. 4.2 ).

Fig. 4.3 shows the vibrationally resolved C 1s and B 1s photoionization
cross sections of CO, CF @xmath and BF @xmath , respectively, as a
function of the photon energy. They have been calculated as explained in
section 2.3.3 , using the static-exchange Density Functional Theory
(DFT) method within the Born-Oppenheimer approximation, and in the case
of BF @xmath and CF @xmath the nuclear motion has been restricted to the
TSSM coordinate. In good agreement with the spectrum shown in fig. 4.2 ,
we observe a large progression of vibrational excitations upon B 1s
ionization of BF @xmath , @xmath and @xmath being the dominant
contributions in the entire energy range. Only the low-lying vibrational
eigenstates or the parent ion are excited in C 1s ionization of CO and
CF @xmath , as experimentally found. In all cases, we can distinguish
that the photoionization cross sections (fig. 4.3 ) exhibit sharp
increases near the ionization threshold due to the presence of shape
resonances [ 185 , 186 , 187 ] . The origin of these structures can be
understood in terms of a quasi-bound state embedded in the electronic
continuum as a consequence to the existence of a small barrier in the
molecular potential. More subtle structures arise at higher energies due
to photoelectron diffraction by the surrounding atomic centers (O in CO,
F in BF @xmath and CF @xmath ). However, the rapid decrease of the cross
sections with the photon energy usually washes out scattering effects in
the high \hyp energy region. A better analysis can be performed by
taking ratios between vibrationally resolved cross sections ( @xmath
ratios), since the decay is the same for each vibrational component.
Experimentally, presenting the cross sections as @xmath ratios is
advantageous since certain calibration problems that one would face in
case of absolute cross sections can be avoided.

Fig. 4.4 shows the experimental and theoretical @xmath ratios a function
of the photoelectron momentum. For the three systems, the @xmath ratios
are calculated taking the largest contribution as a reference, which is
@xmath for CO and CF @xmath and @xmath for BF @xmath . The shape
resonances appear now as even sharper structures close to the ionization
threshold. At higher energies, the @xmath ratios exhibit pronounced
oscillations superimposed to a nearly flat background which are a
consequence of intramolecular scattering. The periodicity of the
oscillations is @xmath , where @xmath is the photoelectron momentum and
@xmath the distance between emitting and diffracting atoms, as in the
well known EXAFS equation [ 188 ] . Our interpretation in terms of
intramolecular scattering is supported by the good agreement with a
first Born model [ 82 ] (see appendices A and B ).

The agreement between theory and experiment is very good in all cases.
The excellent agreement between the results provided by the
static-exchange and the time-dependent DFT methods indicates that
interchannel coupling does not play an important role in core-ionization
and that therefore one can rely on the former to interpret the
experimental findings. In the case of BF @xmath , the overall shape of
the @xmath ratios is very similar for all @xmath ; for @xmath and @xmath
, the oscillations are essentially identical but appear inverted. The
reason is that all vibrational contributions are referred to @xmath . If
we choose @xmath instead, then the first four @xmath ratios would be
inverted. The same behavior is observed in CO and CF @xmath . These
results suggest that, for a given molecule, all @xmath ratios carry the
same structural information. In fact, as discuss in appendices A and B ,
the information contained in each individual @xmath ratio can be
gathered in a generalized @xmath ratio. In the case of BF @xmath , where
the vibrational progression reaches up to @xmath , the use of a
generalized @xmath ratio is very useful because it improves dramatically
the statistical significance of the experimental data.

###### Extracting structural information

As the oscillatory patterns found in the @xmath ratios are due to
intramolecular scattering, they convey structural information about the
system. In appendix D , we present a systematical approach for
extracting this information. As a proof of principle, we have applied it
to the simultaneous determination of the internuclear distance of CO (
@xmath ) and the bond contraction ( @xmath ) upon C 1s ionization. Fig.
4.6 illustrates of how the @xmath ratio @xmath changes when @xmath and
@xmath are modified independently. Since the bond contraction sets the
overlap between the initial and the final vibrational wave functions,
the @xmath ratios are shifted vertically when varying @xmath (left panel
in fig. 4.6 ). This effect is very sensitive because the FC overlap is
strongly affected by small modifications of @xmath , as can be seen in
fig. 4.2 . When @xmath is modified (right panel in fig. 4.6 ), the
periodicity of the high-energy oscillations changes because they are due
to intramolecular scattering and therefore depend on the distance
between the emitting (C) and diffracting (O) centers.

We have performed a @xmath -square minimization procedure in order to
find the values of @xmath and @xmath that provide the theoretical @xmath
-ratio that is in best agreement with the experimental points measured
at SOLEIL and Spring-8 (fig. 4.6 ). These values are @xmath a.u and
@xmath a.u. Details of the fitting procedure can be found in appendix D
. The @xmath ratios computed using these values and those taken from the
literature [ 178 , 179 ] : @xmath a.u. and @xmath a.u. are shown in fig.
4.6 as well as the experimental points. We note that the literature
values lay inside the confidence intervals provided by the method. The
@xmath -square function of the fit is shown in 4.6 as a function of
@xmath and @xmath , as well as the and the isocurves that determine the
bidimensional confidence regions for different confidence levels. Due to
the lack of local minima in the @xmath -square function, we note that
the fitting procedure always converges to the same values, regardless
the initial guess.

#### 4.2 Photoionization of F@xmath: multicenter emission

Young’s double slit interferences are expected to arise when an
electronic wave is coherently emitted from two (several) atomic centers.
As found by Cohen and Fano in the sixties [ 189 ] , these interferences
are imprinted in the angle-integrated photoelectron spectra of
homonuclear diatomic molecules. This phenomenon has attracted the
interest of various authors [ 190 , 176 , 191 , 192 , 81 , 117 , 114 ]
in the last few years. We have investigated multicenter emission effects
in the fluorine molecule by analyzing dissociative and non-dissociative
ionization from inner and valence shells. Here we present a brief
summary of our work, which is explained in detail in appendix E .

Fig. 4.7 shows some @xmath ratios corresponding to ionization from the
@xmath orbital as a function of the photoelectron momentum. We have
chosen @xmath as the common denominator because it constitutes the
largest contribution to the total cross section. As in fig. 4.4 , the
@xmath ratios show pronounced oscillations around the FC value as a
function of the photoelectron momentum. However, in this case they are
not due to photoelectron diffraction but to multicenter emission as the
electron is ejected from an orbital that is delocalized between the two
fluorine atoms. In order to confirm this assumption, we have extended
formula developed by Cohen and Fano in the sixties [ 189 ] to account
for the vibrational motion, as is [ 81 ] . The results of the model are
included in fig. 4.7 , where we can see that the agreement with the
static-exchange theory is very good. As discussed in appendix E , the
agreement is not so good in the case of @xmath and @xmath ionization
because @xmath orbitals concentrate most of the electron density outside
the molecular axis. However, even in those situations, the amplitudes
and periodicities of the oscillations predicted by the Cohen-Fano
formula are close to the ones provided by the static-exchange DFT
theory. Only the phases are not properly described.

#### 4.3 Conclusions

In summary, we have found measurable evidence of intramolecular
scattering and multicenter emission occurring in the photoionization of
small molecules at high photoelectron energies. The details of the work
presented here can be found in appendices A , B , C , D and E . When an
electron is emitted from a very localized region of a molecule, such as
the C 1s (B 1s) orbital in CO or CF @xmath (BF @xmath ), features due to
photoelectron diffraction are expected to arise, whereas in the case of
ionization from a delocalized orbital, like those in F @xmath , one
should expect to observe Cohen-Fano-like interferences. Vibrationally
resolved photoelectron spectroscopy allows to detect these high \hyp
energy interferences in an elegant and consistent way, because (i) the
problem of the rapid decrease of the ionization probability with the
photon energy can be avoided by monitoring the ratios between
vibrationally resolved cross sections, and (ii) the effect of the
interferences manifest differently in different final vibrational
states. The combination of state-of-the-art DFT-like calculations and
high-resolution third-generation synchrotron facilities has enabled to
explore these non \hyp Franck \hyp Condon effects both theoretically and
experimentally, demonstrating that the nuclear response to
intramolecular electron diffraction / multicenter emission is observable
and can provide structural information of both the neutral molecule and
the ionized species.

### Chapter 5 Ultrafast electron dynamics in aminoacids

Intramolecular charge transfer is the trigger of important chemical and
biological processes, such as photosynthesis [ 193 ] , cellular
respiration [ 194 ] or DNA damage [ 195 ] . The study of charge transfer
within isolated complex molecules was pioneered by R. Weinkauf and
coworkers in the 90s [ 36 , 37 , 38 ] . They were able to track the
motion of a positive hole generated upon ionization through up to 12
sigma bonds of a tetrapeptide by analyzing light absorption shifts.
However, the time resolution in their experiments was limited by the
durations of the pulses they employed, that were around 200 ns. One
decade later, by using femtosecond pulses, they could measure how long
it took for a positive charge to move from the phenyl to the amino group
in the PENNA molecule: @xmath fs [ 4 ] . In their paper, they suggested
that the charge transfer was probably mediated by the nuclear motion
through a conical intersection. Motivated by the pioneering work of R.
Weinkauf and collaborators [ 36 , 37 , 38 ] , Lorenz S. Cederbaum and
coworkers demonstrated that electron correlation can drive ultrafast
charge dynamics in a time scale that is faster than the onset of the
nuclear motion [ 32 ] . This phenomenon has been referred to as charge
migration to distinguish it from charge transfer mediated by nuclear
motion and, over the last two decades, it has been widely investigated
in a large number of molecules of biological interest [ 31 , 32 , 33 ,
34 , 35 , 93 , 94 ] .

The application of attosecond technology to the study of complex
molecules has lead to the experimental demonstration of charge migration
in a biomolecule: the amino acid phenylalanine [ 92 , 97 ] . The @xmath
amino acids consist of a central carbon atom ( @xmath carbon) linked to
an amino group ( @xmath NH @xmath ), a carboxyl group ( @xmath COOH), a
hydrogen atom and a side chain (R), which in the case of phenylalanine
is a benzyl group. A two-color pump-probe technique was used in the
experiment. Charge dynamics were initiated by isolated XUV sub-300-as
pulses, with photon energy in the spectral range between 15 and 35 eV
and probed by 4-fs, waveform-controlled visible/near infrared (VIS/NIR,
central photon energy of 1.77 eV) pulses (see appendices F and G ).
Ionization induced by the attosecond pulse occurred in a sufficiently
short time interval to exclude substantial electron rearrangement during
the excitation process. The yield for the production of doubly charged
immonium ions was measured as a function of the time delay between the
attosecond pump pulse and the VIS/NIR probe pulse. Fig. 5.1 a shows the
results on a 100-fs time scale. The experimental data display a rise
time of @xmath fs and an exponential decay with time constant of @xmath
fs (this longer relaxation time constant is in agreement with earlier
experimental results reported in [ 39 ] ). Fig. 5.1 b shows a 25-fs-wide
zoom of the pump-probe dynamics, obtained by reducing the delay step
between pump and probe pulses from 3 to 0.5 fs. An oscillation of the
dication yield is clearly visible. For a better visualization, fig. 5.1
c shows the same yield after subtraction of an exponential fitting
curve. The data have been fitted with a sinusoidal function of frequency
0.234 PHz (corresponding to an oscillation period of 4.3 fs), with lower
and upper confidence bounds of 0.229 and 0.238 PHz, respectively (see
appendices F and G ). The ultrafast oscillations in the temporal
evolution of the dication yield cannot be related to nuclear dynamics,
which usually come into play on a longer temporal scale, ultimately
leading to charge localization in a particular molecular fragment.
Therefore, these measurements constitute the first experimental
observation of purely electron dynamics in a biomolecule.

In order to verify that the observed oscillations are not related to any
nuclear dynamics, we have calculated the vibrational frequencies and the
corresponding periods of phenylalanine by means of Density Functional
Theory (DFT) using the B3LYP functional [ 196 , 197 ] and a 6 @xmath
311+g(3df,2p) basis set, implemented in the quantum chemistry package
Gaussian 09 [ 198 ] . The results are given in table 5.1 . Our
calculations show that the highest vibrational frequency is 0.11 PHz,
which corresponds to a period of 8.9 fs, associated with X-H stretching
modes, whereas skeleton vibrations are even slower, so that one can rule
out that the observed beatings are due to vibrational motion. In any
case, some influence of the nuclear motion cannot be completely
excluded, because, for example, stretching of the order of a few
picometers of carbon bonds can occur in a few femtoseconds, and this
could modify the charge dynamics [ 95 , 102 ] .

Fig. 5.2 shows an energy-level diagram of the electronic states of
singly charged phenylalanine (phe @xmath ) accessible by the XUV pulse,
all the states of doubly-charged phenylalanine (phe @xmath ) and those
of the system doubly-charged immonium + carboxyl. The energies of the
latter two systems have been evaluated within the static-exchange
approximation, which is accurate enough to provide a qualitative picture
of the full process. As can be seen, one can go from a highly excited
state of phe @xmath to the lowest states of the phe @xmath or the
dissociated system by absorbing just a few VIS/NIR photons (photon
energy around 1.77 eV). Of course, one cannot know how likely this
transition will be, but one can unambiguously say that the process only
requires absorption of very few VIS/NIR photons. Even if these
transitions were unlikely, e.g., due to unfavorable overlap between
initial and final orbitals, the transition should be much more likely
than others involving many photons even with favorable overlap. Since
the HOMO orbital of phenylalanine is substantially localized on the
amino group, ionization by the VIS/NIR pulse is expected to occur from
this part of the molecule. Therefore, the removal of the second electron
is sensitive to charge localization on the amino group.

In order to understand the origin of the ultrafast oscillations shown in
fig. 5.1 , we have evaluated the electronic wave packet generated in
phenylalanine upon ionization by an attosecond pulse similar to that
used in the experiment and the subsequent evolution of the electron
density. We aim to understand the influence of different radicals, so we
have performed a systematical study including the amino acids glycine
and tryptophan. For the evaluation of the ionization amplitudes and the
wave packet dynamics, we have employed the static-exchange DFT method
within the formalism of time-dependent first-order perturbation theory,
as explained in chapter 3 . The most stable conformers of glycine [ 199
] , phenylalanine [ 200 ] and tryptophan [ 201 ] are depicted in fig.
5.3 . It is well known that, even at room temperature, amino acids
present several conformations due to their structural flexibility. In
the case of phenylalanine, 37 conformers have been theoretically found [
200 ] . This chapter is organized as follows: first, we give the details
about the evaluation of the electronic stationary states and show the
relevant molecular orbitals of the three amino acids (section 5.1 ) and
the corresponding photoionization cross sections (section 5.2 ),
restricting the analysis to the most stable conformers at the
temperature of the experiment presented in fig. 5.2 . Then, we analyze
the wave packet dynamics initiated by an attosecond pulse similar to
that used in the experiment (section 5.3 ), performing a Fourier
analysis of the electron density on different portions of the molecules
and comparing our results with experimental data and with previous
theoretical work, when available. We conclude by exploring the effect of
molecular conformation (section 5.3.4 ) and the role of the
photoelectron emission dynamics (section 5.4 ) in the charge migration
mechanism.

#### 5.1 Evaluation of electronic states

We employ Slater determinants to represent electronic stationary states,
as explained in section 2.2 . The corresponding bound (Kohn-Sham) and
continuum orbitals have been evaluated in a basis set of B-splines and
spherical harmonics. In particular, we used a large one-center expansion
(OCE) of a variable number of B-spline functions, from @xmath in glycine
to @xmath in tryptophan, enclosed in a sphere of @xmath a.u. with origin
in the center of mass, using spherical harmonics up to an angular
momentum of @xmath (see eq. 2.19 ). The OCE was complemented with small
off centers, located at the atomic positions, with sizes varying from
@xmath to @xmath a.u., larger for the heavier nuclei since they
accumulate more electron density. The angular expansion in each
off-center was limited to @xmath . The LB94 [ 155 ] functional was
employed to account for electronic exchange and correlation effects. An
initial guess for the electronic density of the three amino acids was
generated with the Amsterdam Density Functional (ADF) package [ 151 ,
152 , 153 ] using a double @xmath -polarization plus (DZP) basis set in
the case of glycine and a triple @xmath -polarization plus (TZP) [ 134 ]
for the more complex amino acids phenylalanine and tryptophan. Since it
is well known that the LB94 functional overestimates the molecular
orbital eigenvalues, the first ionization potential of glycine was
calculated using the outer-valence Green’s function (OVGF) [ 202 ]
method implemented in Gaussian09 [ 198 ] , which can provide accurate
values of the ionization potentials of the outer-valence shells. Then,
the DFT/LB94 eigenvalues were shifted according to the energy difference
between the first IP provided by the OVGF method and the DFT/LB94
calculation. In order to obtain reliable values of the ionization
energies of phenylalanine and tryptophan, we have employed the VWN [ 154
] local density approximation functional within the Slater transition
state procedure [ 203 ] using ADF with a TZP basis set. The molecular
geometries where previously optimized at the DFT/B3LYP [ 196 , 197 ]
level in a 6–311+g(3df,2p) basis set (6-31+g(d) in the case of
tryptophan) using Gaussian09 [ 198 ] , starting from the approximate
optimized geometries reported in [ 199 , 200 , 201 ] .

Figs. 5.4 , 5.5 and 5.6 show the occupied Kohn-Sham orbitals of the
ground state of glycine, phenylalanine and tryptophan, respectively,
which were used to evaluate the corresponding wave functions according
to equations 2.17 and 2.18 . Glycine has planar symmetry and therefore
belongs to the @xmath point group and its orbitals have either a @xmath
or a @xmath symmetry. As can be seen in fig. 5.4 , a @xmath orbitals are
symmetric with respect to reflection thought the mirror plane and a
@xmath orbitals are antisymmetric and thus contain a nodal plane.
Phenylalanine and tryptophan belong to the @xmath point group because
they are not invariant under any symmetry transformation except for the
identity operation and therefore all their orbitals have A symmetry.

Neutral glycine, phenylalanine and tryptophan have @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath electrons, respectively. Therefore, the corresponding electronic
ground states constitute closed-shell systems that can be accurately
described using @xmath , @xmath and @xmath molecular orbitals. Core
orbitals are those constituted by the 1s orbitals of the “heavy” atoms
(C, N and O). The energy required to remove an electron from a core
orbital in these molecules ranges from around @xmath eV in the case of C
1s to @xmath eV for N 1s and @xmath eV for O 1s. They are thus not
accessible with usual attosecond pulses generated via HHG. Valence
orbitals, with ionization potentials ranging from around @xmath to
@xmath eV, are the easiest to ionize. They are highly delocalized,
especially in phenylalanine and tryptophan since they contain an
aromatic ring. Inner-valence orbitals present an intermediate situation,
with ionization energies from around @xmath to @xmath eV. In order to
describe the interaction with an XUV pulse, capable of ionizing from all
valence and inner-valence shells, the corresponding ionization
amplitudes need to be evaluated.

#### 5.2 Photoionization cross sections

We have evaluated photoionization cross sections of glycine,
phenylalanine and tryptophan from all valence and inner-valence shells
in the framework of the fixed-nuclei approximation, as explained in
section 1.3 . The results are shown in figs. 5.7 , 5.8 and 5.9 in the
energy range accessible by the attosecond XUV pulse used in the
experiment presented in fig. 5.1 . The energy spectrum of the pulse is
depicted in the figs.by a thick orange curve lying over a shaded area.
As expected, the cross sections decay with the photon energy. In some
ionic channels, we can see sharp structures near the threshold that can
be understood in terms of shape resonances [ 185 , 186 , 187 ] due to
the existence of small barriers in the complex molecular potentials.
Unfortunately, the use of a single excitation approach prevents us from
observing any possible signature coming from multiple (doubly, triply)
excited electronic states of the molecule embedded in the ionization
continuum.

From the figures, it is clear that the three molecules will be
efficiently ionized from most valence and inner-valence shells upon
interaction with the attosecond pulse. Only core electrons will remain
unaffected. In fact, for any energy within the bandwidth, we find
similar contribution from different ionization thresholds. For instance,
using (monochromatic) synchrotron radiation of @xmath eV in
phenylalanine, electrons would be ejected from orbitals @xmath A… @xmath
A and @xmath A would represent the largest contribution. This would lead
to a very delocalized hole in the parent ion. However, monochromatic
light would generate an incoherent superposition of ionic states and the
hole would not migrate. Due to their broad energy bandwidths, attosecond
pulses can generate coherent superpositions of electronic states, i.e.,
electronic wave packets, by emitting electrons with the same energy from
different molecular orbitals and thus induce charge dynamics along the
molecular skeleton. Note that this scenario differs from that considered
in most previous works on charge migration [ 32 , 93 , 31 , 94 , 99 , 96
] , where the initial hole is created in a given molecular orbital.

###### Comparison with experimental photoelectron spectra

In order to test the validity of our description of the ionization
process, we have calculated the photoelectron spectra of phenylalanine
for photon energies of 21.2 and 45 eV using the cross section values at
those energies (shown in fig. 5.8 ) and the corresponding ionization
potentials. Then, we have compared our results with synchrotron [ 204 ]
and He(I) [ 205 , 206 ] radiation spectra available in the literature.
For the comparison with the experiments, we have convoluted our
infinitely resolved lines with a Lorentzian function of @xmath eV width
at half maximum to account for the vibrational broadening and
experimental energy resolution, which is rather limited in these and
earlier experiments (the experiments cannot resolve the individual
peaks). The comparison between theory and experiment is shown in fig.
5.10 . As can be seen, the agreement is reasonably good. We notice
however that the experiment of Plekan et al. [ 204 ] was performed at a
photon energy of 100 eV, which is substantially higher than ours. The
other two earlier experiments [ 205 , 206 ] were performed at a photon
energy of 21.2 eV. Our results are in better agreement with the most
recent experiment, especially for binding energies below 15 eV. This
energy range includes the states that play an important role in the
ultrafast charge dynamics initiated in the molecule by the attosecond
pulse considered in this work (represented in fig. 5.8 ), as we show in
section 5.3 . The photoelectron spectrum is expected to be more
sensitive to the choice of photon energy as we approach the threshold.
The reason is that the ionization amplitudes can strongly vary with
photon energy for values below @xmath eV, while the variation becomes
smother for larger values, as can be seen in fig. 5.8 . This is most
likely the reason we find a better agreement between the high-energy
spectra.

#### 5.3 Ultrafast electron dynamics initiated by attosecond pulses

The first theoretical predictions of the possibility of observing
ultrafast charge migration upon prompt ionization of an organic molecule
can be attributed to Lorenz S. Cederbaum and collaborators [ 32 ] . In
that work, an electronic wave packet is generated by sudden electron
removal from a Hartree Fock (HF) molecular orbital of the
difluoropropadienone molecule. Then, the hole generated in the
electronic structure moves though the molecular skeleton because the
prepared state is not a stationary state of the ionic Hamiltonian but a
linear combination of several. Over the years, they have investigated
charge migration in a large number of organic molecules (see, for
instance [ 32 , 93 , 94 , 96 ] ). Here we consider a different scenario:
(i) we are using an ultrashort pulse with a broad energy bandwidth to
create an electronic wave packet in the parent ion, and (ii) we compute
the scattering states to obtain the actual photoionization amplitudes.

In order to verify the validity of our time-propagation method, we have
compared our results with those obtained by Kuleff, Breidbach and
Cederbaum for the case of glycine [ 93 ] . To perform a meaningful
comparison, we have started from the same initial wave function as in [
93 ] . The corresponding HF orbitals ha-

ve been evaluated using Gaussian 09 [ 198 ] with a DZP basis set. Then,
to study the time evolution of the hole density, we have projected the
initial state onto the Slater determinants built from the KS orbitals
(shown in fig. 5.4 ) that we use to represent ionic stationary states.
The projection leads to a coherent superposition of ionic states that is
let evolve freely as dictated by the relative phases resulting from the
corresponding energy differences. The evolution of the hole dynamics is
shown in figs. 5.12 and 5.12 for the cases of sudden ionization from the
@xmath a @xmath and the @xmath a @xmath HF orbitals, respectively. As
can be seen, the agreement between our results and those previously
reported [ 93 ] is quite satisfactory. In the latter reference,
two-holes-one-particle (2h1p) configurations were explicitly included in
the time propagation, so a direct comparison with their results provides
an answer about the role played by those configurations, which are not
included in our time propagation scheme. If we considered sudden
ionization from the inner-valence HF orbitals of glycine instead, as in
[ 94 ] , the agreement would not be so spectacular because in that case
2h1p configurations play a role. However, these are not expected to be
important in the dynamics studied here. The main reason is that a
transition from the ground state to doubly-excited (shake-up) state is a
two-electron process and therefore is less likely to occur via 1 photon
absorption than a direct transition to a one-hole (1h) state.

In the following, we present our results on the time-evolution of the
hole generated in the electronic structure of the amino acids glycine,
phenylalanine and tryptophan upon interaction with an attosecond XUV
pulse similar to that used in the experiment illustrated in fig. 5.1 .
As discussed in the previous section, attosecond pulses do not remove
electrons from only one molecular orbital but from several of them,
generating coherent superpositions of ionic states. Ionization
amplitudes have been evaluated for all open channels (15 for glycine, 32
for phenylalanine and 39 for tryptophan) using the static-exchange DFT
method [ 139 , 140 , 141 , 142 , 143 ] (see section 2.2.2 ), which has
been thoroughly tested in systems of similar complexity, and
time-dependent first-order perturbation theory (see section 1.2 ). From
the ionization amplitudes, we have evaluated the reduced density
matrices of the ionic subsystems using eq. 3.14 . Then, the hole
densities were calculated as the difference between the electronic
densities of the neutral molecules, which do not depend on time, and the
electronic densities of the ions (eq. 3.16 ). Because in the experiments
the molecules are not aligned, we performed calculations considering
three orthogonal orientations with respect to the polarization vector of
the attosecond pulse. The results were then averaged assuming randomly
oriented molecules.

Figs. 5.13 , 5.14 and 5.15 display snapshots of the relative variation
of the hole density with respect to the time-averaged values for
glycine, phenylalanine and tryptophan, respectively. In spite of the
very delocalized nature of the hole densities resulting from the
broadband XUV excitations, substantial redistributions take place on a
sub-femtosecond scale. These charge dynamics cannot be associated with
simple migrations between two sites of the molecules, as found in most
previous theoretical work [ 32 , 93 , 31 , 94 , 96 ] . However, despite
the complexity of the charge configuration calculated in a realistic
(i.e., experimentally accessible) situation, the concept of charge
migration is still valid.

##### 5.3.1 Fourier analysis on the amino group

In order to perform a more quantitative analysis of the charge dynamics,
we have integrated the hole density around different portions of the
molecule. Here we present our results on the amino group. In the case of
phenylalanine, these results can be compared with the fragmentation
yield of double-charged immonium presented in fig. 5.1 since, as already
discussed, this signal is sensitive to hole localization on the amino
group. A full analysis including different atomic centers is presented
in section 5.3.2 . Figs. 5.16 , 5.17 and 5.18 show the Fourier power
spectra of the hole density on the amino group of glycine, phenylalanine
and tryptophan, respectively, for three orthogonal orientations of the
molecules with respect to the polarization vector of the field
(indicated in the figures) and for the case of randomly oriented
molecules. The peaks appearing in the Fourier spectra provide
information about the frequency and the intensity of the charge
fluctuations observed in figs. 5.13 , 5.14 and 5.15 . As expected, the
complexity of the spectra increases with the number electrons in the
molecule as so does the number of 1h states are accessible by the pulse.

To better understand the observed dynamics, we have identified the ionic
states that are responsible for the most important beatings (indicated
in figs. 5.16 , 5.17 and 5.18 ). Each beating frequency is given by the
energy difference between the pair of states that originate it. The main
interferences involve states with holes in orbitals that are delocalized
between the amino group and another common part of the molecule, which
allows charge migration between the two sites. Also, we can see that the
dominant beatings involve states which are close in energy. In fact, the
greater the energy spacing between two ionic states, the weaker the
interference between them is expected to be. This can be easily
understood in terms of the coherences between the ionic states populated
by the attosecond pulse, which are given by the off-diagonal terms of
reduced density matrix (see eq. 3.14 ). If the energy spacing @xmath
between two ionic states @xmath and @xmath is large, then the kinetic
energy ranges in which the photoelectron is emitted when the two states
are populated are very different and therefore the corresponding element
in the reduced density matrix @xmath is small. If @xmath were greater
than the energy bandwidth of the pulse (and the two ionic states were
accessible), they would be populated incoherently because the
photoelectron kinetic energy ranges would not overlap at all and
therefore @xmath would be zero. Because of the large energy bandwidth of
the attosecond pulse considered here, all 1h states are populated
coherently, but coherences between states with similar energy are, in
general, higher.

In the spectrum of glycine (fig. 5.16 ), we can only see interferences
between states having the same symmetry because states with different
symmetry are populated incoherently. The reason is that, for a given
orientation of the field, electrons emitted from two orbitals ( @xmath ,
@xmath ) with different symmetry have, in general, different symmetry
and therefore the corresponding coherence term ( @xmath ) is zero (see
eq. 3.14 ). In the case of phenylalanine and tryptophan (figs. 5.17 and
5.18 ), although there are no strict selection rules due the lack of
global symmetry elements, approximate selection rules will apply. For
instance, one of the most intense beatings in the amino group of
phenylalanine occurs between the states with holes in the 41A and the
44A orbitals, both having nodal planes that contain the C @xmath N and
the C @xmath O bonds with very similar orientations.

It is clear from the Fourier analysis presented here that the hole
density not only provides information about energy spacings between
different quantum states responsible of the electronic beatings, but
also probes the specific dynamics generated by the attosecond pulse.
This is further illustrated in fig. 5.19 for the case of phenylalanine,
in which the calculated Fourier spectrum is compared with a similar one
containing all possible energy spacings with an equal weight. The
dynamics of the electronic wave packet generation by the attosecond
pulse is responsible for the fact that only a few beatings are observed.
These depend on the dipole matrix elements (i.e., the ionizing
transition induced by the XUV attosecond pulse) and the interference
between the different amplitudes, which are imprinted in the time
evolution of the hole density.

To illustrate that the observed dynamics in the amino group can almost
be entirely explained in terms of some of the ionic states that are
populated by the attosecond XUV pulse, we have carried out calculations
for phenylalanine in which only ionic states resulting from removing an
electron from the 24A, 25A, 28A, 29A, 31A, 32A, 35A, 36A, 41A, and 44A
orbitals are included in the free propagation of the electronic wave
packet. Conversely, we have also performed calculations in which all 1h
states but the above mentioned are included. The results of these two
calculations are shown and compared with the full calculations in fig.
5.20 . As can be seen, the full spectrum is almost entirely reproduced
by only including the above ten states. In contrast, the dynamics
resulting from excluding these states is almost inexistent.

##### 5.3.2 Fourier analysis on different atoms

Charge fluctuations on the amino group are most likely to be responsible
for the observed beatings in the experimental results shown in 5.1 . In
order to perform a complete analysis of the charge modulations on
different sites of the molecule, we have performed a Fourier analysis
also on different atoms of the three amino acids. Figs. 5.21 , 5.22 and
5.23 show the Fourier power spectra of the hole density integrated over
various atoms of the three molecules. As expected, charge fluctuations
occur with different frequencies on different atoms because they are due
to interferences between different pairs of states. Indeed, it is a
requirement for a beating to be observed on a specific site (atom) of
the molecule that the two states involved contain a significant part of
their hole localized on that particular site.

In the case of phenylalanine, beating frequencies in agreement with the
experimental observations were observed when the charge density was
integrated around the nitrogen atom in amino group. The hole densities
at different positions do not show clear and clean frequency components,
with the exception of the doubly bonded O atom in the carboxyl group. We
note that the VIS/NIR probe pulse is not locally absorbed only by the
amino group, but also by other sites of the molecule. However, the
simulations indicate that the periodic modulations observed in the
experiment are mainly related to the absorption of the probe pulse by
the amino group.

##### 5.3.3 Comparison with the experiment: Gabor profiles

The hole density on the amino group has been analyzed by using a
sliding-window Fourier transform which, at the expense of frequency
resolution, shows frequency and time information on the same plot. The
same procedure has been applied to the fragmentation yield of
doubly-charged immonium presented in fig. 5.1 . Fig. 5.24 shows the
resulting spectrograms in a temporal window up to 45 fs. The theoretical
spectrogram presents a dominant peak around 0.25 PHz, which forms in
about 15 fs and vanishes after about 35 fs, in close agreement with the
results of the Fourier analysis of the experimental data. A higher
frequency component is visible around 0.36 PHz in the delay intervals
below @xmath fs and above @xmath fs. At short delays, this component
favorably compares with the experimental observation of the frequency
peak around 0.30 PHz in the same window of pump-probe delays. The good
agreement between between theory and experiment strongly supports the
interpretation of the measured data in terms of charge migration. The
temporal evolution of the main Fourier components is a consequence of
the complex interplay among several beating processes initiated by the
broadband excitation pulse. Despite the agreement with the experimental
results, we cannot exclude that the nuclear dynamics, which are not
included in the simulations, also play a role in the temporal evolution
of the measured oscillation frequencies.

The good agreement between theory and experiment is rather remarkable in
light of the fact that simulations do not take into account the
interaction of the VIS/NIR probe pulse. The fact that the effects of the
probe pulse are not included in the simulations can explain why the
calculated intensities of the different beatings differ from the
experimental ones. We note that the beating frequencies have been
observed experimentally even though the initial hole density is highly
delocalized. An important result of the simulations is that the measured
beating frequencies originate from charge dynamics around the amino
group. This leads to the conclusion that the periodic modulations
measured in the experiment are mainly related to the absorption of the
probe pulse by the amino group. The mechanism that makes the probe pulse
sensitive specifically to the charge density on this group is still not
well understood. Moreover, we observe that, in spite of the large number
of potential frequency beatings associated to the wave packet motion
induced by the attosecond pulse, only a few ones manifest in the
experiment, thus reducing the impact of the modulations introduced by
the probe pulse in the analysis of the wave packet motion. These results
can be seen as the first experimental confirmation that attosecond
pulses and techniques are essential tools for understanding of dynamical
processes on a temporal scale that is relevant for the evolution of
crucial microscopic events at the heart of the macroscopic biological
response of molecular complexes.

##### 5.3.4 What about molecular conformation?

It is well known that amino acids exist in many conformations as a
result of their structural flexibility. Typically, the energy barrier to
interconversion between different conformers is small, of the order of a
few kcal/mol, so that, even at room temperature, thermal energy is
sufficient to induce conformational changes. Theoretical investigations
have shown that such changes can affect the charge migration process [
94 ] . In the case of phenylalanine, 37 conformers have been found by ab
initio calculations [ 200 ] , with a conformational distribution that
depends on the temperature. However, in the experiment presented in fig.
5.1 , performed at an average temperature of about 430 K, only six
conformers are substantially present [ 200 ] . Figs. 5.25 , 5.26 and
5.27 show the most stable conformations of glycine, phenylalanine and
tryptophan at 430K. The relative populations of the conformers of
phenylalanine have been calculated using statistical mechanics methods
based on DFT/B3LYP quantum chemistry calculations of the geometries,
energies, vibrational frequencies and rotational constants [ 200 ] . In
the case of glycine [ 199 , 207 ] and tryptophan [ 201 ] , the relative
populations were estimated assuming Boltzman distributions.

The ultrafast temporal evolution of the wave packet generated by the
attosecond pump pulse has also been calculated for the most stable
conformers of the tree amino acids. The corresponding Fourier power
spectra are shown in figs. 5.25 , 5.26 and 5.27 , together with the
results for the thermal average obtained by taking into account the
estimated populations (given in figs. 5.25 , 5.26 and 5.27 ). We have
found that, although the precise frequencies of the relevant peaks in
the calculated Fourier spectra depend on the particular conformer, the
spectrum of the most abundant conformer is very similar to that of the
thermal average. In the case of the most populated conformers of
phenylalanine (and therefore for the averaged results), the frequencies
at which the dominant peaks appear are in good agreement with those
observed experimentally.

#### 5.4 Time-evolution of the full electron system

The evaluation of the hole density generated upon ionization in terms of
the reduced density matrix of the ionic subsystem has allowed to
describe the ultrafast response of the parent ion to attosecond
ionization. In order to analyze the time-evolution of the electronic
wave packet created in the continuum, one needs to evaluate the electron
density of the full system, including the photoelectron. This can be
done by making use of eq. 3.13 , which retrieves the electron density in
terms of the the wave packet coefficients (see eq. 3.1 ) and the
corresponding bound and continuum orbitals. We have analyzed the
time-evolution of the electron density of the glycine molecule upon
interaction with an attosecond pulse similar to that used in the
experiment illustrated in fig. 5.1 . Fig. 5.28 (rows 1 and 3) shows
snapshots of the relative variation of the electron density of the full
system for different times, from right after the interaction with the
pulse to up to 1fs. For comparison, snapshots of the relative electron
density of the residual ion, calculated using eq. 3.15 and the reduced
density matrix of the ionic subsystem (eq. 3.15 ), are also shown in
fig. 5.28 (rows 2 and 4). For analysis purposes, we have chosen a bigger
cuttoff value ( @xmath a.u.) to generate the isosurfaces of the electron
density than that employed in fig. 5.13 ( @xmath a.u.). Note that
positive values of the relative electron density (purple surfaces in
fig. 5.28 ) correspond to negative values of the relative hole density
(purple surfaces in fig. 5.13 ).

We can see in fig. 5.13 that at @xmath the molecule is surrounded by a
bulky electronic cloud due to the presence of the photoelectron. This
cloud gradually vanishes as the photoelectron wave is emitted and, at
@xmath fs, the electron density of the full system is identical to that
of the residual ion. These results justify the analysis of the ultrafast
charge redistributions occurring in the system in terms of the electron
density of the residual ion.

### Conclusions

The advent of ultrabright light sources based on synchrotron radiation
and ultrafast pulses based on high harmonic generation (HHG) opened the
door to image molecular structures and to monitor and even control
electron and nuclear dynamics in their intrinsic time scales. In this
quest, theoretical modelling and numerical simulations have been probed
to be fundamental in the design of new experimental schemes and to
understand the complex outcomes of those. Methods based on the Density
Functional Theory (DFT) provide an excellent compromise between accuracy
and computational effort. In this work, we have employed the
static-exchange DFT method to evaluate the electronic structure of
molecules (from CO or F @xmath up to large amino acids) in order to
predict and to understand recent experiments performed in two
well-defined contexts: using third-generation light sources and
attosecond pulses generated via HHG. The development of high-resolution
third-generation synchrotron facilities has enabled the investigation of
vibrationally-resolved inner-shell photoionization in small molecules
made of first-row atoms of the periodic table. In chapter 4 and in
appendices A , B , C , D and E we have presented C 1s and B 1s
vibrationally resolved photoionization cross sections of CO, CF @xmath
and BF @xmath , which have been evaluated using the static-exchange and
the time-dependent DFT methods including the nuclear motion at the
Born-Oppenheimer level. By comparing our results with photoelectron
spectra measured at SOLEIL and Spring-8 synchrotron light sources, we
have found clear evidence of non-Franck-Condon effects that take place
upon photoabsorption. When the de Broglie wave length of the
photoelectron is comparable to the dimensions of the molecular target,
i.e., for photon energies of the order of a few hundreds of eVs, the
undulatory nature of the electron manifests as diffraction interferences
by the surrounding atomic centers. These interferences are imprinted in
the ratios between vibrationally resolved cross sections ( @xmath
ratios) as clear oscillations as a function of the photoelectron
momentum. As a proof-of-principle, we have used the C 1s photoelectron
spectra of CO to determine the internuclear distance of the neutral
molecule and the bond contraction accompanying C 1s ionization. This is
a surplus of photoelectron spectroscopy with respect to more
conventional spectroscopic techniques, which usually can only provide
structural information of neutral molecular species. Near the
photoionization threshold, where the continuum waves are sensitive to
the details of the molecular potentials, the cross sections show sharp
features due to the presence of shape resonances. From the theoretical
calculations, and the angular momentum decompositions, we have also
confirmed the existence of confinement effects as those previously found
in more simple molecules. In the future, molecules such as BF @xmath ,
CF @xmath or CO could provide an interesting workbench to study the
photoelectron scattering phenomenon in a time-resolved (pump-probe)
scheme using novel ultrahigh intensity photon sources like seeded FELs,
which now become available.

We have also investigated deviations from the Franck-Condon
approximation in the photoionization of molecular fluorine, by
considering electron ejection from different molecular orbitals using
the static-exchange DFT method. For the outermost shells, we have
included the nuclear degrees of freedom, which has allowed us to
describe dissociative and non-dissociative ionization channels. The
photoionization cross sections show an oscillatory behavior as a
function of the photoelectron momentum, which is the result of the
coherent emission from two equivalent centers. The observed interference
patterns are similar to those already explained by Cohen and Fano [ 189
] in the early sixties. These interferences can be described by using
very simple expressions that account for both the ratio between total
photoionization cross sections associated to different orbitals and to
the branching ratios between vibrationally resolved cross sections
associated to the same electronic ionic state. Both effects were
demonstrated in previous work [ 81 ] in other diatomic molecules, so the
present work reinforces the general validity of those findings. The fact
that there is a non-negligible probability of dissociation accompanying
valence-ionization could be exploited experimentally to obtain molecular
frame photoelectron angular distributions by using multi-coincidence
techniques, since detection of the charged atomic fragments provides
information about the orientation of the molecule at the instant of
ionization.

Since the generation of the first isolated attosecond pulses at the very
beginning of the present century, tracing ultrafast phenomena using
attosecond pump-probe techniques became a reality. The observation of
charge migration in complex molecular structures and, in particular, in
biologically relevant systems, is one of the main targets of attosecond
science. Although charge migration was predicted in the late nineties by
L. S. Cederbaum and coworkers, experimental evidence or reliable
simulations of the electronic wave packet that could be created by an
attosecond pulse were inexistent. In this work, we have investigated the
electronic response of molecules of biological relevance, the amino
acids glycine, phenylalanine and tryptophan, to attosecond ionization.
We have found that attosecond pulses can induce ultrafast charge
fluctuations over large regions of these complex molecules on a temporal
scale that is much shorter than the vibrational response of the system.
The work presented here differs from most previous theoretical work on
charge migration, where charge dynamics is initiated by removing an
electron from a given molecular orbital. Here, the use of the
static-exchange DFT method in the framework of time-dependent
first-order perturbation theory has allowed us to evaluate the actual
wave packet generated upon attosecond ionization. Because of the broad
energy spectrums of attosecond pulses, in a realistic experiment
electrons are coherently emitted from various (many) molecular orbitals
and thus the initial hole is highly delocalized along the molecular
skeleton. The application of isolated attosecond pulses to prompt
ionization of the amino acid phenylalanine has allowed the subsequent
detection of ultrafast dynamics on a sub-4.5 femtosecond temporal scale,
which is shorter than the vibrational response of the molecule. The good
agreement with our numerical simulations of the temporal evolution of
the electronic wave packet created by the attosecond pulse strongly
supports the interpretation of the experimental data in terms of charge
migration resulting from ultrafast electron dynamics preceding any
nuclear rearrangement.

### Conclusiones

La llegada de fuentes de luz ultra-brillantes basadas en radiación
sincrotrón y de pulsos láser ultra-cortos basados en la generación de
altos armónicos (HHG, del inglés “high harmonic generation”) han abierto
la puerta a la visualización de estructuras moleculares y al seguimiento
e incluso el control de dinámica electrónica y nuclear en sus escalas de
tiempo intrínsecas. El modelado teórico y las simulaciones numéricas han
demostrado jugar un papel fundamental en el diseño de nuevos
experimentos así como en la comprensión de los complejos resultados
procedentes de los mismos. Los métodos basados en la Teoría del
Funcional de la Densidad (DFT, del inglés “Density Functional Theory”)
presentan un excelente compromiso entre precisión y esfuerzo
computacional. En este trabajo hemos empleado el método “static-exchange
DFT” para evaluar la estructura electrónica de moléculas (desde CO o F
@xmath hasta grandes amino ácidos) con el objetivo de predecir y
comprender experimentos recientes realizados bajo condiciones bien
diferenciadas: utilizando fuentes de luz de tercera generación y pulsos
ultra-cortos basados en HHG. El desarrollo de instalaciones sincrotrón
de última generación ha permitido la investigación de procesos de
fotoionización de capa interna en moléculas pequeñas, constituidas por
átomos del primer periodo de la tabla periódica, con resolución
vibracional. En el capítulo 4 y en los apéndices A , B , C , D y E hemos
presentado las secciones eficaces de fotoionización de capa interna de
las moléculas CO, CF @xmath y BF @xmath , calculadas mediante el método
“static-exchange DFT” y su versión dependiente del tiempo, incluyendo el
movimiento nuclear a nivel de Born-Oppenheimer. La comparación de
nuestros resultados teóricos con los espectros fotoelectrónicos medidos
en los sincrotrones SOLEIL y Spring-8, nos ha permitido investigar
desviaciones de la aproximación Franck-Condon en procesos de ionización
de capa interna. Cuando la longitud de onda de de Broglie del
fotoelectrón es comparable a las dimensiones del sistema, es decir,
cuando su energía cinética es del orden de unos cientos de eVs, la
naturaleza ondulatoria del fotoelectrón produce interferencias de
difracción intramolecular. Estas interferencias quedan impresas en los
ratios entre secciones eficaces resueltas vibracionalmente ( @xmath
ratios), produciendo claras oscilaciones en función del momento del
fotoelectrón. Como prueba de concepto, hemos utilizado espectros
fotoelectrónicos de la molécula de CO para determinar la distancia
internuclear de la especie neutra y la contracción del enlace que tiene
lugar tras la extracción un electrón del orbital 1s del átomo de
carbono. Cerca del umbral de ionización, donde las funciones del
continuo son más sensibles a los detalles de los potenciales
moleculares, las secciones eficaces presentan estructuras agudas debido
a la presencia de resonancias de forma. La descomposición en momento
angular ha permitido confirmar la existencia de efectos de confinamiento
electrónico similares a los que ya se habían observado previamente en
moléculas más simples. En el futuro, moléculas como BF @xmath , CF
@xmath or CO podrían constituir un punto de referencia para el estudio
del fenómeno de difracción fotoelectrónica mediante el uso de técnicas
bombeo-sonda utilizando pulsos ultra-intensos de láseres de electrones
libres.

También hemos investigado el origen de las desviaciones de la
aproximación de Franck-Condon que tienen lugar en la fotoionización de
la molécula de flúor, considerando emisión fotoelectrónica desde
distintos orbitales. La inclusión del movimiento nuclear en el estudio
de las capas más externas nos ha permitido describir canales de
fotoionización disociativos y no disociativos. Como consecuencia de un
proceso de emisión multicéntrica, las secciones eficaces de
fotoionización presentan claras oscilaciones en función del momento del
fotoelectrón. Los patrones de interferencia observados son similares a
aquellos para los que Cohen y Fano [ 189 ] fueron capaces de dar una
explicación teórica en los años 60. Estas interferencias pueden ser
descritas de forma cualitativa mediante el uso de expresiones sencillas
que permiten calcular ratios entre secciones eficaces totales
correspondientes a diferentes canales iónicos así como entre secciones
eficaces resueltas vibracionalmente asociadas al mismo canal. Estos
efectos fueron previamente observados [ 81 ] en moléculas diatómicas más
sencillas, así que este trabajo refuerza la validez general de esos
hallazgos. El hecho de que exista una probabilidad no despreciable de
que la molécula de flúor disocie tras ser ionizada desde sus capas de
valencia podría ser explotado para medir distribuciones angulares del
fotoelectrón mediante el uso de técnicas de coincidencia múltiple, ya
que la detección de fragmentos atómicos cargados proporciona información
sobre la orientación de la molécula en el instante de la ionización.

La generación de pulsos de attosegundos a comienzos de este siglo ha
permitido la observación y el seguimiento de procesos ultra-rápidos
mediante el uso de técnicas bombeo-sonda. La observación de migración de
carga en estructuras moleculares complejas y, en particular, en
moléculas de relevancia biológica, es uno de los objetivos fundamentales
de la ciencia de attosegundos. A pesar de que los procesos de migración
de carga fueron predichos a finales de la década de los noventa por
Lorenz S. Cederbaum y sus colaboradores, no existían pruebas
experimentales sólidas ni estudios teóricos del paquete de ondas
electrónico generado por un pulso de attosegundos. En este trabajo hemos
investigado la respuesta electrónica de moléculas de relevancia
biológica, los amino ácidos glicina, fenilalanina y triptófano, a la
ionización ultra-rápida. Hemos descubierto que los pulsos de
attosegundos pueden inducir fluctuaciones de carga ultra-rápidas, en una
escala de tiempo que precede a la respuesta vibracional del sistema.
Nuestro trabajo es distinto a otros estudios teóricos previos, donde la
dinámica se inicia arrancando un electrón de un determinado orbital
molecular. El uso del método “static-exchange DFT” en el marco de teoría
de perturbaciones a primer orden ha permitido evaluar el paquete de
ondas electrónico generado por un pulso de attosegundos. Debido sus
anchos espectros energéticos, los pulsos de attosegundos son capaces de
emitir fotoelectrones desde varios (muchos) orbitales moleculares de
forma coherente, generando huecos que están completamente deslocalizados
sobre el esqueleto molecular. La reciente aplicación de pulsos de
attosegundos aislados a la ionización del aminoácido fenilalanina ha
permitido la detección experimental de dinámica puramente electrónica.
El buen acuerdo con nuestras simulaciones numéricas de la evolución
temporal del paquete de ondas electrónico apoya firmemente la
interpretación de los resultados experimentales en términos de migración
de carga ultra-rápida que precede al movimiento nuclear.

## Appendices

### Appendix A Intramolecular photoelectron diffraction in the gas phase

See pages 1- of blank.pdf See pages 1- of Papers/UedaJCP2013.pdf

### Appendix B Vibrationally resolved B1s photoionization cross section
of BF@xmath

See pages 1- of blank.pdf See pages 1- of Papers/AyusoJPCA2015.pdf See
pages 1- of Papers/AyusoJPCA2015-SI.pdf

### Appendix C Vibrationally resolved C1s photoionization cross section
of CF@xmath

See pages 1- of blank.pdf See pages 1- of Papers/PatanenJPB2014.pdf

### Appendix D Effects of molecular potential and geometry on atomic
core-level photoemission over an extended energy range: The case study
of the CO molecule

See pages 1- of blank.pdf See pages 1- of Papers/KukkPRA2013.pdf

### Appendix E Dissociative and non-dissociative photoionization of
molecular fluorine from inner and valence shells

See pages 1- of blank.pdf See pages 1- of Papers/AyusoJESRP2014.pdf

### Appendix F Ultrafast electron dynamics in phenylalanine initiated by
attosecond pulses

See pages 1- of blank.pdf See pages 1- of Papers/CalegariScience2014.pdf
See pages 1- of Papers/CalegariScience2014-SM.pdf

### Appendix G Ultrafast charge dynamics in an amino acid induced by
attosecond pulses @xmath

See pages 1- of blank.pdf See pages 1- of Papers/CalegariIEEE2015.pdf