### Introduction

Introduction to pulsars, including their discovery and peculiar observed
properties, are discussed in Chapter 1 . A simple pulsar toy model is
presented to explain the pulsating nature of this source. Radio waves
from the pulsar, travelling through the interstellar medium, undergo
numerous propagation related effects. A few of these effects can reduce
the pulse energy to zero level. These effects could imitate intrinsic
phenomenon like pulsar nulling. Thus, they are briefly explained to
highlight their true nature. Different observed pulsar parameters and
their stability on various time-scales are also discussed in the
chapter. Various single pulse phenomena reported in the thesis are
briefly introduced with examples.

Chapter 2 aims to provide necessary background about the currently known
radio emission mechanism physics of the pulsars. It starts with a
discussion on the structure of the neutron star along with the
properties and composition of its surface, which were used to build the
standard pulsar emission model proposed by rs75 . Origin of the coherent
radio emission due to the growth in the two stream instability is
briefly reviewed. This chapter also summarises, in detail, all previous
studies conducted to investigate pulsar nulling phenomena. Different
models proposed over the years to explain the mode-changing phenomenon
are also listed in this chapter to relate them to pulse nulling in
extreme conditions. Towards the end, primary incentives for the work
reported in this thesis are listed in order to assess these models.

Details regarding all observations, reported in this thesis, are
discussed with full details in Chapter 3 . Justification regarding the
selections of sources and observing frequencies for different objectives
are elaborated in this chapter. In this thesis, observations from four
different telescopes has been reported viz. the GMRT, the WSRT, the
Arecibo telescope and the Effelsberg radio telescope. Details about all
these telescopes are highlighted in this chapter including various local
setting which were executed during the time of observations. Details
about initial and basic analysis procedures followed for all our
observations in this thesis work are also elaborated. These include, (a)
obtaining single pulses from different observatories, (b) eliminating
radio frequency interferences related effects, (c) estimation of the NF
and (d) obtaining the null and burst length histograms from the
separated null and burst pulses. A novel approach to isolate weak burst
pulses among the null pulses is also introduced here for the first time.

### Survey of nulling pulsars using the GMRT (Gajjar, V., Joshi B. C.
and Kramer M., 2012, MNRAS, 424, 1197)

In recent years Parkes Multibeam Survey (PKSMB) has discovered many new
pulsars. Several of them show nulling behaviour in their discovery
plots. We have carefully looked through the discovery plots of many
pulsars, out of which, 5 promising candidates were selected for longer
observations with the GMRT. In Chapter 4 , the nulling behaviour of 15
pulsars, which include 5 PKSMB pulsars with no previously reported
nulling behaviour, with the estimates on their NFs is reported. For four
of these 15 pulsars, only an upper/lower limit was previously reported.
The estimates of reduction in the pulsed emission is also presented for
the first time in 11 pulsars. NF value for individual profile component
is also presented for two pulsars in the sample viz. PSRs B2111+46 and
B2020+28. Possible mode changing behaviour is suggested by these
observations for PSR J1725–4043, but this needs to be confirmed with
more sensitive observations. An interesting quasi-periodic nulling
behaviour for PSR J1738–2330 is also reported.

We find that the nulling patterns differ between PSRs B0809+74,
B0818–13, B0835–41 and B2021+51, even though they have similar NF of
around 1%. We showed this by comparing the null length and burst length
distributions using a two sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. Our results
confirm that NF probably does not capture the full detail of the nulling
behaviour of a pulsar. Thus, it can be speculated that, due to this,
earlier attempts failed to correlate NF with various pulsar parameters.

We carried out the Wald-Wolfowitz runs test for randomness to 8 more
pulsars. We find that this test indicates that occurrence of nulling,
when individual pulses are considered, is non-random or exhibits
correlation across periods. This correlation groups pulses in null and
burst states, which was also noted by rr09 . However, the durations of
the null and the burst states shown to be modelled by a stochastic
Poisson point process suggesting that these transitions occur at random.
Thus, the underlying physical process for nulls in the 8 pulsars studied
appears to be random in nature producing nulls and bursts with
unpredictable durations. Moreover, modelling of the null length and the
burst length distributions provided typical nulling and burst timescale
(i.e. @xmath and @xmath respectively), which were derived for 8 pulsars
for the first time to the best of our knowledge.

### On the long nulls of PSRs J1738@xmath2330 and J1752+2359 (Gajjar,
V., Joshi B. C., and Geoffrey W. 2014a, MNRAS, 439, 221)

A detailed study of pulse energy modulation in two pulsars, PSR J1738
@xmath 2330 and PSR J1752+2359, with similar NF has been presented in
Chapter 5 . The NFs were estimated to be 85 @xmath 2% and 81% for PSR
J1738 @xmath 2330 and PSR J1752+2359 respectively. The aim of this study
was to investigate similarity and differences between two high NF
pulsars.

Both the pulsars exhibit similar bunching of the burst pulses classified
as the bright phases , which are separated by long null phases. A
similar quasi-periodic switching between these two state is observed for
both the pulsars. However, using a new technique of
pair-correlation-function (PCF), we have reported significant
differences between these two pulsars. The PCF for PSR J1738 @xmath
2330 indicates that the mechanism responsible for bright phases is
governed by two quasi-periodic processes with periodicities of 170 and
270 pulses, On the other hand, the nulling pattern of PSR J1752+2359 is
dominated by 540 pulse quasi-periodicity, which jitters from 490 to 595
pulses. These processes are not strictly periodic, but retain a memory
longer than 2000 pulses for PSR J1738 @xmath 2330, while the memory of
PSR J1752+2359’s periodic structure is retained for only about 1000
periods.

Towards the end of each bright phase of PSR J1752+2359, an exponential
decline in the pulse energy is reported. PSR J1738 @xmath 2330 also
shows similar exponential decay along with a flickering emission
characterized by short frequent nulls towards the end of each bright
phase. We modelled the bright pulse energy decay for PSR J1752+2359 and
estimated their average lengths. A strong anti-correlation was found
between the peak energy and the decay time for all bright phases in this
pulsar. We demonstrated that the area under each bright phase is
similar, suggesting that the energy release during all such events is
approximately constant for PSR J1752+2359. The first bright phase pulse
profile and the last bright phase pulse profile show striking
differences between both the pulsars, hinting differences in transition
from null phase to burst phase and vice-versa between the two pulsars.
We report, for the first time, peculiar weak burst pulses during the
long null phases of PSR J1752+2359, which we call as inter-burst pulses
(IBPs). The IBPs are similar to emission seen from RRATs. The occurrence
rate of the IBPs is random and uncorrelated with the preceding or
following bright phase parameters. The polarization profiles for PSR
J1752+2359 obtained from observations with the Arecibo telescope are
reported for the first time. The total intensity and the circular
polarization profiles of IBPs are slightly shifted towards the leading
side compared to the conventional integrated profile, indicating a
change in the emission region. No such pulses were seen in the long null
phases of PSR J1738 @xmath 2330. Lastly, we do not observe any GPs in
our long observations unlike such pulses being reported at low
frequencies in PSR J1752+2359 EK05 . Hence, these results confirm that
even though these two pulsar have similar but significantly high NFs,
they show very different nulling behaviour.

### Simultaneous multi-frequency study of pulse nulling behaviour in two
pulsars (Gajjar, V., Joshi B. C., Kramer M., Smith R. and Karuppusamy
R., 2014b, ApJ, 797, 18)

A detailed study on the simultaneous occurrence of the nulling phenomena
in two pulsars, PSRs B0809+74 and B2319+60, is reported in Chapter 6 .
The observations were conducted simultaneously at four different
frequencies, 313, 607, 1380 and 4850 MHz, from three different
telescopes viz. the GMRT, the WSRT and the Effelsberg radio telescope.
The overlap time for each pulsar was around 6 hours between different
observatories.

We obtained single pulses at each frequency and the on-pulse energies
were compared across all four frequencies, which showed remarkable
similarity in the pulse energy fluctuations for both the pulsars. To
quantify these similarities, we obtained the NF at each frequency which
were found to be consistence within the error bars, at all four
frequencies for both the pulsars. Similarly, the one-bit sequences were
also compared using the contingency table analysis. To measure the
statistical significance of the contingency tables, we measured the
Cramer-V and the uncertainty coefficient for each pair of frequencies.
For PSR B0809+74, both the statistical tests showed highly significant
broadband nulling behaviour. For PSR B2319+60, the significance was
marginally lower for the pairs involving 4850 MHz.

We also scrutinize all the nonconcurrent pulses (i.e. pulses which did
not show similar emission states across different frequencies) for both
the pulsars to investigate their true nature. For PSR B0809+74, we found
that out of 12 nonconcurrent pulses, 7 (about 58%) occurred at the
transition point where emission state is switching from null to burst
(or vice-verse). Similarly for PSR B2319+60, we found that out of 158
nonconcurrent pulses, 82 (about 52%) occurred at the transition point
where emission state is switching. Thus, both pulsars showed remarkable
similarity in the overall broadband behaviour, also accounting the
fraction of nonconcurrent pulses at the transition points.

A slight difference can be seen for the exclusive pulse profiles, pulses
which exclusively occurred at a single observing frequency, between both
the pulsars. PSR B0809+74 showed significantly narrow pulses (except at
4850 MHz) aligning the overall pulse profile, while PSR B2319+60 showed
significantly weak pulses which are shifted towards the leading edge
compared to the overall pulse profile. However, a strong claim can not
be made regarding their true shapes, due to their small numbers. We also
compared the null length and the burst length distributions across all
observed frequencies which showed similar distribution with high
significance ( @xmath 99%) for both the pulsars. These results clearly
suggest that nulling is truly a broadband phenomena. It favours models
invoking magnetospheric changes on a global scale compared to local
geometric effects as a likely cause of nulling in these pulsars.

### Conclusions

Final summary of all obtained results are listed in Chapter 7 and their
implications are discussed. We have also combined the obtained results
on three different aspects of the nulling behaviour. In light of these
results, following interpretations about the nulling phenomena can be
suggested.

1.  NF is not an ideal parameter to quantify nulling behaviour,
    confirmed firmly by comparing low NF pulsars as well as high NF
    pulsars.

2.  Nulling occurs randomly with unpredictable length durations.
    Quasi-periodicities seen in the high NF pulsars can also be
    explained by the Markov models with a forcing function.

3.  Nulling is an extreme form of mode-changing phenomena which occurs
    on a global magnetospheric scale.

4.  Geometric reasons are less favoured as a likely cause of nulling
    phenomena due to the randomness and broadband behaviour reported in
    this thesis.

These results can also be extended to explain the peculiar emission
behaviour seen in the intermittent pulsars and the RRATs. Future work
motivated by these observations are listed towards the end of this
chapter.

### List of publications

#### Refereed Journal

-   Gajjar, V., Joshi B. C. and Kramer M., 2012,
    Survey of nulling pulsars using the Giant Meterwave Radio Telescope
    ,
    MNRAS, 424, 1197

-   Gajjar, V., Joshi B. C., and Geoffrey W. 2014a,
    On the long nulls of PSRs 11738-2330 and J1752+2359 ,
    MNRAS, 439, 221

-   Gajjar, V., Joshi B. C., Kramer M., Smith R. and Karuppusamy R.,
    2014b,
    Frequency independent quenching of pulsed emission ,
    ApJ, 797, 18

#### Proceedings

-   Gajjar, V., Joshi B. C. and Kramer M., 2009,
    Peculiar nulling in PSR J1738-2330 ,
    ASP conference series, 407, 304

-   Gajjar, V., Joshi B. C. and Kramer M., 2012,
    Broadband nulling behaviour of PSR B2319+60 ,
    ASP conference proceeding, 466, 79

-   Gajjar, V., Joshi B. C. and Kramer M., 2013,
    A survey of nulling pulsars using the Giant Meterwave Radio
    Telescope ,
    Proceedings of IAU Symposium, 291, 385

-   Gajjar, V., Joshi B. C. and Kramer M., 2011,
    A survey of nulling pulsars using GMRT ,
    Astronomical Society of of India Conference Series, 3, 118

## Chapter 1 Introduction

Pulsating stars (aka Pulsars) are one of the most exotic objects in the
known Universe due to their unique nature. Pulsars are highly magnetised
rotating neutron stars. They emit beams of radiation in a concentrated
emission cone which sweeps the surrounding sky in a light-house manner.
When this beam of radiation crosses the line-of-sight towards the
observer, a pulse can be detected. This train of pulses has a unique
period associated with it, which is the period of rotation of the
pulsar. Pulsars are known to emit radiation from radio to gamma-rays
frequency regime, although from widely spaced emitting regions with
different emission mechanisms. However, this thesis particularly focuses
on the study in the radio frequency regime only.

### 1.1 Pulsar Discovery

The first pulsar was discovered serendipitously in the late 1960s hbp+68
. Jocelyn Bell, a graduate student from the Cambridge University, and
her supervisor Anthony Hewish, were conducting experiments to study the
interplanetary scintillations. During these investigations, a train of
pulses was detected. In an interesting account by bell77 , the first
ever recorded signal from a pulsar was noticed as “a bit of scruff ” on
a chart recorder. The observed train of pulses, with 1.33 second
periodicity, were first thought to be terrestrial signal. However,
regular appearance of this signal following the sidereal time,
eliminated the possibility of terrestrial origin (the source was
subsequently named CP 1919 which is now known as pulsar B1919+21). All
different possibilities were considered, including a possible beacon
from an extra-terrestrial intelligence civilization. However, after a
few months of this discovery, couple of more such sources were found at
different locations in the sky, making it clear that the recorded
phenomena has a natural origin. The peculiar property of such short
periodicity allowed hbp+68 to conclude that, compact objects such as
white dwarfs and neutron stars could be the possible source. The
suggestion that pulsars are rotating neutron stars was also provided by
gold68 . This was indeed confirmed later when a pulsar with 33
millisecond periodicity was discovered powering the Crab nebula, which
is a supernovae remnant pac68 .

The existence of neutron star in a stellar life cycle was first
predicted by bz34 . However, a possible detection of any signal from the
neutron stars was never expected. Hence, the discovery of radio signals
from pulsars became the single most significant event to prove the
existence of neutron stars. Currently, more than 2000 pulsars are known
which exhibit a plethora of observed phenomena. Pulsars are fantastic
laboratory to test many physical and astrophysical problems. They were
extensively used to study the interstellar medium. Pulsars are also
proposed to be an important probe in the gravitational wave detection
[see joshi13 for a review].

### 1.2 Pulsar Toy model

Pulsar radio emission have been studied extensively to scrutinize the
emission mechanism. The radio emission was found to be highly polarized.
In an interesting study by rc69 , pulsar emission was shown to be
originating near the magnetic field lines. The rotating vector model
suggests, pulsar has a co-rotating radiation beam aligned with its
magnetic axis. The angle between the rotation axis and the magnetic
axis, also known as @xmath , produces pulsed radio emission (shown in
Figure 1.1 ) every time the radiation beam sweeps the line-of-sight of
the earth rc69 . This picture of the pulsar toy model is shown in Figure
1.2 .

The charged particles, bound to the magnetic field lines, are forced to
corotate with the neutron star. However, as the distance from the
neutron star rotation axis increases, the linear velocity of the
rotation of the charge particles also increases up to speed of light.
Beyond this boundary, the particles can not continue to corotate with
the star. This boundary, also known as the light cylinder , divides the
pulsar magnetosphere in two different regions, namely the open field
lines and the close field lines as illustrated in Figure 1.2 . The
region of open field lines allows the charge particles to accelerate and
escape the magnetosphere. The radio emission is generated inside this
open field line regions. The details regarding the production of the
radio emission is given in Section 2.1.4 .

### 1.3 Propagation of radio waves

The radio waves generated by the pulsar pass through the Galactic
interstellar medium (ISM) before reaching the observer. During their
travel, the signal experiences multiple propagation effects, such as
dispersion, scattering and scintillation, discussed below. Some of these
effects can be reverted to retrieve the original signal.

#### 1.3.1 Pulse dispersion

The ionised component of the interstellar medium disperses the passing
signal by introducing a frequency dependent delay. Pulse at higher
frequencies experiences relatively shorter delay compared to pulse at
lower frequencies. The delay in pulse arrival times across a finite
bandwidth can be seen in Figure 1.3 .

Quantitatively, the delay, @xmath in arrival times between a high
frequency, @xmath , and a low frequency, @xmath , can be given as
handbook ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here the dispersion measure (DM), which is an integrated column density
of electrons, can be calculated as,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here, d is the distance to the pulsar and @xmath is the electron density
of the ISM. For all the known pulsars, the DM can be measured very
accurately by comparing the pulse delay between higher and lower
frequency channels across the observed bandwidth (as seen in Figure 1.3
). The model of the electron density, known as NE2001, across various
line-of-sights has been approximately measured from independent
estimates NE2001 . Thus, DM of a pulsar also provides a good measure of
its distance with @xmath 30% uncertainty.

The dispersion effects can easily be removed from the DM of the pulsar.
The procedure to remove the dispersion smearing is known as the
dedispersion. There are two different ways in which the dispersion can
be reverted to retrieve the original signal (a) Incoherent dedispersion
and (b) Coherent dedispersion. During the coherent dedispersion, a model
of the ISM needs to be adapted to revert the phase delays. This
procedure is generally carried out during the observation time itself.
However, it is also possible to coherently dedisperse the recorded data
as well. While, for the case of incoherent dedispersion, signals are
delay compensated for individual frequency channels.

#### 1.3.2 Pulse scattering

Scattering of the pulsar signals manifest as an exponential tail at the
trailing edge of the received pulse. The irregularities in the electron
density of the ISM results in a one-sided broadening of the pulse. To
scrutinize the scattering phenomena, the intermediate ISM can be
presented as multiple patches with varying refractive index in a thin
screen. These patches perturbs the phase of the impinging radio
wave-front, causing a scatter of the resultant signal. A simplified
screen approximation of the ISM is shown in Figure 1.4 , in which the
multipath scattering can be seen at the observing end. Signals received
by the observer from different patches arrive slightly later compared to
signals that travelled unperturbed. Hence, an exponential tail can be
observed once the leading phase of the pulse arrives.

As can be seen from Figure 1.4 , the signal to noise ratio (S/N) reduces
substantially due to the scattering. If the scattering tail decay
time-scales matches the pulsar period, pulse detection becomes a
daunting task. The relation between the exponential decay time-scale,
pulsar distance (d) and observing frequency (f) can be presented as
handbook ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Lower frequencies show relatively longer tails due to the above given
relation. Hence, most of the pulsar searches are conducted above 1 GHz.
The ISM is also not uniform in different directions. The Galactic plan
and specially the Galactic center are regions where the electron density
highest and the line-of-sight passes through a longer path of electrons,
making search for pulsars a more challenging task in these regions.

#### 1.3.3 Pulse scintillation

Closely similar to the scattering phenomena, single pulses from the
pulsars undergo large pulse intensity fluctuations. This effect is
similar to the optical twinkling of stars caused by the Earth’s
atmosphere. Figure 1.1 shows varying pulse intensities, a combination of
intrinsic and scintillation effects seen for all known pulsars. It was
first reported by lr68 . The pulse scintillation is caused by the highly
turbulent and inhomogeneous ISM sch68 . Different ISM patches, as
mentioned in the Section 1.3.2 , also cause an interference pattern at
the observer’s plane. Due to the relative motion between the observer,
the pulsar and the ISM patches, the interference pattern also moves
across the observer’s plane. The relative velocity shifts the enhanced
and the reduced intensity regions to cause changes in the pulse
intensity. The time-scale of this intensity fluctuation depends upon the
aggregated relative velocity sch68 . Scintillation can also reduce the
observed pulse intensity to go below the detection threshold, making the
single pulse study a challenging task. sch68 has suggested that pulse
scintillation are correlated only over a limited range of frequencies,
also known as the scintillation bandwidth ( @xmath ) related to the
observing frequency ( @xmath ) as, @xmath . This matched well with the
early observations of ten pulsars by ric69 . The correlation bandwidth
for different line-of-sights can be calculated using Galactic electron
density model NE2001 . Hence, by using a relatively larger bandwidth
than @xmath , scintillation effects can be reduced.

Figure 1.5 shows only the peak pulse energy of around 5000 consecutive
burst pulses, of PSR B0809+74 observed from the Giant Meterwave Radio
Telescope (GMRT) at 325 MHz with 33 MHz bandwidth. The gradual fall and
rise in the pulse intensity is clearly evident. For an unbiased
treatment of the individual pulses, pulse intensities can be averaged in
consecutive blocks and each pulse can be normalized with their
respective block average. The effective peak pulse intensities,
normalized by their respective block average to remove the
interplanetary scintillation effect, is also shown in Figure 1.5 .

### 1.4 Observed pulsar parameters

#### 1.4.1 Integrated profile

Pulsar exhibits varying types of fluctuations in the shape of the
individual pulses. However, after adding many hundreds or a few thousand
pulses, a stable shape can be obtained which is known as the integrated
profile of the pulsar. The profile of a pulsar remains constant, at a
given observing frequency, irrespective of the epoch of observations.
The integrated profile is like a unique signature of the individual
pulsar and it shows wide variety of shapes and structures across all
known pulsars. A few such examples of integrated profiles, to highlight
their different shapes, are shown in Figure 1.6 . The remarkable
stability of the integrated profile suggest a stable emission process
for each pulsar. Hence, the study of the integrated profiles is
important to map the radio emitting regions. However, a few pulsars show
switch between different integrated profiles, a phenomena known as
mode-changing , which tends to occur for a few hundred to a few thousand
pulses (see Section 1.5.3 for details). There are also effects like
geodetic precession which causes a gradual change in profile shapes,
although number of pulsars, in which this effect is seen, are very few.

#### 1.4.2 Period and slowdown

The period of the pulsar, which corresponds to its rotation, is one of
the pulsar parameter measured with high accuracy. The period does show a
gradual slow down due to the loss in the rotational kinetic energy of
the neutron star with time. However, this slowdown of the period is only
one part in 10 @xmath second for normal pulsars. The slowdown of the
pulsar, presented as @xmath (= dP/dt), can be measured accurately to
predict the period of the pulsar at each epoch of observations. As the
gradual changes in the slowdown rate is related to the amount of energy
release by the neutron star, young pulsars show higher slowdown rate
compared to older pulsars. The rate of loss of rotation kinetic energy,
the spin-down luminosity, can be presented as handbook ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here, @xmath is the moment of inertia and @xmath is the rotation angular
frequency. For a normal pulsar with @xmath of 1 sec, @xmath around 10
@xmath s/s and @xmath of the order of @xmath [assuming spherical shape
with canonical values of mass around 1.4 @xmath ¹ ¹ 1 @xmath = 1 Solar
Mass and radius of 10 km handbook ], the loss of rotational energy is of
the order of 10 @xmath ergs/sec. However, the radio luminosity of a
pulsar is a significantly small fraction of this energy as most of the
energy of the pulsar goes in the emission at X-rays and @xmath -rays
frequencies along with the energy carried away by the particle winds and
magnetic dipole emission.

@xmath and @xmath are unique parameters which can also be used to
calculate other parameters such as the characteristic age and the
magnetic field. Pulsar exhibits wide range of periods, starting from the
fastest known pulsar PSR J1748 @xmath 2446ad with period of around 1.3
msec hrs+06 to the slowest known pulsar PSR J2144 @xmath 3933 ² ² 2 Few
high energy sources were found to show longer periods compared to this
pulsar. with period of around 8.5 sec mld+96 . Figure 1.7 shows the
@xmath diagram, obtained from around 2000 pulsars. The plot shows
scatter of points with two loosely bound clusters with a bridge joining
them. The clusters correspond to two main groups, which seem to show
slightly different observational properties. Pulsars with period less
than 30 msec belong to a special class known as the millisecond pulsars
. They correspond to old neutron stars which have been ’recycled’ by
phases of mass accretion from the binary companion, to radiate once
again. The big cluster at relatively slow rotation rate, with periods
between 0.1 to 1 sec, are the normal pulsars. In this thesis, radio
emission properties of only the normal pulsars have been discussed.

#### 1.4.3 Pulse Polarization

As mentioned in Section 1.2 , pulsar signals are highly polarized. The
plane of the linear polarization point towards the orientation of the
magnetic field lines at the point of emission. Hence, pulse polarization
measurements are useful to scrutinize the geometry of the radio emitting
region. Using the radio observations, four Stokes parameters, I, Q, U
and V can be obtained, where I is the total intensity of the signal,
while V is the circular polarization intensity. The linear polarization
intensity, obtained from Q and U profiles as L ( @xmath ), is also of
great importance to investigate. Along with these parameters, it is also
of interest to study the position angle (PA) of linear polarization
(Equation 5.7 ) as a function of pulse phase.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

The error in the PA can be measured as mli04 ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here, @xmath and @xmath are the root mean square deviations from Stokes
U and Q average profiles respectively.

rc69 has demonstrated that the emission in the radio regime originates
near the magnetic pole, using the PA changes across the pulse profile.
In the proposed Rotating-vector model, rc69 demonstrated the expected
shape of the PA angle changes as characteristic @xmath -shape curve by
simple geometric arguments. The expected polarization angle swing, as
the line-of-sight cross the magnetic field lines, matched perfectly well
with the observed PA swing for many pulsars. It should be noted that a
few pulsar also exhibit an abrupt 90 @xmath swing in the otherwise
smooth @xmath -shape curve. These kind of changes tend to occur due to
the presence of two different orthogonal polarization modes. The change
in their dominance can cause such abrupt swing of 90 @xmath . Figure 2
shows an example of different polarization profiles obtained for PSR
B0525+21 ² ² 2 www.jb.man.ac.uk/research/pulsar/Resources/epn , along
with the @xmath -shaped PA swing across the pulse profile. In principle,
the observed PA swing can also help to derive other pulsar parameters,
such as @xmath and @xmath using the geometry. Here, @xmath (also known
as the impact angle) is an angle between the magnetic pole and the
center of the line-of-sight cut on the emission beam measured away from
the rotation axis. However, a degeneracy can occur between an outer
line-of-sight cut (positive @xmath ) and an inner line-of-sight cut
(negative @xmath ) for limited range of active pulse longitude nv82 .

As the pulsar signal passes through the interstellar medium, it also
undergoes Faraday rotation, which is a frequency dependent rotation of
the polarization angle. The effect can cause artificial changes in the
PA, although these changes are large and can easily be distinguished
from the intrinsic PA changes. However, a careful calibration is
required using an artificial source before obtaining the four Stokes
parameters.

### 1.5 Single pulse phenomena

#### 1.5.1 Giant Pulses

Pulsar in the Crab nebula was one of the first source discovered through
its extremely strong burst pulses sr68 . These pulses, also known as the
Giant pulses , have peak intensities up to 1000 times higher than normal
individual pulses. Detail study of these Giant pulses from the Crab
pulsar has revealed that they are superposition of extremely narrow
nanosecond duration structures hkw+03 . Currently, giant pulses are
known to occur in around 10 pulsars. They are mostly reported in the
millisecond pulsars kt00 ; rj01 ; J04 . They have also been reported in
three regular pulsars ke04 ; EK05 , only at lower frequencies of 100
MHz, which remain to be verified at higher frequencies. In the earlier
studies sr68 ; kt00 ; J04 , it was reported that giant pulses have
significantly smaller pulse widths compared to average pulses. The
expected brightness temperature of these pulses reached up to 10 @xmath
K, making them the brightest source in the known Universe cbh+04 . They
also tend to occur near the edge (either near the trailing edge or near
the leading edge) of the pulse profile. The emission mechanism behind
the production of giant pulses, with this peculiar nature, still remain
unidentified.

#### 1.5.2 Drifting

A few pulsars tend to show individual pulses with multiple peaks (i.e.
subpulses), although the integrated profiles are smooth with single
component in many cases. For such pulsars, contiguous pulses are
reported to show marching of these subpulses across the pulse longitude,
also known as the drifting . The drifting of the subpulses was first
reported by dc68 . Figure 1.9 (a) shows sequence of observed pulses from
PSR B0809+74. The drifting of the subpulses is clearly evident here with
a periodicity of around 11 periods after which the pattern repeats
itself (see Section 2.2.2 for more details regarding the drifting
periodicities). rs75 have suggested the cause of the periodicity due to
a rotating carousal of sub-beams within a hollow radiation beam (as
shown in Figure 1.9 (b)). Each time the line-of-sight passes across the
radiation beam, it encounters a slightly different set of arrangements
of the sub-beams because of their rotation around the magnetic pole. As
these sub-beams are uniformly distributed, the patten repeats itself
after certain number of periods as each sub-beam is replaced by an
adjacent sub-beam. dr01 has proposed a method to determine the number of
sub-beams in the rotating carousal.

The periodicity of the drifting subpulses is defined as @xmath while the
separation between the subpulses in the individual pulse is defined as
@xmath . A significant correlation was reported between the @xmath and
pulsar age wol80 ; ran86 . However, in the largest survey conducted on
the drifting pulsars wes06 ; wse07 ; wel07 , it was concluded that no
such correlation exist. Drifting of subpulses can occur in both
directions, from leading side to trailing side and vice-versa. ran86 has
reported that pulsars do not have any preferred sense of drifting as
equal number of pulsars were found exhibiting different drifting
directions. wes06 ; wse07 has also concluded that drifting is an
intrinsic property of emission mechanism. However, for a few pulsars it
is not possible to detect classical drifting behaviour because their
subpulses are disordered. As pulsar gets older, the sub-beams structure
becomes more and more organized to produce detectable subpulse drifting
pattern wes06 ; wse07 .

#### 1.5.3 Mode-changes

The integrated profile of a pulsar is known to be one of the stable
parameter and in most cases, characterising cuts across the radiation
beam. However, a few pulsars display switching between different
integrated profiles. This phenomena is known as the mode-changing . In
all mode-changing pulsars, one of the profile mode is more favoured over
the other. This can be distinguished by measuring the amount of time
pulsar spends during each profile mode.

Figure 1.10 shows two examples of mode-changing pulsars. PSR J1725
@xmath 4043 shows two different modes with different intensities in the
trailing component. However, PSR B2319+60 shows three different modes
with significantly different profiles wf81 . The transition between
different modes are rather sudden for both these pulsars. In many
pulsars, the modes are classified as the normal mode/s (for more
frequent modes) and abnormal mode/s (for non-frequent modes).
Mode-changes also manifests itself in the form of changing drift rates
with different modes (see Section 2.3.2 ). For example, PSR B2319+60
shows slightly different drifting periodicities between Mode-A to
Mode-B, while the Mode-C shows disordered subpulses wf81 .

ran86 has tabulated different mode-changing pulsars and concluded that
mode-changing is mostly observed in pulsars with multiple component
profiles. The intensity of the central component was reported to enhance
during the abnormal modes ran86 . A few pulsars also show significant
changes in different polarization profiles, along with the total
intensity profiles, indicating a global magnetospheric change. Recently,
wmj07 has enhanced the number of known nulling pulsars by identifying
mode-changing phenomena in around 6 pulsars.

#### 1.5.4 Pulse Nulling

The abrupt cessation of pulsed radio emission for several pulse periods,
exhibited by many pulsars, has remained unexplained despite the
discovery of this phenomenon in many radio pulsars. This phenomenon,
called pulse nulling , was first discovered in four pulsars in 1970
bac70 . Subsequent studies have revealed pulse nulling in about 100
pulsars to date bac70 ; rit76 ; big92a ; viv95 ; wmj07 .

The fraction of pulses with no detectable emission is known as the
nulling fraction (NF) and is a measure of the degree of nulling in a
pulsar. However, NF does not specify the duration of individual nulls,
nor does it specify how the nulls are spaced in time. Nulling can also
considered to be an extreme form of mode-changing phenomena wmj07 , in
which pulsar emission goes below the detection threshold. Chapter 2
discusses the nulling phenomena in full detail.

### 1.6 Outline of the thesis

The aim of this thesis is to investigate the absence of pulses in
pulsar, a phenomena also know as pulsar nulling. The outline of the
thesis is as follows. The motivation for the work done in thesis is
listed in Chapter 2. It also discusses the emission mechanism as
proposed by the standard model. A summary on the previous work carried
out to investigate the pulsar nulling phenomena is also included in
Chapter 2. Chapter 3 discusses in details all the observations carried
out for the work that has been reported in thesis. Observations from
various radio telescopes are discussed and compared in the similar
chapter. The common analysis techniques deployed during most of the
observations are also listed in Chapter 3. In Chapter 4, details
regarding the nulling behaviour of various pulsars are listed. The
comparison has been made between similar NF pulsars in order to
demonstrate that, the NF does not quantify nulling behaviour in full
details. Chapter 4 also highlights the fact that nulling is
unpredictable. Chapter 5 presents a comparison between two pulsars with
high NFs. It is shown that both the pulsars exhibit similar bursting
behaviour, but strikingly different quasi-periodicities and emission
properties. Chapter 6 discusses the details regarding the simultaneous
observations of two nulling pulsars at four different frequencies.
Chapter 7 summaries the results obtained in three different studies
along with their implications. The future work to extend the work
carried out in the thesis is also listed in Chapter 7.

## Chapter 2 Background

This chapter discusses the peculiar single pulse phenomena, exhibited by
many radio pulsars, known as the pulsar nulling in full detail. The
basic background regarding different relevant works that have been
carried out, since the discovery of this phenomena, is also discussed
with details in this chapter. In order to understand the cessation of
radio emission, the chapter also highlights the standard emission
mechanism model. Towards the end of the chapter, various models proposed
over the years to explain the cessation of radio emission are discussed.
The chapter also lists the broad motivations, for the work carried out
in this thesis.

### 2.1 Pulsar emission mechanism

#### 2.1.1 Neutron star

Neutron stars are born after the violent death of massive stars. When a
core of a star attains the critical mass limit, after the ‘burning’ of
hydrogen, the core becomes unstable to support the balance between the
radiation pressure and the gravitational collapse. During this period, a
chain of events occurs in which star’s core collapses in a massive
explosion known as the supernova. The supernovae mainly ejects the rest
of the star in a vast energy release impulsively, while collapsing the
core further to form a neutron star. There are two main types of
supernovae events, namely type I and type II supernovae. Type II
supernovae is associated with the isolated massive stars. Type I
supernovae is classified as a contact binary system of a white dwarf and
a companion star, in which the companion star transfers matter to White
Dwarf, there by pushing it to the Chandrasekhar limit. To distinguish
between the two classes, their spectra can be studied. Type II
supernovae are hydrogen rich as it was still available in the envelop
surrounding the core, while type I supernovae are hydrogen depleted due
to their origin from the white dwarfs. Theoretically, type II supernovae
are more likely to form a neutron star because during the type I
supernovae, the white dwarf is also likely to get disintegrated rather
than collapse further to form a neutron star.

The neutron star avoids further collapse due to the neutron degeneracy
pressure . ov39 analysed the structure of a star consisting of
degenerate neutron gas. It was shown that degeneracy was so complete
that density and pressure are more important than the temperature. The
relationship between the density and pressure, also known as the
equation of state, have been modelled through multiple theories which
can be tested by the observed relationship between the radius and the
mass of the neutron star. Hence, these quantities are important to
measure for a large number of pulsars. Current estimate suggest the
radius of the neutron star to lie within a small range of 10.5 to 11.2
km gho07 . The theoretical limit on the neutron star masses lies between
0.5 to 2 M @xmath gho07 . The maximum expected mass of a neutron star is
about 3 M @xmath lp01 . Most observed values of the neutron star masses
are around 1.4 M @xmath handbook .

The structure of the neutron star is divided in two different regions,
namely the crystalline solid crust (about 1 km thick) and liquid
interior mainly consisting of superfluid neutrons. The density at the
surface of the neutron star is around 10 @xmath g cm @xmath which
reaches to 10 @xmath g cm @xmath near the core. The constituents of the
central region could be further exotic state of matter, like mesons or
kaons bay91 . At the exact core, neutrons are also likely to dissolve to
form quarks and gluons. The surface of the neutron star is relatively
less dense (about 10 @xmath orders of magnitude) compared to the
interior, hence its likely to be made of solid crystalline lattice,
mainly of iron nuclei with a sea of free electrons flowing between them.
The iron is more likely element to exist because of it’s high binding
energy. The surface is believed to be extremely smooth with structure
irregularity of only @xmath 5 mm because of the high gravitation
potential. Neutron stars are also proposed to have very thin layer of
helium rc72 and hydrogen on the surface.

#### 2.1.2 Magnetosphere of pulsars

Pulsars are known to be one of the highly magnetized objects in the
known Universe. The magnetic field strength of pulsars ranges from 10
@xmath G to 10 @xmath G. The high energy X-ray sources, known as
Magnetars , are known to have the highest magnetic field of 10 @xmath to
10 @xmath G while the old millisecond pulsars have low magnetic fields
of around 10 @xmath G. The direct measurements of the high magnetic
fields come from the absorption lines observed in the X-ray spectra
wdp+79 ; wsh83 . pac67 has suggested that, the magnetic flux
conservation during the core compression can cause magnetic fields to
reach up to 10 @xmath G for the neutron stars. This is possible to occur
if the interior of the neutron star is highly conductive. Although, the
high magnetic field has very little effect on the overall structure of
the neutron star, it can alter the structure of the lattice on the
surface rud74 . The primary loss of rotational energy from the neutron
star is also due to the radiation caused by the high magnetic field.

The region around the neutron star were first thought to be complete
vacuum due to their origin from a massive explosion which strips the
envelop around the neutron star. However, in reality, it is filled with
plasma of different polarities partitioned by the magnetic field, hence
also known as the pulsar magnetosphere . This plasma is accumulated by
pulling the charged particles from the surface of the neutron star.
deu55 was first to suggest this scenario, before the discovery of
pulsars, in which rotating magnetized star would generate enough
electric field to accelerate particle to substantial energies. Thus, he
also suggested that accelerating particles from these magnetized star
could produce cosmic rays, an idea persist to the present day. gol68
suggested a model in which a bunch of particles were proposed to
corotate with the pulsar, trapped in the equatorial magnetic field.
However, no explanation was given regarding how such bunch would remain
stable. This model was the first to propose bunching of particles which
influenced future work. og69 proposed a model for oblique rotator, where
the magnetic and the rotation axes are not aligned, in which the loss of
rotational energy was associated with the low frequency magnetic dipole
radiation. The non-alignment will cause the magnetic dipole to radiate
pulses. gj69 were the first to formalize the magnetosphere around
pulsars using a simple aligned rotator case. They extended the model
proposed by deu55 for the neutron stars. Although, the gj69 model does
not describe a realistic scenario, it was important work because it
demonstrated, using simple electrostatics, that region surrounding the
pulsar is filled with plasma of two different polarities. Multiple work
for the oblique rotator have been conducted using numerical simulations
to extend the gj69 interpretation of the magnetosphere km85 ; ckf99 ;
spi04 . The origin of this plasma was proposed as follows, for an
aligned rotator gj69 .

The induced electric field ( E @xmath ) at a distance (r) due to the
rotation of the neutron star with magnetic field ( B ) would be around,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here, @xmath is the angular velocity of the pulsar. For an aligned
rotator, as assumed by gj69 , the rotation and the magnetic axes point
in the @xmath direction with the neutron star at the center. The angular
velocity in such case can be simplified in polar coordinates as,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Similarly, the aligned dipole magnetic field at a distance r, from the
center of the conducting sphere (neutron star) with radius R, can also
be presented as jackson ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here, @xmath is the surface magnetic field near the pole, which can also
be given as, @xmath , where, @xmath is the magnetic dipole moment. By
putting equations 2.2 and 2.3 into equation 2.1 , we can obtain the
induced electric field inside the neutron star ( @xmath for @xmath ) as,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

As mentioned in Section 2.1.1 , the crust region is highly conductive
for the neutron stars. Thus, the charges will move and arrange inside
the star to cancel the induced electric field. If outside of the sphere
is taken as a vacuum in the initial conditions, the boundary conditions
will allow the estimate of the electrostatics potential near the surface
as,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

The external electric field can be derived by taking a gradient of the
above mentioned electric potential as,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

It can be shown from equations 2.3 , 2.4 and 2.6 that, @xmath while
@xmath . Hence, the component of the electric field ( @xmath ) aligning
the magnetic field and perpendicular to the surface at the the polar cap
( @xmath ) can be given as handbook ; gho07 ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

The force exerted by the perpendicular induced electric field (equation
2.7 ) on the surface is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

For a pulsar with the magnetic field of around 10 @xmath G, the force
exerted by the induced electric field exceeds the gravitation force on
the charge particles of the neutron star by many orders of magnitude
(around 10 @xmath for protons and more for electrons). Hence, particles
get pulled out from the surface of the neutron star to cancel the
electric field component (making @xmath ). Moreover, the starting
conditions of vacuum around the neutron star is no longer valid as it
gets filled with the plasma supplied from the surface. These charge
particles also experience, due to the toroidal component of the electric
field (E @xmath to the magnetic field), @xmath drift, which force them
to corotate rigidly with the neutron star. However, particles bounded
inside the magnetosphere can only corotate to the point where their
rotational velocity ( @xmath ) do not cross the upper bound of the speed
of light, c. This boundary is also known as the light-cylinder as
mentioned in the Chapter 1 and shown Figure 2.1 , reproduce here with
aligned axes. The radius of the light-cylinder (R @xmath ) is given by,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

For a pulsar with a period around 1 sec, the light-cylinder radius is
around 5 @xmath cm. As mentioned in Section 1.2 , the light-cylinder
divides the magnetic field lines in two separate regions, closed field
lines and open field lines.

At any instance the magnetosphere acquires certain charge distribution,
by pulling out particles from the surface, to cancel the induced
electric field outside the neutron star to keep @xmath (replacing @xmath
with @xmath for simplicity). The charge distribution, required for the
corotation and validity of the force free conditions (for r @xmath
@xmath ), is known as the Goldreich-Julian (GJ henceforth) charge
distribution and can also be expressed as gj69 ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using equations, 2.2 and 2.3 , the charge density of the particles in
the magnetosphere can be estimated as,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

The @xmath is known as the Goldreich-Julian charge density and it plays
essential role in building the pulsar emission model. The charge
density, at the polar cap for a pulsar with period of around 1 sec and
magnetic field of @xmath G, is around @xmath cm @xmath . As can be seen
from equation 2.11 , the magnetosphere of the pulsar consist of charges
with two different polarities, with a boundary at @xmath . Figure 2.1
shows the distribution of the different polarity charge particles for an
aligned rotator as assumed by gj69 and aro81 . rs75 assumed an
anti-parallel alignment of rotation and magnetic axes, hence giving
opposite polarity of charge distributions from the one shown in Figure
2.1 . In both cases, the charge separated magnetosphere maintains @xmath
in all regions.

#### 2.1.3 Sparking

In the open field line region, the particles are not bounded. Thus,
travelling through the open field lines, they escape the magnetosphere.
This creates depletion of charge particles on top of the polar cap
region, causing a non-zero electric field with @xmath . The potential
drop keeps growing on top of the polar cap as particles depart. Part of
the magnetosphere, with sufficient charge particles to keep @xmath ,
pulls away from the surface of the neutron star at polar cap and a gap
forms, which is the origin of the radio emission according to the
standard model [ rs75 ; also referred to as RS model henceforth]. This
gap is also known as the inner gap and it occurs on either poles due to
quadratic nature of the electric field. The radius of the inner gap (
@xmath ) extends from the magnetic field axis at the center to the last
open field line. The RS model argues that iron nuclei (ion) has higher
bounding energy and hence they can not be pulled out from the surface of
the neutron star, while electrons can be pulled out easily from the
surface as their binding energies are much lower. This is known as the
binding energy problem. If the binding energy of the ion decreases, they
can continuously flow from the surface and no such gap will grow.
Consequences of such event has important implication in different pulsar
nulling models (see Section 2.4.2 )

For the inner gap with height h, the potential across the gap ( @xmath )
can be given in terms of the surface magnetic field @xmath and charge
density @xmath as rs75 ; gho07 ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

As the gap between the neutron star surface and the magnetosphere (
@xmath ) grows, the potential drop also increases ( @xmath ). At the
instance when the gap height reaches to a limit where its equivalent to
the polar cap radius ( @xmath ), the gap attains maximum potential
difference, suggested by the RS model as,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath is the surface magnetic field in units of @xmath G and
@xmath is the total magnetic open field line flux. However, before it
acquires this limit, an avalanche of electron-positron pairs will
discharge the gap potential. The discharge occurs due to the interaction
of high energy background photons ( @xmath -rays) with the high magnetic
field lines on top of the polar cap. Under the influence of high
magnetic field, a @xmath -ray photon splits into an electron-positron (
@xmath ) pair. The gap potential then accelerates both these particles
to relativistic velocities along the curved magnetic field lines in
different directions. Depending upon the direction of the electric field
(given model), positron or electron escapes the gap while the other
falls back and hits the polar cap region. According to the RS model,
positrons were speculated to escape the polar gap while the electrons
travel back towards the surface (as shown in Figure 2.2 ). The energy of
these particles, accelerate to relativistic velocities, is around @xmath
eV. Here, @xmath is the gap height in units of @xmath cm, while @xmath
is the pulsar period in seconds. The particle with this energy, moving
in the curvature field lines, again emits high energy photon which in
turn, again creates another electron-positron pair and so on [see stu71
; rs75 ; aro83b and Figure 2.2 ]. dh86 have also suggested an
alternative mechanism to produce pairs by an inverse Compton scattering
the low-energy thermal photons by the accelerated charged particles. The
low-energy photons may come from the surface through simple blackbody
radiation due to the high neutron stars temperatures. It is not very
clear which of these processes drives the pair creation but either of
them create an avalanche of pairs, within @xmath cm from the surface to
discharge the gap potential. This process repeats as the particles
depart from the open field line region and gap again starts to grow.
stu71 was the first one to suggest the above mentioned model of pairs
production through curvature radiation and continuous ejection of
particle from the magnetic poles at a controlled rate in pulsars. The
localized spots on the polar cap, where the magnetic field lines that
caused the breakdown are anchored, are known as “sparks” . Thus, the
above discussed phenomena is also known as sparking rs75 .

stu71 and rs75 discussed the necessary conditions for the sparking. As
pulsar gets older, it’s rotation period gets slower and slower and hence
the maximum achievable polar gap potential ( @xmath shown in equation
2.13 ) drops down. For these pulsars. the gap potential is not
sufficient to create sparking and hence the necessary conditions for
radio emission, discussed below, will cease. This is the death of a
pulsar! Figure 2.3 shows the @xmath diagram, also discussed in Chapter
1. Its clearly evident that, very few pulsars (only two or three) exist
beyond the theoretically estimated death line using the standard dipole
approximation cr93 . According to the standard model, pulsars are born
in the upper left corner and they progress slowly to the island of
normal pulsars. They eventually evolve to go beyond the death line into
the what is known as the pulsar graveyard at the lower right corner in
the @xmath diagram.

#### 2.1.4 Radio emission

Extensive research have been focused on developing the emission
mechanism model which can give rise to observed phenomena in radio
pulsars. The mechanism to generate the radio waves, with the brightness
temperature of around @xmath , is of main interest in pulsar
phenomenology. It became clear in the early days that such mechanism has
to be of coherent nature, as non of the incoherent phenomena can account
for such bright radiation. If there are N particles emitting coherently,
the resulting emission would enhance by @xmath times the emission from a
single particle during the coherent mechanism, while it only enhances by
@xmath times during the incoherent mechanism. The coherent emission
models can broadly be divided into three main groups of theories, viz.
(a) emission by the coherent bunches [see rs75 ; cr77 ; bb77 and
references therein], (b) maser emission, corresponding to negative
absorption [see bla75 ; mel78 ; mel92b and references therein] and (c)
reactive instability due to an intrinsically growing wave mode ab86 ;
bgi88 ; aps90 . Each of these models have their own numerous variants,
which is beyond the scope of this thesis to discuss [for a review see
mic91 ]. Among these theories, the two-stream instability to cause
bunching is the most favoured one as it has been considered by many
authors rs75 ; bb77 ; cr77 ; uso87 ; uu88 ; mgp00 ; uso02 and will be
discussed further here. Broadly the origin of the two-stream instability
can be expressed as follows.

Positrons which escape the gap on top of the polar cap, acquire
relativistic velocities with Lorentz factor, @xmath , reaching up to
@xmath , which are also know as the primary particles. These high energy
primary particles do not get further acceleration beyond the gap as they
enter the region of the magnetosphere where @xmath with @xmath charge
density. Travelling in the curved magnetic field lines, they emit high
energy photons through curvature radiation. A few of these photons again
interact with the magnetic field to produce further pairs of @xmath ,
which are known as the secondary particles. However, the energies of
these secondary particles are much lower (with @xmath of around @xmath
). In the absence of any accelerating electric field, both secondary
particles pair travel in the outward direction, along the curved field
line to conserve the momentum. These particles are the prime source in
three different variants of two-stream instability theories which can
give rise to the observed radio emission, viz. (a) interaction between
primary and secondary particles rs75 , (b) electrostatic interaction
between electron and positron of the secondary particles cr77 , (c)
interaction between clouds of secondary plasma uso87 ; uu88 ; mgp00 .

According to the RS model, the most energetic positrons ( @xmath )
radiate away most of their energies within @xmath cm from the stellar
surface after leaving the gap. Most of these energies get converted to
outward moving secondary particle pairs as discussed above. It can be
shown that curvature radiation from these secondary particles falls in
the radio regime rs75 . However, incoherent radiation from individual
secondary particle can not give rise to bright radio emission seen in
pulsars. To generate coherent radiation from these particle, they have
to form bunches . Bunching occurs due to the Coulomb interaction between
the relativistic secondary particles with the passing ultra-relativistic
positrons. These positrons, generated at the later stage of the gap
discharge, when the gap potential has decreased substantially, travel
much further in the magnetosphere without losing much of their energies.
Due to their negligible energy loss, they catch up and pass through the
slow moving secondary particles cloud which causes the two-stream
instability to grow and enhance the curvature radiation from bunches.
Similar formalism was also suggested by stu71 . However, bb77 have
obtained more precise estimate on the development of the bunches and
showed that, the beams of primary particles passing through the
secondary pairs do not have enough time to develop two-stream
instability. These authors have also tried to correct the RS model by
invoking ion beams, originating from surface along with the positrons.

In other models of two-stream instability, cr77 have suggested
interaction between electrons and positrons in the secondary particle
pairs. It was shown by these authors that, when the secondary particles
cloud moves along the curved magnetic field lines of a rotating
magnetosphere, a relative streaming between electron and positron causes
two-stream instability to grow and form bunches. The resultant bunch,
travelling in the curved field lines, give rise to the observed radio
emission. Similarly, uso87 has suggested interaction between two
consecutive secondary pair clouds with different momenta, which leads to
two-stream instability at a distance of around @xmath cm from the
surface. At these heights, the high energy particles from a lower cloud
catch up with the slow moving low energy particles from a cloud going
ahead of it, which causes the two-stream instability to develop. mgp00
extended this model further by introducing the concept of plasma
solitons , which emit curvature radiation in the radio regime.

In the above mentioned three models, the basic assumption is the
non-stationary nature of the pair creation. However, as79 and aro81 have
invoked steady pair creation, which, according to uso87 , may be just
time average values. It is not very clear that which of the coherent
emission models is operating in pulsars. Observational constraints on
the emission heights has, however, confirmed the origin of emission near
50 stellar radius. At these heights, it is unlikely for the plasma
instability models to be active as they are expected to occur at much
higher heights. The other coherent mechanism, maser emission, requires
much stronger magnetic field and thus fails to operate in millisecond
pulsars which have magnetic field of around @xmath G. Hence, many years
of extensive study has pointed out the bunching mechanism as the most
viable coherent mechanism operating in rotation powered pulsars.
However, it is not very clear which of the two-stream instability model
is responsible for bright radio emission.

### 2.2 Radiation beam

The coherent radiation from pulsars, originating from one of the above
mentioned emission model, give rise to conical beam of emission with the
magnetic axis as a center rc69 ; kom70 . If the magnetic axis is
misaligned with the rotation axis, each time this beam of emission point
towards the observer, a pulse can be detected. The integrated profile,
obtained from around thousand of such pulses, represents average shape
of the beam for a given line-of-sight cut (see Chapter 1). This model
seems to be in accord with most of the observed phenomena seen in radio
pulsars.

A charge particle travelling along the magnetic field line emits
curvature photon towards the observer from a point at which the
line-of-sight is tangent with the corresponding field line kom70 . Thus,
the detected curvature photons ¹ ¹ 1 Photon emitted from the curvature
radiation. also carry information regarding the orientation of the
magnetic field lines at the location of their origin. This idea can be
extended to speculate that, the last open field lines define the angular
extent of the radiation beam and hence the width of the integrated
profile also. As the open field line region is inversely related to the
period of the pulsar (see equation 2.9 , where @xmath is proportional to
period and thus inversely related to the angular extent of the open
field line region), fast spinning pulsars tend to have wider profiles,
which has been confirmed by various observations.

The linear polarization of the observed photon, depicts the orientation
of the magnetic field plane (the plane containing the field line). This
linear polarization in many pulsars show peculiar variation across the
pulse profiles, as discussed extensively in Section 1.4.3 by introducing
the rotating-vector model proposed by rc69 . According to the model, at
the origin of radio emission, the magnetic field can be assumed to be of
purely dipole nature. Thus, by modelling the polarization angle changes,
one can decipher the beam geometry around the line-of-sight cut. Figure
2.4 illustrates the emission beam along with the misaligned magnetic and
rotation axes. The angles shown in the diagram has following
relationships using simple geometry mt77 ; mic91 .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

The measured polarization angle (PA) is the angle @xmath shown in Figure
2.4 . Variation in the PA with @xmath is a measurable observed pulsar
property. However, along with the different propagation effects
mentioned in Section 1.4.3 , there are various intrinsic phenomena which
causes further changes in the polarization angle, such as the orthogonal
mode changes. However, this topic is beyond the scope of this thesis to
discuss further.

#### 2.2.1 Emission height

The pulsars show gradual widening of the integrated profiles from higher
to lower frequencies. This effect is known as the radius-to-frequency
mapping , which suggest that, the emission regions are localized at
different heights from the neutron star surface for different
frequencies. Estimation of the emission heights are crucial to
scrutinize different emission mechanism models, as some of them failed
to operate at lower heights (as discussed in Section 2.1.4 ). According
to stu71 the emission region is around 1 stellar radii from the surface
while rs75 suggested much higher emission heights ( @xmath 10-100
stellar radii). For pulsars with double profile components, separation
between both of them were measured at multiple frequencies to derive the
separation to frequency dependence. kom70 suggested this relation to be
around @xmath by using the curvature of the field line arguments.
According to the RS model, the emission height at a given frequency is
dependent upon the plasma density, given in equation 2.11 , which
decreases with increasing height by a factor of @xmath . Thus, these
authors suggested frequency dependence of @xmath for the profile
evolution. Many studies have reported the emission heights in number of
pulsars cor78 ; ran83a ; lm88 ; kg98 ; gg01 ; mr02a ; kg03a .

To demonstrate the relative heights and size of the emission beams at
different frequencies, we compared the integrate profiles of PSR
B2319+60 at four frequencies viz. 300, 600, 1400 and 5000 MHz. The
profile evolution is clearly evident in Figure 2.5 with narrow higher
frequency profile to wider lower frequency profile. To estimate their
relative heights, we used the relationship suggested by kg03a as,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath is the emission height at frequency @xmath given in GHz,
while @xmath is the rate of change of period ( @xmath ) in units of
@xmath . For PSR B2319+60, wg95 estimated the inclination angle @xmath
(31 @xmath ) and impact angle @xmath (4 @xmath ), which were used to
estimate the radiation beam opening angle ( @xmath ) given as kg03a ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath is the width of the pulse profile at the corresponding
frequency. Thus, using equations 2.15 and 2.16 , the beam shape at each
of the observing frequency was derived and shown with a relative scale
in Figure 2.6 . The emission height were estimated to be around 780,
665, 535 and 385 km at 300, 600, 1400 and 5000 MHz, respectively. These
heights are only rough estimates and calculated just to demonstrate the
radius-to-frequency mapping of the emission regions. There are multiple
effects that plays crucial role in determining these heights which are
known as retardation and aberration of the emission beam due to the
rotation. To estimate the true heights of emission regions, one has to
correct for these effects which is beyond the scope of this thesis.

#### 2.2.2 Rotating carousal

As mentioned in Section 2.1.3 , the emission from the polar cap comes
from group of localized regions ( aka. sparks). The primary particle
beams generated from these sparks are the sources of secondary pair
plasma, which give rise to radio emission by one of the bunching
mechanism. Thus, the location of sparks on the polar cap also reflects
in the structure of the emission beam. Due to which, the emission beam
does not have uniform illumination but, as mentioned in Section 1.5.2
and shown in Figure 2.7 , constitute of small patches of emission
sub-beams. These sub-beams are not stationary as they rotate around the
magnetic axis due to the following mechanism.

According to the RS model, the charge particles in the sparks do not
corotate with the stellar surface (or rotate with a slightly different
speed) as long as the charge densities do not reach @xmath (given in
equation 2.11 ). As the gap discharges, it attains the @xmath . At this
instant, just like the particles inside the neutron star (see Section
2.1.2 ), the particles in the spark regions also experience @xmath
drift. These particles move with the neutron star like a rigid rotator
around the magnetic axis. Thus, the presence of the gap alters the
velocity of the rotation of the spark regions. This alteration or
difference in the velocity of sparks, moving around the magnetic axis,
mimics a slow drifting of their locations. This difference in velocity
is given by rs75 ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath is the radius of the polar gap through which net positive
charge is supplied to the magnetosphere, while @xmath is the potential
across the gap height given in equation 2.12 . As these sparks give rise
to sub-beams in the emission beam, similar drifting of sub-beams can
also be observed each time the line-of-sight cuts the emission cone. The
periodicity of drifting is given as the time taken by a sub-beam to move
to an adjacent sub-beam location. Total time taken by a sub-beam to
circulate around the polar cap is around, @xmath . If there are @xmath
such sub-beams in the emission beam, the observed drifting periodicity (
@xmath ) can be given as rs75 ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath is the magnetic field in units of @xmath G, and @xmath is
the pulsar period. It should be noted at this point that, along with
comprehensive picture of pulsar emission mechanism, the major success of
rs75 was in predicting the drifting periodicity. However, vsrr03 has
shown that drift velocity is not always correctly predicted by the RS
model.

kom70 has estimated the open field line region which possess field line
with sufficient curvature to produce the radio emission. Thus, intensity
of the radio emission should be higher at the boundary of the open field
line region, while it should vanish at the magnetic pole. Thus, he
suggest a hollow cone model of the emission beam where emission is
further localized in a ring of sub-beams as shown in Figure 2.7 .
According to which, for each line-of-sight cut, a double component
profile should be observed. However, many pulsars show multi-component
profiles which was explained by a introducing further concentric
circular rings of sub-beams around the core component bac76 ; os76a ;
ran93 . ran83a classified different profiles in various categories
depending upon their line-of-sight cuts (also shown in Figure 2.7 ), and
proposed rotating carousal as the cause of drifting seen in pulsars. In
later years, the carousal beam was modelled for PSR B0943+10 and number
of sub-beams were calculated dr99 ; dr01 . This direct modelling of the
radiation beam, using single pulse observations, made the rotating
carousal as one of the highly popular model.

### 2.3 Pulsar nulling

Among the various single pulse phenomena exhibited by the radio pulsars,
absence of pulses or pulse nulling is the most peculiar one. Pulsar
nulling is discussed in this section, with necessary details regarding
earlier findings, as it is the core theme of this thesis.

#### 2.3.1 Chronicles of pulsar nulling observations

Pulsar nulling was first reported by bac70 in four pulsars, PSRs
B0834+06, B1133+16, B1237+15 and B1929+10. These pulsars were found
suddenly to miss one to ten pulses at various times. He classified
nulled pulses in two categories according to their duration and spacing.
Type I nulls are the most prominent, with a spacing of about fifty
pulses. Type II nulls have width of only one or two pulses and recur
with spacing of three to ten pulses. bac70 claimed the nulled pulses to
be periodic. To find the periodicity of these null pulses, a sequence of
null and burst pulses with nulled pulses as 1 s and burst pulses as 0 s
was formed. The Fourier transform of this one-zero time series was used
to look for periodicity of occurrence of null pulses. He reported
possible periodicity of 10.5 P, 2.8 P and 25 P (where P is the period of
the pulsar) for PSRs B1929+10, B1237+25 and B1133+16, respectively. He
suggested the origin of nulling due to (a) the radiation region of
pulsar is undergoing some rapid changes, and (b) type II nulls are
mostly related to subpulse drifting, as marching of subpulse with a
spacing greater than the pulse profile could periodically cause null
pulses.

In a first ever comprehensive study on the nulling pulsars, rit76
reported nulling behaviour of 32 pulsars using the Mk IA radio telescope
at Jodrell Bank. He also introduced a method to quantify occurrence of
nulling using a quantity called ‘Nulling Fraction ( NF )’, which
quantifies the fraction of null pulses in the pulse energy sequence. His
method to estimate the NF for a pulsar is discussed in Section 3.5.3 .
By comparing their NFs, it became possible to compare nulling between
different pulsars and also to look for any possible correlations with
pulsar parameters. He reported correlation of NF with the period of the
pulsar and thus, concluded that the pulsars with longer period seem to
posses high NFs. As the period is related to the age of the pulsar (
@xmath ), he concluded that pulsar die with increasing fraction of
nulling in them. An important characteristic reported by rit76 is that,
pulsar emission is produced in burst of pulses and the length of the
burst does not depend upon the age of the pulsar. However, the
separations between these bursts of pulses, also known as null states,
increases with the age of the pulsar. He also suggested that, if
subpulse drift is due to drifting of the spark regions in the polar cap
then inactive or absence of few spark regions in the observer’s
line-of-sight can sometime give rise to nulling in some pulsars.
Similarly, using the Arecibo telescope, single pulse observations were
conducted for 20 pulsars by bac81 . Out of which, nine showed nulling
behaviour for which accurate estimation on the NFs were obtained.

In a further attempt to correlate nulling fraction with various pulsar
parameters, ran86 reported a study of around 60 pulsars. It was claimed
that nulling is quite common phenomena and should occur for half of the
known pulsars. The pulsars, in the studied sample, were classified based
on their integrated profile classes defined by ran83a (also shown in
Figure 2.7 ). By comparing NFs of pulsars between different classes, she
concluded that core single pulsars possess small NFs compared to other
classes. Conal double and multiple component profile classes possess
larger number of pulsars with high NFs compared to all other classes. In
an earlier study, rit76 concluded that pulsar die with increasing NF.
Contrary to that, ran86 suggested that apparent relation of nulling and
age is because of profile classes. In a given profile class, there is no
strong correlation between the NF and the pulsar age. Pulsars which
possess larger NFs has no greater age then those which possess small NFs
in the same class. ran83a suggested that young pulsars usually have
profiles with prominent core components, thus, they are likely to show
small NFs ran86 . She also pointed out that, nulling is a global effect
as it is seen in main pulse as well as in interpulse ² ² 2 Some pulsars
show two prominent components, separated by about half the period, in
their integrated profiles. The more prominent component is usually
called the main pulse, while the other component is called the
interpulse. The main pulse and the interpulse are believed to originate
from widely separated emission regions. . Thus nulling represents
“global failure of the condition necessary for emission”. wab+86 carried
out high sensitive modulation study of around 28 pulsars, in a similar
year, using the Arecibo telescope at 400 MHz. These authors concluded
that, pulse energy modulation in the core component is much lower
compared to conal components, thus, supporting ran86 claim of core
component having smaller NFs. This study also reported NFs in around 20
pulsars for the first time.

In later years, big92a conducted a correlation study of 72 nulling
pulsars comparing their NFs with several other parameters. He observed
around 25 of them at 645 and 843 MHz and compared the results with those
reported in previous studies. On the basis of these observations, he
concluded that in about 30% of the studied pulsars of core dominated
class, nulling may be detected with higher sensitive observations.
big92a confirmed the results of ran86 about the other profile classes,
with 40% of conal single, 65% of multiple profile pulsars and nearly all
conal double pulsars have been observed to null. He also made similar
remarks regarding the correlation of NF-age, as no correlation was seen
in the same profile class. The apparent NF-age correlation is due to
differences in the age between core single and conal profile classes.
One of the apparent correlation which was highlighted by big92a was
about Period-NF. Pulsar with longer period seems to possess higher NF.
This may indicate that pulse emission mechanism is faltering for these
objects since quantities related to polar cap emission mechanisms, such
as maximum potential difference across the gap, are inversely related to
P (see equation 2.13 ). The other weak correlations which he noticed
were with the rate of energy loss ( @xmath ) and the magnetic field at
the light-cylinder ( @xmath ). However, these correlations can occur due
to the Period-NF correlation as all of these quantities are highly
correlated with the period of the pulsar. Unlike other earlier studies,
big92a reported an anti-correlation between NF and @xmath , thus, NF is
large for small @xmath . lm88 and ran90 both gave different methods to
estimate @xmath . It was suggested by lm88 that as a pulsar gets older,
the magnetic axis tends to align to the rotation axis. Hence, the
anti-correlation between NF- @xmath points towards underline NF-age
correlation in the lm88 model. On the other hand, @xmath estimated by
ran90 does not appear to be related to pulsar age. Thus, from her model,
NF- @xmath correlation might have an independent origin. In any case,
this correlation suggests nulling to have geometric origin. Moreover,
the correlation of NF with magnetic field at light cylinder suggests
that large fields are associated with the increased pulsar nulling.
However this correlation is not an independent estimate, as determined
value of B also depends upon @xmath and period P which are, according to
big92a , correlated with NF. lw95 also reported a statistical study of
72 nulling pulsars, contesting corrections reported by big92a . These
authors concluded that, NF is more strongly correlated with the pulse
width, @xmath , compared to period and @xmath of the pulsar. These
authors also claimed that NF- @xmath correlation can also explain NF-
@xmath and NF- @xmath correlation reported by big92a .

The method to estimate the NF, given by rit76 , was further improved by
viv95 . With this new method, it became possible to estimate NF for the
weak pulsars. viv95 observed around 15 pulsars and estimated NFs for 10
of them. Only two of these pulsars in the sample were new, while for the
other pulsars, NFs values were improved with his new technique. He also
reported similar results regarding the null and burst length as those
reported by rit76 . The emission from PSR B0031 @xmath 07 comes in burst
of pulses and there are two time-scales involved. Short time-scale
bursts and nulls come in @xmath 10 periods, while a long time-scale
process can causes burst duration of @xmath 24 periods and null duration
@xmath 29 periods. viv95 also reported that there were no truncated
burst pulses before or after the null phase, indicating that subpulses
are basic units of pulsar emission.

Parkes multibeam survey has discovered more than half of the known
pulsars mlc+01 ; mhl+02 ; kbm+03 ; hfs+04 ; fsk+04 ; lfl+06 . In one of
such investigation, fsk+04 reported for the first time, nulling in a
binary pulsar, PSR J1744 @xmath 3922. Pulsars are also found in binary
systems, where the other companion could be a white dwarf or a normal
star [see gho07 for a review]. The reported pulsar rotates in a tight
circular orbit every 4.6 hours. The time-scale of the nulling seen in
this pulsar are around few tens of minutes repeating after every few
minutes of burst states. They also reported occasions where pulsar is
not seen during a full 35 minute observing run. All external effects,
such as scintillation and obscuring binary companion have been ruled out
by these authors. The potential gap values were also calculated for
non-nulling and nulling pulsars. It was suggested by these authors that
nulling pulsars tend to have smaller median gap potential values and
hence they are likely to null more. Similarly, PSR J1744 @xmath 3922 was
shown to have smaller gap potential which is analogues to nulling
pulsars. In the similar category of strange nulling pulsars, cl07
reported signs of nulling behaviour in an extra Galactic pulsar, PSR
B0529 @xmath 66, located in the Large Magellanic Cloud. However, this
was never confirmed.

Recently, wmj07 carried out observations of 25 newly discovered pulsars
from the above mentioned Parkes multibeam survey and estimated their NFs
for the first time. Their study increased the total number of nulling
pulsars by a substantial amount. Moreover, a pulsar with NF of 93% was
also found, which is the largest known NF. Their study actually doubled
the total number of known nulling pulsars, which possess NF above 50%.
It was concluded that nulling is a property of old pulsars. It was also
claimed that there is no correlation of NF and profile morphological
classes as claimed by ran86 . These authors showed that, almost all
classes of pulsars show nulling and mulitcomponent profiles tend to have
higher NFs but such pulsars are old. Thus, their study once again
supported the NF-age correlation. Along with these nulling pulsars, they
also reported weak mode in two of their studied pulsar. It was also
claimed that nulling and mode changing are highly correlated, which was
also suggested by ran86 . Moreover, wse07 reported tentative evidence of
nulling in 8 pulsars but no estimates on the NFs were reported. Number
of nulling pulsars were further enhanced by pulsar searches conducted
from the Giant Meterwave Radio Telescope jml+09 and the Parkes telescope
bbj+11 ; bjb+12 .

#### 2.3.2 Nulling@xmathDrifting/Mode-changes interaction studies

bac70a reported subpulse drifting in PSR B1929+10 which was shown to
have null pulses. Sub-pulse drifting is associated with nulling in many
pulsars, for example PSRs B0809+74, B0818–13 and B0031–07. In the early
attempts, various studies bac70c ; col70a ; th71 ; pag73 have reported
associated changes in the drift rate with null states. urwe78 have
reported unique phase memory of of the subpulse location before and
after the null states in PSR B0809+74. They also concluded that nulling
occurs due the quenching of sparks (an intrinsic phenomena) and not
caused by deflection or absorption of the radiation beam as it shows
clear phase memory of subpulses across the null length. However, fre83
contested these results by showing lack of subpulse phase memory in
their observations of PSR B0809+74. A more detailed account of this
phenomena was reported by la83 in two pulsars, PSRs B0809+74 and
B0818–13. These authors showed clear changes in the drifting speed
before and after the null states with estimate on the relaxation time in
acquiring regular drifting behaviour directly proportional to the length
of the null states. Thus, nulling in these pulsars were compared with a
damped oscillator, which also has a finite relaxation time constant.
Contrary to urwe78 , these authors reported phase jumps in the subpulse
location across the nulls. They suggested that these changes are due to
the gradual speed up of drifting during nulls. In a similar line of
investigations, vj97 reported phase memory across nulls in PSR B0031–07,
where a method to estimate reduction in the pulse energy during the null
state was also reported for the first time. This quantity, defined as
@xmath , can put tight constrain on the possible nulling models. In the
later study of the similar pulsar, PSR B0031–07, jv00 reported lack of
subpulse phase memory for longer null lengths. These authors also
reported a change in the drift rate across nulls, exclusively noted to
occur during one of the profile mode. These studies suggest that,
nulling and drifting could be related in their fundamental origin or
might have a similar sporadic parameter controlling them.

In a continuing attempt to study interactions between nulling and
drifting phenomena, vkr+02 again looked at PSR B0809+74 with more
sensitive observations. These authors classified different drift rates
as two different emission modes, among which one is the normal emission
mode while the later was classified as the slow drifting mode which
tends to occur after all null states. They also showed increase in the
intensity, with a shift in the profile towards an earlier longitude
during the slow drift mode. Thus, these authors suggested that
mode-changing in PSR B0809+74 is induced by nulls. In a later study,
vsrr03 claimed that post nulls, the drift rates are similar to those
seen at higher frequencies. Hence, during the post-null burst state, the
emission originates from lower heights in the magnetosphere. Similarly,
jv04 extended work of la83 on PSR B0818–13 with more sensitive
observations. These authors also concluded analogous behaviour, by
reporting changes in the subpulse phase memory to speculate that during
the nulls the drift rate appears to speed up.

wf81 reported interesting nulling behaviour in PSR B2319+60, which also
shows three profile modes, also shown in Figure 1.10 . These modes were
classified as modes A, B and ABN in order of decreasing @xmath values
(increasing drift rate) and their stability. The ABN mode showed highly
irregular drifting pattern, while mode A showed very prominent stable
drifting. They reported a highly correlated mode-switching and nulling.
Before an onset of the null state, the modes are shown to transit from A
@xmath B @xmath ABN, depicting an stepwise increase in the drift rate.
In an interesting study of PSR B1944+17, a large nulling fraction
pulsar, dchr86 investigated similar nulling and mode-changing
interactions. These authors reported four different emission modes, mode
A and B with regular drift rates while mode C with zero drifting. The
fourth mode, mode D, displays chaotic subpulse phase distributions.
Changes between these mode were shown to triggered by the occurrence of
nulls. Contrary to PSR B0809+74, this pulsar did not show any phase
memory across the null lengths. The transition states, i.e.
null-to-burst (and vice-versa) were shown to have different profile
shapes indicating a gradual change in emission properties before the
onset of the null state. A slow decrease in the intensity was also
noticed which was modelled as an increasing temperature, causing gap
potential to yield lower magnitudes. After a few years, in line of
similar studies, rwr05 reported interesting observations of interactions
between nulling and mode changing in PSR B2303+30. The pulsar exhibited
two profile modes, classified as mode B and Q. In the mode B pulsar
showed regular drifting while in mode Q drifting is less ordered and it
shows wider profile. Nulls were seen to occur exclusively during mode Q
and also often either at the start or at the end of the mode Q. These
authors also reported gradual changes in the emission from mode B to Q
as damped oscillator with finite relaxation time, similar to those
reported by la83 .

Nulling behaviour in an unusual pulsar, PSR B0826–34, with presence of
emission over the entire pulse longitude, was reported by dll+79 at 408
MHz. It is likely that, pulsar is almost an aligned rotator with a very
small @xmath and a small viewing angle from the rotation axis. Moreover,
the most interesting aspect of it’s emission is the high NF of around
70%, making it as one of the first known pulsar with long nulls dll+79 .
In contrast, elg+05 have reported presence of weak emission during the
null states, in their observations at 1374 MHz. The pulsar also showed
regular drifting across 13 subpulse components. These authors suggested
that, the line-of-sight always remains inside the emission beam, cutting
inner and outer conal rings. They proposed a hypothesis that, nulls in
this pulsar are not real and they occur due to different weak emission
mode. Recently, kr10 reported a study on an interesting nulling and
mode-changing pulsar, PSR B1944+17, which was investigated earlier by
dchr86 . These authors reported analogous results regarding the presence
of four drift-modes along with the 70% NF. They report a mixture of
short and long nulls, in which the short nulls show weak average power.
These short nulls were classified as pseudo -nulls, nulls due to the
empty line-of-sights (further discussed in Section 2.3.3 ).

#### 2.3.3 Periodic nulling

Excluding the first reported study of nulling phenomena by bac70 ,
nulling was thought to be a randomly occuring phenomena and no further
studies were conducted for for many decades. This view was challenged by
later investigators. naf03 reported periodic nulling in PSR J1819+1305.
rw08 have conducted an extensive study of the same pulsar and obtained a
better estimate on the nulling periodicity of around 57 @xmath 1
periods. They concluded an empty line-of-sight passing between the
emitting sub-beams, as the cause of periodic nulling seen in this
pulsar. wr07 reported a detail study of PSR B0834+06. In the earlier
studies, subpulses were considered as a basic units of emission due to
the absence of truncated profiles or partial nulls la83 ; viv95 ; vkr+02
; jv04 . wr07 reported such partial nulls in their study as pulses with
only one of the profile component active at an instance. They reported
that nulls occur after ever alternating pulses and their total observed
numbers are too large for their origin from random expectation. In
similar line of studies, hr07 have reported a periodic feature in the
pulse energy sequence of PSR B1133+16. A low frequency feature was
earlier reported in this pulsar but was not confirmed with any orderly
subpulse structure. hr07 reported that, this low frequency feature is
because of the ordered sequence of null and burst pulses. The sample of
these periodic nulling pulsars were further enhanced by hr09 . In a
statistical study of the occurrence of null pulses, rr09 showed
non-randomness in 14 pulsars using a randomness test known as the
Wald–Wolfowitz runs test ww40 . These authors concluded that, this
non-randomness point towards the quasi-periodic nature of the null
pulses, originating from the empty line-of-sight cuts between the
sub-beams. Recently, hlk+12 carried out observations of PSR B1133+16 at
8.35 GHz, and found supporting evidence of periodic nulling as reported
by hr07 .

#### 2.3.4 Broadband nulling behaviour

In a simultaneous single pulse study of two pulsars, PSRs B0329+54 and
B1133+16 at 327 and 2695 MHz, bs78 showed highly correlated pulse energy
fluctuations. As nulling and pulse energy fluctuations are highly
correlated, this study suggests that nulling is a broadband phenomena
within this frequency range. However, later simultaneous observations of
PSR B0809+74 for about 350 pulses indicated that only 6 out of 9 nulls
were simultaneous at 102 and 408 MHz dls+84 . Contrary to that, big92a
reported indirect evidence of broadband nulling behaviour in many
pulsars from non simultaneous observations at two frequencies viz. 645
and 843 MHz. In a first ever attempt to investigate broadband aspect of
nulling behaviour, bgk+07 reported partially simultaneous nulls in PSR
B1133+16. These authors conducted simultaneous observations at four
different frequencies, viz. 325, 610, 1400 and 4850 MHz from three
different telescopes. They reported that, only half of the nulls occur
simultaneously for PSR B1133+16. Observations at higher frequencies
showed little nulling compared to observations at lower frequencies. It
was concluded that, about 5% of the time pulsar showed exclusive burst
emission only at the highest observing frequency, with clear nulls at
lower frequencies. The profile of these exclusive pulses were shown to
be extremely narrow compared to the average profile. The location of
these pulses were noted to arrive at earlier phase, towards the leading
edge of the pulse profile. Thus, they were suspected to have similar
origin as the giant pulses. In contrast, simultaneous nulls were
reported at 303 and 610 MHz for PSR B0826 @xmath 34 bgg08 .

#### 2.3.5 Extreme Nullers

In the last decade, the view regarding the nulling phenomena has
completely changed due to the discoveries of extreme nullers, which are
sources exhibiting extreme form of nulling behaviour. These sources have
been classified in two categories, first are the intermittent pulsars,
which null for several days before emerging as an active normal pulsar
for a few days. klo+06 reported a quasi-periodic nulling behaviour in
PSR B1931+24, as the first of this class of known sources. B1931+24
showed complete absence of emission for around 25 to 35 days while it
remained active for around 5 to 10 days. In the high cadence
observations, it was observed to transit rapidly within 10 sec from an
active burst state to a null state. One of the worth highlighting
characteristic of this source is the changes in the @xmath . During the
active state, pulsar displayed regular slow down, as expected from a
normal pulsar. However, during the off-state (null), the slowdown rate
decreased, suggesting an overall reduction in the energy loss. Thus,
klo+06 suggested cessation of pair production on top of the polar cap as
the cause of long off-states seen in this pulsar. In later years, three
more sources were found. PSR J1841 @xmath 0500 was observed to show
off-state for around 580 days crc+12 , while PSR J1832+0029 showed
off-state for around 650 to 850 days llm+12 . Recently, sjm+13 have also
reported a tentative detection of intermittent behaviour in PSR
J1839+15.

The second class of extreme nullers are the Rotating Radio Transients
(RRATs), discovered during the reprocessing of the Parkes multibeam
survey data mll+06 . RRATs are pulsars which only emit single burst
pulses separated by long null states lasting several seconds or minutes.
They were discovered by their dispersion smear of these strong single
pulses seen in their discovery plots. In the original discovery paper by
mll+06 , only 11 such sources were reported. However, this sample was
further enhanced to around 85 sources in just 7 years of their discovery
through various surveys dcm+09 ; kle+10 ; bb10 ; kkl+11 ; bjb+12 ;
skd+09 . Many of these sources are not yet published but a tentative
list of them can be found at RRATalog (
http://astro.phys.wvu.edu/rratalog/ ). Recent observations by pmk+11
reported quasi-periodicity on the time-scale of minutes to years in six
RRATs. mmr+11 reported spectral behaviour of these sources, which is
similar to normal pulsars. One of the strongest RRAT, PSR J1819–1458 has
also been observed in optical and X-rays. The optical observations
returned with negative results dkm+11 , while the X-ray observations
with Chandra and XMM Newton provided clear detection rbg+06 ; mrg+07 .
However, the emission mechanism and the origin of their peculiar
behaviour is still remain to be explained by a suitable model [see km11
for a review].

#### 2.3.6 List of nulling pulsars

In the past 44 years, since the discovery of this phenomena, around 109
pulsars were found to show nulling behaviour. These pulsars exhibit a
variety in their behaviour, including interaction with drifting and
mode-changing as discussed above. Table 2.1 lists most of the reported
nulling pulsars in the literature, including the pulsars discussed in
this thesis. NF values are listed along with their respective errors and
corresponding references. It can be seen from Table 2.1 that, pulsar
exhibits wide range of NFs, starting from as small as 0.0008% to as
large as 93%. These pulsars also exhibit a wide range in their basic
parameters, thus the operational mechanism of nulling in pulsars remain
to be identified.

### 2.4 Why do pulsars null?

In the early studies, it was argued extensively that nulling is a
property of older pulsars and they tend to lie close to the death line
in the @xmath diagram tm77 ; mt77 ; wc81 ; ao82 ; oa82 ; gi83 ; lw95 .
Hence, its worth testing this hypothesis by estimating the positions of
nulling pulsars in the @xmath diagram. Figure 2.8 shows the distribution
of all nulling pulsars (listed in Table 2.1 ). Its clearly evident from
this distribution, in the @xmath diagram, that they are not localized
near the death line. Moreover, it should be noted, that pulsars with
high NFs lie right in the middle of the normal pulsar population. Thus,
its unlikely that nulling presents dying state of a radio pulsar.
Similar conclusions were also suggested by mic91 .

If nulling is not due to the age of the pulsar, then certain mechanism,
operating along with the emission processes, may cause faltering of the
radiation beam. There are two different group of theories in literature
that attempt to explain the cause of nulling. First group of theories
are more inclined towards changes in the geometry of the beam and the
line-of-sight, while the second group of theories suggest intrinsic
effects that can cause cessation of the full radiation beam.

#### 2.4.1 Geometric effects

In the line of geometric reasoning, aro83c proposed nutation of the
emission beam as a likely cause. In Section 2.3.3 missing line-of-sight
as one of the geometric effects was briefly discussed. This model was
proposed due to the observed periodic fluctuations seen in a few nulling
pulsars. According to which, the line-of-sight cuts between the
radiating sub-beams, and thus missing the emitting regions. It is also
possible that, only a few radiating sub-beams extinguished and when
line-of-sight passes over them, nulls are observed. As the sub-beams are
organised in an evenly spaced uniform pattern (Figure 2.7 ), empty
line-of-sight cuts or extinguished individual sub-beams are more likely
to repeat after certain pulsar periods. rit76 concluded, for the first
time, the geometric origin of nulling phenomena due to these
extinguishing sub-beams in his study. This was attributed as the nulling
periodicity hr07 ; hr09 ; rw08 .

In further models of geometric origin, dzg05 suggested reversal of
emission beam for PSR B1822 @xmath 09 to explain the peculiar main pulse
and interpulse relation. This pulsar exhibit strong main pulse with a
precursor . Precursors are known as the pulse component in front of the
main pulse, separated by a few degrees in longitude [see gjk+94 for a
review]. PSR B1822 @xmath 09 exhibit interesting anti-correlation
between this precursor and interpulse, as when the precursor goes in the
null state the interpulse emission appears and vice-verse gjk+94 . Thus,
dzg05 suggested that, the interpulse and the precursor are likely to
originate from the same side of the emission beam. The emission seen
during the interpulse is simply reversed emission coming from the
precursor, from the main emission beam facing away from the observer.
Thus, during these occasions, emission in the precursor beam reverses
it’s propagation direction. If such action takes place in the main beam
also then it will give rise to the observed null pulses. However, recent
studies from bmr10 showed that during many pulses, the precursor and the
interpulse are both present in PSR B1822–09. Thus, its unlikely that
such emission reversal exist for this pulsar.

In other models, zx06 reported precession of the rotation axis as the
cause of nulling to explain absence of regular emission from one of the
transient sources near the Galactic centre namely, GCRT J1745–3009.
However, the precession in pulsars are very rare as there are only a few
tentative evidence wrt89 ; cgc97 ; ja01 ; hh02 ; wt05 . Moreover, gle90
reported deformation of the emission beam due to the misalignment
between the rotation and the neutron star symmetry axes. However, it
should also be noted that, such models are likely to give periodic
oscillations in the pulse energy with consecutively occurring null and
burst states. In other studies, cr04a reported non-radial oscillation as
the cause of may single pulse phenomena including nulling, drifting and
mode-changing. These authors suggest that mode-changing and nulling are
due to the changes between different oscillation modes.

#### 2.4.2 Intrinsic effects

In the RS model, as explained in Section 2.1.4 , the coherent radiation
is a highly tuned process. Change in any of the necessary conditions of
coherence may lead to stoppage of emission. In the early years, che81
suggested fluctuations in the temperature to invoke changes in the
coherence conditions as a possible cause of nulling. dchr86 also
reported possible increase in the temperature, which can cause ion
outflow and extra X-ray flux, to decrease the polar cap potential to
stop sparking and primary particle flow. This rise in temperature can
occur due to the backflowing electrons, generated during the sparking
action, hitting the polar cap region with relativistic velocities. The
heated up spark regions (also known as the hot spots) are more likely to
produce further pairs on top of them in the consecutive sparking action
(post null). Thus, this model was proposed as the reason for the
reported subpulse phase memory across the nulls in B0809+74. dchr86 also
estimated the null-to-burst (and vice-versa) transition time-scales of
around 2 to 30 milliseconds, which is equivalent to the subpulse widths.
Thus, it was also suggested as an explanation for the lack of partial
nulls in B0809+74. However, these claims were contested by fr82 and
later observations from fre83 . fr82 showed that, these hot spots will
cool too fast to persist any memory on the time-scale of null lengths.
In contrast, they proposed a model of continuous flow of charge particle
as the cause of nulling. In their model, the polar gap potential attains
a stationary state in which gap discharges roughly at the same rate as
it charges, thus the flow of primary particle does not stop. However, in
an non-stationary flow, as discussed in Section 2.1.4 , any of the
proposed two stream instability conditions will not be satisfied to
produce bunching. Thus, this stationary flow of primary plasma may give
rise to absence of emission. This polar cap potential can suddenly
discharge also, retaining normal interrupted sparking to cause
non-stationary flow to form bunches again. To explain the memory across
nulls, fr82 invoked the mechanism of flux tubes through which the
particles are transferred to the magnetosphere to form sub-beams. The
electric field in these flux tubes are much higher compare to regions
between them, and thus they are more likely to produce sparking. During
the post-null state also, the sparking takes place inside these tubes to
retain the subpulse phase memory.

kmms96 reported a model of nulling in pulsars considering a different
emission mechanism proposed by kmm91 . According to kmms96 , the
drifting of subpulses are not due to the shifting spark regions, but
rotation of plasma wave around the magnetosphere. Particles are
extracted from the surface to form a primary beam distribution. The most
energetic particles of this beam give rise to secondary plasma and
backflowing particles. These backflowing particles heat up the surface,
which causes broadening of the primary beam energy distribution. As this
process repeats several times, gap potential slowly drops (on much
larger time-scale compared to RS sparking). Thus, the distribution of
the primary plasma moves towards the low Lorentz-factors, ultimately
switching off the emission mechanism. When the gap attains the @xmath ,
it closes to charge again as pulsar retains its emission state. This
phenomena is different from the RS model, in which gap discharges
roughly on the time-scale of a few microseconds. However, in the kmms96
model, the gap discharges on the time-scale of primary beam distribution
function. Thus, if this process takes more time than the pulsar period,
nulls can be observed. One of the main argument that can be put forward
to contradict this model is the speculated emission height. This theory
suggest generation of radio emission around 10 to 20% height of the
light cylinder, which is around 5000 times stellar radii. However,
recent observations have confirmed the hight of emission to be around 50
stellar radii cor78 ; ran83a ; lm88 ; kg98 ; gg01 ; mr02a ; kg03a .

As discussed in Section 2.1.3 , the gap discharge can occur due to (a)
avalanche of pair plasma triggered by the photons created from the
curvature radiation (CR) or (b) by inverse Compton scattering (ICS) of
the thermal photons from the relativistic charged particles ejected from
the surface. In the original RS model, the ICS process was assumed to be
very inefficient mechanism and hence was not considered. However, dh86
suggested that due to the strong magnetic field, ICS could be an
efficient mechanism. zq96 argued that in case of ICS gap discharge, the
surface temperature plays an important role. If the temperature is above
certain threshold, the binding energy of ions will decrease, which can
cause the ion flow from the surface to extinguish the polar gap (as
suggested in Section 2.1.3 ), and ultimately to cause nulls. zqlh97
proposed that a mixture of CR and ICS discharge might be operating with
different temperature ranges in a same pulsar to explain the observed
mode-changing phenomena. zqh97b extrapolated this model to nulling
pulsars, specially for PSR B1055–52. They argued that normally the gap
remains in a thermal ICS mode, which causes relatively low gap height
but very energetic secondary particles. In contrast, the resonant ICS
mode has higher gap height and low energy secondary plasma. When pulsar
switches from thermal ICS to resonant ICS mode, due to the temperature
fluctuations, the secondary pair plasma will not have sufficient energy
in this pulsar to maintain the coherence conditions, and it exhibits
nulls.

The chemical composition and structure of the neutron star also plays an
important role in characterising its emission behaviour. Section 2.1.1
discusses the constituents of the surface materials and also highlights
that the surface of the neutron star is smooth. However, vr80 showed
that, it is possible for the neutron star surface to have irregularities
of the order of around 10 cm. These tiny hills on the polar cap region
will have different electric potential on top of them. Thus, they can
heavily affect the outflow of particles. vr80 showed that this 10 cm
hill can cause 10 @xmath times fluctuations in the pulse energy, which
was proposed as a possible cause of brighter and weaker profile modes
seen in a few pulsars. This model can be extrapolated to suggest that it
can also cause the radio emission to go below the detection threshold of
the telescope to produce nulls.

In the recent study, tim10 reported interesting model for nulling and
mode-changing pulsars ³ ³ 3 Ideally, this model should be classified
along with the other geometric effects, however, due to the changes
proposed in this model occurs on a global magnetospheric scale, it is
describe here along with the intrinsic phenomena. . The motivation for
his proposed model was to explain the @xmath variations seen in the
intermittent pulsars as they suggest an underline phenomena on a global
magnetospheric scale during the nulls. tim10 proposed two different
scenarios which can keep the entire magnetosphere in different
configurations. These include (1) configurations with different close
field line regions as shown by tim06 and (2) configurations with
different current density distributions con05 . The magnetosphere of a
pulsar can switch between different close field line regions or it can
switch between different current density distributions or both. However,
the emission beaming angle will change for any type of above mentioned
state changes, to cause nulling as shown in Figure 2.9 . For an outer
line-of-sight cut pulsars, the change in the beaming angle can cause the
entire emission to propagate away from the observer and thus nulls will
be observed. For the pulsars with slightly inner cut, such changes will
allow sampling of different parts of the emission region to show
different sub-beam structures with different integrated profiles. tim10
argued that the difference between the rate of energy loss for both
types of state changes is similar to explain the @xmath changes during
the nulls in the intermittent pulsars.

#### 2.4.3 External effects

There are also models proposed in various studies which are related to
magnetospheric changes triggered by external influences. mic91 suggested
that nulling might be due to accretion of interstellar medium to pulsar
magnetosphere. In a more recent study, csh08 reported influence of
asteroid belt around the pulsars to cause various temporal changes. This
“cirumpulsar” debris entering the light cylinder can change the
conditions for pair productions and coherence, which can cause cessation
of observed emission. csh08 argued that the time-scale of this phenomena
ranges from seconds to months to trigger nulling as well as
intermittency of radio emission.

### 2.5 Motivations for this study

Pulsar nulling remained an unexplained phenomena even after many decades
of investigations. The fundamental question, Why only a few pulsars null
and others do not? , remain unanswered. Various models have been
proposed which aim to tackle the problem for individual cases. However,
a broad overall picture regarding the true nature of the nulling
phenomena has escaped a satisfactory explanation. The reason could be a
lack common agreement between different studies regarding the
correlations of NFs with different pulsar parameters. For example, rit76
reported NFs are correlated with the age of the pulsar while ran86
contradicted these claims by showing correlations with profile classes.
These claims were also contested by later studies conducted by wmj07 to
show that all profile classes of pulsars show similar nulling behaviour.
Moreover, the degree and form of pulse nulling varies from one pulsar to
another even though they exhibit similar NFs. On one hand, there are
high NF pulsars such as PSR B1931+24 which shows absence of emission for
several days klo+06 , while there are pulsars such as PSR J1752+2359
lwf+04 , which exhibits nulls for only for 3 to 4 minutes, while
exhibiting similar NF. Thus, it is possible for two pulsars to have
similar NF while their nulling time-scales could be complete different,
which raises an important question, does the NF of a pulsar an ideal way
to quantify it’s behaviour?

Similarly the broadband aspect of the nulling behaviour remains
ambiguous due to various contradictory studies. For example, a few
studies have shown the nulling to be a broadband phenomena bs78 ; bgg08
, while a a few other studies have contested these results by showing
lack of concurrent behaviour dls+84 ; bgk+07 . In light of all these
previous investigations, long, sensitive, and preferably simultaneous
observations at multiple frequencies of a carefully selected sample of
pulsars are motivated. The main motivations behind the major part of the
work carried out in this thesis can be listed as follows.

1.  The nulling behaviour of similar NF pulsars should be compared to
    quantify their differences.

2.  Nulling behaviour should be quantified incorporating their
    time-scales.

3.  The periodicities observed in the nulling phenomena by recent
    observations are intriguing to scrutinize for a large number of
    pulsars.

4.  Broadband aspect of the nulling phenomena needs to be investigated
    from more number of pulsars with sensitive and simultaneous
    observations at wide range of frequencies.

Thus, the aim of this thesis is to quantify, model and compare nulling
behaviour between different classes of pulsars to scrutinize the true
nature of the nulling phenomenon at multiple frequencies.

## Chapter 3 Observations and Analysis

### 3.1 Introduction

This chapter focuses on the details of the observations and the data
analysis procedures carried out in this thesis. The first part discusses
the details regarding the observations carried out using the Giant
Meterwave Radio Telescope (GMRT), the Westerbork Synthesis Radio
Telescope (WSRT), the Effelsberg and the Arecibo radio telescopes. In
the second part, analysis procedures followed for the data reductions
have been discussed briefly. Table 3.1 lists all the pulsars that were
observed as a part of this thesis work along with the observing
frequencies and the approximate number of observed pulses for these
pulsars. For two pulsars (PSRs B0809+74 and B2319+60), observations were
carried out simultaneously at four different frequencies, which includes
the GMRT at 313 and 607 MHz, the WSRT at 1380 MHz and the Effelsberg at
4850 MHz. For PSR J1752+2359, long observations were carried out from
the GMRT. Along with that, archival data from shorter independent
observation from the Arecibo telescope were also investigated. The prime
motivation behind these observations are listed in Section 2.5 .
Moreover, a few observations were also conducted on the newly discovered
pulsars to enhance the number of known nulling pulsars (motivation for
these observations are mentioned in Sections 3.3 and 4.1 ).

### 3.2 Selection of observing frequencies

Observations of the recently discovered pulsars, reported in this thesis
work, were carried out at 610 MHz with the GMRT. However, observations
of many known nulling pulsars were carried out at various other
frequencies, as listed in Table 3.1 . The GMRT is capable of operating
at six different frequencies. The choice of the observing frequency
depends upon many factors. However, the most important factor that
drives the selection of observing frequency is the source’s flux density
at that particular frequency. Pulsars are intrinsically stronger at
lower frequencies. Dependence of the pulsar flux density with the
observing frequency can be expressed as,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here, @xmath is the spectral index and S @xmath is the flux density at
an observing frequency @xmath . Most of the pulsars exhibit negative
spectral indices, which makes them stronger in flux as one goes to lower
and lower radio observing frequencies.

Only a few pulsars were observed at 325 MHz while rest of the newly
discovered pulsars were observed at 610 MHz. At frequencies around 325
MHz, the Galactic noise, due to the emission from the interaction of the
charge particles with the Galactic magnetic fields, will dominate the
background noise. It would also become much more difficult to phase
equalise the antennas with larger baselines for longer duration at lower
frequencies (see Section 3.4.1.1 ). Many of the newly discovered pulsars
have high DM and situated near to the Galactic centre. These pulsars
suffer large scattering, which reduces their single pulse sensitivity at
325 MHz (as discussed in Section 1.3.2 and shown in Figure 1.4 ). Hence,
relatively lower frequency of 610 MHz was used for most the observations
of the newly discovered pulsars to overcome these effects as well as to
take advantage of the negative spectral indices.

### 3.3 Study of newly discovered pulsars

The GMRT was used to study some of the recently discovered nulling
pulsars in this thesis work as it has an advantage of larger collecting
area along with a wider low frequency coverage. In the last few years,
several new pulsars have been discovered. For example, the Parkes
Multibeam Survey (PKSMB) has discovered around 800 pulsars in the last
decade mlc+01 ; mhl+02 ; kbm+03 ; hfs+04 ; fsk+04 ; lfl+06 . Analysis on
the PKSMB data with improved techniques still promises to enhance this
number. As mentioned in Section 2.3.5 , RRATs are one of such example,
which were discovered in the reprocessing of the PKSMB data mll+06 .
Among all of these recently discovered pulsars, several of them show
interesting single pulse intensity variations. However, many of these
have not been systematically studied to investigate pulsar nulling.
Thus, to investigate this further, discovery plots of around 600 pulsars
were studied carefully in order to find indication of nulling in them.
Out of this sample, 93 seem to exhibit nulling like behaviour.

The GMRT can only observe pulsars which are located higher than @xmath
in the declination. As all these pulsars were discovered by the Parkes
telescope, some of them are located deep in the southern sky. Out of 93
selected candidates, 13 are located outside the GMRT observable sky
range. The remaining 80 pulsars were categorised according to the pulse
intensity variations seen in the discovery plots. In some of these
pulsars, degree of pulse intensity variations clearly suggest nulling.
In other cases, it is difficult to make clear judgement about the
possible nulling because of low S/N. Third criteria for selection of
suitable observable candidates, is based on the choice of an appropriate
observing frequency.

To estimate, whether a particular pulsar is above the sensitivity limit
of the GMRT, it is essential to know its flux densities at 325 and 610
MHz. Most of the known pulsars exhibit spectral index of around -1.8
@xmath 0.2 mkk+00 . PKSMB pulsars were discovered at 1420 MHz so for
most of our candidates, flux densities were reported only at 1420 MHz. A
few of these pulsars, among the selected candidates, have reported flux
densities at 400 MHz. For these pulsars, the known spectral indices were
used to calculate the flux densities at 325 and 610 MHz. While for the
remaining pulsars, flux densities at 325 and 610 MHz were calculated
using their 1420 MHz flux density with an assumed common spectral index
of @xmath 1.8. Only those pulsars were selected for the final
observations, which showed reasonably high expected single pulse
sensitivity (i.e. expected S/N @xmath 5).

### 3.4 Radio Telescopes and Observations

#### 3.4.1 The GMRT

The observations with the GMRT were carried out during the cycle 15, 16,
18 and 19 under the project name of 15VRG01, 16 @xmath 048, 18 @xmath
036, 18 @xmath 071 and 19 @xmath 022 between 2008 to 2011.

The individual dishes of the GMRT are 45-meter in diameter. Their
reflecting surface forms a paraboloid which allows the parallel waves to
converge to one common point. If the parallel waves fall on the dish,
then the reflected waves will still remain in phase at the focal point
of the dish which is also known as the feed . There are five
dipole/cylindrical feeds, corresponding to the central frequencies of
150, 233, 327, 610 and 1420 MHz, mounted on the four faces of a rotating
turret at the focal point. The feed detects both the approaching
polarisation components from the sky. The antenna has two axes of
rotation to point towards any direction in the sky through its azimuth
and elevation electric motors. The elevation axis has a limit of 17.5
@xmath from the horizon. The reflecting surface of the dish is a
rectangular mesh which allows the antenna to operate in comparatively
higher wind speeds. It also reduces the load on the electric motors
which cuts down the construction cost by a large margin. Due to this
design of the reflecting surface, the maximum operating frequency with
this dish is around 3 GHz. The size of the mesh is also not uniform. The
inner one third of the dish has a mesh with the size of 10 mm @xmath 10
mm, the middle one third has the size of 15 mm @xmath 15 mm and the
outer one third has the size of 20 mm @xmath 20 mm. The available
effective area at 1420 MHz is smaller related to the other frequencies
due to a comparatively bigger size of the mesh in the outer area, which
does not act as an efficient reflecting surface at 1420 MHz.

The inner part of the array is called a central square (CQ). The CQ is 1
km @xmath 1 km in size and contains 14 antennas. The purpose of these
antennas is to provide short baselines specially for wide field imaging
and pulsar observations sak+91 . Rest of the 16 antennas are distributed
in a @xmath Y @xmath shaped configuration as shown in Figure 3.1 . The
three arms according to their positions from the CQ are called the
eastern, the western and the southern arms. The eastern and the southern
arms contain five antennas each while the western arm contains six
antennas. The longest baseline possible with the GMRT is 25 km long. The
antennas in the arms make the GMRT a very important instrument for high
resolution imaging by an unique technique called the earth rotation
aperture synthesis . However, this will not be discussed in this thesis
as non of the observations used the imaging capabilities of the
instrument. To study the single pulse behaviour of the nulling pulsars,
we used the GMRT in a single dish mode which will be discussed in the
following sections. The GMRT provided very valuable and high sensitivity
observations to investigate single pulse behaviour with its large
collecting area and good frequency coverage.

##### 3.4.1.1 Selection of antennas

The GMRT was used in a phased array mode for all the observations
reported in this thesis. To construct a phase array beam, the
instrumental phase differences between the array antennas need to be
compensated. This procedure, called the phasing , uses a strong point
source to estimate phases of the array antennas with respect to a
reference antenna. The instantaneous phase of the astronomical signal
received by a given antenna depends on the signal’s path through the
ionosphere which can exhibit turbulence due to various external factors.
Thus, antennas which are widely separated (i.e. antenna pair with a long
baseline), receive signals from completely different ionospheric zones
above them. At lower frequencies, the ionospheric changes are
comparatively rapid for long baselines, hence it is not possible to
phase equalise such antennas for more than two hours. The observations
at 325 and 610 MHz were carried out with only short baseline antennas
(CQ + 6 antennas) to keep the respective phase fluctuations minimum
during a single stretch of two hours long observations. Prior to any
schedule observations, all fourteen CQ and first two antennas of each
arm were selected (i.e. total 20 antennas). However, during the
observations, only 16 to 17 of these antennas could be used due to the
following reasons concerning their performance.

To conduct the observations at a particular frequency, the feed for the
required frequency was rotated and pointed towards the dish. For all the
selected antennas, a solar attenuator, situated inside the feed, was set
to 14 dB in order to get rid of the excess Galactic background at 325
MHz. Before the observations of the targeted source, the pointing offset
experiment was carried out to estimate the sensitive and the beam
pattern for each antenna. During the pointing offset experiment, a
strong point source was selected (either Cassiopeia A or Cygnus A). All
selected antenna beams were scanned across the source in order to get
the beam pattern. The beam pattern of each antenna was carefully
examined to identify any anomaly. The corresponding offset in the
pointing for individual antenna was corrected manually. For any known
strong point source, there are corresponding counts an antenna should
provide as an output from the calibrated back-end. Hence, the
sensitivity of the antenna can be determined from the corresponding
counts it displayed on the observed strong point source. Those antennas
which showed degraded sensitivity were excluded before the observations.
At the start of the observations, it is essential to equalise the
default output power from all the antennas. Those antennas which even
after a manual adjustment failed to reach the required power level were
also excluded before the observations. After carrying out power
equalisation, all selected antennas were also phase equalised to give
minimum phase difference with a reference antenna. Only those antennas
were selected which showed phase differences within acceptable limits (
@xmath 20 @xmath ) across the entire frequency band. Phasing is however
not possible for a few of the selected antennas, as occasionally the
true instrumental power is masked by the radio frequency interference
(RFI). Those antennas, for which phasing was not successful, were not
included. Band shapes of all the antennas were also observed carefully
in order to find any significant RFI lines in any frequency channel.
Those antennas which showed RFI were excluded from the observations.
Every exclusion of an antenna from the array will degrade the
sensitivity of the experiment, hence it is not possible to throw away
more than 3 to 4 antennas. In the final selection, one has to find a
balance between the degradation of the sensitivity and the antenna
quality.

For initial studies of the newly discovered pulsars and the a few of the
known nulling pulsars, hardware backend was used (Cycle 15 and 16). For
rest of the observations, a newly developed software backend was used.
First the settings for the hardware backend are described and later the
settings for the software backend will be discussed. The I @xmath local
oscillator (LO) needs to be set such that the corresponding RF gets
converted to an intermediate frequency (IF) of 70 MHz with 32 MHz
bandwidth. For the observations at 325/610 MHz as an observing
frequency, I @xmath LO was set at 255/595 MHz respectively. These
signals were again modulated to the optical wavelengths to transfer them
through the optical fiber links to the central electronics building. The
same procedure was applied to both the polarisation outputs.

##### 3.4.1.2 Hardware backend and settings

In the central electronics building, the optical wavelengths were
down-converted to obtain the 70 MHz IF for each polarisation. The
retrieved signal were again down-converted to baseband using a IV @xmath
LO of 70 MHz in the baseband system. This conversion was carried out
using a quadrature mixer splitting the overall 32 MHz band in two 16 MHz
sidebands, namely the Upper side band (USB) and the Lower side band
(LSB). The baseband also has an Automatic level control (ALC), which is
usually switched off during the pulsar observations for the following
reasons. The purpose of the ALC is to keep the signal in an optimum
range (i.e above quantization error limit but below saturation limit).
The ALC flattens the changes in the signal passing through it. The
pulsar signals on the other hand are train of pulses. The ALC introduces
a distortion to the pulsar signals because of the inherent finite time
constant. Hence, it is essential to keep the ALC off during the pulsar
observations. The signals were then orderly processed by the
analog-to-digital converter (ADC), the delay processing units and the
FFT engines. The FFT unit was configures to take 512 points FFT, which
corresponds to 256 channels across the observed bandwidth. The output of
the FFT is a time multiplexed polarisation data with 256 channels in a
time-series. The output was then transferred to the corresponding USB or
the LSB GMRT Array Combiner (GAC) unit.

GAC first demultiplexes both the polarisation channels. The phased array
output is produced by taking a sum of the voltages from each antenna and
then adding them for the final detection pr97 . An additional selection
of gain values were made inside the GAC. One has to choose the gain
values with a certain precision, between 1 to 15 with a 3 dB step,
because the lower gain value will introduce the quantization errors and
the higher gain value will saturate the output signals. For these
observations, gain value number 8 was selected. The GAC permits the
users to select their choice of antenna to be added in the phased array
beam. After considering various issues related to individual antennas
(as discussed in section 3.4.1.1 ) final selections were made in the GAC
output. Same antennas were selected for both the USB and the LSB.

The GAC-USB is connected to the Phased Array (PA) backend while the
GAC-LSB is connected to the Polarimeter pulsar backend (PMTR). Both the
backends were configured to give an integration time of around 1 msec.
The output from these backeds are also time multiplexed polarisation
data similar to output of the FFT units. These backends can be
configured to provide the Stoke’s parameters or the cross and the self
power terms. However for these observations, only total intensity modes
were used for both the USB and the LSB. In this configuration, both the
polarisations were combined together in the backends and the total
intensity outputs were produced. The pulsar backends also provide
intermediate GPS bits, which can be used to get a time stamp for the
recorded data. The general information regarding the start and the stop
times, in the Coordinated Universal Time (UTC), are recorded in a the
separate header file along with the recorded data file for the
observations of each source. The USB and the LSB files were recorded
separately and then transferred to their respective standard SDLT tape
units mounted on the backend control computers.

##### 3.4.1.3 Software backend and settings

In 2009, the GMRT was upgraded with more efficient and easy to handle
backend called the GMRT Software Backend (GSB) . The GSB provides
instantaneous bandwidth of 33.333 MHz with a high time resolution upto
61 @xmath sec rgp+00 . The GSB consist of a Linux based cluster of 48
Intel Xeon nodes, which are connected with 11 GB/s gigabit switches. For
acquisition, 16 nodes are used with 4 channel input to each of them.
These input receives two polarisation channels from each antenna. All
these nodes are synchronized to trigger start observations
simultaneously with the observatory’s Rubidium clock. It also carries
out the analog-to-digital conversion with an additional gain amplifier
at each input of the ADC to digitally adjust the gain of each antenna.
Additional 16 nodes are used for the central processing pipe-line and
the rest of 16 nodes are used as a recording cluster for the raw voltage
dump mode. The basic operational pipe-line of the GSB is similar to the
earlier discussed hardware backend. The signals from each antenna are
corrected for the path length, the geometric delays and the instrumental
phase differences. On-line FFTs are calculated for each antenna before
adding them in the phased array beam-former. The beam data then gets
recorded in the peripheral nodes depending upon the coherent and the
incoherent beam requirements.

The GAC can be configured either in a 16 MHz with 8 bit quantization or
in a 32 MHz with 4 bit quantization. The later one was used for all of
our observations. The sampling time used during most of the observations
was around 128 @xmath sec with 512 channels across 33.333 MHz band. The
power level of each antenna were precisely set to required level using
the individual antenna gain values. The phase of each antenna was also
equalize to match with a reference antenna after the FFT operation and
before the beam-former. The data were then recorded into a separate node
(node 50), which is dedicated for the coherent beam data recording with
the appropriate time stamp files. The recorded data were transferred to
the standard LTO tape drives for further processing.

#### 3.4.2 The WSRT

The WSRT was used for the observations of two nulling pulsars, which
were simultaneously observed at four different frequencies from three
different telescopes. The observations were carried out between 5 to 17
February 2011 with eight hours per source during its semester 11A.

The WSRT is an aperture synthesis radio telescope bh74 which consists of
14 dish antennas, each of size 25-meter in diameter on an equatorial
mount. Four of the dish antennas are placed on the rail tracks, which
can be positioned to obtain a suitable baseline coverage. These
observations were taken with a short spacing configuration of the array
in order to keep the ionospheric effects minimum. The signals are
received by the Multi-Frequency Front-End (MFFE) at each antenna. The
MFFE is designed to receive signals in any of the various available
bands between 110 MHz to 9 GHz. The front-end also has crossed dipole to
receive the linear polarisation for most of the frequency band (few
bands provide circular polarisation). Signals are then down converted to
an IFs and transferred to the centrally located IF amplifiers using the
coaxial cables to compensate for the cable losses. The IFs have the
bandwidth of 160 MHz which is split into eight subbands of 20 MHz each
for every antenna. For pulsar observations, after compensating for
various instrumental and geometric delays, the digitized signals are
added in a tied array added module (TAAM).

Both pulsars were observed at a central frequency of 1380 MHz with 160
MHz of total bandwidth using an upgraded WSRT Pulsar Machine II
(PuMa-II). PuMa-II is a fully digital and a flexible cluster of 44
nodes, which processes instantaneous observing bandwidth of 160 MHz
ksv08 . PuMa-II receives the phased array output from the TAAM using the
optical fibre links. It converts the digital optical signals to the
electric signals for the baseband recording of the data. A Hydrogen
maser provides the necessary time-stamps to the recorded samples for an
accurate time keeping. The data were recorded on the PuMa-II storage
cluster with the available high time resolution of around 50 nsec for
further processing. These observations generated few terabytes of data,
which were reduced off-line to the standard filter-bank formats. Both
the polarisations were also added during the off-line processing to get
the total intensity. After integrating the high time resolution samples,
we acquired an effective integration time of around 1 msec in the
off-line processing to reduce the data volume. The off-line processes at
the WSRT generated 8 dedispersed time-series files from all the
subbands. These data were transferred to a local facility at the
National

#### 3.4.3 The Effelsberg Radio Telescope

The Effelsberg Radio Telescope (ERT) was used for the observations of
two nulling pulsars which were simultaneously observed at four different
frequencies from two other telescopes. It is among the biggest fully
steerable single dish radio telescope in the world. The antenna has a
Gregorian design to receive the signals through a primary dish of
100-meter and a secondary dish of 6.5-meter. The primary dish is a
paraboloid and the secondary dish is an ellipsoid. The ERT is capable of
carrying out observations at various frequency bands between 333 MHz to
95 GHz. There are various types of receivers which can be divided among
the prime and the secondary focus receivers. The prime focus receivers
are flexible to change according to their usage while the secondary
receivers are permanently mounted on their positions.

Our observations were carried out at a central frequency of 4850 MHz
with 500 MHz of observing bandwidth in the total intensity mode. We used
a 6-cm dual horn secondary focus receiver. The detected signals were
converted to pulses (voltage-to-frequency conversion) to reduce the path
losses. They were digitally transferred to the receiver room and counted
in the digital backend. The signals were converted back to the analog
signals for control and adjustment purposes in the receiver room ¹ ¹ 1
http://www3.mpifr-bonn.mpg.de/div/electronic/content/receivers/6cm.html
. We used the PSRFFTS search backend for these observations. This
backend was reconfigured to have 128 frequency channels across 500 MHz
and a dump time of 64 @xmath sec. This time resolution is adequate to
correct for the highest observed dispersion smearing in our observed
pulsars of @xmath 0.1 msec across the 3.9 MHz wide frequency channels.
The above configuration of the PSRFFTS generated a net data rate of 8
MB/s with the output written out in the 32-bit format. Appropriate
observing start time in the Modified Julian Date (MJD) were also
recorded in the header part of the data files. These data were written
into the LTO disk and transferred to the local facility at NCRA, India,
for the off-line processing.

#### 3.4.4 The Arecibo radio telescope

The Arecibo radio telescope is a single dish radio telescope, with a
diameter of around 305-meter, fixed in a natural crater. It is capable
of operating at a wide range of frequencies. It was used to observe PSR
J1752+2359 for around 30 minute at 327 MHz on 2006 February 12. The
primary mirror of the dish is a spherical reflector. The advantage of
using the spherical surface it to gain tracking capabilities for longer
observations. The focus of the primary reflector is on a line and hence
the line feeds are used to receive the reflector signals. However,
current observations made use of a Gregorian feed designed to operate
from 312 MHz to 342 MHz. The data were recorded with a Wideband Arecibo
Pulsar Processors (WAPP1). The voltages produced by the receivers
connected to the orthogonal linearly polarised feeds were 3-level
sampled. The stokes time-series were obtained from the auto-correlations
and the cross-correlations of these voltages. Fourier transform of these
correlations was used to synthesise 64 channels across a 25 MHz
bandwidth with about 1 @xmath s sampling time.

The single pulse polarisation data were obtained directly at the
observatory. The recorded time-series were dedispersed and folded to 256
bins every period using the rotation period obtained from the polyco ² ²
2 Polynomial coefficients of the period and period derivatives for an
accurate period prediction (www.jb.man.ac.uk/~pulsar/Resources) . For
details, see section 3.5.1.2 . The single pulse data were then converted
to the European pulsar network (EPN) format ljs+98 . These single pulse
polarisation data were sent to the local facility at NCRA, India.

#### 3.4.5 Sensitivity of observations

This section briefly describes the justifications behind the usage of
the phased array during the observations with the GMRT and the WSRT. A
comparison of single pulse sensitivity of the observations carried out
by various telescopes in this thesis work is also presented in this
section.

For a single dish, the minimum detectable pulsar signal, with a period
(P) and a pulse width (W), can be expressed as,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Where, K is a sensitivity constant, n @xmath is the number of
polarisation, @xmath is the observed bandwidth, @xmath is the system
temprature and @xmath in the effective integration time. Here the
detected signal with an unity S/N is assumed. The antenna gain, G, can
also be expressed as,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here A @xmath is an effective collecting area and @xmath is the
Boltzmann constant. Hence, the minimum detectable signal, by
substituting the value of G, can be expressed as,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Above equation expresses the fact that, a bigger antenna with a wider
bandwidth can provide better sensitivity to detect weak signals. The ERT
is a single dish antenna with a diameter of around 100-meter. The
minimum detectable signal of 0.04 mJy, at the observed frequency of 4850
MHz, can be obtained after appropriate substitutions in equation 3.4
with, K = 1, G = 2.8 @xmath 10 @xmath K/Jy, n @xmath = 2, @xmath = 500
MHz and T @xmath = 9 K ³ ³ 3
www3.mpifr-bonn.mpg.de/div/electronic/content/receivers/6cm.html . To
obtain the single pulse sensitivity, we used the effective integration
time ( @xmath ) similar to the assumed pulsar period of 1 sec with 10%
duty cycle (W = 0.1 sec).

However, the single dish telescopes have a limitation on the feasible
dish size as it is a mechanical challenge to build a fully steerable
antenna bigger than @xmath 100-meter in diameter. However, an array of
small dish antennas can provide necessary collecting area resembling a
bigger dish when the signals from each of them are combined. There are
two way in which the signals from different antennas can be combined,
known as, (1) the Phased Array (PA) and (2) the Incoherent Array (IA).

With N antennas in the PA mode, where signals from different antennas
are added in phase, the sensitivity of the observations improves by a
factor of N compared to an observations from the single dish. The
minimum detectable flux, with N antennas in the PA mode and both
polarisations combined (i.e. total intensity), can be expressed as,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the IA mode, where signals are not added with the necessary phase
corrections, the sensitivity increases just by @xmath times. The minimum
detectable flux, with N antennas in the IA mode, can be expressed as,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

From the S @xmath of both the configurations (i.e equation 3.5 and 3.6
), it can be concluded that, the PA mode is around @xmath times more
sensitive than the IA mode. In the PA mode, the size of the final beam
is inversely proportional to the longest possible baseline in the array.
While in case of the IA mode, the beam size depends upon the diameter of
a single dish in the array. Both the configurations have their own
usefulness depending upon the science goals of the observations. The PA
mode is useful for targeted observations, where the source positions are
known with a great accuracy. While in the IA mode, large area of the sky
can be scanned in a relatively shorter time to search for new pulsars or
to point towards targets with a large uncertainty in their coordinates.

For the observations using the GMRT and the WSRT, the PA mode was the
most suitable choice due its capability in providing higher sensitivity
to obtain single pulses with high S/N. Table 3.2 lists the minimum
detectable flux at different observatories with their respective
frequencies used during the observations. For the GMRT, the minimum
detectable flux was obtained after substituting, K = 1, G = 3.3 @xmath
10 @xmath K/Jy, @xmath = 16 MHz, @xmath = 1 sec, N = 20, T @xmath = 106
K and 102 K for 325 MHz and 610 MHz ⁴ ⁴ 4 www.gmrt.ncra.tifr.res.in
respectively, into equation 3.5 . Similarly for the WSRT, the minimum
detectable flux was obtained after substituting, K = 1, G = 8.8 @xmath
10 @xmath K/Jy, @xmath = 160 MHz, @xmath = 1 sec, N = 14 and T @xmath =
27 K ⁵ ⁵ 5 www.astron.nl , into equation 3.5 . For the Arecibo radio
telescope, the minimum detectable flux was obtained using equation 3.4
with the substitutions of, K = 1, G = 25 @xmath 10 @xmath K/Jy, @xmath =
25 MHz, @xmath = 1 sec and T @xmath = 113 K ⁶ ⁶ 6
www.naic.edu/~astro/RXstatus/327/327greg.shtml . In all four cases, a
pulsar of period around 1 sec with 10% duty cycle was assumed. All four
observatories provided sufficient S/N to detect single pulses with high
significance. For example, the weakest pulsar in our sample (Table 3.1
), PSR J1725 @xmath 4043, was expected to provide single pulses with S/N
of around 2 for observations at 610 MHz from the GMRT. Similarly, the
second weakest pulsar, PSR J1738 @xmath 2330, was expected to provide
S/N of around 10 for observations at 325 MHz from the GMRT. Moreover, It
was possible to achieve single pulse S/N of around 25 at 1420 MHz from
the WSRT for PSR B0809+74, while PSR B2319+60 was expected to provide
single pulse S/N of around 26 at 4850 MHz from the ERT. For these
estimations, spectral index of around @xmath 2, was assumed.

### 3.5 Analysis

This section describes the common analysis procedures followed for all
our observations in this thesis work. There were different techniques
deployed to investigate individual science goals, which will be
discussed in the following chapters. However, this section summarises
the initial steps in obtaining the single pulses from different
observatories, estimation of the NF, separation of the null and the
burst pulses, construction of the null-length and the burst-length
histograms and fluctuation spectra analysis.

#### 3.5.1 Obtaining single pulses

Most part of the thesis is based on the statistical analysis of the
single pulses. Hence, it suffices to highlight the steps involved in
obtaining these single pulses. Numerous C programs were used during the
analysis ⁷ ⁷ 7 partial credit: Dr. B. C. Joshi . Along with that, a
publicly available package, SIGPROC ⁸ ⁸ 8 http://sigproc.sourceforge.net
was also used. The man-made signals are known to be more active at lower
frequencies. Due to which, analysis of the GMRT data required various
procedures to remove the RFI at different stages. First, the procedure
to remove the RFI before acquiring the single pulses, from the GMRT raw
data, is described.

##### 3.5.1.1 RFI removal from the GMRT raw data

As discussed in section 3.4.1 , the GMRT data were recorded in the
time-multiplexed frequency channels from both the backends. The recorded
data have bandwidth of 16 MHz or 33.333 MHz depending upon the usage of
the hardware correlator or the software correlator, respectively during
the observations. For the 16 MHz band, the data were divided into 256
spectral channels while for the 33.333 MHz band, the data were divided
into 512 spectral channels. The data were taken only from those antennas
where much lower level of the RFI were noticed before a start of the
observations. However, it is not possible to exclude large number of
antennas due to the possible loss in sensitivity. The RFI, which occurs
randomly in time, can occur for any antenna. It occurs mostly due to the
man-made signals picked up by the antennas, although it can also be
generated in the receiver electronics. Hence, a standard way to
automatically remove all the RFI can not be adapted. In this thesis,
mostly a manual identification of the RFI is implemented at various
stages. To remove the RFI affected channels, we obtained the observed
frequency band from the observations. Figure 3.2 shows an example of
33.333 MHz frequency band from the GMRT observed at 325 MHz. The
narrow-band RFI, which are concentrated in the individual frequency
channels, can easily be identified from the average band (as marked by
the arrows in Figure 3.2 ). These channels were tagged and replaced with
zeros to create flagged files to be used for the remaining part of the
analysis. Removal of the RFI infected channels reduces the overall
sensitivity of the observations, however it is useful for a true
identification of the nulled and the burst pulses.

##### 3.5.1.2 Single pulses from different observatories

The single pulses from different observatories were obtained using
slightly different techniques. For all of the single pulse analysis
reported in this thesis, the SIGPROC single pulse file format was used.
Hence, a conversion is required at an initial stage for the different
formats of the data from different observatories to the selected SIGPROC
format.

The GMRT data were recorded in the raw filterbank mode with the header
information stored in the separate manually written log files. A
conversion was required at this stage into the standard SIGPROC
filterbank format from the raw GMRT filterbank data format. For the GMRT
data, we used following set of codes to obtain the single pulses.

-    Filterbank ⁹ ⁹ 9 Credit : Dr. B. C. Joshi converts the raw GMRT
    pulsar data into a SIGPROC filterbank format. The code acquires the
    necessary details, regarding the observations, by a manual entry
    before the conversion. In the SIGPROC filterbank format, the data
    are arranged in the multiple frequency channels per sample with the
    observations details in the header.

-    Dedisperse ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 http://sigproc.sourceforge.net combines
    frequency channels after adjusting the dispersion delay between them
    caused by the interstellar medium. This delay was calculated using
    the DM of the pulsar obtained from the ATNF catalogue mhth05 ¹¹ ¹¹
    11 http://www.atnf.csiro.au/research/pulsar/psrcat/ . The dedisperse
    time-series consists of samples separated by the effective
    integration time.

-    Fold ^(†) ^(†) footnotemark: is the program which folds the SIGPROC
    time-series data to the given pulsar period. The period can be given
    manually as one of the input arguments or it can be provided as a
    polyco file. The polyco file is generated from a publicly available
    package called TEMPO ¹² ¹² 12
    http://www.jb.man.ac.uk/~pulsar/Resources/tempo_usage.txt . The
    TEMPO code, calculates the pulse arrival time at a given observatory
    using the known pulsar period and period derivatives and, where
    necessary, one of the several binary models. The polyco file is the
    prediction regarding the pulse phase behaviours in a given time
    range, which are calculated from the input models. The Fold program
    allows the user to choose the output to be produced in the single
    pulse format or in the integrated profile format. Fold was also used
    to bin the time-series in the user defined number of phase bins for
    each single pulses. For most of the pulsars in this thesis, the
    period was divided into 256 phase bins.

The WSRT data were obtained as 8 dedisperse time-series from the 8
observed subbands for each pulsar. A separate conversion code was needed
to combine these 8 subbands and form a single time-series in the SIGPROC
format for the Fold program. The code data @xmath converter.c ¹³ ¹³ 13 I
would like to thank Patrick Weltevrede for providing me various PuMa
off-line analysis packages , combines these time-series with the
respective DM to produce a single dedisperse time-series in the SIGPROC
format with the 160 MHz bandwidth. These SIGPROC time-series were folded
using the Fold program, using the polyco files, to obtain the single
pulses.

At the the Effelsberg telescope, the PSRFFTS recorded data in the
SIGPROC filterbank format only. Hence, these filterbank files were
directly used to obtain the dedisperse time-series using the appropriate
DMs. These SIGPROC time-series were also folded using the Fold program,
utilising the polyco files, to obtain the single pulses.

The Arecibo telescope data were converted in the EPN format at the
observatory. A separate code, EPN_to_sigproc.c was implemented to
convert the observed single pulses with the calibrated polarisations
into four separate single pulse files corresponding to the four Stoke’s
parameters, I, Q, U and V.

#### 3.5.2 RFI removal from single pulses

After obtaining the single pulses, NF of the pulsar can be obtained. In
many occasions, the data show broadband RFI, where the RFI is present
for short duration in time but over the entire observed band. These RFI
mask the true intensities of the pulses and hence a judgement on the
true nature of the pulse, to be either a null or a burst, can not be
made. Thus, it is necessary to remove these RFI infected single pulses
before the NF analysis. To carry out this task automatically on the
observed single pulse files, a code rfi_singlepulse.c was implemented.

Figure 3.3 shows the single pulses obtained from PSR B0835 @xmath 41
observed from the GMRT at 610 MHz. To identify RFI infected pulses, we
selected two windows on the phase bins. The on-pulse window (shown with
a red square in Figure 3.3 ) bounds the entire pulse region. All the
phase bins inside this windows were averaged to obtain the on-pulse
energy sequence (ONPS). Similarly, equal number of phase bins were
selected, away from the main pulse, to form an off-pulse window. All the
phase bins, inside the off-pulse window, were added to form the
off-pulse energy sequence (OFPS). A baseline was selected (from the
remaining phase bins) to obtain the mean counts in the entire off-pulse
region, and subtracted for every period. The off-pulse is a region where
one does not expect any emission. Hence, for the periods, where a
baseline has been subtracted, the OFPS should show distribution around
zero mean energy. Figure 3.4 shows the ONPS and OFPS for PSR B0835
@xmath 41. The presence of RFI can be seen in the OFPS, for periods
around 2500, where the OFPS fluctuations are larger. To identify these
periods, a model root-mean-square (rms) deviation of the off-pulse mean
energy was calculated from the periods where such large fluctuations
were not present (for example periods between 1500 to 1600 in Figure 3.4
). A threshold was adapted as 2 to 3 times the model rms to identify all
the pulses which showed mean off-pulse energy beyond this range. All the
pulses which were above such threshold were removed from the single
pulse data. After removal of these pulses, the remaining pulses were
used for the NF analysis.

For most of the observations, the threshold technique was useful to
remove the RFI pulses, however for certain observations, the occurrence
of RFI were short and did not overlap with the off-pulse window. Hence,
it was not possible to remove them using the above mentioned strict
threshold. We carried out a visual inspection of the single pulse data
to identify such pulses and they were removed manually for a few
pulsars. Figure 3.5 displays a stack of single pulses from PSR B0835
@xmath 41 after the removal of all RFI infected pulses. The drawback in
removing the RFI infected pulses is the break in continuation of the
observed pulse sequence. Hence, these data sets were not used to obtain
the null length and the burst length statistics.

#### 3.5.3 Nulling fraction estimation

In this section, the method to estimate the NF is explained in detail.
It is similar to the methods used by rit76 and viv95 [as mentioned in
Section 2.3.1 ]. The single pulses observed from the PSR B2319+60 at 610
MHz from the GMRT is shown in Figure 3.6 . The on-pulse and the
off-pulse windows were selected from the integrated profile. The total
energy in the on-pulse window and the off-pulse window were calculated
for each pulse to form the ONPS and the OFPS. Figure 3.7 presents the
obtained ONPS and the OFPS from PSR B2319+60. The presence of nulling
can be seen for pulses near the zero pulse energy.

In a few pulsars, the interstellar scintillation can cause the on-pulse
energy to fluctuate on a larger scale. The effects of such large
fluctuations can be addressed by averaging pulse energy in blocks of
around 200 pulses. This technique is introduced briefly in Section 1.3.3
. Every pulse in the ONPS and the OFPS were normalised by the average
energy estimated for the corresponding block of 200 pulses. The ONPS and
the OFPS were binned to various energy bins depending upon the available
S/N. The histograms of the on-pulse and the off-pulse energy, after a
normalisation by the highest number of occurrence, are shown in Figure
3.8 for PSR B2319+60 (The highest number of occurrence count is always
at the zero mean energy bin of the off-pulse energy histogram for a
nulling pulsar). It should be noted that, histograms with these
normalisation do not give probability distribution, however, choice of
such normalisation makes it easier to discern the NF from the
histograms.

To obtain the NF for each pulsar, modelling of the on-pulse energy
histogram (ONPH) and the off-pulse energy histogram (OFPH) were carried
out (using the NF.c code). The OFPH represents the telescope noise (a
Gaussian random noise), the width of which can be used to estimate the
rms fluctuations of the data. During the period, when the pulsar goes
into a null state, the on-pulse energy also represents the telescope
noise similar to the off-pulse energy. The height of the zero centred
energy in the ONPH provides the fraction of the pulses in the null
state. If nulling is very prominent, then the ONPH would be
indistinguishable from the OFPH due to the large fraction of the null
pulses. Pulsar with a steady power output, tends to show a bimodal
distribution in the ONPH with two peaks, one at the zero energy bin and
other at the mean pulse energy bin. Figure 3.8 shows such bimodal
distribution with two peaks in the ONPH for the PSR B2319+60. Both the
histograms were normalised by the maximum number of occurrence, at the
zero mean energy bin, from the OFPH. As mentioned earlier, such
normalisation was adapted to discern the NF directly from the plot. The
height of the ONPH, near the zero mean energy bin, represents the
fraction of pulses in the ONPH which are similar to the OFPH. This
fraction represents the observed nulled pulses in the data, also known
as the NF. A scaled version of the OFPH was modelled for the ONPH to
estimate this fraction. The ONPH is contaminated with noise which has
distribution similar to OFPH distribution. Hence, before subtraction,
OFPH has to be deconvolved from the ONPH. However, rit76 has reported
that such deconvolution does not provide significantly different
results. Hence, no such deconvolution was carried out in the analysis of
our data. Before the subtraction, the OFPH was modelled as a zero
centred Gaussian function, also represented as,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here, A is the height of the histogram at zero mean energy, in the units
of fraction of pulses, which can be identified as A @xmath . The rms
noise of the system can be estimated from the width of the fitted
Gaussian (i.e. C = @xmath ). In the ONPH, the zero energy excess
represents the nulled pulses. The height of which can be estimated by
fitting the similar Gaussian function given by equation 3.7 . Fitting
this function on the ONPH provided the a width of the Gaussian function
(i.e. C) obtained from OFPH. This parameter was kept fixed in the later
fitting process on the ONPH. Thus, only height was used as a free
parameter for fitting the ONPH around the zero mean energy bin. This
fitting gave an estimation of the A @xmath . The ratio of the
parameters, obtained from the ONPH (A @xmath ) to the one obtained from
the OFPH (A @xmath ), states the NF of a pulsar as,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The fitted parameters A @xmath and A @xmath will have the corresponding
fitting errors on them. The error on the NF was obtained using these
fitting errors as,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here, @xmath NF is the error on the NF while @xmath and @xmath are the
fitting errors on the @xmath and @xmath , respectively. For a few
pulsars, the null pulse distribution and the burst pulse distribution
were not well separated in the ONPH. Hence, fitting the Gaussian on
these histograms can give large fitting errors. For these pulsars, where
the null and the burst pulse distributions are indistinguishable in the
ONPH, the estimation of the NF using the above mentioned method leads to
an overestimation. This happens due to the low S/N burst pulses mixing
with the null pulse distribution in the ONPH. For pulsars with low S/N
burst pulses and relatively good amount of null pulses, consecutive
pulses (around 5 to 10 pulses depending upon the single pulse S/N) can
be sub-integrated to get the bimodal distribution in the ONPH.
Estimation of the NF from the sub-integrated pulses leads to a
underestimation, as it is likely that sub-integration will combine few
null pulses with the neighbouring burst pulses. Hence, the above
mentioned methods has to be used with precautions on the individual
cases.

#### 3.5.4 Separation of null and burst pulses

The null and the burst pulses need to be separated in order to carry out
further analysis. There are different ways in which these pulses can be
separated. We have at large used two different methods in various
different cases depending upon the available S/N. A simplest method is
to apply a visual threshold on the ONPH as shown in Figure 3.8 . This
threshold is selected at the location where the null pulse and the burst
pulse distributions cross each other. Pulses below the threshold can be
identified as the null pulses, while the pulses above the threshold can
be tagged as the burst pulses. For pulsars with high S/N burst pulses,
such threshold can be set very easily. However, separation using such
threshold can lead to erroneous results for the pulsars where the
bimodal distributions of ONPH, from the null and the burst pulses, are
not well separated. For such ONPH, a threshold can cause a few null
pulses to get mix with the separated burst pulses. Similarly, a few low
S/N burst pulses can also get mix with the separated null pulses. Hence,
for such cases we undertook a slightly different approach.

A relatively higher threshold was set initially on the ONPH histogram,
to separated strong burst pulses above the set threshold (around 0.4
E/[E] in the ONPH of Figure 3.8 ). The set higher threshold obviated any
possibility of null pulses mixing with the high S/N burst pulses. The
pulses below such threshold will have a mixture of true null pulses and
weak burst pulses as shown in Figure 3.9 (a). They show a significant
integrated profile indicating the presence of weak burst pulses. To
separate these pulses robustly, we calculated the on-pulse energy for
every period after weighting the on-pulse bins, for every period, with
the average pulse profile. We arranged all these pulses in the acceding
order of their on-pulse energy. Such arrangement will cause few pulses,
with pulse shape resembling the average profile and having high on-pulse
energy, to move towards the high energy end. A box can be selected, as
shown in Figure 3.9 (b), which encloses all the significant burst pulses
at the high energy end. To include most of the weak burst pulses, the
lower end of the box was moved from the high energy end towards the low
energy end till the pulses outside the box did not show a significant
profile (S/N @xmath 1). Pulses outside this box were tagged as the null
pulses while the pulses inside the box were tagged as the burst pulses.
After this final separation, the integrated profiles obtained from the
null pulses and the burst pulses are shown in Figure 3.10 .

#### 3.5.5 Estimation of the reduction in the pulse energy

The degree by which the radio emission from a nulling pulsar declines
during the nulls can be obtained from the average null pulse and the
burst pulse profiles of the pulsar for the null and the burst pulses
respectively. We calculated the reduction parameter, @xmath , for a
pulsar in a manner similar to that described by vj97 . First, the total
energy from the on-pulse bins of the burst pulse profile was obtained.
The rms deviation was obtained from the phase bins inside the predefined
on-pulse window of the null pulse profile. To estimate an upper limit on
any possible emission inside the on-pulse phase bins, in the null pulse
profile, three times the corresponding rms estimate was used. The ratio
between the total on-pulse energy of the burst pulse profile and an
upper limit on any detectable emission from the null pulse profile can
be defined as,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath is the intensity of the i @xmath bin inside the on-pulse
window of the burst pulse profile, rms @xmath is the rms estimated over
the on-pulse window of the null pulse profile and N is the total number
of bins in the on-pulse window. The error on the estimated factor,
@xmath , was obtained as three times the off-pulse rms of the burst
pulse profile. The @xmath robustly quantifies the reduction in the pulse
energy during the null state. It can be used to constrain various
hypothesis regarding the nulling phenomena.

#### 3.5.6 Null length and burst length histograms

To estimate the distributions of null and burst durations, the null
length and the burst length histograms were obtained. For each pulsar,
single pulses were tagged with an index number according to their order
of occurrence in the observed sequence. The null and the burst pulses
were separated as explained in Section 3.5.4 . The original index
numbers, which remained unaltered after the separation, were used to
find a continuous sequence of consecutive null and burst pulses. Figure
3.11 displays a small section of the observed data with their identified
emission states (null or burst). To carry out various fluctuations
analysis, each null pulse was tagged as zero and each burst pulse was
tagged as one [as discussed in Section 2.3.1 , bac70 introduced this
technique]. Thus, from the identified state sequence of the pulses, a
onezero time-series was formed (as shown in Figure 3.11 ). A Fourier
transform of such one-zero series can be used to scrutinize
periodicities associated with the nulling phenomena.

An individual uninterrupted sequence of null (or burst) pulses can be
used to count the length of the corresponding null (or burst) state in
the units of number of pulses. A nulling pulsar switches between the
null state and the burst state with different time-scales. From the
identified emission state sequence, such as Figure 3.11 , a sequence of
consecutively occuring null lengths and burst length can also be formed.
Figure 3.12 shows a small section of consecutive null lengths and burst
lengths for PSR B2319+60. It can be seen from Figure 3.12 , the pulsar
exhibits various lengths of null and burst phases. It should be noted
that, for the in case of lower S/N, identification of true null and
burst pulses can become difficult task. It can cause large differences
in the obtained null length and burst length histograms, specially near
the short nulls short bursts. cor13 has presented a compahensive study
on this aspect.

These null length and burst length sequences were binned to form the
null length histogram (NLH) and the burst length histogram (BLH). A few
pulsars exhibit large fraction of RFI infected pulses, where a judgement
regarding the pulse emission state can not be made. For these pulsars,
null lengths and burst lengths, which include RFI infected pulses, were
entirely excluded. Figure 3.13 displays the obtained null length and
burst length histograms for PSR B2319+60. The distributions follow an
exponential slope with relatively higher number of short null/burst
lengths. As discussed in Section 2.4.2 , its important to investigate
the time-scale of these length distributions to scrutinize various
nulling mechanism models. They are discussed further in Section 4.5 .

#### 3.5.7 Longitude resolved fluctuation spectra

Many pulsars in our sample do exhibit regular drifting behaviour.
Section 1.5.2 introduced this phenomena, while a detail discussion
regarding its origin in presented in Section 2.2.2 . To identify the
drifting periodicities, we obtained a Longitude resolved fluctuation
spectra (LRFS). The LRFS represents a Fourier transform computed over
each individual phase bin in a contour plot. Figure 3.14 (a) shows a
section single pulses from a very prominent drifting pulsar, PSR
B0809+74. To obtain the drifting periodicity, the pulsar period was
divided into 256 phase bins (512 bins in a few cases). Pulse-to-pulse
fluctuation time-series was obtained for the individual phase bin. A
Fourier transform was carried out for each phase bin time-series to
identify the fluctuation periodicities. The obtained Fourier spectra
from all the phase bins were displayed in a contour plot to highlight
the common features over the on-pulse phase bins. If a pulsar exhibit
regular drifting behaviour, then the contour plot will show peak at the
corresponding periodicity only at the on-pulse phase bins. An example of
such composite LRFS for PSR B0809+74 is shown in Figure 3.14 (b). The
central panel in Figure 3.14 (b) shows the contour plot of the Fourier
spectra obtained from all the phase bins. The peaks in the contour plot
and a strong peak in the average spectrum located near 0.09
cycles/period which corresponds to drifting periodicity of around 11
periods. The drifting periodicity, also clearly visible in Figure 3.14
(a), is consistent with the reported periodicity by la83 .

## Chapter 4 A survey of nulling pulsars using the GMRT

### 4.1 Introduction

Pulsar nulling is reported to occur in around 109 pulsars (see Table 2.1
). NF, as discussed in Section 3.5.3 , is a widely used quantity to
measure the degree of nulling in these pulsars. However, NF does not
specify the duration of individual nulls, nor does it specify how the
nulls are spaced in time. Although some attempts of characterising
patterns in pulse nulling were made in the previous studies bac70 ;
rit76 ; jv04 ; kr10 , not many pulsars have been studied for systematic
patterns in nulling, partly because these require sensitive and long
observations.

Recent discoveries suggest that nulling pulsars with similar NF may have
different null durations. These include intermittent pulsars, such as
PSR B1931+24 klo+06 and PSR J1832+0029 lyn09 , and the RRATs, which show
no pulsed emission between single burst of emission mll+06 ; kkl+11 [see
Section 2.3.5 for details]. These pulsars also show extreme degree of
nulling similar to a few classical nulling pulsars. As mentioned in
Section 2.3.5 , PSR B1931+24 exhibits radio pulsations for 5 to 10 days
followed by an absence of pulsations for 25 to 35 days klo+06 . If the
cessation of radio emission in this pulsar is interpreted as a null, it
has a NF of about @xmath 72 to 85% similar to PSR J1502 @xmath 5653
wmj07 ; lem+12 . Yet the latter shows nulls with a typical duration of
few tens of seconds in contrast to a much longer duration for PSR
B1931+24. A similar conclusion can be drawn by comparing RRATs with
classical high NF pulsars. While this leads to the expectation that
pulsars with similar NF may have different nulling time-scales, no
systematic study of this aspect of nulling is available to the best of
our knowledge. In this chapter, a modest attempt to investigate this is
initiated.

Pulse nulling was usually believed to be a random phenomenon rit76 ;
big92a . However, recent studies indicate a non-random nulling behaviour
for a few classical nulling pulsars hjr07 ; hr09 ; rr09 ; kr10 [see
Section 2.3.3 for details]. rr09 also report random nulling behaviour
for at least 4 out of 18 pulsars in their sample. Therefore, it is not
clear if non-randomness in the sense defined in rr09 is seen in most
nulling pulsars and such a study needs to be extended to more nulling
pulsars. This issue is investigated in this chapter with a distinct set
of nulling pulsars.

In this chapter, we present observations of 15 pulsars, carried out
using the GMRT at 325 and 610 MHz. Among these, five were discovered in
the PKSMB survey mlc+01 ; mhl+02 ; kbm+03 ; lfl+06 , which have no
previously reported nulling behaviour. Selection of these pulsars is
justified in Section 3.3 . Rest of the sample consists of well known
strong nulling pulsars. The observations and analysis techniques are
similar to the one described in Chapter 3. In Section 4.2 , nulling
behaviour for individual pulsar is discussed along with estimates of
their NFs and the reduction in the pulsed energy during the null state.
A comparison of the null length and burst length distributions for
pulsars, which have similar NF, is presented in Section 4.3 and a
discussion on the randomness of nulls is presented in Section 4.4 . The
expected time-scales for the null and the burst durations are presented
in Section 4.5 . Finally, the conclusions are presented in Section 4.6
while the implications of these results are discussed in Section 4.7 .

### 4.2 Single pulse behaviour of individual pulsars

The on-pulse and the off-pulse energy histograms for each observed
pulsar are shown in Appendix A. The null and the burst pulses were
separated, using the method discussed in Section 3.5.4 , for each
pulsar. The separated null and burst pulses were used to construct the
null length histograms and the burst length histograms, shown in
Appendix B.

#### B0809+74

As mentioned in Section 2.3.1 , this is one of the well studied nulling
pulsar. Nulling in this pulsar was first reported by th71 . A section of
observed single pulses at 325 MHz, is shown in Figure 4.1 (a), which
displays a clear null region around period number 440. An upper limit on
NF for this pulsar was estimated by rit76 . A refined value of the NF
was estimated by la83 using 40 hrs long observations. la83 also reported
reduction in burst pulse energy by @xmath 78 times. This is the only
pulsar in the sample with a previously reported @xmath value. The
on-pulse and the off-pulse energy histograms obtained from our
observations are shown in Figure A.1 . The ONPH shows clear bimodal
distribution originating due to small fraction null pulses and large
fraction of strong burst pulses. We obtained the NF of 1.0 @xmath 0.4%
using these histograms. The estimated @xmath is 172.0 @xmath 0.5, which
matches with the previously reported lower limit by la83 . Figure B.1
shows the NLH and the BLH, constructed using 73 null lengths and 73
burst lengths. The NLH shows typical null length of around 1 to 3
periods occurring more frequently while extending the overall
distribution up to 8 periods null. The BLH shows exponentially declining
distribution of burst lengths up to 800 periods. We also carried out
LRFS analysis (shown in Figure 4.2 ) to highlight the 11 period
periodicity, confirming the earlier claims by la83 and vkr+02 . The
pulsar also shows intriguing change in the drift rates before and after
the null states la83 ; vkr+02 .

#### B0818@xmath13

This is one of the well known nulling pulsar. A section of observed
single pulses at 610 MHz is shown in Figure 4.1 (b) which shows clear
null pulses at period numbers around 130 and 180. la83 , did an
extensive study about the change in the drift pattern before and after
the null states in this pulsar (see Section 2.3.1 ). Our data show
drifting feature at 0.21 cycles per period (Figure 4.3 ) which matches
with the earlier reported P @xmath la83 ; jv04 . The pulse energy
histograms are shown in Figure A.2 . Our NF (0.9 @xmath 1.8%) also
matched with the earlier reported NF (1.01 @xmath 0.01%) within the
error bars. The new result from our study is the amount of flux
reduction during the null states. Although this is a relatively stronger
pulsar, the estimated @xmath ( @xmath 4.2) is comparatively small. The
NLH and the BLH are shown in Figure B.2 , which were constructed using
57 null lengths and 57 burst lengths. The NLH shows around 90% of nulls
tend to occur for only single period while the rest 10% are distributed
up to 4 periods. The BLH shows smooth exponential decline of the burst
lengths distribution up to 400 periods.

#### B0835@xmath41

Nulling in this pulsar was first reported by big92a . A section of
observed single pulses at 610 MHz is shown in Figure 4.1 (c), which
shows regions of short null states around period numbers 100 and 140.
The on-pulse and the off-pulse energy histograms are shown in Figure A.3
. The estimated NF, of around 1.7 @xmath 1.2%, is small like in the case
of PSR B0818 @xmath 13. However, estimated @xmath (15.7 @xmath 0.2) is
comparatively higher. The NLH and the BLH are shown in Figure B.3 ,
which were constructed using 74 null lengths and 74 burst lengths. The
NLH shows very interesting null length distribution as more than 95% of
the nulls tend to occur only for one period, while the rest 5% tend to
occur for two periods. It can be speculated that the true nulling
time-scale could be shorter than the period of the pulsar and the
observed NLH presents only a tail of this distribution. The BLH shows
exponentially declining distribution of burst lengths up to 500 periods.

#### B1112+50

For this pulsar, nulling was first reported by rit76 . This pulsar was
reported to have three different profile modes of emission at 1420 MHz
wsw86 , where it shows two distinct profile components. In this survey,
observation at 610 MHz showed single profile component. The pulsar shows
sporadic nature of pulse energy modulations. The pulse energy histograms
are shown in Figure A.4 , using which the NF of around 64 @xmath 6%
(which matches with the reported NF of around 60 @xmath 5% by rit76 )
was obtained. For the large fraction of the observed duration, pulsar
switched rapidly between the null state and the burst state within one
or two periods. The reduction in the pulse energy, @xmath , during these
null states is 44.7 @xmath 0.2. Due to the intriguing flickering nulls
seen in Figure 4.4 (a), it is interesting to investigate periodicity of
this pulse energy fluctuations. However, the obtained LRFS, shown in
Figure 4.5 , did not show any significant spectral feature, rejecting
any possibility of periodicity in the pulse energy modulation. wse07
also reported no strong spectral feature in their observations at 92-cm.
Theoretically, it would be challenging to propose any nulling mechanism
which can cause changes to the pulse energy by such a large fraction
(around 45 times) in such a short time-scale (one to two periods). The
overall NLH and the BLH, constructed using 635 null lengths and 635
burst lengths, are shown in Figure B.4 . They show large fraction of
short nulls and short bursts with exponentially declining null length
and burst length distributions up to 50 periods.

#### J1639@xmath4359

This is one of the newly discovered pulsars from the PKSMB survey kbm+03
. The single pulses from this pulsar were very weak. The single pulse
data were averaged over successive pulses to form average profiles for
every block of 16 single pulses (sub-integration) to show the pulse
energy modulations. The pulse sequence of around 180 sub-integrated
blocks (3000 pulses) is shown in Figure 4.4 (b). As its clearly evident
from the sub-integrated pulse plot, there are no clear null states.
Figure A.5 shows the on-pulse and the off-pulse energy histograms,
obtained from the sub-integration of successive 16 periods. The
histograms are presented just to demonstrate the absence of null pulses
among the sub-integrated pulses. Estimation of the NF was not possible
as averaging over consecutive periods resulted in detection of emission
for every sub-integration giving a NF of zero (as shown in Figure A.5 ).
However, some of the single pulses in a sub-integration may well have
been nulled pulses. To estimate an upper limit on the fraction of such
pulses for this pulsar, we arranged all the single pulses in the
ascending order of their on-pulse energy. A threshold was moved from the
lower energy end towards the high energy end till the pulses below the
threshold did not show a significant (S/N @xmath 3) profile component
(similar to the method discussed in Section 3.5.4 ). These pulses,
located below the threshold at the lower energy end, were tagged as the
null pulses. Although, it is likely that these pulses are a mixture of
true null pulses and weak burst pulses (as the expected significance was
comparatively higher with S/N @xmath 3 compared to such threshold
mentioned in Section 3.5.4 ). Hence, the fraction of these pulses were
used only as an upper limit of around 0.1%, as the true NF for this
pulsar could be lower than this limit, if more sensitive observations
are conducted. The NLH and the BLH were not possible to obtain as the
pulsar showed weak single pulses.

#### B1658@xmath37

Nulling in this pulsar was first reported by wmj07 with a lower limit on
the NF ( @xmath 14%). It was also reported to have short nulls. However
due to lower S/N, wmj07 sub-integrated 10 pulses. Our observations were
more sensitive with higher S/N on single pulses [shown in Figure 4.4
(c)], hence we obtained better estimate on the NF (22 @xmath 4) compared
to earlier reported value. The pulse energy histograms used to estimate
this NF are shown in Figure A.6 . The null pulses and burst pulses were
separated and the obtained length histograms are shown in Figure B.5 ,
which show exponentially declining null length and burst length
distributions. The NLH also shows a slight excess of around 10 period
nulls. Total 73 null lengths and 73 burst lengths were used to obtain
these length histograms. A careful look at the single pulse sequence
reveals interesting pulse energy fluctuation with a sudden fall of the
pulse energy at the beginning of the null state followed by a gradual
rise towards the end. Figure 4.6 shows an example of two consecutive
null states which shows a gradual rise of the on-pulse energy towards
the end of the null state. This behaviour has been reported for the
first time in this pulsar. wmj07 reported two different profile modes in
this pulsar at 1420 MHz. However, scattering caused by the observations
at a lower frequency hindered identification of different profile
components. Hence, no profile mode-changing was possible to identify
from our observations.

#### J1715@xmath4034

This is one of the pulsar discovered in the PKSMB survey kbm+03 and it
shows single broad integrated profile of more than 15% duty cycle at 610
MHz with a prominent scattering tail. Width of the pulses shows
significant modulation as seen in Figure 4.7 (a). The pulsar shows two
profile components at 1420 MHz kbm+03 , which is difficult to identify
at 610 MHz because of the interstellar scattering. Modulation in these
components can cause this apparent change in the pulse width. The
estimation of the NF, was obtained after sub-integrating successive 10
pulses. As discussed in Section 3.5.3 , such sub-integration will cause
few null pulses to merge with the neighbouring burst pulses. Thus, only
a lower limit on the NF was possible to obtain using the conventional
estimation technique. The pulse energy histograms, used in the
estimation of the NF ( @xmath 10%), are shown in Figure A.7 . The pulsar
was too weak to obtain the NLH and the BLH.

#### J1725@xmath4043

This is also one of the pulsar discovered in the PKSMB survey kbm+03
with no previously reported nulling behaviour. Its integrated profile at
610 MHz exhibits three narrow components - one strong central component
with weak trailing and leading components. To improve the S/N, 24
successive pulses were sub-integrated. A section of these
sub-integrations as well as the integrated profile for this pulsar is
shown in Figure 4.7 (b). The pulse energy histograms, obtained from the
sub-integrated pulses, are shown in Figure A.8 , which shows large
fraction of null pulses. Visual inspection of the Figure 4.7 (b) shows
emission bunches of 50 to 200 strong pulses, which correspond to the
normal integrated profile [hereafter referred as Mode A - for example
periods between 120 to 264 in Figure 4.7 (b)]. After adding all the
sub-integrations during the null states, separated by a visual
inspection, a weak profile [hereafter referred as Mode B - for example
periods 264 to 780 in Figure 4.7 (b)], different from the normal
integrated profile (Mode A), is obtained. The integrated profiles for
the two modes are shown in Figure 4.8 . Although the two profiles are
similar in shape with distinct three components, Mode B profile shows
relatively stronger trailing component (Figure 4.8 ). Table 4.1 shows
S/N of various peaks from Mode A and Mode B profiles to compare their
significance. Hence, it appears that the pulsar shows sporadic emission
with two distinct modes. As the pulses were weak, the NLH and the BLH
were not possible to obtain.

Visual inspection of the single pulses, forming the null
sub-integrations, reveals weak individual pulses among nulled pulses.
Hence, it is difficult to identify null pulses as these could be low
intensity Mode B pulses. The pulsar spends 30% of time in Mode A
emission. The remaining 70% could be combination of null pulses and Mode
B emission. Hence, only an upper limit on the NF, of around 70% for this
pulsar was possible to obtain.

#### J1738@xmath2330

This pulsar was also discovered in the PKSMB survey lfl+06 . We observed
this pulsar at 325 MHz using the GMRT. We are reporting a unique nulling
behaviour of this pulsar in this chapter. The pulsar seems to have
quasi-periodic bursts, with an average duration of around 50 to 100
periods, interspersed with nulls of around 300 to 400 periods. This
interesting single pulse behaviour in this pulsar is evident in Figure
4.7 (c), where a plot, with 5 successive single pulses integrated, is
shown. A visual inspection shows that it seems to have regular periodic
bursts for total 1200 periods (bursts at period number 1700, 2100, 2600
and 3100 in Figure 4.7 (c)). Figure 4.10 shows the LRFS for this pulsar.
It shows quasi-periodicities at nearly 0.0019 cycles per period and
0.0028 cycles per period, which correspond to periodicities of
approximately 525 and 350 periods, respectively. Such large
periodicities can only occur from a quasi-periodic modulation of the
pulse energy. This quasi-periodic behaviour is similar to PSR B1931+24
but with much shorter time-scale. Figure A.9 shows the on-pulse and the
off-pulse energy histograms from the sub-integrated pulses. Only a lower
limit of around 69% was possible to obtain from these data due to the
sub-integration. As the pulses were weak, the NLH and the BLH were not
possible to obtain.

Close examination of single pulses suggests that the bursts typically
consist of a sequence of a 20 to 30 period bursts followed by 2 short
bursts of 5 to 10 pulses. These three bursts are separated by shorter
nulls of about 10 to 25 pulses. The overall burst bunches are separated
by around 400 periods nulls. Three examples of this burst pattern are
shown in Figure 4.9 . However, the single pulse S/N was too low to
confirm this with high significance. A more sensitive observations,
motivated from this study, was carried out and more details regarding
this pulsar’s nulling behaviour are discussed in Chapter 5.

#### J1901+0413

This pulsar was also discovered in the PKSMB survey mhl+02 with no
previously reported nulling behaviour. The pulsar showed single
component profile with 15% duty cycle with a prominent scattering tail
at 610 MHz [shown in the bottom panel of Figure 4.11 (a)]. The single
pulses were weak, hence 10 successive single pulses were sub-integrated,
as shown in Figure 4.11 (a), to display the pulse energy modulation.
Visual inspection of the single pulses showed small amount of nulling,
hence estimation of the NF using conventional technique was not
possible. It was only possible to obtain an upper limit using the
similar method discussed for PSR J1639 @xmath 4359. We arranged all the
single pulses in the ascending order of their on-pulse energy. A
threshold was moved from low to high on-pulse energy end till the pulses
below the threshold did not show a collective profile with a pulse with
high significance (S/N @xmath 3). All the pulses below such threshold
were tagged as null pulses. The fraction of these pulses gave an
estimate for the upper limit on the NF ( @xmath 6%). As the pulses were
weak, the NLH and the BLH were not possible to obtain.

#### B2020+28

This is one of the well studied pulsar. The pulsar profile shows two
strong components [shown in the bottom panel of Figure 4.11 (b)], but
this pulsar was classified as triple profile class pulsar due the core
emission in the saddle region between the two components rsw89 . A small
section of single pulses is shown in Figure 4.11 (b). Interestingly, the
emission in the individual profile components reduces significantly for
only for a small fraction of pulses, which is different for the two
components. A clear even-odd modulation pattern can be seen in the
trailing component while the leading component does not show such rapid
fluctuations. To scrutinise these modulations, the LRFS was obtained (as
shown in Figure 4.12 ) which clearly shows even-odd modulation in the
trailing component. Our results matches with the earlier reported
behaviour by nuk+82 . The pulsar shows small amount of nulling when the
entire pulse longitude is considered [see Figure 4.11 (b)]. The pulse
energy histograms are shown in Figure A.11 which shows significantly
small number of pulses near the zero pulse energy. We estimated NF of
0.2 @xmath 1.6% of for this pulsar. Estimation of the reduction in the
pulse energy was around 2.5 @xmath 0.2. The large errors in the NF is
due to the fewer number of full null pulses in the data. However, there
are many pulses which show partial nulls (i.e. null in only one of the
component). Our time resolution was not sufficient to identify the
saddle region clearly so we were able to estimate the NF for two
components only. The estimated NF for the leading component is 3.5
@xmath 0.8% and @xmath is around 9.7. The estimated NF for the trailing
component is 9 @xmath 1 % and @xmath is around 21, suggesting that at
least the trailing component shows a nulling behaviour similar to a
regular nulling pulsar. Both the NFs were significantly higher than the
overall NF. Due to the small number of full null pulses, the NLH and the
BLH were not possible to obtain.

#### B2021+51

This pulsar was reported nulling by rit76 with only an upper limit on
the NF( @xmath 5%). A small section of observed single pulses is shown
in Figure 4.11 (c). As can be seen from the single pulse plot, we were
able to obtain sufficient S/N for single pulses. The pulse energy
histograms are shown in Figure A.12 . We were able to obtain a better
constrain on the NF (1.4 @xmath 0.7%). The estimated reduction in the
pulse energy, @xmath is 2.6 @xmath 0.2. The null and burst length
histograms are shown in Figure B.6 , obtain using 12 null lengths and 12
burst lengths. The NLH shows that 60% of nulls are single period nulls
while the rest 40% nulls are double period nulls. This nearly equal
distribution between single and double period nulls can be extrapolated
to claim small number of shorter nulls (i.e. size smaller than pulsar
period) compared to large number of such nulls in PSR B0835 @xmath 41.
Such large number of double period nulls, assuming exponential null
length distribution seen in most pulsars, suggest the pulsar to have few
long nulls (i.e. longer than double period) which are not seen in our
data. BLH histogram shows around 65% of burst are less than 100 periods
while the distribution extends up to 800 periods.

#### B2034+19

This pulsar was reported nulling by hr09 . We observed this pulsar at
610 MHz and a section of observed pulse sequence is shown in Figure 4.13
(a). To improve the S/N, successive 3 periods were sub-integrated. The
pulse energy histograms are shown in Figure A.13 , obtained using these
sub-integrated data. Hence, we were able to estimate only a lower limit
on the NF ( @xmath 26%). Although, the estimated NF matches with the
earlier reported value within the error bars, it is slightly smaller due
to our inability to detect short nulls. By arranging pulses in the
ascending order of their on-pulse energy and using the variable
threshold method discussed in Section 3.5.4 , we were able to clearly
separate null and burst pulses from the single pulse data. Using these
separated null and burst pulses, with estimated @xmath of 6.4 @xmath
0.1, the obtained null and burst length histograms are shown in Figure
B.7 . Total 336 null lengths and 336 burst lengths were used to obtain
these length histograms. The NLH shows gradual distribution of null
lengths up to 10 periods. This is small given that pulsar spends more
than 26% of time in the null state. The BLH shows more than 50% of
bursts are of size smaller than 3 periods while the other half extends
up to 50 periods.

#### B2111+46

This pulsar is one of the long period well studied pulsar with
multicomponent profile [bottom panel of Figure 4.13 (b)]. rsw89
classified this pulsar as triple component profile class pulsar but
zqh+07 reported two additional components in the saddle region
connecting the core component and the outer components. The
depolarisation shows swing in the middle component at 600 MHz gl98 ,
hence, the profile is of core multicomponent class. A section of the
observed single pulses at 610 MHz is shown in Figure 4.13 (b). Our data
shows stronger emission in the saddle region compared to core and outer
conal components for many individual pulses. Nulling in this pulsar was
first reported by rit76 . Figure A.14 shows the conventional pulse
energy histograms obtained after considering the entire pulse longitude.
We measured a slightly higher NF (21 @xmath 4%) compared to the
previously reported estimate by rit76 . Like PSR B2020+28, the fraction
of pulses for which emission is not detected varies from component to
component. For the core component, NF was estimated to be of 26 @xmath
2%, slightly higher than the NF of the entire pulse. The estimated
@xmath value for this component is around 56. For the leading component,
NF was found to be 53 @xmath 5%, almost double the NF for the entire
pulse. The NLH and the BLH, shown in Figure B.8 , considering the
emission in the entire pulse are reported here for the first time for
this pulsar. The NLH shows 50% of nulls are single period nulls while
other 50% are gradually distributed up to 10 periods. Total 145 null
lengths and 145 burst lengths were used to obtain these length
histograms.

Visual inspection of the single pulse data shows many long nulls with
lengths varying from 8 to 16 periods. Many of these long nulls show
single burst from the core component located inside them. Some of the
interesting cases of such nulls are shown in the Figure 4.14 . This
behaviour has been reported for the first time in this pulsar to the
best of our knowledge. It is consistent with the estimated NF of the
leading component (around 52%) compared to the NF of the core component
(around 26%) as these burst pulses reduce the NF of the core component.
However, length of our observations were not sufficient to claim a
statistically significant result of this behaviour. Our study motivates
longer observations of this pulsar as many of the interesting single
pulse behaviour has not been investigated yet.

#### B2319+60

This is also one the long period well studied pulsar. Pulsar has three
component at 610 MHz. It has reported NF of around 25 @xmath 5% rit76 .
Observed single pulse data show that this pulsar displays a regular
switching between three different profile modes. During two of these
modes, it exhibits regular drifting behaviour while in the third mode no
such drifting feature is seen. Figure 4.13 (c) shows a section of
observed single pulses from this pulsar. A clear change in the drift
rate (transition from slower drift mode to faster drift mode) is clearly
seen around period number 1480. This matches with the reported behaviour
for this pulsar at 1 GHz by wf81 [also discussed in Section 2.3.2 ].
More details regarding the broadband nulling behaviour of this pulsar
are discussed in Chapter 6. Figure A.15 shows the obtained pulse energy
histograms. The estimated NF, using these histograms, is around 29
@xmath 1 % and estimated @xmath is around 115.8 @xmath 0.4 which is
second highest in our sample. Figure B.9 shows the exponentially
declining length distributions where the NLH extends up to 30 periods
while the BLH extends up to 90 periods. Total 225 null lengths and 225
burst lengths were used to construct these length histograms.

#### Summary of results

The summary of results on all pulsars is shown in Table 4.2 . It also
shows basic parameters ¹ ¹ 1 gg74 ; dtms88 ; jml+95 ; lylg95 ; wmz+01 ;
mhl+02 ; kbm+03 ; hlk+04 ; lfl+06 and ATNF Catalogue :
http://www.atnf.csiro.au/research/pulsar/psrcat mhth05 along with the
previously reported NF for each pulsar. As it can be seen from Table 4.2
, our study reported NFs for around 15 pulsars out of which 5 were PKSMB
pulsars (marked with a dagger in Table 4.2 ) with no previously reported
nulling behaviour.

### 4.3 Comparison of nulling behaviour

This section discusses comparison of nulling behaviour between four
nulling pulsars. Each of this pulsar has estimated NF of around 1%. As
summarised in Section 2.3.1 , over the years various attempts have been
made to correlate the NF with various pulsar parameters. rit76 , who
presented a novel approach to quantify amount of nulling by the NF,
reported a correlation between the pulsar period and the NF. rit76
claimed that, pulsars with longer periods tend to null more frequently
compared to pulsars with smaller periods. Pulsar period is also
correlated with the age of the pulsar. Hence, rit76 suggested that
pulsar die with increasing fraction of nulls. ran86 concluded that core
single pulsars possess small NF compared to other classes. Contrary to
rit76 , ran86 had suggested that apparent relation between nulling and
pulsar age is due to the profile morphologies. In a given profile class,
there is no strong correlation between the NF and the pulsar age. big92a
reported correlation study between the NF with several pulsar
parameters, using 72 nulling pulsars. One of the highlighted correlation
was again between the NF and the pulsar period. Contrary to ran86 ,
wmj07 have claimed that there is no correlation between the NF and the
profile morphological classes. Multicomponent profile pulsars tend to
have higher NFs but such pulsars are old. Thus it can be due to the
reported NF-age correlation. Hence, there is no common agreement between
various studies on the true nature of any correlation. Apart from the
weak NF-period correlation, reported by many authors, NF do not appear
to strongly correlate with any of the pulsar parameter. Thus, none of
the previous studies were able to provide a common agreement among
various reported correlations with the NF. This presents an important
question regarding the NF that, Is the NF an ideal parameter to quantify
nulling behaviour of a pulsar ?

#### 4.3.1 Nulling behaviour of similar NF pulsars

We have carried out observations of four nulling pulsar which exhibit
similar NF. These pulsars include PSRs B0809+74, B0818 @xmath 13, B0835
@xmath 41 and B2021+51. All these pulsars exhibit small amount of
nulling with estimated NF of around 1%. The single pulse plot of all
these four pulsars are shown in Figure 4.15 . All these pulsars exhibit
sufficiently high S/N to detect nulling in the single pulses with high
significance.

From Figure 4.15 , it can be seen that although these pulsars have
similar NF of around 1%, they exhibit very different single pulse
behaviour. PSRs B0809+74 and B0818 @xmath 13 show clear drifting bands
while drifting in PSRs B0835 @xmath 41 and B2021+51 are difficult to
identify from these plot. PSR B0809+74 also has very high duty cycle
with much wider pulse width compared to other three pulsars. Table 4.3
lists a few basic pulsar parameters of these four pulsars for a
comparison. PSR B0809+74 is among the oldest (around is 10 times)
compared to the characteristic age of other three pulsars. It also shows
weak inferred surface magnetic field. Although, with these differences
in their derived parameters, they show similar fraction of nulling.

To compare the nulling pattern seen in these four pulsars, we also
compared their NLHs and BLHs with each other using the the
Kolmogrov-smirnov test. Figure 4.16 shows the NLHs for these four
pulsars. Similarly, Figure 4.17 shows the BLHs. These histograms,
specially the NLHs, show significant differences between each other.
PSRs B0809+74 and B0818 @xmath 13 exhibit null lengths of around 4 to 8
periods, while PSRs B0835 @xmath 41 and B2021+51 show only single and
double period nulls. Moreover, the NLH of PSR B0835 @xmath 41 shows
around 95% of only single period nulls while less than 5% are two period
nulls, which can also be seen in Figure 4.15 . The NLH of PSR B2021+51
shows 60% single period nulls while the rest 40% are double period
nulls. Hence, just from the visual examinations of the NLHs, it can be
seen that these four pulsar have very different nulling time-scales.

#### 4.3.2 KS-test comparison

To quantify these differences, a two sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov (KS) test
press was carried out between the above mentioned four pulsars. The
KS-test is a non-parametric distribution free test, applicable to
unbinned data. KS-test provides a statistic, D, which is the maximum
difference between the two cumulative distribution functions (CDFs). To
compare the null length distributions of two pulsars, we formed their
CDFs from the observed unbinned null length sequences. We found D from
their CDFs and estimated the rejection probability of null hypothesis,
which assumes that the measured distributions are drawn from the same
underlying distribution. The results of these tests are given in Table
4.4 for each pair of the four pulsars. The null hypothesis is rejected
for all pairs with high significance (except for the comparison of null
lengths for PSRs B0818 @xmath 13 and B0835 @xmath 41, where the
significance is marginally smaller). Thus, the nulling patterns differ
between each of the four pulsars even though they have the same NF. This
kind of differences are not only seen in pulsars with small NF, but also
in pulsars with larger NF. For example, PSRs B2319+60 and B2034+19 have
NF @xmath 30% but their NLH are different (Figures B.9 and B.7 ). A
KS-test once again rejects the null hypothesis with high significance.
Likewise, NLH for PSRs B2111+46 also differ with PSRs B2319+60 and
B2034+19. However, as these pulsars have slightly different NFs, it is
difficult to draw a strong conclusion from these data. Chapter 5,
discusses a comparison between two pulsars namely, PSRs J1738 @xmath
2330 and J1752+2359 with NF of around 85%, where further differences are
shown with much higher significance. Hence, comparisons of null lengths
at different NFs suggest that NF does not quantify nulling behaviour in
full details.

### 4.4 Do nulls occur randomly ?

Previous studies hjr07 ; rr09 ; hr09 ; kr10 indicated that nulling may
not be random. To test the above premise, non-randomness tests were
carried out on our data for 8 pulsars where it was possible to obtain
the NLH and the BLH.

If the null pulses of a pulsar are characterised by an independent
identically distributed (iid) random variable, for which NF represents
the proportion statistics, then one can Monte-Carlo simulate synthetic
data sets using a random number generator press . We simulated around
10,000 random one-zero time series of the same length as that of the
sequence of the observed pulses for each pulsar with a given NF. The
distributions of null and burst lengths were derived from the synthetic
data sets. If the underlying distribution of observed null lengths does
not differ from the the simulated distribution with high significance,
then it can be concluded that the observed nulls are sampled from a
distribution characterising such an iid random variable, for which NF
represents the proportion statistics. The above premise can be tested by
carrying out a one sample KS-test press . As explained in the earlier
section, KS-test provides D statistic, which is the maximum deviation
between the two CDFs. For our test, one CDF was obtained from a
simulated null sequence while the other CDF was obtained from the
observed null sequence. As usual, the test was carried out on the
unbinned data. The D statistic from this comparison was averaged over
all 10,000 simulated sequences.

Table 4.5 summarises significance level of rejection for the null
hypothesis, which assumes that the two data sets are drawn from the same
underlying distribution (or the observed nulls are drawn from a random
distribution). Apart from PSRs B0818 @xmath 13 and B2021+51 (where the
significance is marginally lower - @xmath 82%), the null hypothesis is
rejected at high significance for the rest of the pulsars.

A stronger test is Wald @xmath Wolfowitz statistical runs @xmath test
ww40 . A dichotomous data set, such as the nulling pattern, can be
represented by a series of length n consisting of n @xmath 1s (i.e.
burst pulses) and n @xmath 0s (i.e. null pulses), with each contiguous
series of 1 or 0 defined as a run, r (i.e. number of runs given in
Column 9 of Table 4.2 ). In order to quantify the degree to which the
runs are likely to represent a non-random sequence, we calculated Z,
defined as,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Where, the mean of the random variable, R, is given by,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The variance of R is given by,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Sampling distribution of Z asymptotically tends to a standard normal
distribution in case of large n with a zero mean and unity standard
deviation. Therefore, Z will be close to zero for a random sequence and
the value of Z, derived from R, can be used to test the hypothesis that
the given sequence is random in a distribution free manner. Note that a
sequence judged random by the runs test indicates that each observation
in a sequence of binary events is independent of its predecessor.

This statistic was calculated for 8 pulsars for which the NLH and the
BLH are presented in Figures B.1 to B.9 (except for PSR B1658 @xmath
37). The results are given in Table 4.5 . The observed values of Z for
all 8 pulsars (except for PSR B0835 @xmath 41) were large and hence the
null hypothesis is rejected with more than 95 % significance. Even for
PSR B0835 @xmath 41, the rejection significance is 92 %, although this
is not as significant as the other pulsars. Interestingly, Z is negative
for all 8 pulsars suggesting that the null and burst pulses tend to
occur in groups.

The preceding two tests confirm that a null (or a burst), in the
null-burst sequence for the 8 pulsars studied, is not independent of the
state of the pulse preceding it. In other words, individual nulls
(bursts) are correlated across several periods. However, these tests
place no constraint on the randomness of the duration of nulls (bursts).
A careful examination of data suggests that the interval between two
transition events , defined as a transition from a null to burst and
vice-verse, does not depend on the duration of previous nulls or bursts
and appears to be randomly distributed.

This random behaviour of the null (burst) duration is also supported by
the following arguments. When the complete pulse sequence is divided
into several subintervals, consisting of equal number of periods
(typically 200 pulses), the count of the number of such transitions
(events) is distributed as a Poisson distribution for all pulsars in our
sample. Likewise, the interval between two transitions is distributed as
an exponential distribution as its evident in the NLHs and BLHs shown in
Appendix B. Lastly, featureless spectra are obtained from the sequence
of null (burst) durations indicating no correlations between these
durations. Thus, it appears that the duration of nulls and bursts can be
considered as a random variable, at least over the time-scale spanned by
our data for our sample of pulsars. These claims are further supported
by the remarkable matching of the null length and burst length
distributions with the stochastic Poisson point process presented in the
next section.

In summary, the Wald @xmath Wolfowitz runs tests imply non-randomness
(i.e. correlation in the one-zero sequence, derived from the pulse
sequence, across periods) in nulling in the sense that the absence (or
presence) of emission in a given pulse is not independent of the state
of the pulse preceding it, hinting a memory of the previous state.
However, the duration of the null and burst states and the time instants
of these transitions appear to be random. Hence, these pulsars produce
nulls and bursts with unpredictable durations.

### 4.5 Expected time-scale for nulls and bursts

The nature of random variable, characterizing the null (burst) duration,
is investigated further in this section, to also obtain the expected
time-scale for nulls (bursts). The NLHs and the BLHs in Figures B.1 to
B.9 suggest that the null and the burst durations are distributed as an
exponential distribution, which characterizes a stochastic Poisson point
process. The CDF, F(x), of a Poisson point process is given by pp02 ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Where, @xmath represents a characteristic time-scale of the stochastic
process. A least square fit to this simple model provides the
characteristic null and burst time-scales ( @xmath and @xmath
respectively; equation 4.4 ).

Figures C.1 to C.8 show the CDFs corresponding to NLHs and BLHs for
eight pulsars along with the least square fits to the proposed Poisson
point process CDFs given in equation 4.4 . These fits show remarkable
similarity between the observed CDFs and the proposed CDF from the
Poisson point process (equation 4.4 ). These fits suggest that the
interval between one transition from null to burst state (and
vice-verse) to another transition from burst to null state appears to be
modelled well by a Poisson point process for these pulsars. It should be
noted that, the model given in equation 4.4 need not be unique and other
models may fit the CDFs equally well [See viv95 ; wwr+12 ; cor13 ].
However, we use this model (a) as this is the simplest model suggested
by our data, and (b) we did not have sufficient data to try more
complicated models.

The characteristic null and burst time-scales ( @xmath and @xmath
respectively; equation 4.4 ) and the uncertainties on these parameters,
obtained from these fits, are listed in Table 4.6 . No fits were carried
out for the CDF of nulls for PSRs B0835 @xmath 41 and B2021+51 as only
two points were available for the fit. The fitted model was checked by
carrying out a two-sample KS-test in the following manner. First a pulse
sequence, consisting of a million pulses, was simulated using the
parameter @xmath obtained in these fits. Then, the NLH and the BLH were
obtained for this simulated pulse sequence, which provides much larger
sample of nulls and bursts than the observed sequence. A two-sample
KS-test was carried out on the NLH and the BLH, obtained from the
observed sequence and the simulated pulse sequence. The significance
level of rejection for the null hypothesis, which assumes, in this case,
that the two distributions are different, is given in Column 4 and 6 of
Table 4.6 for the null and the burst durations, respectively. They are
also indicated in Figures C.1 to C.8 . The null hypothesis is rejected
with high significance for null duration in all six pulsars, for which
the fit was carried out. Apart from PSRs B2034+19 and B2319+70 the null
hypothesis is rejected with high significance for the burst duration for
the other six pulsars. The lower significance of rejection of null
hypothesis for the burst duration in the above listed two pulsars may be
due to the use of the simple model given by equation 4.4 .

### 4.6 Conclusions

The nulling behaviour of 15 pulsars, out of which 5 were PKSMB pulsars
with no previously reported nulling behaviour, is presented in this
chapter with estimates of their NFs. For four of these 15 pulsars, only
an upper/lower limit was previously reported. The estimates of reduction
in the pulsed emission is also presented for the first time in 11
pulsars. NF value for individual profile component is also presented for
two pulsars in the sample, namely PSRs B2111+46 and B2020+28.
Interesting pulse energy fluctuations around the null region is reported
in PSR B1658 @xmath 37. Possible mode changing behaviour is suggested by
these observations for PSR J1725 @xmath 4043, but this needs to be
confirmed with more sensitive observations. An interesting
quasi-periodic nulling behaviour for PSR J1738 @xmath 2330 is also
reported. We also reported intriguing single period core emission during
the long nulls in PSR B2111+46. We find that the nulling patterns differ
between PSRs B0809+74, B0818 @xmath 13, B0835 @xmath 41 and B2021+51,
even though they have similar NF of around 1%.

The null and burst pulses in 8 pulsars in our sample appear to be
grouped and seem to occur in a correlated way, when individual periods
are considered. However, the interval between transitions from the null
to the burst states (and vice-verse) appears to represent a Poisson
point process. The typical null and burst time-scales for these pulsars
have been obtained for the first time to the best of our knowledge.

### 4.7 Discussion

The estimates for the factor, @xmath , by which the pulsed emission
reduces during the nulls for 11 pulsars were presented for the first
time in this study (Table 4.2 ). Although the physical process, which
causes nulling, is not yet understood, it could be due to a loss of
coherence in the plasma generating the radio emission or due to
geometric reasons as summarized in Section 2.4 . In the former case,
@xmath provides a constraint on the process responsible for this loss of
coherence. Our estimates provide lower limits for different pulsars as
this estimate is limited by the available S/N. Nevertheless, reduction
by two orders of magnitude is seen in at least two pulsars. If nulling
is caused by a shift in the radio beam due to global changes in
magnetosphere, @xmath provides a constraint on the low level emission
and will depend on the orientation to the line-of-sight and the
morphology of the beam during the null.

Our results confirm that NF probably does not capture the full detail of
the nulling behaviour of a pulsar. We find that the pattern of nulling
can be quite different for classical nulling pulsars with similar NFs.
Estimates for typical nulling time-scales, @xmath , for 6 pulsars in our
sample were obtained for the first time. For 2 of these with a NF of
about 1%, @xmath varies by a factor of three. In particular, the typical
nulling time-scale for PSR B1112+50 (NF @xmath 65%) is about 2 s, more
than 6 orders of magnitude less than that for the intermittent pulsar
PSR B1931+24 (NF @xmath 75%). In the rs75 model, the pulsar emission is
related to relativistic pair plasma generated due to high accelerating
electric potential in the polar cap. As mentioned in Section 2.4.2 ,
changes in this relativistic plasma flow fr82 ; lhk+10 , probably caused
by changes in the polar cap potential, have been proposed as the
underlying cause for a cessation of emission during a null. The typical
nulling time-scale, @xmath (and burst time-scale @xmath ) provides a
characteristic duration for such a quasi-stable state, which is similar
to a profile mode-change. An interesting possibility may be to relate
this to the polar cap potential. In any case, any plausible model for
nulling needs to account for the range of null durations for pulsars in
our sample and relate it to a physical parameter and/or magnetospheric
conditions in the pulsar magnetosphere.

We have extended the Wald-Wolfowitz runs test for randomness to 8 more
pulsars. Results for 15 pulsars were published in previous studies rr09
; kr10 . Our sample has no overlap with the sample presented by these
authors. Like these authors, we find that this test indicates that
occurrence of nulling, when individual pulses are considered, is
non-random or exhibits correlation across periods. Unlike these authors,
all 8 pulsars in our sample show such a behaviour. This correlation
groups pulses in null and burst states, which was also noted by rr09 .
However, the durations of the null and the burst states seem to be
modelled by a stochastic Poisson point process suggesting that these
transitions occur at random. Thus, the underlying physical process for
nulls in the 8 pulsars studied appears to be random in nature producing
nulls and bursts with unpredictable durations. More details regarding
this behaviour are further discussed in Section 7.4.2 .

Lastly, our estimates of NFs in Table 4.2 are consistent with those
published earlier for PSRs B0809+74, B0818 @xmath 13, B0835 @xmath 41,
B1112+50 and B2319+60 la83 ; big92a ; rit76 , which indicates that NF
are consistent over a time-scale of about 30 years.

In Section 2.4 , it was highlighted that nulling is an open question
even after 40 years since it was first reported. Recent studies suggests
that both nulling and profile mode changes probably represent a global
reorganization of pulsar magnetosphere probably accompanied by changes
in the spin-down rate of these pulsars klo+06 ; lhk+10 . Interestingly,
such quasi-stable states of magnetosphere have recently been proposed,
based on MHD calculations, to explain the release of magnetic energy
implied by high energy bursts in soft-gamma ray repeaters ckf99 ; con05
; tim10 . Global changes in magnetospheric state is likely to be
manifested in changes in radio emission regardless of the frequency of
observations. This study motivates simultaneous multi-frequency
observations of pulsars with nulling, as they will be useful to study
these changes and constrain such magnetospheric models. Chapter 6
discusses similar observations conducted on two pulsars.

## Chapter 5 On the long nulls of PSRs J1738@xmath2330 and J1752+2359

### 5.1 Introduction

Nulling pulsars exhibit a variety of NFs, as shown in Table 2.1 , and
one might hope that this apparently fundamental parameter could be used
to characterise further aspects of the pulsar’s behaviour. However, as
demonstrated in Section 4.3 , our study dashed this hope and concluded
that pulsars with similar low NFs ( @xmath 1 %) are not necessarily
similar in their nulling pattern. In this chapter, we set out to see if
this result still holds even for pulsars with large NF ( @xmath 80 %).
We compare and contrast two high-NF pulsars and assess to what extent
their nulling patterns follow a common statistical rule.

PSR J1752+2359 was discovered in a high Galactic latitude survey with
the Arecibo telescope fcwa95 . Subsequent timing observations indicated
interesting single pulse behaviour with bursts up to 100 pulses,
separated by nulls of about 500 pulses lwf+04 , giving an NF of about 80
%. This study also noted an intriguing exponential decrease in the pulse
energy during a burst, a feature seen in very few nulling pulsars rw08 ;
bgg10 ; lem+12 to the best of our knowledge. The second, PSR J1738
@xmath 2330, as mentioned in Section 4.2 , was discovered in the PKSMB
survey lfl+06 . As discussed in Section 4.2 and shown in Figures 4.10
and A.9 , PSR J1738 @xmath 2330 shows quasi-periodic bursts interspersed
with long nulls at 325 MHz with a lower limit of 69% on its NF. Table
5.1 highlights some of the basic parameters for both the studied pulsars
for a comparison. Note that PSR J1738 @xmath 2330 is approximately five
times slower and three times younger than PSR J1752+2359.

In previous studies of these pulsars the typical duration for single
pulse observations was 1-2 hours. Such short observations, particularly
for pulsars with periods around 1 s, do not yield sufficient nulls and
bursts for a satisfactory comparison of their statistical properties. In
this study much longer observations were undertaken to obtain a large
sample of nulls and bursts in each pulsar.

The observations of both pulsars were carried out with the GMRT at 325
MHz, using the GMRT software backend (details of which are given in
Chapter 3). The off-line analysis procedures are also similar to those
discussed in Chapter 3 to obtain the NFs and to construct the NLHs and
BLHs. For PSR J1752+2359 around 30 minutes of archival full polar data
(Rankin, private communication), observed at 327 MHz from the Arecibo
telescope was also analysed to confirm the presence of weak burst pulses
during the null states and to compare the linear and the circular
polarization profiles. Details regarding the data reduction and the
polarization calibration are similar to those discussed by rwb13 (also
see Chapter 3 for details regarding the Arecibo telescope and off-line
data analysis).

The nulling patterns and their quasi-periodicities are discussed in
Sections 5.2 and 5.3 . The variations in the burst pulse energy and the
modelling thereof is described in Section 5.4 . The emission behaviour
during null-to-burst transitions and vice-versa are discussed in Section
5.5 . Unusual emission behaviour present in the null sequences of PSR
J1752+2359 is analysed in Section 5.6 . Section 5.7 discusses the
polarization profiles of PSR J1752+2359. Section 5.8 examines the
presence of Giant pulses in PSR J1752+2359. The results of this study
and their implications are summarized in Sections 5.9 and 5.10 ,
respectively.

### 5.2 Null-burst statistics

Small sections of the observed single pulses are shown in Figure 5.1 for
both the pulsars. Figure 5.1 (a) shows around 1500 pulses for J1738
@xmath 2330, while Figure 5.1 (b) shows a section of around 5000 pulses
for J1752+2359. Both the pulsars display unique nulling behaviour with a
large fraction of null pulses. The arrangement of burst and null pulses
in the single pulse sequence for the two pulsars showcase both
similarities and differences. The single pulse sequences of Figure 5.1
show the burst pulses of both pulsars clustering together in groups,
which we will refer to as the bright phases interspersed with long null
phases (the inter-burst or off-phases ), giving a quasi-periodic effect.

The energies in a window centred on the pulse and a window with equal
number of samples away from the pulse were obtained from the single
pulse sequence. The histograms for these on-pulse and off-pulse energies
are shown in Figures 5.2 (a) and 5.2 (b) respectively for PSRs J1738
@xmath 2330  and J1752+2359. The distributions around zero mean pulse
energy in the ONPH indicate the large fraction of null pulses in both
the pulsars. The NFs were estimated using the method discussed in
Chapter 3 [also see rit76 ]. All the RFI affected pulses were removed
during the estimation of NFs.

A NF of around 85.1 @xmath 2.3% was estimated for J1738 @xmath 2330 
from the bimodal distribution in the ONPH. J1752+2359 shows large number
of weak pulses and its ONPH is not bimodal. Hence, we can only estimate
an upper limit of around @xmath 89% for the NF as some fraction of weak
burst pulses will be included in the null pulse distribution. A method
to separate these individual weak burst pulses from the null pulses is
discussed in Section 5.6 , which is similar to technique discussed in
Section 3.5.4 . After this separation, the fraction of null pulses are
around 81% for J1752+2359. A variation up to 20 to 25 times the mean
pulse energy is visible in the ONPH for both the pulsars. As both the
pulsars spend about 85% of time in the null state, the estimated mean
pulse energies also get reduced by the same fraction for both of them.

However, behind this general similarity we find a number of important
differences between the two pulsars, and these can be seen in the burst
and null length histograms of each pulsar (Figure 5.3 ). In J1738 @xmath
2330, the lengths of the bursts [see Figure 5.3 (a)] are much shorter
than those typical of J1752+2359 [shown in Figure 5.3 (c)] because in
its bright phases, the bursts of J1738 @xmath 2330 are equally mixed
with short nulls, as can be seen from the inset of short nulls in Figure
5.3 (b). Together this results in bright phases of up to 60 @xmath 80
pulses in length, with the nulls predominating towards the end (see
Section 5.4 ). The high NF of this pulsar then arises through the
presence of a long tail of long nulls in the histogram of Figure 5.3
(b). All the designated null pulses of this pulsar, whether occurring
within or between bright phases, were integrated and found to show no
profile of significance. Figure 5.4 shows the integrated profiles from
all separated null and burst pulses for a comparison, which clearly
shows absence of any emission during the nulls.

By contrast, in PSR J1752+2359 the bright phases consist of sustained
non-null pulses [see Figure 5.3 (c)], typically of 70-80 pulses. What is
unusual about this pulsar is the very large number of isolated burst
pulses which occur in the inter-burst phases. These are not evident in
Figure 5.1 and can only be found by a careful inspection of the
sequences. We designate them as inter-burst pulses (IBPs) and as shown
in Section 5.6 that they appear at random between the bright phases, and
maybe throughout the entire emission of J1752+2359. As a result, the
apparently long nulls of this pulsar become subdivided in a random way
giving rise to the exponential distribution strikingly visible in the
NLH [in Figure 5.3 (d)]. No such effect is seen in J1738 @xmath 2330.

One consequence of the burst-null mix in the bright phases of J1738
@xmath 2330  and the IBPs in J1752+2359 is that the conventional burst
and null length histograms of both pulsars in Figure 5.3 show no
evidence of the quasi-periodic behaviour of the bright and off-phases
despite it being very clear in the pulse sequences shown in Figure 5.1 .
To overcome this, we carried out a visual inspection of the single
pulses of both pulsars and identified appropriate bright phases and
their separation (the separation being defined as the number of pulses
between the first pulses of two consecutive bright phases).

In the case of J1738 @xmath 2330, 21 bright phases were identified and a
histogram of these is shown in Figure 5.5 (a). This distribution shows a
peak at around 50 to 70 pulsar periods with a spread of around 40 pulsar
periods, a result which might be expected from combining the short
bursts and nulls of Figures 5.3 (a) and 5.3 (b). Likewise, a histogram
of the separations between the first pulse of two successive bright
phases is shown in Figure 5.5 (b). This has a surprising bimodal
character with peaks around 170 and 500 pulses. Lengths of around 500
pulses cannot be formed by combining a typical burst length from Figure
5.3 (a) and the longest null length from Figure 5.3 (b), where the
maximum is 400 pulses. We can therefore deduce that the longest
inter-burst phases must be interrupted at some point by very short (and
maybe weak) bursts which were rejected as burst pulses. This explains
the longer off-phase stretches seen in this pulsar’s sequence of Figure
5.1 and foreshadows our discussion of this pulsar’s quasi-periodic
patterns in Section 5.3 . However, strong claim can not be made on the
bi-modality of the bright phase separation due to their small numbers.

For J1752+2359, the identification of bright phases was a more difficult
task, since it had to take into account the intrusion of IBPs in the
off-pulse phases and the fact that the precise end point of a fading
bright phase was sometimes difficult to fix (see Section 5.4 ). We were
able to identify around 123 bright phases from a visual check of the
single pulse sequences in the 8-hour observations. The bright phase
lengths of Figure 5.5 (c) show much the same distribution as the burst
lengths of Figure 5.3 (c) (apart from the single-pulse bursts). We find
a prominent peak at around 60 pulsar periods with a spread of around 40
pulsar periods. The distributions of bright phase lengths of J1738
@xmath 2330 and J1752+2359 are similar, but note that the former has a
smaller number of bright phases. The bright phase separations of
J1752+2359 also formed a broad distribution around a central peak. We
measured 120 examples and the histogram is shown in Figure 5.5 (d). The
peak is at about 570 pulses with separations ranging from 150 to 1200
pulsar periods. The wide range of separations indicates that the nulling
pattern is not strictly periodic, as can be seen in Figure 5.1 , and is
discussed in the next Section.

### 5.3 Quasi-periodicity of pulse energy modulation

In the previous section we elucidated the basic statistics of the
null-burst distributions in both pulsars. Both have bright phases whose
lengths are approximately normally (or possibly lognormally) distributed
over lengths with a similar number of pulses [Figures 5.5 (a) and 5.5
(b)], but their respective separations follow very different statistics
[Figures 5.5 (b) and 5.5 (d)]. In the case of J1738 @xmath 2330  the
separations of the bright phases have a bimodal distribution, suggesting
that the pulsar must sometimes ‘skip’ a burst [Figure 5.5 (b)], giving
an exceptionally long off-phase. In J1752+2359, the burst separations
cover a very wide range from 100 up to 1000 pulses [Figure 5.5 (d)].
These features are apparent in Figure 5.1 , with the sequence of J1738
@xmath 2330 including a very long off-phase, and that of
J1752+2359 producing a quasi-periodic effect despite the varying
separations.

To probe deeper into the nature of “quasi-periodicity” in our two
pulsars, we require a suitable tool. Power spectra are a common device
[as discussed in Section 4.2 for various pulsars and also by hjr07 ],
but in pulsars whose burst pulses form clusters such spectra are very
much dominated by red noise due to the observed jitter in cluster
separation. In the present context, a more useful procedure is to form a
Pair Correlation Function (PCF) for each pulsar. This is simply a
histogram of all burst-to-burst separations, whether successive or not,
and can be utilized to find the coherence time over which any
quasi-periodicity is maintained. A formal description of PCFs can be
found in Appendix D.

The PCF for J1738 @xmath 2330 in Figure 5.6 (a) is formed from adding
the burst-to-burst separation histograms from all observed pulse
sequences, where each sequence is approximately 2000 pulses long. The
pulse clustering is very clear and reveals a dramatic periodicity of
about 170 pulses between each pulse of a cluster and the pulses in other
clusters. If all bright bursts were equal in length then the height of
the peaks would be equal for nearby separations and slowly decline for
large separations (see Section 5.4 ), but we see a striking drop in the
level of these peaks for the two closest bursts to a given burst,
followed by a strong third peak. More distant peaks also have irregular
levels, but a general periodicity of about 170 pulses is maintained. In
essence, it is the structure revealed by this PCF which underlies the
bimodal distribution of the burst phase separations shown in Figure 5.5
(b) with its second peak at about 500 pulses.

To understand our result we formed the Fourier spectrum (FFT) of the
PCF, which is shown in the inset diagram of Figure 5.6 (a). This
indicates two separate periodicities corresponding to approximately 170
pulses and 270 pulses, with the former dominating. The weighted sum of
two sine-waves with these periodicities is overlaid on the PCF and
demonstrates a good match with the PCF peaks. The 170 pulse and 270
pulse periodicities in the PCF are approximately the third and the
second harmonics respectively of @xmath pulse periodicity, similar to
the one obtained from Figure 4.10 in Section 4.2 . The peaks produced by
the dominant periodicity of 170 pulses are diminished for two successive
peaks and then enhanced for the third by the weaker but significant
harmonically-related periodicity of 270 pulses. The weaker periodicity
is not precisely harmonically related to 170 and thereby produces a
progressive difference in the peak levels. What is very remarkable is
that this reproduces very closely the relative magnitude of the peaks
throughout the combined 2000 pulse separation of Figure 5.6 (a). This
suggests an emission pattern which maintains coherence over at least
2000 pulses. However, we must caution that these results may or may not
persist on time-scales longer than our observations.

The PCF for J1752+2359 [Figure 5.6 (b)] has its first peak at around 500
pulsar periods. This is more pronounced than that of J1738 @xmath 2330 
but much broader in terms of pulses and it clearly corresponds to the
peak found in the bright phase separations [Figure 5.5 (d)]. A second
peak occurs at 1150 pulses, which is little late to be simply periodic
with the first peak, and later peaks show very little evidence of
long-term coherence. We obtained the Fourier spectra of the PCF, which
is shown in the inset diagram in Figure 5.6 (b), indicating three
periodic features at 540, 595 and 490 pulses, with the first dominating.
The weighted sum of the three sine-waves is overlaid on the PCF but, in
contrast to J1738 @xmath 2330, the generated wave loses coherence beyond
1500 pulses as only the first two peaks are matched. Thus in J1752+2359,
three sine waves are needed to yield just the two leading peaks of the
PCF, in stark contrast to J1738 @xmath 2330, where two sine waves were
enough to match the entire observation. This suggests that the
decomposition into sine waves has little physical significance in this
pulsar.

It is indeed apparent in Figures 5.1 (b) and 5.5 (d) that the bursts of
J1752+2359 appear with a wide variety of unpredictable separations. Thus
the superficial impression of quasi-periodicity is only maintained by
the fact that that the separation of successive pulses is rarely less
than 500 pulses, as is indicated by the PCF. At two and three burst
separations, there seems little evidence of memory operating between
bursts and even less of an underlying periodicity.

### 5.4 Pulse energy modulation in bright phases

J1738 @xmath 2330 exhibits bright phase structures of various lengths,
consisting of short burst bunches interspersed with short nulls, which
was also highlighted in Figure 4.9 in Section 4.2 . The onset of a
bright phase is relatively sudden for J1738 @xmath 2330  with a strong
burst pulse, which is followed by a change in the emission throughout
the bright phase duration. This change is manifested by either a
reduction in the intensity of single pulses or by an increase in the
number and/or length of short null states, as can be seen in the three
examples displayed in Figure 5.7 (a). At the end of every bright phase,
the pulsed emission clearly goes below the detection threshold and
produces long null phase or off-phase. We extracted 100 pulses starting
with the first identified burst pulse and averaged these over several
bright phases to obtain averaged bright phase profile. A few bright
phases in our observations were separated by less than 100 pulses from
the next consecutive bright phase, hence they were not included in this
analysis. The on-pulse energy averaged over 12 bright phases is shown in
Figure 5.8 (a), where a decline in the pulse intensity towards the end
of the averaged bright phase is evident.

The onset of the bright phase in J1752+2359 is more gradual, spanning
typically 5 to 10 pulses. The decline in the intensity from its peak is
also more striking, as was also reported by lwf+04 . Figure 5.7 (b)
shows three examples of the decline in on-pulse energy during a bright
phase in this pulsar. Note the absence of convincing null pulses during
the decline. The on-pulse energy for 110 pulses, averaged from an equal
number of bright phases (i.e. 12) as that for J1738 @xmath 2330, is
shown in Figure 5.8 (b) to illustrate the similarity of average bright
phase on-pulse energy variations in the two pulsars.

#### 5.4.1 Bright phase modelling

Our analysis of J1752+2359 clearly shows that on-pulse energy for most
of the individual bright phases follows the model given by equation 5.1
. J1738 @xmath 2330 also has a similar average on-pulse energy variation
for its bright phases.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here, @xmath is a scaling parameter and @xmath is the decay time-scale.
The values for @xmath and @xmath were obtained by a least-square-fit of
function 5.1 to the on-pulse energy in a bright phase with errors on
each energy measurement given by off pulse rms. The length of a given
bright phase was defined as the difference between the two points where
@xmath crosses of 10% of the @xmath . It can be shown that @xmath is
given by @xmath . So the points where the @xmath attains 10% of the peak
value (i.e. @xmath ) are given by,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath attains these values on both sides of the peak position and these
points can be determined by solution of equation 5.2 , obtained using
numerical methods and the difference between these two points was
defined as the length of a given bright phase (i.e. @xmath = @xmath
@xmath @xmath ). It can be seen from equation 5.2 that values of @xmath
and @xmath do not depend upon @xmath . To quantify the dependence of the
bright phase length on @xmath , we solved equation 5.2 for a range of
@xmath values. Figure 5.9 shows the linear dependence of L on this range
of @xmath , which can also be expressed as,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The error on L is given by,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The average length of a bright phase derived from the above mentioned
least-squares fit are 86 @xmath 4 pulses and 88 @xmath 3 pulses for
J1738 @xmath 2330 and J1752+2359, respectively and are consistent with
the histograms of bright phase lengths discussed in Section 5.3 (Figures
5.5 and 5.5 , which were obtained from the visual inspection). The
length of the individual bright phase for J1752+2359 was obtained in a
similar manner. Out of 123 observed bright phases in J1752+2359, only
83, with higher S/N burst pulses, were fitted to obtain their lengths
(shown in Figure 5.10 ). We obtained the reduced @xmath in the range of
around 0.6 to 2.2 for these fits. The average length of the bright
phases from these measurements is 77 @xmath 20 pulses.

#### 5.4.2 Bright phases of PSR J1752+2359

We could investigate the nature of bright phases in J1752+2359 further
due to their large number in our @xmath 8 hours data, observed with the
GMRT, as well as high S/N 30 minute data with the Arecibo telescope. The
on-pulse energy for around 83 observed bright phases were fitted to the
model given by equation 5.1 and their respective @xmath and @xmath were
obtained (shown in Figure 5.10 ). The log-log plot in Figure 5.11
clearly displays a power law dependence of @xmath with @xmath . The
fitted line in the Figure 5.11 gives the power law index of around -0.74
@xmath 0.04 incorporating the errors on both axes. The Kendall @xmath s
tau rank order correlation between @xmath and @xmath is around -0.67
with a very small probability ( @xmath ) of random chance. Thus, bright
phases with large peak intensities decay faster for J1752+2359.

We also investigated the relationship between the separation between
consecutive bright phases with the parameters of bright phase preceding
and succeeding the null/off phase under consideration. We plotted the
@xmath and the @xmath of a bright phase as a function of the length of
the off-phase preceding and succeeding it (shown in Figure 5.12 ). The
lengths of the long off-phases were estimated as number of pulses
between the last and the first pulse of two consecutive bright phases
(for example number of pulses between pulse number 2885 and 3421 in
Figure 5.16 ). We did not find any correlation as the parameters showed
similar scatter for all lengths. Hence, bright phase parameters are
independent of the length of the off-phase occurring before and after
it.

The strong anti-correlation between @xmath and @xmath suggests that the
area under the on-pulse energy envelope for a bright phase for
J1752+2359 is constant. As the full pulse energy of a bright phase can
be modelled by equation 5.1 , the area under a given bright phase (
@xmath ) was calculated by,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

The error in the obtained area can be obtained after propagating the
fitting error @xmath and @xmath as,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

These were calculated for the 83 observed bright phases and were the
same, within errors, for all of them (shown in Figure 5.13 ). This
indeed confirms that the total intensity of bright phase is same
irrespective of its length or peak intensity and consequently, the total
energy released during a bright phase is likely to be approximately
constant.

### 5.5 First and Last bright phase pulse

Compared with J1752+2359, J1738 @xmath 2330 emits relatively strong
individual pulses with high S/N during the entire span of its bright
phases [as can be seen from Figure 5.7 (a)]. Although the intensity of
the J1738 @xmath 2330’s pulses during a bright phase shows a decline
towards its end, the energy of the last pulse is sufficiently above the
detection threshold to identify them clearly. The first and the last
pulse of 18 bright phases were combined to form the
first-bright-phase-pulse profile and the last-bright-phase-pulse
profile. Figure 5.14 (a) shows these profiles for J1738 @xmath
2330 along with its average pulse profile. All these profiles look
similar. A KS-test comparison, carried out between the
first-bright-phase-pulse profile and the average pulse profile,
indicates similar distributions with 94% probability. Similarly, a
KS-test comparison between the last-bright-phase-pulse profile and the
average pulse profile also suggests similar distributions with even
higher probability of 99%. These results suggest that J1738 @xmath
2330 switches back into the bright phase mode from the off-phase (and
vice-versa) without any significant change in the emission. However,
these results should be treated with caution due to the small number of
pulses available in forming first-bright-phase-pulse profile and
last-bright-phase-pulse profile.

For J1752+2359, only 114 out of 123 observed bright phases were used to
obtain the first-bright-phase-pulse as the remaining were affected by
RFI. The red solid line in Figure 5.14 (b) shows this profile. While the
profiles look similar, a KS-test comparison between the
first-bright-phase-pulse profile and the average pulse profile rejects
the null hypothesis of similar distributions with 99% probability. The
last pulse for most of the bright phases of J1752+2359 is very difficult
to identify due to the decline in the pulse energy during this phase.
Instead, a range of last pulses (10 to 20 pulses) were used for each
bright phase to form the last-bright-phase-pulse profile. The length of
each bright phase was determined with its associated error from the
least-square-fit as explained in Section 5.4.1 . To obtain the
last-bright-phase-pulse profile, we averaged a range of pulses within
the error bars (shown in Figure 5.10 ) around the expected last pulse,
obtained by adding the estimated length for every bright phase to the
pulse number of its first pulse. The last-bright-phase-pulse profile
averaged from 114 bright phases were compared with the average pulse
profile using the KS-test, which rejected the null hypotheses of similar
distributions with 99.9% probability. Figure 5.14 (b) shows the
last-bright-phase-pulse profile with a significant ( @xmath 3 times
off-pulse rms) component preceding the pulse and shoulder emission after
the pulse. Neither of these features is present in its average profile.

### 5.6 Emission in the off-phase of PSR J1752+2359

In Section 5.2 we noted that, unlike J1738 @xmath 2330,
J1752+2359 exhibited intermittent single pulse bursts during the
off-phase. Weak emission during an apparent null phase is not unknown
elg+05 and may question whether weak pulses are sometimes confused
‘true’ nulls. We therefore investigated this by forming the off-phase
pulse profile by averaging all pulses between the bright phases. Those
parts of the observations (about 15%), affected by the RFI, were
excluded from this analysis. All the pulses in identified bright phases,
amounting to around 9000 pulses, were separated from the remaining
single pulse observations . The profile obtained from these pulses (i.e.
bright phase pulse profile) is shown in Figure 5.15 (a). The remaining
41,500 pulses, which occurred between the bright phases, were integrated
to form the off-phase pulse profile. Surprisingly, the null-pulse
profile showed weak emission with a significance of around 20 standard
deviations [Figure 5.15 (b)]. It is therefore important to clarify
whether this emission originates from bright but rare single pulses
and/or from underlying weak emission.

In many nulling pulsars, the burst pulses are strong enough to create a
bimodal intensity distribution and can then be separated by putting a
threshold between the two peaks in the histogram (as shown in Section
3.5.4 ). J1752+2359 does not show such a bimodal distribution due to the
presence of many weak energy pulses [Figure 5.2 (b)]. Hence, the use of
any threshold will lead to a wrong identification of weaker burst pulses
as nulls and result in a weak emission profile during the off-phase, as
seen in Figure 5.15 (b). This could be due to (a) weak emission
throughout the off phase, (b) emission from weak burst pulses in the
diminishing tail of a bright phase, or (c) emission from a few wrongly
identified individual burst pulses during the off-phase.

To distinguish between the above possibilities, we used higher S/N
observations for this pulsar obtained from the Arecibo telescope (see
Section 3.4.4 for details). Figure 5.16 shows a section of the
observations from the Arecibo observation. The pulse energy plot clearly
shows three bright phases with about 60 isolated single burst pulses
occurring during the off-phase between them. This strongly supports our
earlier suspicion that weak emission, seen during the off-phase in this
pulsar, is due to these isolated burst pulses (i.e. pulses outside the
bright phases or IBPs).

To investigate this further with GMRT observations, all pulses remaining
after separating the bright phases were arranged in ascending order of
their on-pulse energy. A variable threshold technique, discussed in
Section 3.5.4 , was used to separate these weak burst pulses from the
null pulses. All the separated null pulses were again visually checked
for wrongly identified nulls due to presence of low level RFI. The
average profile, obtained from all the pulses tagged as null after this
procedure, is shown in Figure 5.15 (c), indicating that tagged pulses
are all nulled pulses, ruling out the possibility of weak emission
throughout the null.

This method of identifying the IBPs was also used on the Arecibo
observation. The null or the burst state for each individual pulse was
identified and is shown in Figure 5.16 in the bottom panel. It can be
seen from this figure that IBPs are not localised near either the start
or the end of a bright phase, but are distributed randomly inside the
long off phase. In fact, these pulses may not be confined to off-phases
and may occur at random through all phases since within a burst phase
the their numbers would be small and not detectable. To the best of our
knowledge, the presence of such pulses has not been reported in a pulsar
before.

A random occurrence of IBPs implies that the rate of IBPs should remain
constant. The Arecibo observation were short and hence statistical
analysis of the IBP rate was not possible. Using GMRT observations we
identified around 2700 such pulses, using the variable threshold method
described above. As discussed in Section 5.4 , the length of every
bright phase was derived after fits to equation 5.1 . An acceptable fit
could not be obtained for a few bright phases due to either low pulse
energy or due the presence of strong RFI. We only considered those
off-phases bounded at both ends by bright phases, with acceptable fits.
A few such off-phases were also affected by RFI and hence not included.
The number of identified IBPs were counted for each off-phase and the
IBP rate estimated using about 53 such off phases of various lengths.
Figure 5.17 shows a histogram of the number of IBPs for a given
off-phase between two consecutive bright phases. The error bars on them
were obtained from Poisson statistics. Figure 5.17 clearly demonstrates
that the number of IBPs are linearly correlated with the corresponding
off-phase lengths. Hence, the IBP rate is independent of the length of a
given null phase and could remain fixed throughout the entire emission
of the pulsar.

### 5.7 Comparison of J1752+2359 polarization profiles

We analysed the full polarization data from the Arecibo telescope,
observed with 25-MHz bandwidth at 327 MHz (Rankin, private
communication). The observed data were calibrated to measure the four
Strokes parameters (i.e. I,Q,U and V). Each of the Stokes parameter was
corrected for interstellar Faraday rotation, various instrumental
polarization effects, and dispersion. The bright phase pulses and the
IBPs were separated from the observed single pulse data and separate
polarization profiles were obtained for both. The linear polarization
(L) for every phase bin was measured after obtaining U and Q parameters
for the corresponding phase bins by calculating @xmath . The off-pulse
mean was subtracted from it to remove the positive bias. Figure 5.18
shows the total intensity profiles along with the linear and the
circular polarization profiles for the bright phase pulses and the IBPs.
The position angle swing was also measured for phase bins where the
observed linear polarization was more than 3 times the off-pulse RMS in
the linear polarization profile. The bright phase linear polarization
profile showed wider range of such phase bins. However, the IBP linear
polarization profile showed very limited number of such phase bins
(around 3 to 4), hence an acceptable PA swing was not possible to obtain
for the IBPs. Figure 5.18 shows the PA swing for the bright phase pulses
calculated by,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

for each phase bin by the obtained U and Q profiles. The error in the PA
was calculated as mli04 ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Where @xmath and @xmath are the off @xmath pulse RMS from Stokes U and Q
average profiles respectively.

Figure 5.18 shows striking differences between the intensity and
polarization profiles of the bright phase pulses and the IBPs. The total
intensity profile of the IBPs is clearly shifted to earlier phase with
respect to that of bright phase. A KS-test comparison between these two
profiles rejected the null hypothesis of similar distributions with
99.9% probability. The average intensity of the IBPs is around 5 to 7
times weaker than the average bright phase pulses. A Gaussian function
was fitted on both the profiles to estimate the position of their peaks.
The offset between the peaks in the total intensity profiles for bright
phase pulses and the IBPs was estimated to be around 0.6 @xmath 0.1
@xmath . The linear polarization profile for the bright phase pulses is
wider than that for IBPs and shows strong linear polarization of around
20% as compared to about 16% for IBPs. The shift in the position of peak
intensity between these two profiles is not very significant. The
circular polarization profile of the IBPs is offset from that of the
bright phase pulses by 0.54 @xmath 0.07 @xmath . However, in contrast to
the overall reduction in the pulse energy during the IBPs, the IBP
circular polarization fraction shows a small increase compared to that
for the bright phase pulses (circular polarization of 35% and 32%,
respectively) as is also evident from Figure 5.18 .

### 5.8 No Giant pulses from PSR J1752+2359

PSR J1752+2359 is one of the few pulsars, which showed giant pulses
(GPs) at 111-MHz. The energy of these GPs was reported to be 200 times
the energy of the mean pulse EK05 . Our data show only a gradual
distribution up to 20 times the mean pulse energy [Figure 5.2 (b)]. We
separated all single pulses with S/N greater than 5 and estimated the
mean pulse energy from these well defined burst pulses. The distribution
of on-pulse energies of all burst pulses, scaled by this mean pulse
energy, is shown in the Figure 5.19 . indicating that these are
distributed only up to 5 times the mean pulse energy, which is
significantly lower than that reported by EK05 at 111-MHz. In the
earlier studies of GPs sr68 ; kt00 ; J04 ; kss11 , it was reported that
(a) GPs have significantly smaller pulse widths compared to average
pulses and (b) GPs tend to occur mostly at the edge of the average pulse
profile. We separated the strongest pulses to compare their widths with
that of the average pulses and no significant difference was found.
While the profile for IBPs is slightly narrower and shifted towards the
leading edge, their intensities are 5 to 7 times weaker than the average
bright phase pulses. If the IBPs have different spectral behaviour
compared to bright phase pulses, then it is likely that they may give
rise to GPs at 111-MHz. However, this needs to be tested with
simultaneous observations at both frequencies. Hence, it can be
concluded from our data that PSR J1752+2359 does not show GPs at 325
MHz.

### 5.9 Conclusions

As we have stressed from the start, the superficial similarity in the
emission patterns of J1738 @xmath 2330 and J1752+2359 hides many
differences. J1738 @xmath 2330 is the younger pulsar but with a stronger
magnetic field, which has enabled it to spin down to a period five times
longer than the older, but weaker, J1752+2359 (see Table 5.1 ).
Nevertheless, both have arrived at a point where their nulling fractions
are greater than 80% and their bursts of emission are of similar length
(measured in pulses) separated by long null sequences which give the
overall appearance of being quasi-periodic (Figure 5.1 , Table 5.2 ).

However, detailed examination of the patterns of emission bursts reveals
significant differences. Firstly, the burst separations of the younger
pulsar J1738 @xmath 2330 turn out to be underpinned by periodic
behaviour. A histogram of the burst pulse separations (PCF in Figure 5.6
) could be modelled by the superposition of two near-harmonically
related sine-waves and matched to the observations for at least 2000
pulses (i.e 11 burst phases). This is strong evidence of long-term
memory in this pulsar. However, although the coherence of the sine waves
is not lost, individual burst phases often fail to materialise except in
some vestigial form. This can be seen as the effect of the stronger sine
periodicity sometimes countered by the effect of the weaker
near-harmonic (2:3) periodicity.

By contrast, in J1752+2359 there is no evidence of long-term
periodicity. This pulsar requires a complex wave superposition to
reproduce just the first two burst phase intervals in its
pulse-separation histogram (Figure 5.6 b). Beyond about 1000 pulses,
coherence is lost rapidly and there is no memory of any periodicity. The
impression of quasi-periodicity is maintained since the burst
separations usually range between 300 and 600 pulses [Figure 5.5 (d)].

Additionally, J1752+2359 has a striking feature not present in the
younger pulsar – and hitherto not reported in any pulsar. In the long
null intervals between the bursts of J1752+2359  the nulls are
interrupted at random by burst pulses which are mostly single and
relatively weak in intensity (IBPs). These pulses have a profile
significantly shifted with respect to the main profile and different
polarisation properties (Figure 5.18 ), hinting at a different physical
origin. They may well occur continuously through both burst and
off-phases, providing a diffuse background to the pulsar’s more
structured emission of bright and off-phases.

The bright phases of the pulsars, although similar in duration when
measured in pulses, have different substructures. In J1738 @xmath 2330,
the bursts start suddenly and as they progress, they are increasingly
punctuated by nulls until the off-phase begins [Figure 5.7 (a)]. Thus
the onset and the end of the bright phases are clearly marked, and
profiles obtained by integrating first and last burst pulses are
effectively identical to the pulsar’s overall profile [Figure 5.14 (a)].
In J1752+2359, the bursts take longer to reach their peak emission,
followed by an exponential decline in intensity. The bright phase fades
with weak emission and it is often difficult to pinpoint its true end
[Figure 5.7 (b)]. There is evidence that an additional small leading
component appears in the emission profile as the phase closes [Figure
5.14 (b)].

In both pulsars the progression of the intensity of their burst phases
can, when averaged, be fitted by the same functional form (equation 5.1
, see Figure 5.8 ). In the case of J1752+2359, we find that individual
bright phases with a higher peak intensity tend to be shorter in length
with a significant anti-correlation ( @xmath 0.7) between these two
parameters (Figure 5.11 ), implying that the output in energy integrated
over a bright phase is constant, at least at the observing frequency.
Furthermore, the bright phase parameters are independent of the length
of the off-phase before and after the bright phase.

### 5.10 Discussion

As summarized in Section 2.3.1 , it has long been known that no strong
correlations exist between NF and other pulsar parameters such as period
or period derivative rit76 ; ran86 ; big92a ; wmj07 . This is also true
here since, despite their similar NFs, the positions of PSRs J1738
@xmath 2330 and J1752+2359 in the @xmath diagram could hardly be further
apart. Furthermore, Figure 5.20 clearly shows that, both are far from
the so-called “death line” – contradicting a simple view that pulsars
die through progressive increase in NF rit76 . However, what high NF
pulsars do seem to have in common is that their individual null pulses
do not appear at random with a single fixed probability. In fact, their
few non-null pulses have a tendency to cluster in what we have called
“bright phases”, even when these phases are separated by hours or even
days klo+06 ; lem+12 .

The simplest way of generating clusters of bright emission is to assume
a two-state probability model, such that the probability of a null
during a bright phase is fixed but lower than that during an off-phase
[see Section 4.5 and cor13 ]. This represents an elementary Markov
(Poisson point) process and results in separate exponential
distributions for the null and burst lengths, so that short nulls/bursts
are very common and long nulls/bursts much less likely. This model has
been plausibly applied to the null and burst statistics of several
pulsars with low to medium NFs [see Appendix B and C and Figure 1 of
cor13 ]. In all these models burst/null clustering occurs and their
power spectra show broad red features, but they do not generate
quasi-periodic features.

However, in the case of the two pulsars described in this chapter we
have become convinced that neither of them has null/burst distributions
which are exponential in form. This is most evident in the burst
distribution of J1752+2359 [Figure 5.3 (c)], which appears to be
bimodal, and when the IBPs are disregarded [as in Figure 5.5 (c)] a
simple Gaussian-like distribution becomes clear. The same is true of the
pulsar’s apparently exponential null distribution in Figure 5.3 (d),
which, on neglect of the IBPs, is transformed into a single hump in
Figure 5.5 (d). In J1738 @xmath 2330, the burst/null distributions of
Figures 5.3 (a) and 5.3 (b) are superficially exponential, but we know
them to partly consist of short bursts and nulls which arise exclusively
during the bright phases, again meaning that the distribution is
bimodal. When these short nulls/bursts are disregarded, as in Figures
5.5 (a) and 5.5 (b), a single-hump distribution is evident (in fact a
double hump in the case of Figure 5.5 (b) for reasons given in Section
3). This line of reasoning is similar to that of kr10 in their study of
the high NF pulsar B1944+17. They suggest that the shortest nulls of
that pulsar are “pseudo-nulls”, which in fact integrate to a weak
profile, leaving a hump-like distribution for the remaining nulls.

We are therefore forced to abandon the simple (Poisson point) assumption
of a separate but fixed null probability for each of the two phases.
Instead, we see that the probability of the length of time the two
pulsars spend in their bright and off-phases is dependent on its
respective Gaussian-like distribution. It is this which gives the pulse
sequences their quasi-periodic character, as typical bright phase and
off-phase alternate with lengths scattered around the means of their
distributions.

Within this picture, the burst phases will not occur in precisely
periodic sequences, but can be expected to gradually lose coherence as
their separation varies randomly about a mean. This can be seen very
clearly in the PCF of J1752+2359 [Figure 5.6 (b)], where coherence is
lost after only two peaks. In J1738 @xmath 2330, the typical burst phase
separations are less and their distribution narrower [Figure 5.5 (b)],
so we might expect coherence to persist for more peaks, as is indeed the
case [Figure 5.6 (a)]. However, the degree of coherence in this pulsar’s
PCF is exceptionally high and we have been able to reproduce it well by
combining just two near-harmonic underlying periodicities. This hints at
the presence, at least in this pulsar, of forcing periodicities with
suitable phase shifts cor13 . How this is achieved physically is a
matter of speculation. For example, these periodicities may arise from
an external body csh08 or neutron star oscillations cr04a or
near-chaotic switches in the magnetosphere’s non-linear system tim10 .

In both pulsars the bright phases themselves show clear evolution and
therefore have some kind of internal memory (Figures 5.7 and 5.8 ). Both
diminish in intensity and J1738 @xmath 2330 has an increasing number of
null pulses as the burst proceeds. A decline of energy during a burst
has been noted in several other pulsars. Recently, lem+12 have found
that PSR J1502 @xmath 5653 has long nulls interspersed with weakening
bursts (their Figure 2) whose peak drifts as the burst develops. A
similar phenomenon appears to occur in PSR J1819+1305 rw08 and bgg10
have also reported a gradual fall in pulse intensity before the onset of
null states for PSR B0818 @xmath 41. In other studies, ysw+12 report
intermittent long off-phases in PSR B0823+26 and their Figure 1 clearly
shows a decline in intensity before null onset. In all cases it seems
that the off-phases do not come out of the blue, so that the burst phase
may represent a reset or relaxation of the magnetospheric conditions. It
is clear that a change-of-state occurs when the pulsars move to the
off-phase, quite possibly involving a global magnetospheric change ckf99
; con05 ; tim10 .

The appearance of random isolated pulses (IBPs) during the off-phase of
J1752+2359, exhibiting a different integrated profile to the burst
profile, has not been reported in other long-null pulsars. Its random
nature is reminiscent of RRATs and the bright single pulses which appear
in the weak mode of PSR B0826 @xmath 34 elg+05 or the RRAT phase of PSR
J0941 @xmath 39 bb10 . We cannot know if this emission represents an
additional property of the stable but intermittent off-phase
magnetospheric state or whether it is a permanent background phenomenon
such as accretion w79 , which has a separate physical origin. Recently,
ysw+12 also reported similar state switching between normal nulling
pulsar mode and intermittent pulsar mode in PSR B0823+26.

The differences in the statistics and the structure of the bright phases
of PSRs J1738 @xmath 2330 and J1752+2359 do not necessarily imply that
the two pulsars produce nulls in a fundamentally different way. It is
possible that through having a stronger surface magnetic field and a
wider light cylinder J1738 @xmath 2330 is somehow able to maintain
near-periodic coherence for longer than J1752+2359  (considerably longer
if measured in clock time rather than pulse numbers), and possible
differences in the unknown inclinations of the pulsars’ dipole axes to
their rotation axes may play a role csh08 . Our results suggest that
pursuing in detail the “quasi-periodic” behaviour of any pulsar may well
yield valuable physical clues to the nature of its magnetosphere and
environment.

An earlier study of pulsars with low NFs (Section 4.3 ) found that the
NF percentage was not predictive of a pulsar’s subpulse behaviour. Our
detailed study of PSRs J1738 @xmath 2330 and J1752+2359 has shown that
pulsars with very similar, but high , NFs can also have subtle but
important differences in emission.

## Chapter 6 Simultaneous multi-frequency study of pulse nulling
behaviour in two pulsars

### 6.1 Introduction

Pulsar emission at different radio frequencies, originates at different
locations in the pulsar magnetosphere kom70 . This has been discussed
with details in Section 2.2.1 . All of the nulling studies, reported in
Chapter 4 and 5, were carried out at a single observing frequency.
Moreover, most of them were conducted only for a typical observations
lasting about an hour. There are very a few long simultaneous
observations of nulling pulsars reported so far in the literature.
Section 2.3.4 highlights some of the studies that have been conducted to
scrutinize the broadband behaviour of the nulling phenomena. Among the
investigated pulsars, PSRs B0809+74 and B1133+16, represent a conal cut
of pulsar beam rr03 ; ran93 , while PSR B0826 @xmath 34 has an almost
aligned pulsar beam bmh+85 . Thus, it is not clear if nulling represents
a global failure of pulse radiation or is due to a shift in pulsar beam
manifesting as lack of emission at the given observation frequency due
to the geometry of pulse emission. Thus, as suggested in Section 2.5 ,
long, sensitive, and preferably simultaneous observations at multiple
frequencies of a carefully selected sample of pulsars are motivated by
these previous investigations.

In this chapter, we report on long simultaneous multi-frequency
observations of two pulsars, PSRs B0809+74 and B2319+60 to investigate
the broadband nature of pulse nulling. These pulsars were chosen as (a)
they are strong pulsars allowing an easy determination of nulls, (b) PSR
B0809+74, show prominent drifting and single component profile [see
Section 4.2 and la83 ] indicating a tangential and peripheral line of
sight traverse of their emission beam, and (c) PSR B2319+60, show long
prominent nulls and have high NF [about 30%, see Section 4.2 and Figure
4.13 (c)]. It also shows a multiple component profile with drifting in
outer components indicative a more central line of sight traverse of the
emission beam ran86 ; gl98 . Thus, this sample allows us to test the
effect of pulse nulling as a function of observational frequency for
different parts of pulsar beam and discriminate between a geometric or
an intrinsic origin for pulse nulling. In Section 6.2 , observations and
essential time-series alignments between various observed frequencies
are described. The results on PSR B0809+74 are presented in Section 6.3
, while the results on PSR B2319+60 are presented in Section 6.4 . The
conclusions of the study are presented in Section 6.5 along with a
discussion on the implications of the results in Section 6.6 .

### 6.2 Observations and time-series alignments

PSRs B0809+74 and B2319+60 were observed simultaneously with the Giant
Meterwave Radio Telescope (GMRT), the Westerbok Synthesis Radio
telescope (WSRT) and the Effelsberg Radio Telescope. The details of
observations are discussed in details in Chapter 3 and also listed in
Table 6.1 , with exact observing frequency for a comparison.

Given the difference in the longitude of the observatories, the total
overlap at all frequency was smaller than the total duration of
observations at each telescope. Part of the data during the overlap was
affected by radio frequency interference (RFI) at one or the other
telescope and was not considered for the analysis described below. The
remaining number of pulses observed simultaneously are indicated in
Table 6.1 .

The data from all observatories, as mentioned in Section 3.5.1.2 , were
converted into a standard format required for SIGPROC ¹ ¹ 1
http://sigproc.sourceforge.net/ analysis package and dedisperesed using
the programs provided in the package. These were then folded to 1000
bins across the period using polycos obtained from the ephemeris of
these pulsars using TEMPO ² ² 2 http://tempo.sourceforge.net/ package to
obtain a single pulse sequence.

First, the pulse sequence for the longest data file, typically
consisting of 6000 pulses, were averaged for each frequency to obtain an
integrated profile, which was used to form a noise-free template, after
centering the pulse, for the pulsar at that frequency. The template at
each frequency was used to estimate the number of samples to be removed
from the beginning of each file for these two frequencies so that the
pulse is centred in a single period and time stamps for single pulses
were corrected by these offsets. The single pulse sequences were then
aligned by converting these time stamps to solar system barycentre (SSB)
using TEMPO @xmath . This conversion also takes into account the delay
at lower frequencies due to dispersion in the inter-stellar medium
(ISM). Then, the pulses corresponding to identical time stamps at SSB
across all frequencies were extracted from the data. As the observations
were typically recorded in 2 @xmath 3 data files at the GMRT (325 and
610 MHz), the data recorded at the WSRT and the Effelsberg were split
into similar number of files with observations duration equal to that at
the GMRT.

The single pulse sequences were then visually examined to remove any
single pulses with excessive Radio Frequency Interference (RFI). The
number of pulses available at all frequencies simultaneously after
eliminating pulses affected by RFI are indicated in Table 6.1 for each
pulsar. Broadband nulling behaviour for each pulsar, using these single
pulse sequences, are discussed in the following sections.

### 6.3 Psr B0809+74

A subset of simultaneous pulse sequences, obtained at all four
frequencies, are shown in Figure 6.1 . At 1380 MHz, single pulses were
detected with highest S/N, while they showed relatively low S/N at 4850
MHz. The drifting of subpulses is clearly evident for single pulses at
313, 607 and 1380 MHz. To improve the single pulse S/N at 4850 MHz, we
added 10 consecutive phase-bins. Thus, such drifting behaviour is not
possible to identify at 4850 MHz in Figure 6.1 . The simultaneity in the
absence of emission is also evident across all four frequencies in
Figure 6.1 . Presented section of single pulses clearly shows two
distinct null regions near period numbers 1640 and 1740 at each
frequency. To verify and quantify this behaviour further, the NFs, the
correlation between the nulling pattern represented by the one-bit
sequence and the distributions of null and burst lengths were compared
across four frequencies.

First, we obtained the on-pulse energy sequence by selecting an
appropriate on-pulse window at each frequency from their respective
integrated profile. Due to the interstellar scintillation, the on-pulse
energy shows large fluctuations at all frequencies. As discussed in
Section 1.3.3 , this can cause the on-pulse energy to plunge around zero
pulse energy, which makes identification of the null pulses a daunting
task. Thus, for all those sections, which showed low S/N single pulses
at any particular frequency (around 2% of the observed pulses), were
excluded at all four frequencies. For a few different sections, pulse
energy was marginally reduced which was normalized by subtracting a
moving average, or a box average (see Section 1.3.3 ). Figure 6.2 shows
sections of on-pulse energy sequences at all frequencies, after
subtracting a box average. As PSR B0809+74 exhibit small fraction of
null pulses separated by large burst phases, to display more
simultaneous null regions, four different sections of pulse sequences
around these null states were extracted for display at each frequency.
The null pulses at each frequency clearly shows simultaneous occurrence
across all observed frequencies. A visual inspection of the entire data
broadly confirms this behaviour.

#### 6.3.1 NFs comparison

As a first test to quantify the similarity of nulling behaviour,
obtained NFs at all four frequencies were compared. The on-pulse energy
sequence and the off-pulse energy sequence at each frequency were
binned. The obtained ONPHs and OFPHs are shown in Figure 6.3 . All four
ONPHs show very small fraction of null pulses. The method to obtain the
NF is discussed with details in Section 3.5.3 . The ONPHs at 313, 607
and 1380 MHz [i.e. Figure 6.3 (a),(b) and (c)] show clear bi-modal
distributions of the pulse energy. Thus, we were able to obtain accurate
estimate of the NFs at these lower frequencies. However, at 4850 MHz the
single pulse S/N was not sufficient to produce such clear bi-modal
distribution in the ONPH. For such cases, consecutive pulses can be
integrated to improve the S/N and to get better separation between the
null and the burst pulse energy distributions in the ONPH. This
technique has been used for many weak pulsars, as discussed in Chapter
4. However, PSR B0809+74 exhibit null states with significantly smaller
lengths (1 or 2 periods). Integrating consecutive pulses will lead to
large fraction of null pulses merging with the neighbouring burst
pulses. Thus, such sub-integration was not possible to deploy for NF
estimation. By using the standard Gaussian fit technique on the ONPH and
OFPH (see Section 3.5.3 ), only an upper limit on the NF was possible to
derive due to the mixture of weak burst pulses with the null pulses near
the zero pulse energy. The obtained NFs are also listed in the inset
text of Figure 6.3 for each frequency. Figure 6.4 shows these NFs for
all frequencies, to demonstrate a good match between the obtained
quantities within the error bars. Although the NF does show a good match
across a decade of frequencies, as suggested in Section 4.3 , it does
not quantify nulling behaviour in full details. Hence, it is essential
to confirm pulse-to-pulse matching of the nulling behaviour in order to
check the true broadband behaviour of this phenomenon.

#### 6.3.2 One-bit sequence comparison

The null pulses and the burst pulses were identified and separated at
all four frequencies. For the lower three frequencies, i.e. 313, 607 and
1380 MHz, a threshold was first set on the respective ONPH, where the
null pulse distribution and the burst pulse distribution overlap with
each other. Pulses below the threshold were tagged as null pulses while
pulses above the threshold were tagged as burst pulses. A visual
inspection was carried out on the separated null and burst pulses to
check for any misidentified pulses. At the highest observing frequency,
4850 MHz, single pulses were weak and hence such threshold was not
possible to set to separate null and burst pulses. Hence, we initially
arrange all pulses in the ascending order of their on-pulse energy. A
threshold was moved from lower energy end towards the higher energy end
till pulses below the threshold did not form significant profile
component (with S/N @xmath 3). All the pulses below the threshold were
tagged as null pulses while pulses above the threshold were tagged as
burst pulses. This method, also discussed in Section 3.5.4 , allows
separation of weak burst pulses from true null pulses. All the separated
pulses were carefully examined visually to eliminate any possibility of
misidentification. Using these separated null and burst pulses, one-bit
sequences were formed for all observed frequencies (see Section 3.5.6
and Figure 3.11 ).

As a second test, one-bit sequences for a pair of observing frequencies
were compared using a contingency table analysis pftv86 . Figure 6.5
shows these sequences for the entire range of simultaneously observed
pulses. To obtain these sequences, different observed sections were
patched together at all frequencies to compare the synchronicity of null
states. A visual comparison between various frequency pairs suggests
that pulsar shows simultaneous switching between the null and the burst
states at all frequencies, for large fraction of periods. To quantify
this simultaneity, a correlation between these states for a pair of
frequencies can be obtain as a 2 @xmath 2 contingency table. In
statistics, contingency table presents measure of association between
two variables. In this chapter, the contingency table was used to
measure the number of occurrences when the pulsar was in a similar
emission state at both frequencies under consideration. Thus, such
contingency table was obtained for each pair of frequencies. Table 6.2
shows the different contingency tables for all frequency pairs. It can
be seen from these tables that around 9 to 11 pulses show a mismatch for
different pairs of frequencies. For example, a comparison between
one-bit sequences obtained at 313 and 1380 MHz indicates around 5 pulses
for which the pulsar showed absence of emission at 313 MHz but it showed
burst emission at 1380 MHz (see Table 6.2 ). Similarly, for 4 pulses,
the pulsar showed absence of emission at 1380 MHz while it was in a
burst state at 313 MHz. These are significantly small numbers ( @xmath
0.1%), hence it can be concluded that PSR B0809+74 exhibit similar
emission states at all pairs of frequencies for the duration of our
observations.

A @xmath test (Cramer-V) and uncertainty test based on entropy
calculations can then be used to assess the strength and significance of
these correlations. Both these tests result in a value between 0 and 1.
A value close to 1 indicates a strong correlation. Cramer-V for a 2
@xmath 2 contingency table, as in our case, is just a measure of reduced
chi-square. Hence, a value close to 1 indicates a very high significance
of correlation. Likewise, a value close to unity for the uncertainty
coefficient calculated from entropy arguments indicates a very high
probability of observing null (burst) pulses at both frequencies. See
pftv86 for details about these tests. The results of these tests are
presented in Table 6.3 . Both Cramer-V and the uncertainty coefficients
have values very close to 1 for PSR B0809+74 indicating a significantly
high association across all pairs of frequencies.

#### 6.3.3 Nonconcurrent pulses

As can be seen from Table 6.2 , for a small number of pulses, the above
association does not hold for various pairs. In a comparison across all
four frequencies 12 pulses were found to show nonconcurrence in the
emission states among 10003 compared pulses. All such pulses were
carefully examined to verify their true nature and identify their
locations. Surprisingly, 7 of the nonconcurrent pulses occurred either
at the start or at the end of a burst. A few examples of such
nonconcurrent pulses are shown in Figures 6.6 , 6.7 and 6.8 . As shown
in Figure 6.6 , at period number 415, pulsar exhibits absence of
emission at 313 and 607 MHz [Figure 6.6 (a) and (b)] while weak burst
pulses can be seen at 1380 and 4850 MHz [Figure 6.6 (c) and (d)]. As
mentioned previously, a deeper examination reveals that such
nonconcurrent events are most likely to occur at the transition stage.
Figure 6.7 shows example of two such pulses where narrow pulsed emission
can be seen at 1380 MHz, while no detectable emission is present at 313,
607 and 4850 MHz. One of these burst pulses is localized right in the
middle of the long null state, while the other is located near the onset
of the burst phase at 1380 MHz. On a few occasions, as shown Figure 6.8
, pulsar also exhibits absence of emission at higher frequencies (i.e.
607, 1380 and 5100 MHz) while a narrow and weak burst pulse can be seen
at the lowest observing frequency, 313 MHz, again near the onset of the
burst phase. In summary, a comparison across all four frequencies
revealed about 12 out of 10003 pulses ( @xmath 0.1%) to be nonconcurrent
null (or burst) state for PSR B0809+74.

As its evident from Figures 6.6 , 6.7 and 6.8 , when pulsar displays
nonconcurrence in the emission state across different frequencies, the
burst emission is likely to be weak or narrow. To scrutinize this
behaviour further, we identified and separated all the exclusive
nonconcurrent burst pulses. ³ ³ 3 Pulses that are seen to occur only at
a given frequency while for the same pulse no emission is seen at other
frequencies. Thus, the number of such pulses are smaller compared to
those quoted in Table 6.2 . These pulses were combined at each frequency
and an average pulse shape was obtained, which is shown in Figure 6.9
for all frequencies. The peak S/N of these profiles ⁴ ⁴ 4 It should be
noted that, it is not similar to the classical integrated profile, but
just the aggregate power from all the exclusive pulses. are around 11,
30, 23 and 8 for the profiles at 313, 607, 1380 and 4850 MHz,
respectively. For the highest observed frequency, 4850 MHz, no exclusive
burst pulse was noticed. Figure 6.9 (d) shows average profile from the
pulses which showed emission at 4850 MHz while no detectable emission
was seen at the lowest frequency (i.e. 313 MHz). Figure 6.9 also shows
comparisons of exclusive nonconcurrent pulse profiles with the standard
integrated profiles. The narrowness of the exclusive nonconcurrent pulse
profile can be spotted easily from these figures. It should be noted
that, PSR B0809+74 exhibit prominent drifting behaviour. Thus, most of
the individual single pulses consist of two or three narrow subpulses.
As the number of exclusive nonconcurrent pulses are very small, a broad
single component smooth profile can not be obtained. This could be a
likely reason behind the narrowness of the exclusive burst pulse
profiles. We also can not reject the possibility of detection limits at
various frequencies. If the emission is narrow and weak at a certain
frequency, it is likely to be below detection limits at other
frequencies. If there is an undetectable weak level emission at other
frequencies, during the occurrence of exclusive burst pulse at a certain
frequency, averaging these null pulses may provide a detectable
component at these frequencies. However, no detectable emission was seen
during the occurrence of such nonconcurrent pulses in our data. This
scenario can not be truly tested here, again due to the small number of
exclusive burst pulses and also due to the small number of nonconcurrent
pulses for different pairs of frequencies.

#### 6.3.4 Null length and burst length comparison

To check the effect of small number of nonconcurrent emission states, on
the overall nulling pattern at various frequencies, their NLHs and BLHs
were compared. As elaborated in Section 6.3.3 , more then half of the
nonconcurrent pulses are localized either at the start or at the end of
the burst phase. This can be further tested by comparing overall null
length and burst length distributions, which should not show significant
differences. The separated null and burst pulses, as discussed in
Section 6.3.2 , were used to construct the NLHs and the BLHs for all
observed frequencies (Figures 6.10 and 6.11 ). Figure 6.10 shows the
similarity in the null length distribution across all observed
frequencies. The minor differences seen at the single and double period
nulls occur due to the a few nonconcurrent pulses. These differences are
superficial and only due to the small number of overall null pulses seen
in this pulsar. To check the statistical significance of the similarity
between the null length distributions, we carried out a two sample
KS-test, assuming a null hypothesis of different distribution. Figure
6.12 (a) shows CDFs, obtained using the observed null lengths, for all
four frequencies which presents analogous distributions. Similarly,
Figure 6.11 shows almost identical burst length distributions. To
quantify these similarities, these distributions were again compared
using the two sample KS-test, assuming a null hypothesis of different
distribution. Figure 6.12 (b) again shows the remarkable similarity
between CDFs, obtained using the observed burst lengths at all four
frequencies. Table 6.4 summarizes the results on both comparisons for
each pair of observing frequencies. For all pairs of frequencies, the
null hypothesis was rejected, at a very high significance, confirming
the alternate hypothesis that these distributions for a pair of
frequencies are similar. This confirms that nonconcurrent pulses occur
near the null to burst transitions (or vice-verse).

Thus, while the nulling patterns for this pulsar is largely broadband,
deviations from this behaviour is seen in about 0.1 percent of pulses,
more than half of which occur at the transition from null to burst (or
vice-verse).

### 6.4 Psr B2319+60

PSR B2319+60, as also discussed in Section 4.2 , is a strong
mode-changing pulsar with a prominent drifting in the outer two conal
components. This section discusses the broadband behaviour of the
nulling phenomenon seen in this pulsar. Sections of observed single
pulse sequences are shown in Figure 6.13 at all four observed
frequencies. A clear drifting feature in the conal component can be seen
at 313, 607 and 1380 MHz. For the highest observed frequency, to improve
the single pulse S/N, consecutive phase-bins were added, to give a total
of 125 bins across the profile. Thus, such drifting behaviour is not
possible to spot in Figure 6.13 . Moreover, Figure 6.13 clearly shows
three distinct null states between period numbers 1837–1851, 1859–1867
and 1887–1905. The simultaneity in the absence of emission is also
evident across all four frequencies in Figure 6.13 . To scrutinize and
quantify this behaviour further, the NFs, the correlation between the
nulling pattern represented by the one-bit sequence and the
distributions of null and burst lengths were compared across four
frequencies.

Similar to PSR B0809+74, we obtained the on-pulse energy sequence by
selecting an appropriate on-pulse window at each frequency from their
respective integrated profile. Figure 6.14 shows sections of concurrent
on-pulse energy sequences at all four frequencies. The coordinated pulse
energy fluctuations are also evident from these time-series. The
on-pulse energy clearly plunges to zero level for around six times,
depicting an occurrence of null state at each frequency. These null
states clearly show simultaneous occurrence across all observed
frequencies. A visual inspection of the entire data broadly confirms
this behaviour.

#### 6.4.1 NF comparison

A few sections of the data, specially at the lower frequencies, showed
presence of RFI. These sections were removed at each frequency before
estimating corresponding NFs. The obtained NFs at all four frequencies
were compared as the first test to quantify the similarity of nulling
behaviour. Figure 6.15 shows the obtained ONPHs and OFPHs for all
observed frequencies. Each ONPH, at the corresponding observed
frequency, point towards a significant number of null pulses, presented
as a separate distribution around the zero mean pulse energy. The method
to obtain the NF is discussed with details in Section 3.5.3 . The number
of pulses used during these estimation are indicated in the inset texts
at the respective frequency plots. The ONPHs, obtained from the single
pulses, at 313, 607 and 1380 MHz [i.e. Figure 6.15 (a),(b) and (c)] show
clear bi-modal distributions of the pulse energy. Thus, we were able to
obtain accurate estimate of the NFs at these lower frequencies. However,
at 4850 MHz, as previously mentioned, the single pulse S/N was not
sufficient to produce such clear bi-modal distribution in the ONPH.
Hence, 3 consecutive pulses were integrated to obtain the ONPH and OFPH.
Such integration, as discussed in Section 3.5.3 , will lead to a lower
estimate of the NF as few null pulses will get mixed with the
neighbouring burst pulses. Figure 6.15 (d) shows a lower limit on the NF
at 4850 MHz due to the sub-integrations. The obtained NF is also listed
in the inset texts of Figure 6.15 for each frequency. Figure 6.15
demonstrate a good match between the obtained NFs within the error bars.
Although the NF does show a good match across a decade of frequencies,
as suggested in Section 4.3 , it does not quantify nulling behaviour in
full detail. Hence, it is essential to confirm pulse-to-pulse matching
of the nulling behaviour in order to check if this phenomenon is truly
broadband.

#### 6.4.2 One-bit sequence comparison

The null pulses and the burst pulses were identified and separated at
all four frequencies. For the lower three frequencies, i.e. 313, 607 and
1380 MHz, a threshold was first set on the respective ONPH, where the
null pulse distribution and the burst pulse distribution overlapped each
other. Pulses below the threshold were tagged null pulses while pulses
above the threshold were tagged as burst pulses. A visual inspection was
carried out on the separated null and burst pulses to separate any
misidentified pulses. At the highest observing frequency, 4850 MHz,
single pulses were weak and hence such threshold was not possible to set
to separate null and burst pulses. We first obtain the single pulse ONPH
and OFPH which showed large fraction of null pulses due to the mixture
of true null pulses with the weak burst pulses near the zero pulse
energy. A slightly higher threshold was first set in such a way that it
included all null pulses below it. Pulses above this higher threshold
were all high S/N burst pulses, while pulse below the threshold
presented a mixture. Pulses, only belonging to this mixture, were
arranged in the ascending order of their on-pulse energy. A threshold
was moved from the lower energy end towards the higher energy end till
pulses below the threshold did not form a significant profile component
(with S/N @xmath 3). All the pulses below the threshold were tagged as
true null pulses while pulses above the threshold were tagged as burst
pulses (see Section 3.5.4 ). All the separated pulses were carefully
examined visually to eliminate any possibility of misidentification.
Using these separated null and burst pulses, one-bit sequences were
formed at all observed frequencies, in which zero represents a null and
one represents a burst. Figure 6.17 shows a section of around 350 pulses
with their identified emission states at all frequencies.

The one-bit sequences for a pair of observing frequencies were compared
using a contingency table analysis pftv86 , as a second test. A visual
comparison between various frequencies clearly confirms that pulsar
shows simultaneous switching between the null and the burst states at
all frequencies. To quantify this simultaneity, the correlation between
these states for a pair of frequencies can be obtain, as a 2 @xmath 2
contingency table (see pftv86 and section 6.3.2 for details). Table 6.5
shows these different contingency tables for all frequency pairs. It can
be seen from these tables that around 14 to 77 pulses show a mismatch
between different pairs of frequencies. For example, a comparison of
one-bit sequence between 313 and 1380 MHz shows around 21 pulses for
which the pulsar showed absence of emission at 313 MHz but it showed
burst emission at 1380 MHz (see Table 6.2 ). Similarly, for 14 pulses,
the pulsar showed absence of emission at 1380 MHz while it was in a
burst state at 313 MHz. Total number of pulses which were compared for
each pair were around 5126 pulse, hence these numbers presents a small
fraction of nonconcurrence. Hence, it appears that PSR B2319+60 exhibits
similar emission states at all pairs of frequencies for the duration of
our observations.

A @xmath test (Cramer-V) and uncertainty test based on entropy
calculations can then be used to assess the strength and significance of
these correlations. These tests are briefly discussed in Section 6.3.2 .
See pftv86 for details about these tests. The results of these tests are
presented in Table 6.6 . Both Cramer-V and the uncertainty coefficients
have values very close to 1, indicating a significantly high association
across all pairs of frequencies. However, the strength is marginally
smaller for association between pairs involving 4850 MHz.

#### 6.4.3 Nonconcurrent pulses

As can be seen from Table 6.5 , for a small number of pulses, the above
association does not hold. In a comparison across all four frequencies,
about 158 out of 5126 pulses ( @xmath 3%) do not show concurrent null
(or burst) state for PSR B2319+60. All such pulses were carefully
examined to verify their true nature and identify their locations.
Surprisingly, 82 of these nonconcurrent pulses ( @xmath 52%
nonconcurrent pulses) occurred either at the start or at the end of a
burst. A few examples of such nonconcurrent pulses are shown in Figures
6.18 , 6.19 and 6.20 . As shown in Figure 6.18 , pulsar showed absence
of emission at 313 and 607 MHz [Figure 6.18 (a) and (b)] while weak and
narrow burst pulses can be seen at 1380 and 4850 MHz [Figure 6.18 (c)
and (d)]. Figure 6.19 shows example of a pulse that is seen to produce
detectable emission at 313, 607 and 1380 MHz, [Figures 6.19 (a),(b) and
(c)] while no detectable emission is present at 4850 MHz. Similarly,
during a burst to null transition, as shown in Figure 6.20 , a narrow
weak pulse can be seen at 1380 MHz [Figure 6.20 (c)] while no detectable
emission is present at 313, 607 and 4850 MHz [Figure 6.20 (a), (b) and
(d)].

As it is evident from Figures 6.18 , 6.19 and 6.20 , when pulsar
displays nonconcurrence in the emission state across different
frequencies, the burst emission is likely to be weak (also narrow on a
few occasions). To scrutinize this behaviour further, we identified and
separated, all the exclusive nonconcurrent burst pulses (similar to
those mentioned in Section 6.3.3 for PSR B0809+74). These pulses were
combined and the average profile was obtained at each frequency. These
profiles are shown in Figure 6.21 from the exclusive pulses at all
frequencies. Approximately 7 to 13 pulses were averaged to obtain these
profiles. It should be noted that these pulses are only seen to occur at
a given observed frequency while they show absence of emission at all
other frequencies. Thus, they are smaller in numbers compared to number
of pulses given in Table 6.5 for different pairs. The peak S/N of these
profiles are relatively low (i.e. peak S/N of 4.6, 7, 15 and 7.5 at 313,
607, 1380 and 4850 MHz respectively) compared to PSR B0809+74.

#### 6.4.4 Null length and burst length comparison

Similar to PSR B0809+74, to check the effect of nonconcurrent emission
states on the overall nulling pattern at various frequencies, their NLHs
and BLHs were compared. As elaborated in Section 6.4.3 , more than half
of the nonconcurrent pulses are localized either at the start or at the
end of the burst phase. This can further be tested by comparing the
overall null length and burst length distributions, which should not
show significant differences. The separated null and burst pulses, as
discussed in Section 6.4.2 , were used to obtain the NLHs and the BLHs
for all observed frequencies (they are shown in Figures 6.22 and 6.23 ).
Figure 6.22 shows the NLHs with similar exponential decay in the null
length distributions across all observed frequencies. A two sample
KS-test, assuming a null hypothesis of different distribution was
carried out between these distributions. Figure 6.24 (a) shows CDFs,
obtained using the observed null lengths, at all four frequencies which
presents remarkably similar distributions. Table 6.7 shows a high
significance ( @xmath 99%) in rejecting the null hypothesis for all
pairs of frequencies, confirming similar null length distributions at
all frequencies. Similarly, Figure 6.23 also shows almost identical
burst length distributions. Figure 6.24 (b) again shows the remarkable
similarity between the CDFs obtained using the observed burst lengths at
all four frequencies. Table 6.7 summarizes results on a comparison of
the burst length distribution, using a two sample KS-test conducted for
each pair of frequencies. Here also the null hypothesis, which assumed
different burst length distributions, was rejected with a very high
significance ( @xmath 99%), confirming the alternate hypothesis that
these distributions for each pair of frequencies are similar. This
ascertain our results on the location of the nonconcurrent pulses, as
they do not change the overall length distributions. Thus, while the
nulling patterns for this pulsar is largely broadband, deviations from
this behaviour is seen in about 3% of pulses, more than half of which
occur at the transition from null to burst (or vice-verse).

### 6.5 Conclusion

A detail study on the simultaneous occurrence of the nulling phenomena
in two pulsars, PSRs B0809+74 and B2319+60, is being reported in this
chapter. The observations were conducted simultaneously at four
different frequencies, 313, 607, 1380 and 4850 MHz, from three different
telescope including the GMRT, the WSRT and the Effelsberg. The overlap
time for each pulsar was around 6 hours between different observatories.

We obtain single pulses at each frequency and the on-pulse energies were
compared across all four frequencies, which showed remarkable similarity
in the pulse energy fluctuations (Figures 6.2 and 6.17 ) for both the
pulsars. To quantify these similarities, we obtain the NF at each
frequency which showed a clear matching, within the error bars, at all
four frequencies for both the pulsars (Figures 6.4 and 6.16 ).
Similarly, the one-bit sequences were also compared using the
contingency table analysis. The significance of association across
frequencies was measured using the Cramer-V and the uncertainty
coefficient. For PSR B0809+74, both the statistical tests showed highly
significant concurrent behaviour. For PSR B2319+60, the significance was
marginally lower for the pairs involving 4850 MHz.

We also scrutinize all the nonconcurrent pulses for both the pulsar to
investigate their true nature. For PSR B0809+74, we found that out of 12
nonconcurrent pulses, 7 (about 58%) occurred at the transition point
where emission state is switching from null to burst (or vice-verse).
Similarly for PSR B2319+60, we found that out of 158 nonconcurrent
pulses, 82 (about 52%) occurred at the transition point where emission
state is switching. Thus, both pulsars showed remarkable similarity in
the overall broadband behaviour, also accounting the fraction of
nonconcurrent pulses at the transition points. All exclusive pulses were
separated and their aggregate power was obtained. It can be concluded
from these exclusive pulses that, during a nonconcurrence event, pulsar
exhibit weak and narrow emission. Thus, it is likely that these pulses
occur due to different detection limits at various frequencies. A slight
difference can be seen for the exclusive pulse profiles between both the
pulsars. PSR B0809+74 showed significantly narrow pulses (except at 4850
MHz) aligning the overall pulse profile, while PSR B2319+60 showed
significantly weak pulses shifted towards the leading edge compared to
the overall pulse profile. However, a strong claim can not be made
regarding their true shapes, due to their small numbers (inset texts of
Figures 6.9 and 6.21 ). Moreover, both the pulsars exhibit prominent
drifting behaviour which could easily give rise to such differences for
individual pulses. Thus, shape of the exclusive profiles should be
interpreted carefully. We also compared the null length and the burst
length distributions across all observed frequencies which showed
similar distribution with high significance ( @xmath 99%) for both the
pulsars.

### 6.6 Discussion

We find that nulling is broadband for PSRs B0809+74 and B2319+60 across
1:15 frequency range (313 to 4850 MHz). Deviation from this behaviour
was seen for less than 3% of pulses, most of which occur at the
transition phase (either at null to burst or vice-verse). If the absence
of emission during the null state is related to the loss of coherence by
the secondary particles to produce the radio emission [see fr82 and
Section 2.4.2 for details], these nonconcurrent pulses represent
interesting scenario of pulsar magnetospheric state changes. The
magnetospheric state switching may not be sudden and it is likely to
posses finite relaxation time to switch between different states. For
example, PSRs J1752+2359 and J1738 @xmath 2330, show gradual decay and
slow rise in the pulse energy before and after the null state
respectively (see Chapter 5). This kind of gradual changes could
manifest itself to give rise to differences in the emission state at
different frequencies near the transition points. These transitional
states could be chaotic and effect of which can have a different
frequency dependence for a finite amount of time ( @xmath 1 period).

However, the possibility of lower S/N single pulses as the prime cause
of nonconcurrent pulses can also not be rejected. PSR B0809+74 showed
switching between the null and the burst state for around 100 times at
each frequency in our data, out of which only 7 times (7%) the
transition showed nonconcurrence. If these pulses are occuring due to
real differences in emission at various frequencies, then they are
likely to occur for larger fraction, which was not observed. Moreover,
the exclusive pulses are narrow which makes their detection even more
challenging at lower S/N single pulses. Thus, its likely that that
differences which are seen between different frequencies in PSR B0809+74
are only due to the limited detection limits at various frequencies.
Similarly for PSR B2319+60, we observed roughly around 476 such
transitions at each frequency, out of which 82 times (17%) the
transition stage showed nonconcurrence across all observed frequencies.
Moreover, the exclusive pulses seen at different frequencies are very
weak and again lead to same speculation about their origin, which is due
to the lower S/N single pulses. Hence, in both pulsars we can not reject
S/N of the single pulse as the cause of 0.1% to 3% differences seen in
PSRs B0809+74 and B2319+60 respectively.

These results differ from the ones reported by bgk+07 , in which only
50% of pulses were claimed to be concurrent across similar range of
frequencies for PSR B1133+16. It is likely that B1133+16 exhibit unique
frequency dependent nulling behavior while the pulsars studied here
exhibit frequency independent quenching of pulsed emission. One
possibility for the seen discrepancy in PSR B1133+16 can be pointed out
as the frequency dependent pulse-to-pulse modulation. bsw80 suggested
that pulses below critical frequency ( @xmath 1 GHz) are highly
correlated while high frequency pulses intermediately correlate with the
low frequency pulses. As this dependence of the pulse energy between the
low and the high frequency pulses varies from pulsar to pulsar, one is
likely to observe range of non-concurrent behavior. Moreover, bgk+07
also reported lower frequencies to have longer nulls compared to nulls
at higher frequencies in PSR B1133+16, pointing towards similar
deviations at the transition instances. The distinct emission seen at
higher frequencies for PSR B1133+16 can also be consider as a unique
mode-changing phenomena in which one magnetospheric state does not
produce detectable emission at lower frequencies.

Static geometrical models invoking extinction of sparking region are
allowed by our results, but ones invoking empty line-of-sight are ruled
out for these pulsars as the emission will be seen at some frequency.
Moreover, unexcited emission regions implies some sort of periodicity in
pulse energy modulation. As concluded in chapter 4, both these pulsars
exhibit random occurrences of null pulses. Thus, empty line-of-sight is
unlikely to be an explanation. Changes of emission geometry as in
movement of emission region within the beam also imply that emission
should be seen at some frequency or other for significant fraction of
pulses. While this is not ruled out, it is unlikely if our results for
conal pulsars such as PSR B0809+74 are taken together with those for a
pulsar with more central cut of line of sight such as PSR B2319+60.
Thus, our results suggest failure of emission conditions on a global
magnetospheric scale ckf99 ; con05 ; tim10 as more likely cause of
nulling seen in these two pulsars. If nulling is another form of
mode-changing phenomena then our results suggest simultaneous occurrence
of this phenomena. More such observations for number of mode-changing
and nulling pulsars, covering lower frequencies up to 50 MHz, in future
would be of great importance.

## Chapter 7 Conclusions and discussion

The aim of this thesis was to quantify, model and compare nulling
behaviour between different classes of pulsars to scrutinize the true
nature of the nulling phenomenon at multiple frequencies. In the
previous three chapters, results on different aspects of the nulling
behaviour with the above mentioned core theme are presented. This
chapter summarizes the results obtained from each of these studies. An
attempt has been made towards the end of this chapter to examine the
possible nulling models in view of our results.

### 7.1 A survey of nulling pulsars using the Giant Meterwave Radio
Telescope

A survey of around 15 nulling pulsars including some newly discovery
PKSMB pulsars, was conducted using the GMRT at 325 and 610 MHz.
Following results were obtained from this survey.

Subsidiary Results

-   Better estimates were obtained on the NFs for four of the observed
    pulsars, where only an upper/lower limits were previously reported.

-   The estimates of reduction in the pulsed emission was also presented
    for the first time in 11 pulsars.

-   NFs values for individual profile components were also presented for
    two pulsars in the sample viz. PSRs B2111+46 and B2020+28.

-   Possible mode changing behaviour was suggested by these observations
    for PSR J1725 @xmath 4043, but this needs to be confirmed with more
    sensitive observations.

-   An interesting quasi-periodic nulling behaviour for PSR J1738 @xmath
    2330 was also reported.

-   The Wald-Wolfowitz runs test for randomness was carried out to 8
    more pulsars to point out the clustering of burst pulses.

-   Typical null and burst time-scales were derived for 8 pulsars for
    the first time.

Primary Results

-   It was shown that, nulling patterns differ between PSRs B0809+74,
    B0818–13, B0835–41 and B2021+51, even though they have similar NFs
    of around 1%. Our results confirm that NF does not capture the full
    detail of the nulling behaviour of a pulsar.

-   The durations of the null and the burst states were shown to be
    modelled by a stochastic Poisson point process suggesting that these
    transitions occur at random. It was concluded that, the underlying
    physical process to cause nulls, in the 8 studied pulsars, appears
    to be random in nature producing nulls and bursts with unpredictable
    durations.

### 7.2 On the long nulls of PSRs J1738@xmath2330 and J1752+2359

A detailed study of pulse energy modulation in two pulsars, PSRs J1738
@xmath 2330 and J1752+2359, with similar NFs has been presented to
compare and contract their nulling behaviour.

Subsidiary Results

-   The NFs were estimated to be 85 @xmath 2% and @xmath 89% for J1738
    @xmath 2330 and J1752+2359, respectively.

-   Both the pulsars show similar bunching of burst pulses, classified
    as the bright phases, which are separated by long null states. A
    similar quasi-periodic switching between these two states was
    observed for both the pulsars.

-   Towards the end of each bright phase of J1752+2359, an exponential
    decline in the pulse energy was reported. J1738 @xmath 2330 also
    showed similar exponential decay along with a flickering emission
    characterized by short frequent nulls towards the end of each bright
    phase.

-   We modelled the bright phase energy decay for J1752+2359 and
    estimated their average durations.

-   Unlike J1738 @xmath 2330, the first bright phase pulse profile and
    the last bright phase pulse profile show striking differences for
    J1752+2359, hinting differences in transition from null state to
    burst state and vice-verse between the two pulsars.

-   The occurrence rate of the inter-burst pulses (IBP) is random and
    uncorrelated with the preceding or following bright phase
    parameters.

-   The total intensity and the circular polarization profiles of IBPs
    are slightly shifted towards the leading side compared to the
    conventional integrated profile, indicating a change in the emission
    region.

-   We reported absence of any giant pulses in our long observations,
    although such pulses being reported at low frequencies in
    J1752+2359.

Primary Results

-   The PCF for J1738 @xmath 2330 indicated that the mechanism
    responsible for bright phases is governed by two quasi-periodic
    processes with periodicities of 170 and 270 pulses.

-   The PCF for J1752+2359 indicated that the nulling pattern is
    dominated by 540 pulse quasi-periodicity, which jitters from 490 to
    595 pulses.

-   It was shown that these processes are not strictly periodic, but
    retain a memory longer than 2000 pulses for J1738 @xmath 2330, while
    the memory of J1752+2359’s periodic structure is retained for only
    about 1000 periods.

-   We demonstrated that the area under each bright phase is similar for
    J1752+2359, suggesting that the energy release during all such
    events is approximately constant.

-   We report, for the first time, peculiar weak burst pulses during the
    long null phases of J1752+2359, which are similar to emission seen
    from RRATs.

-   These results confirm that even though these two pulsars have
    similar but significantly high NFs, they show very different nulling
    behaviour.

### 7.3 Simultaneous multi-frequency study of pulse nulling behaviour in
two pulsars

This study reported a detailed investigation on the simultaneous
occurrence of the nulling phenomena in two pulsars, PSRs B0809+74 and
B2319+60 at 313, 607, 1380 and 4850 MHz.

Subsidiary Results

-   We obtained single pulses at each frequency and the on-pulse
    energies were compared across all four frequencies, which showed
    remarkable similarity in the pulse energy fluctuations for both the
    pulsars.

-   We obtained the NF at each frequency which were found to be
    consistent within the error bars, at all four frequencies for both
    the pulsars.

-   We measured the Cramer-V and the uncertainty coefficient for each
    pair of frequencies and showed simultaneous nulling behaviour with
    high significance for both pulsars.

-   For B0809+74, we found that out of 12 nonconcurrent pulses, 7 (about
    58%) occurred at the transition point where emission state is
    switching from null to burst (or vice-verse).

-   For B2319+60, we found that out of 158 nonconcurrent pulses, 82
    (about 52%) occurred at the transition point where emission state is
    switching.

-   B0809+74 showed significantly narrow pulses (except at 4850 MHz)
    aligning the overall pulse profile during it’s exclusive emission at
    only single frequency.

-   B2319+60 showed significantly weak exclusive pulses which are
    shifted towards the leading edge compared to the overall pulse
    profile.

-   It was suggested that these exclusive pulses occur due to prominent
    drifting behaviour seen in both pulsars along with differences in
    the S/N between different frequencies.

Primary Results

-   We showed that nulling is a broadband phenomena in these two
    pulsars, which favors phenomena intrinsic to the pulsar
    magnetosphere as a more likely cause of nulling. Geometric effects
    are less likely to give rise to such high concurrent behaviour.

### 7.4 Implication of our results

Following are a few of the implications of our study on the overall
understanding of the pulsar nulling phenomena.

#### 7.4.1 Quantifying the nulling behaviour

Nulling behaviour has been classically quantified as the fraction of
null pulses among the total number of observed pulses. rit76 , who
presented a method to estimate amount of nulling by the NF, reported a
correlation between the pulsar period and the NF. rit76 suggested that,
pulsars with longer periods tend to null more frequently compared to
pulsars with smaller periods. Pulsar period is directly correlated with
the age of the pulsar hence, rit76 suggested that pulsar die with
increasing fraction of nulls. However, as shown in Figure 2.8 of Chapter
2, such claims can be contested in light of currently known sample of
nulling pulsars. ran86 concluded that core single pulsars possess small
NF compared to other classes. Investigations by ran86 contradicted
earlier claims by rit76 and suggested that apparent relation between the
nulling and the pulsar age is due to the profile morphologies. In a
given profile class, there is no strong correlation between the NF and
the pulsar age. big92a reported correlation study between the NF with
several pulsar parameters, using 72 nulling pulsars. The NF-period
correlation was highlighted by big92a . The other correlations which
were reported by big92a includes @xmath and @xmath . However, these
correlations can be the results of the reported NF-period correlation as
all these quantities are strongly correlated with the period that there
is no correlation between the NF and the profile morphological classes.
In a detail study, wmj07 reported that, multicomponent profile pulsars
tend to have higher NFs but such pulsars are old.

Thus, NF-period correlation has been tentatively supported by early
investigators. However, this is not a strong correlation as PSR
J1752+2359, which we have studied, has one of the smallest period among
the known nulling pulsars, but it still exhibit extreme NF. Our results
on the small NFs as well as on the long NFs pulsars suggest that, NF is
probably not an ideal parameter to quantify nulling behaviour. Thus, our
interpretation can be extrapolated to explain it’s lack of strong
correlation with any of the pulsar parameters. We have also made an
attempt to quantify nulling behaviour by incorporating their length
distributions to estimate @xmath and @xmath . These quantities needs to
be incorporated in order to truly quantify nulling behaviour. In similar
line of studies, lr06 made an attempt to correlate the longest observed
null lengths in 19 pulsars with different pulsar parameters. A weak
correlation, with pulsar’s age, was reported by these comparisons,
although strength of this correlation was not reported. A visual
inspection of Figure 6 in lr06 revels no such correlation. Recently, an
attempt has been made by yhw13 to characterize nulling phenomena by
incorporating nulling time-scales.

#### 7.4.2 On the randomness of pulsar nulls

We have shown extensively in Chapter 4 that, nulls do occur randomly
with their length distributions originating from a stochastic random
process, which we modelled as a simple Poisson Point Process (PPP). As
discussed in Chapter 2, for many pulsars, periodic nulling have been
reported. These analysis were carried by taking a Fourier transform of
the pulse energy fluctuations hr07 ; hr09 . Moreover, rr09 reported
non-random behaviour in around 14 pulsars using a statistical method
called Wald–Wolfowitz runs test ww40 . Thus, a question can be raised
that, do nulls occur randomly?

We would like to suggest that, although the runs test is a test of
randomness, it only describes randomness in the occurrence of single
pulses. Many previous studies have suggested that burst pulses tend
occur in clusters bac70a ; rit76 . Thus, this clustering is bound to
give non-randomness, if the probability of random occurrence of null or
burst states are estimated for individual pulses (in the sense of the
Wald–Wolfowitz runs test). This should not be interpreted as a
non-randomness of nulling phenomena. We also carried out similar runs
test for 8 observed pulsars, in Chapter 4, which clearly showed that
they fail the runs test with high significance. We have also suggested
that, if the distribution of nulls and bursts follow the stochastic
random PPP, the individual pulses will fail the runs test due to their
excessive clustering. To stretch this point further, we generated
multiple sequences of null and burst pulses, following the PPP. The
Poisson point random variable was generated using the standard
procedures given in press . Table 7.1 shows the random sequences
generated from the simulations along with their Poisson point variables.
Its clearly evident from Table 7.1 that, runs test will fail for any
combination of average null lengths and average burst lengths, obtained
from the PPP random variable. The null length (or burst length) presents
the time-scale between the two transitions, first from burst-to-null and
second from null-to-burst (or vice-verse). Thus, it can be concluded
that these transitions occur randomly and they are unpredictable.

In a similar line of studies, we also investigated periodicities in two
high NF pulsars, viz. J1738 @xmath 2330 and J1752+2359. Their
quasi-periodicities are difficult to model using the above mentioned
simple PPP. As suggested in Chapter 5, more complicated models have to
be invoked to explain the observed quasi-periodic fluctuations.
Moreover. the observed quasi-periodicities are due to the clustering of
burst pulses, as typical bright phase and off-phase alternate with
lengths scattered around the means of Gaussian like distributions.
However, we have also pointed out that at least for one of the pulsar,
J1752+2359, the coherence of quasi-periodicity only last for around 1000
pulses.

Recently, cor13 has extend our work on the randomness in nulling pulsars
to more classes of pulsars exhibiting mode-changes, drift-rate
variations and normal-abnormal modes (these classes are introduced in
Chapter 2). Transitions between different states exhibited by these
pulsars were modelled by Markov chain (Poisson Point Process is the
first order Markov chain). For every period, the transition probability
(q), from previous emission state to current emission state can be
estimated. By obtaining all such probabilities, a 2 @xmath 2 transition
matrix (Q) can be formed for a nulling pulsar, as shown in Equation 7.1
.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here, @xmath and @xmath are null-to-null and null-to-burst probabilities
given as,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Similarly, @xmath and @xmath are burst-to-burst and burst-to-null
probabilities given as,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here, @xmath and @xmath are the typical null and burst time-scales,
defined in Chapter 4. cor13 also modelled multi-state switching which is
also seen in many mode-changing pulsars (see Chapter 2 for a detailed
discussion on multi-state switching). The relevant findings, which can
also be extrapolated to the quasi-periodicities seen in the above
mentioned two pulsars, are on the stochastic nature of the 35 day
quasi-periodicity in the intermittent pulsar B1931+24. cor13 introduced
a forcing function along with the Markov transition probability, to
invoke quasi-periodic changes. Such forcing function, @xmath , can be
given as cor13 ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here, A is the amplitude of the forcing function while @xmath is the
forcing periodicity and @xmath is the arbitrary phase shift. Similarly,
such forcing periodicity can also be applied for the two high NF pulsars
to explain their quasi-periodicities using the Markov model. This
forcing function can change the probabilities of all transitions. The
transition probability matrix in such case can be given as cor13 ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Thus, it can concluded from our studies and by incorporating recent
findings from cor13 that, nulls do occur randomly as they do not give
rise to predictable length sequences. For pulsars exhibiting
quasi-periodic energy fluctuations, forcing functions can be invoked to
model their transition to follow the Markov chain model. As mentioned in
Chapter 5, such forcing functions may arise from an external body csh08
or neutron star oscillations cr04a or near-chaotic switches in the
magnetosphere’s non-linear system tim10 .

#### 7.4.3 On the global magnetospheric state changes

Recently, wmj07 have suggested that nulling is an extreme form of
mode-changing phenomena. Our discovery of weak emission modes in PSRs
J1725 @xmath 4043 and J1752+2359 support this claim that nulls and
profile modes can be interpreted as different extremes of similar
phenomena. Our results on the simultaneous observations of two nulling
pulsars, point towards the global failure of emission processes at all
frequencies. Thus, it can be speculated that nulls represent a different
stable magnetospheric state tim10 during which the emission is ceased.
Similar conclusions were also derived for the intermittent pulsar, PSR
B1931+24 klo+06 . Moreover, lhk+10 reported correlated changes in the
pulse profiles with the changes in the @xmath , pointing towards global
magnetospheric changes. Recent simultaneous radio and X-ray observations
of PSR B0943+10 also revealed such global changes hhk+13 .

### 7.5 Implication for possible nulling mechanism

In this section, an attempt has been made to characterize different
observations in order to compare them with different proposed models of
pulsar nulling.

According to che81 , temperature changes on the surface may lead to
changes in the ion flow from the polar cap. Such ion flow may hinder the
growth of polar cap potential. cor81 ; cor83 listed various time-scales
for the occurrence of different observed phenomena. In which, he
suspects the temperature fluctuations of the order of few milliseconds
to several seconds (Figure 3 of cor81 ). Such time-scales do match with
the derived typical null and burst time-scale in our study (Table 4.6 in
Chapter 4). Thus, such temperature variations are likely to cause
nulling in pulsars we studied. However, nulling observed in the
intermittent pulsars, which occurs with the time-scale ranging from days
to weeks, are difficult to explain by this rapid temperature
fluctuations.

zqlh97 also considered three gap discharge mechanisms, operating at
different temperature ranges. These models include CR and two different
types of ICS processes. The resonant ICS mode in which the cross section
of interaction between the high energy particle and thermal photon is
maximum, while during the thermal ICS mode where the temperature are
high enough to produce sufficient thermal photons. These authors argue
that the normal pulsars lie in the range where the gap discharge process
can switch between these different models. They suggested two different
critical temperature ranges as T @xmath and T @xmath with T @xmath
@xmath T @xmath . Above T @xmath , the thermal ICS could be active while
below T @xmath , CR is a more viable mechanism. Most of the normal
pulsars possess temperature in the range between T @xmath and T @xmath .
Thus, they are likely to switch rapidly between different gap discharge
models due to the thermal fluctuations. This was proposed as an
explanation for mode-changing phenomena. As nulling is an extreme form
of mode-changing phenomena, as discussed earlier, this can be
extrapolated to explain nulling. For some of these pulsars, due to the
temperature fluctuations, the gap properties and the Lorentz factor of
the primary particles can be altered on a sudden instant. This can cause
inefficiency in the two-stream instability and can lead to loss of
coherence and eventually to absence of emission. zqh97b also
extrapolated the mode-changing model given by zqlh97 and suggested
similar interpretation for PSR B1055 @xmath 52.

zx06 reported precession as the cause of extreme nulls. If precession is
causing the beam to shift, then one is expected to get gradual changes
in the pulse width as the pulsar goes into the null state from the
emitting burst state. In J1752+2359, we see evidence of slightly narrow
profile for the first periods of the bright phases while the last pulses
are much wider and also have an extra component. Moreover,
J1752+2359 also exhibit weak single burst pulses during the long null
states. For J1738 @xmath 2330, we do not see any evidence of profile
variations across the burst state. Thus, precession can explain the
extreme nulls but our results are not consistent with the proposed
model. Moreover, gle90 also reported deformation of the emission beam
due to the misalignment between the rotation and the neutron star
symmetry axes. Such models can also be rejected due to the absence of
significant profile variations during the bright phase in two of the
pulsars we studied.

fr82 has proposed a model of pulse nulling as a break in the two stream
instabilities which occurs during a steady polar gap discharge. A brief
discussion regarding this model is given in Section 2.4.2 . Two stream
instabilities are produce due to the propagation of secondary particles
with different momenta. These secondary particles are generated from the
primary particles with high gamma, generated at initial gap discharge. A
situation can occur for long period pulsars in which gap discharges at
roughly the same rate as the potential drop would increase before the
sparking. In which, Polar cap attains a steady discharge state which
does not produce high gamma primary particles for the consecutive two
stream instabilities and bunching. In the absence of two stream
instability, the coherent radio emission will be ceased. It can be
speculated that, this steady state is reached after a build up from the
residual potential, left over after each gap discharge during normal
non-steady condition (non-null state). Once the build up of the residual
potential reaches the maximum gap height potential, pulsar attains a
steady state which does not emit radio emission (null state). When the
residual potential discharges, pulsar can resume its normal interrupted
sparking action which give rise to primary particles with high gamma for
the consecutive bunching and coherence. The charging and discharging of
this residual potential on top of normal gap discharge has an inherent
memory associated with them. The time-scale of this memory mechanism
should be higher for long period and low surface magnetic field pulsars.
We reported nulling time-scales from the PPP model in 8 pulsars. This
modelling reveals that there is an inherent memory which constrains the
transitions to occur in accord with the PPP distributions. However, the
charging and discharging of the gap potential, on top of the left over
potential, needs to be simulated in order to scrutinize this model for
our pulsars. Moreover, correlation with the long period and low surface
magnetic field can also not be tested for such a small sample. However,
this appears to be a more viable mechanism to cause nulls.

In Section 2.4.1 , various geometric phenomena which can give to pulsar
nulls were also discussed. The phenomena which is related to the missing
line-of-sight can be scrutinize in light of our results. One of the main
prediction of this model is the periodic occurrence of null pulses.
However, we have conclusively shown that occurrence of nulls are
completely random (see above section 7.4.2 ). For all pulsars we have
studied, a stochastic random process can be invoked to explain their
length distributions. Moreover, missing line-of-sight will also give
rise to large mismatch between observations at different frequencies. As
the emission at different frequencies, originate at different heights
from the surface, the structure of the emission beams are also likely to
be significantly different. The higher frequencies originates from the
much lower heights in the conical emission beam, with emission sub-beams
closely spaced (see Figure 2.6 ). Thus, the likelihood of an empty sight
line is significantly lower at higher frequencies and this can give rise
to high fraction of nonconcurrent pulses between the occurrence nulls at
different frequencies. However, contrary to that, we have observed
highly significant concurrent emission behaviour, with only around 1 to
3% mismatch for different frequency pairs. Thus, our results on the
randomness of pulsar nulls, simultaneously occurring at large range of
radio frequencies, do not support empty line-of-sight as a likely
mechanism in the sample of pulsars we studied.

### 7.6 Future work

Our study can be extended to incorporate more classes of pulsar in order
to understand the magnetospheric state switching phenomena. The sample
of pulsars we have studied are very small for which this state switching
is shown to be random and global. This samples needs to be enhanced in
order support these claims. Thus, following future work can be suggested
from this thesis which can help to unravel the mechanism operating
behind the nulling phenomena.

-   The sample of pulsars, with null and burst length distributions,
    needs to be enhanced by observing several relatively strong nulling
    pulsars using the GMRT.

-   Similarly, simultaneous observations of more nulling pulsars needs
    to be conducted to conclusively point out global state switching.
    Such pulsar should include more central line cut to scrutinize the
    concurrent emission behaviour of the core component.

-   The Pair correlation function analysis applied for the high NF
    pulsars should also be applied to intermittent pulsars, in order to
    investigate their coherence time-scales.

-   The @xmath variations can be measured by separating the bright
    phases and the IBPs for PSR J1752+2359 by monitoring it for a few
    months. Both these @xmath values can be compared to estimate the
    changes in the rotation during these different phases in order to
    scrutinize pair production.

-   PSR J1738 @xmath 2330 needs to be observed for a continues stretch
    of around 8 hours from instruments like the Ooty radio telescope or
    the Parkes radio telescope to investigate the coherence length of
    the measured quasi-periodicity.

-   Estimation on the NFs for the individual profile components should
    be extended for more number of pulsars in order to truly understand
    the phenomena.

-   In order to truly scrutinize the global changes during the nulls,
    simultaneous radio and X-ray observations should conducted for a few
    strong nulling pulsars with long nulls.

### 7.7 Summary

In light of the results reported in this thesis, following
interpretations about the nulling phenomena can be suggested.

1.  NF is not an ideal parameter to quantify nulling behaviour,
    confirmed firmly by comparing low NF pulsars as well as high NF
    pulsars.

2.  Nulling occurs randomly with unpredictable length durations.
    Quasi-periodicities seen in the high NF pulsars can also be
    explained by the Markov models with a forcing function.

3.  Nulling is an extreme form of mode-changing phenomena which occurs
    on a global magnetospheric scale.

4.  Geometric reasons are less favoured as a likely cause of nulling
    phenomena due the randomness and broadband behaviour reported in
    this thesis.

## Appendix A Appendix A Pulse energy Histograms

This appendix lists the on-pulse and the off-pulse energy histograms of
all the pulsars discussed in Chapter 4. The on-pulse and the off-pulse
energy were binned in various number of bins, which are mentioned in the
caption for each pulsar. The bin sizes are kept similar for both the
histograms, the ONPH and the OFPH for each pulsar. In all figures, the
name of the pulsar is listed at the top. The abscissa presents the
normalized energy obtained using the block average as discussed in
Chapter 3. The ordinate presents the normalized counts of occurrence for
each energy bin. The OFPHs are shown with the red solid lines while the
ONPHs are shown with black filled curve. The counts in both the
histograms were normalized by the peak from the corresponding OFPH
histogram for each pulsar. As highlighted in Chapter 3, this
normalization does not provide probability distribution of the pulse
energy. It was only adopted here to easily discern the NFs from these
plots. The obtained NF, observed frequency along with the number of
pulses used during the analysis are displayed in the inset texts. For
weak pulsars, the number of sub-integrated pulses are shown in the
parentheses beside the total number of pulses in the inset texts.

## Appendix B Appendix B Null length and Burst length histograms

This Appendix lists all the null length and the burst length histograms
obtained for pulsars studied in Chapter 4. The NLHs are shown in the
left hand panel with red solid line while the BLHs are shown on the
right hand panel with blue sold line. The abscissa present length of
contiguous null or burst phases in units of pulsar periods. The ordinate
presents the normalized counts as counts on every bin were normalized by
the total number of observed contiguous null/burst lengths (mentioned in
the caption) for each pulsar. The pulsar names are given at the top of
the plot.

## Appendix C Appendix C Cumulative Distribution Function

This appendix displays the Cumulative distribution functions (CDF), as
discussed in Chapter 4, of eight pulsars for which the NLH and the BLH
were possible to obtain. PSR B1658 @xmath 37 did not show a suitable
match with the fitted model, hence it was not included in the following
plots. Moreover, for PSRs B0837 @xmath 41 and B2021+51 the null length
distribution only showed single and double period nulls, hence they were
also excluded in the following plots. For each pulsars, both the null
length and burst length fits to the Poisson point process, given by the
following equation, are shown.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Each plot shows the obtained CDFs (blue line) using the observed
null/burst length distributions along with the fitted models (red line).
After obtaining the least-square-fit, the decay parameter, @xmath , was
obtained for each CDF. These fitted parameters, @xmath and @xmath in
units of pulsar period ( @xmath ), are also shown for each pulsar. The
fitted model was checked by carrying out a two-sample KS-test between
the observed CDF and the obtained CDF from the simulated data, as
discussed in Section 4.5 . The rejection probability of the null
hypothesis of similar distributions is also shown for each pulsar in the
inset texts.

## Appendix D Appendix D The Pair Correlation Function

The Pair Correlation Function ( PCF ) is a probability density function
(also known as the radial distribution function or pair separation
function) for the clustering of certain objects or events in space
and/or time coordinates plu85 and is useful for measuring the degree of
packing. We have used a one-dimensional PCF, which identifies the
clustering of events (the bursts pulses of a bright phase in our case),
in the time series data. A brief description is provided here as this
seems to be the first time such a technique is applied the clustering of
burst pulses in pulsar astronomy.

The PCF for a series M pulses with N burst pulses can be derived as
follows. The pulse index of these burst pulses are

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then, PCF is defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where G is a scaling parameter and @xmath is the Kronecker delta
function. A normalized binning of PCF, g(p), provides the probability of
occurrence of certain separations between burst pulses. If a pulsar
exhibits bunching of burst pulses and periodic occurrence of these
bunches, the PCF shows prominent peaks around repeatedly occurring
separations and their harmonics. A simple way to detect such
periodicities is to obtain the Fourier spectra of the PCF.

Fig. D.1 shows an example of the PCF obtained for 8000 pulses of a
pulsar nulling with a precise periodicity. The pulsar was simulated by
repeated occurrence of 100 burst pulses separated by 400 null pulses, so
the NF was 80 %. The periodicity is clearly visible both in the PCF and
in the Fourier spectra in the inset figure. The peaks in PCF are at 500
pulses, broadened by the 100 pulse spread.

The PCF measures not only the periodicity of the clustering but also how
long its coherence persists. If coherence in the bunching is lost, the
PCF would not show peaks beyond a particular length. This makes it
superior to a simple Fourier analysis of the pulse energy modulation
since a PCF emphasises short-lived periodic features as well as
providing information regarding the coherence length. An additional
advantage over conventional Fourier analysis is that observations from
different sessions can be combined. The maximum coherence length
measurable in this case will come from the session with the longest
pulse sequence among all the observing sessions. Hence, the PCF is a
useful technique to scrutinize periodic pulse energy fluctuations.
