##### Acknowledgements.

-   General Acknowledgments:
    I am extremely grateful to Steve Carlip for encouraging this
    research, and for providing outstanding guidance and mentorship
    throughout my time in Davis. I am also very grateful to Henrique
    Gomes for welcoming me into the very impressive group of scientists
    that comprise the shape dynamics community. Many thanks to Markus
    Luty and Andrew Waldron whose helpful suggestions and thoughtful,
    constructive criticism have improved this manuscript.

-   Chapter 2:
    This chapter was based on a collaboration with Henrique Gomes. I
    would like to thank Steve Carlip for his support and for his many
    helpful questions, comments and constructive criticisms. I would
    also like to thank Vasudev Shyam and Joshua Cooperman for their
    valuable input and insightful questions about this and related
    research. H.G. was supported in part by the U.S.Department of Energy
    under grant DE-FG02-91ER40674.

-   Chapter 3:
    This chapter was based on a collaboration with Vasudev Shyam. I
    would like to thank Henrique Gomes for helpful conversations. I am
    also grateful to Sean Gryb for lively discussions and for his
    generous hospitality during the final stages of this work, and to
    Flavio Mercati for helpful suggestions. Many thanks to Steve Carlip
    for his valuable insights and suggestions. Research for this chapter
    was supported in part by FQXi minigrant MGA-1404 courtesy of the
    Foundational Questions Institute. V.S. was supported in part by
    Perimeter Institute for Theoretical Physics. Research at Perimeter
    Institute is supported by the Government of Canada through Industry
    Canada and by the Province of Ontario through the Ministry of
    Research and Innovation.

-   Chapters 4-6:
    I am grateful to Steve Carlip for carefully reading drafts and
    making many helpful suggestions, and to Joseph Mitchell for many
    lively conversations about this work as it progressed. I would also
    like to thank Jack Gegenberg for helpful discussions in the early
    stages of this work, and Henrique Gomes, Sean Gryb, Flavio Mercati
    and Vasudev Shyam for their thoughtful questions and remarks.

\makeintropages

## Chapter \thechapter Canonical General Relativity

One of the most celebrated acheivements of twentieth century physics was
the description of gravity in terms of the curvature of spacetime. The
general theory of relativity was completed in the year 1915 and in the
very same year David Hilbert proposed an action integral reproducing the
Einstein field equations:

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (1)
  -- -------- -- -----

where @xmath is Newton’s constant, @xmath is the spacetime metric,
@xmath is the scalar curvature of @xmath , and units have been chosen
such that the speed of light @xmath . The integral is carried out over
the entire spacetime manifold @xmath .

Despite the fact that a variational principle was identified very early
in the development of general relativity, it would not be until the year
1959 that Richard Arnowitt, Stanley Deser and Charles Misner (ADM) were
first able to reformulate general relativity as a constrained
Hamiltonian system [ 1 ] . Since then, their original paper has received
thousands of citations and has paved the way for many important advances
in classical and quantum gravity. Some important examples include
numerical relativity; the Wheeler-Dewitt equation [ 2 ] ; Ashtekar’s
formulation of general relativity in terms of “new variables” [ 3 ] and
loop quantum gravity [ 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 ] ; Euclidean quantum gravity [ 8 ]
; causal dynamical triangulations [ 9 ] ; Hořava-Lifshitz gravity [ 10 ]
and recently, shape dynamics [ 11 ] to name just a few.

The key insight provided by ADM was that any arbitrarily chosen local
time coordinate @xmath defines a local foliation of spacetime by
space-like hypersurfaces @xmath of constant @xmath , often called “time
slices.” The spacetime metric @xmath can then be decomposed in terms of
the spatial metric @xmath induced on the time slices, a three-vector
@xmath on the spatial slices called the shift vector, and a scalar
function @xmath called the lapse function.

In terms of this decomposition, one can think of the spacetime line
element @xmath as the hypotenuse of an infinitesimal “Lorentzian right
triangle” with one leg @xmath orthogonal to the time slices and one leg
@xmath (whose length is measured relative to the induced metric @xmath )
lying tangent to the later time slice @xmath This leads to:

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (2)
  -- -------- -- -----

Comparing ( 2 ) to the standard exression for the spacetime line element
@xmath , one can read off the components of the spacetime metric in
terms of the ADM variables.

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (3a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3c)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

One can also display ( 3 ) as a matrix equation

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (4)
  -- -------- -- -----

which has the inverse

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (5)
  -- -------- -- -----

where the spatial metric was used to lower indices of the spatial shift
vector as @xmath .

Ordinarily, one thinks of the Einstein-Hilbert action ( 1 ) as being a
functional of the spacetime metric @xmath , but making use of ( 3 ) it
can just as easily be thought of as a functional of @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath . In terms of the ADM decomposition, the action ( 1 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (6)
  -- -------- -- -----

where @xmath is the scalar curvature of @xmath , @xmath is the extrinsic
curvature of @xmath embedded in @xmath , defined by:

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (7a)
              @xmath      (7b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

and @xmath is the trace of the extrinsic curvature. In ( 7 ) @xmath is
the Lie derivative along the vector field @xmath , @xmath is the unit
normal vector to the time slice @xmath , and @xmath is the Levi-Civita
connection associated with @xmath .

One can now compute the momenta conjugate to the ADM variables:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (9)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

The momenta @xmath and @xmath conjugate to the Lagrange multipliers
@xmath and @xmath vanish and are therefore primary constraints. The
equation defining the momentum @xmath conjugate to @xmath is equivalent
to

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (11)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath . The action can now be rewritten ( 1 ) in terms of the
constraints and canonical variables:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (12)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (13)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (14)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

Having performed the Legendre transformation, the canonical Poisson
bracket relations can now be read from from the symplectic potential
term @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (15)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (16)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (17)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

The remainder of the Legendre transformed Lagrangian @xmath is
identified as the gravitational Hamiltonian, which is pure constraint.
From the canonical commutation relations ( 15 ), one can compute the
brackets of the constraints with each other:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (18a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (18b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (18c)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where I have adopted units such that @xmath . It is evident from ( 18 )
that the constraints form a closed algebra, and are therefore said to be
“first-class.” However, it is also clear that the right hand side of (
18a ) depends on the inverse spatial metric @xmath —thus, the algebra of
constraints is said to have “structure functions” rather than structure
constants, since the algebra of constraints varies from point to point
in phase space [ 12 ] . The constraint algebra is therefore not an
ordinary Lie algebra—a fact which has been a stumbling block toward
understanding canonical general relativity in standard gauge-theoretic
terms. It will be shown in the following chapter that shape dynamics
avoids this complication.

## Chapter \thechapter Shape Dynamics

### 1 What is Shape Dynamics?

Shape dynamics is a classical, Hamiltonian theory of gravity in which
solutions are described by the time evolution of spatial
(three-dimensional Riemannian) conformal geometries [ 11 ] rather than
spacetime geometries as in general relativity. Remarkably, while the two
theories have different physical degrees of freedom and different gauge
redundancies, the dynamics of the two theories agree in a broad range of
circumstances.

While there are certainly some great advantages to the general
relativistic description of gravity over shape dynamics, most notably
that general relativity has a local Hamiltonian and a clear description
of test particle motion in the limit of no back-reaction relying solely
on the geometry of spacetime, shape dynamics with its peculiar non-local
Hamiltonian has some advantages as well. The pure-constraint structure
of ADM Hamiltonian has the well-known problem that it entangles dynamics
with gauge transformations for the simple reason that time-evolution can
be achieved by performing a transformation of the time variable. On the
other hand, shape dynamics has a vastly restricted class of allowable
time variables, leading to a clear separation between gauge
transformations and physical time-evolution. Additionally, shape
dynamics has the benefit that the constraint algebra does not vary from
point to point of phase space—it is a bona-fide Lie algebra. Both of
these features have raised hopes that the shape dynamics description of
gravity might be more amenable to canonical quantization than the
general relativistic description, although it must be admitted that
these hopes are so far largely unfulfilled.

The canonical variables of shape dynamics are given by a Riemannian
metric @xmath and its conjugate momentum @xmath . It is instructive to
compare shape dynamics with the canonical formulation of general
relativity due to Arnowitt, Deser and Misner (ADM) [ 13 ] summarized in
the preceding chapter. In the ADM formalism, the gauge symmetries are
spatial diffeomorphism and (on–shell) refoliation invariance.
Refoliation invariance allows one to transform from a solution on one
family of spacelike hypersurfaces to a physically equivalent solution on
another. Shape dynamics does not possess refoliation invariance; the
solutions are described by the evolution of a conformal class of
three-dimensional Riemannian geometries with respect to a time parameter
that is fixed (up to monotonic reparemetrizations @xmath ).

Rather than refoliation invariance, the equations of motion of shape
dynamics are invariant under local scale transformations of the spatial
metric. The result is a theory which possesses different gauge
symmetries than general relativity, but which is nevertheless
generically locally equivalent to it. Local equivalence holds in the
sense that around a generic point in a solution to Einstein’s equations
there is a local patch which can be directly mapped onto a shape
dynamics solution, and vice-versa. The mapping is achieved by
simultaneously applying (partial) gauge fixings on each theory [ 14 ] .

Local scale transformations (here called spatial Weyl transformations)
are generated by the trace of the momentum @xmath . The statement that
spatial Weyl transformations are a gauge symmetry of shape dynamics ¹ ¹
1 The full set of Weyl transformations are easier to implement in case
one has a non-closed spatial manifold. In case the manifold is closed,
shape dynamics is constructed with the group of Weyl transformations
that preserve the total volume of space. is translated in the Dirac
constraint formalism into @xmath being a first class constraint on the
phase space of shape dynamics. It is only for solutions of ADM for which
one can find a global foliation in maximal slicing– i.e. that for which
@xmath on each hypersurface– that ADM can be dual to shape dynamics. For
certain important cases, such as the ones investigated in this thesis,
this is not the case.

For this reason the notion of a line element is carefully distinguished
from that of a spacetime metric, the former being viewed as an ansatz to
construct the latter which is successful only when the line element is
non-degenate. This is because shape dynamics does not possess spacetime
diffeomorphism invariance, as I have stressed above. A reconstructed
solution always exists and gives rise to a line element in the maximal
foliation, but in many circumstances the line element will not form a
non-degenerate, or a non-singular, spacetime metric.

The most straightforward way to construct shape dynamics is to make use
of a tool called the “linking theory” that serves as a theoretical
bridge between the ADM formulation of general relativity and shape
dynamics. One starts with the ADM phase space, and then extends this
phase space by a new pair of conjugate variables @xmath . In more
concrete terms, one begins with the ADM action, and perform the
canonical embedding into the phase space of the linking theory defined
by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (19)
     @xmath      (20)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the spatial metric induced on a constant- @xmath
hypersurface, and @xmath is its conjugate momentum. This procedure
yields the action of the linking theory, which now possesses not only
the transformed ADM constraints which generate on-shell refoliations and
spatial diffeomorphisms, but also a new “conformal constraint” which
generates spatial Weyl transformations. In order to obtain shape
dynamics, one then imposes the gauge fixing condition @xmath , which
reproduces the original phase space @xmath . The resulting theory
depends on the field @xmath , but @xmath is no longer a dynamical
variable. One can show that as a result of performing this phase space
reduction, the scalar constraint @xmath is no longer first class with
respect to the diffeomorphism constraint @xmath and the conformal
constraint @xmath which are the only remaining first class constraints
in shape dynamics. The result is a theory which, loosely speaking, is
defined on a fixed maximal foliation, where the conformal constraint
@xmath can be identified with the maximal slicing condition commonly
used for finding valid initial data in the ADM formulation of general
relativity. What distinguishes shape dynamics from ADM general
relativity in maximal slicing is that the role of the gauge fixing
conditions and constraints have been reversed— @xmath is now viewed as a
first class constraint generating spatial Weyl transformations rather
than as a gauge-fixing condition on the ADM phase space. For more
details on the construction and historical development of shape dynamics
see [ 11 , 15 , 14 , 16 , 17 ] . It is worth noting that the form of the
constraints and equations of motion for shape dynamics differ somewhat
depending on the spatial topology. Throughout this paper asymptotically
flat boundary conditions are assumed on a spatially non-compact topology
as in [ 15 ] . For details on the spatially compact case see e.g. [ 11 ]
. Readers seeking additional background on shape dynamics should refer
to [ 11 , 18 , 16 , 19 , 20 , 21 , 22 ]

### 2 Construction of Shape Dynamics from the Linking Theory

Before continuing to the main results concerning shape dynamic black
holes, it is worthwhile to review the construction of shape dynamics for
asymptotically flat spatial manifolds presented in [ 18 ] and elaborated
in [ 15 ] . One begins with the standard canonical formulation of
general relativity. The canonical form of the Einstein-Hilbert action is
given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (21)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

where @xmath is the momentum canonically conjugate to @xmath , @xmath is
the metric induced on @xmath by @xmath , @xmath is the outward pointing
normal vector of @xmath , @xmath is the trace of the extrinsic curvature
of @xmath embedded in @xmath , and @xmath and @xmath are the lapse
function and shift vector. The quantities @xmath and @xmath are the
scalar constraint (or “Hamiltonian constraint”) and the diffeomorphism
constraint (or “momentum constraint”), defined by ( 18 ).

The scalar constraint @xmath generates refoliations of spacetime
provided the equations of motion are satisfied, and the diffeomorphism
constraint @xmath generates foliation-preserving spatial
diffeomorphisms.

The next step in the construction of shape dynamics is to extend the
phase space of canonical general relativity by a scalar field @xmath and
its canonically conjugate momentum @xmath , where @xmath plays the role
of a “conformal factor” satisfying the fall-off condition @xmath .
Together with the new first class constraint @xmath , the addition of
these new canonical variables trivially embeds canonical general
relativity into the extended phase space @xmath .

To obtain a non-trivial embedding, one then performs the canonical
transformation

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The Hamiltonian for the extended phase space can be written in terms of
the canonically transformed first class constraints:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (22)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the lapse function, @xmath is the shift vector, @xmath
is a Lagrange multiplier for the Weyl constraint @xmath , @xmath is the
Gibbons-Hawking-York boundary term (the surface integral in ( 59 )), and
@xmath plays an important role in defining the globally conserved
charges in shape dynamics [ 15 ] . The system described by this
Hamiltonian is known as the linking theory , as it provides a link
between canonical general relativity and shape dynamics [ 14 ] . In
order to obtain shape dynamics from the linking theory, one imposes the
gauge fixing condition @xmath . The only constraint whose Poisson
bracket with this condition is weakly non-vanishing is @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (23)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the scalar constraint smeared with the lapse function
@xmath . Equation ( 23 ) implies the so-called lapse-fixing equation ² ²
2 The quantity @xmath appearing in the lapse fixing equation is the
DeWitt supermetric defined by:
@xmath
:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (24)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the scalar curvature of @xmath , and @xmath denotes
“weak equality”—i.e. equality up to an additive term that vanishes when
the constraints are satisfied. The solution @xmath of the lapse-fixing
equation ³ ³ 3 For a physical interpretation of the solution of ( 24 )
as an effective “experienced lapse” for weak matter field fluctuations
see [ 22 ] . For a related discussion of how spacetime emerges from
coupling shape dynamics to matter see [ 23 ] . ( 24 ) is unique up to a
choice of boundary conditions on the lapse. This will be discussed in
further detail in chapter A Tour Through Shape Dynamic Black Holes .

After imposing the gauge fixing condition @xmath and working out the
consistency conditions in the algebra of constraints, we are left with
the first class constraints @xmath , @xmath and @xmath and the second
class constraints @xmath and @xmath . Of the remaining first class
constraints, @xmath generates, foliation-preserving time
reparametrizations of the form @xmath , @xmath generates diffeomorphisms
acting on the conformal spatial metric and it conjugate momentum, and
@xmath generates spatial Weyl transformations. To summarize, the total
Hamiltonian for shape dynamics is given by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (25)
  -- -------- -- ------

which leads to the first-order equations of motion:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (26)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                       @xmath      
                       @xmath      
                                   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

The non-vanishing part of the constraint algebra for shape dynamics is
given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (28)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (29)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

As claimed in the previous chapter, the constraint algebra for shape
dynamics does not vary from point to point of phase space as it does in
canonical general relativity.

At this stage, it would be conscientious to admit some shortcomings of
the formalism presented above. Since the solution of the lapse-fixing
equation @xmath is obtained by inverting a second-order differential
operator, @xmath is non-local and hence @xmath is also non-local. For
the same reason, it is typically a non-trivial problem even to write
down the explicit form of the shape dynamics Hamiltonian for all but the
simplest initial data.

Also, while the asymptotically flat formulation of shape dynamics
described above is very useful for studying isolated systems, it should
be thought of as an approximation to the more fundamental, spatially
compact formulation of the theory. In that spirit, the solutions studied
here should be thought of as approximately describing nearly empty
regions of a much larger, spatially compact universe. The primary
drawback of the asymptotically flat framework is that the solutions
depend on a choice of boundary conditions, which spoils some of the
relationalism that the full, spatially compact theory boasts [ 24 ] .
Moreover, it is not yet clear what physical role the degeneracy
introduced by the freedom to choose boundary conditions plays in the
theory. The reader should particularly keep this point in mind when
reading chapter A Tour Through Shape Dynamic Black Holes .

## Chapter \thechapter Static and Rotating Black Hole Solutions for
Shape Dynamics

Despite the local equivalence of shape dynamics and general relativity,
there nevertheless exists the possibility that corresponding solutions
of shape dynamics and general relativity may have different global
structures. In particular, it was recently shown in [ 25 ] that while
shape dynamics possesses a unique asymptotically flat, spherically
symmetric solution that agrees with general relativity near spatial
infinity, the solution differs physically from the Schwarzschild
solution at and within the event horizon. This chapter closely follows [
26 ] in which the author, in collaboration with H. Gomes, generalized
these results to the case of stationary, axisymmetric solutions, and
explicitly derived the rotating black hole solution for shape dynamics.
I will discuss how the solutions are related to the corresponding
exterior general relativity solutions, and how they depart from one
another at the horizon. Finally, I will make contact with the
spherically symmetric solution by considering the zero angular momentum
limit of the rotating solution.

Before considering the axisymmetric case, it is instructive to review
the main results of [ 25 ] for the spherically symmetric solution of
shape dynamics.

### 3 The isotropic line element

The Birkhoff theorem for general relativity states that the only vacuum
solution that is spherically symmetric is in the isometry class of the
Schwarzschild line element. For shape dynamics, an analogous theorem
exists, but there one must also provide boundary conditions on the
dynamical variables. By reconstructing the line element one obtains:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (30)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath and @xmath are the usual angular coordinates. The radial
coordinate @xmath is related to the Schwarzschild radial coordinate,
@xmath only for @xmath . In that regime the line elements are isometric,
and the relation between the two radial coordinates is given by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (31)
  -- -------- -- ------

At @xmath , the coordinate transformation breaks down. The line element
( 30 ) is degenerate at the horizon, where the 4-volume of the
reconstructed metric collapses. This collapse is a
coordinate-independent statement from the point of view of shape
dynamics, as the vanishing of the metric determinant @xmath cannot be
avoided by any combination of spatial diffeomorphisms and spatial Weyl
transformations. Indeed, let M be the reconstructed spacetime associated
with ( 30 ) and let @xmath . Now, suppose @xmath such that @xmath with
@xmath everywhere on M. But since @xmath on @xmath , and @xmath , we
must have @xmath on M. But then @xmath is not differentiable on @xmath
and we reach a contradiction. This defect in the spacetime view,
however, does not afflict a shape dynamics interpretation, since shape
dynamics does not require the emergence of a non-singular reconstructed
spacetime for a solution to be well-defined—the spatial conformal
geometry (and it’s conjugate momentum) are perfectly smooth.

An observer in the asymptotically flat region will not see any
difference between this solution and a Schwarzschild black hole at the
classical level. Nonetheless, the fact that there is indeed a physical
difference can be seen directly by observing differences in physical
statements made about general relativistic vacuum spacetime solutions.
For instance, a simple calculation shows that the infalling radial
geodesic takes infinite proper time to reach @xmath [ 27 ] . The proper
time along an ingoing radial geodesic is therefore unbounded in the
interior of the shape dynamics solution in contrast to the interior of
the Schwarzschild solution in general relativity in which the proper
time along ingoing radial geodesics is bounded from above. It must be
emphasized at this point that these arguments are somewhat heuristic.
Timelike geodesics are not particularly natural objects to study in
shape dynamics, and we refer to them only because of the close analogy
between shape dynamics and general relativity. In fact, when viewed as a
solution of general relativity, this solution has a delta function
contribution to the Ricci scalar at the horizon, and as a consequence of
the vanishing of @xmath the inverse metric @xmath is ill defined on the
horizon. On the other hand, the geodesic equation makes explicit use of
the inverse metric, so while timelike geodesics are still well-defined
across the horizon as the piece-wise smooth curves in the reconstructed
spacetime maximizing the proper time, they are not well-defined as the
solution of a differential equation in a neighborhood of the horizon.
Despite the heuristic nature of these arguments, we will take the point
of view that since the canonical variables are smooth everywhere, the
solution is non-singular from the point of view of shape dynamics.

Furthermore, the line element ( 30 ) can be shown to form from a
thin-shell collapse [ 28 ] . This is possible because from the shape
dynamics perspective it is reduced phase space continuity of the
solutions that is fundamental, not spacetime continuity. If one demands
spacetime continuity, one recovers the usual Schwarzschild solution, if
one demands reduced phase space continuity of the solution, one recovers
a collapse asymptoting to the line element ( 30 ).

Another interesting property that will persist in the axisymmetric case
is that the transformation @xmath can be checked to leave the form of
the line element ( 30 ) invariant. Thus the solution has the property of
inversion , associated to conformal invariance (as for instance in the
method of images as applied to spherical conducting shells in
electrodynamics). The presence of this inversion symmetry, along with
asymptotic flatness, is enough to see that there cannot be a physical
singularity at @xmath in the shape dynamic solution.

It is natural to ask if this singularity-avoiding property persists in
all solutions of shape dynamics. It is worth noting that spacetimes in
maximal slicing have a well-known singularity avoidance property for
their Eulerian observers [ 29 ] . ⁴ ⁴ 4 For the constant mean curvature
case relevant when the spatial manifold is compact, one can still obtain
cosmological, or “crunching” singularities. Due to the close
relationship between shape dynamics and ADM in maximal slicing, there is
good reason to think that shape dynamics might share this
singularity-avoiding property. One of the purposes of this paper is to
show that at least in the case of axisymmetric solutions this is indeed
the case.

### 4 Stationary, Axisymmetric Solutions

We will consider the stationary axisymmetric line element:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (32)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are the lapse, shift and conformal
factor respectively, @xmath is a function that determines the entire
spatial conformal geometry, and all functions depend exclusively on
@xmath and @xmath . Strictly speaking @xmath is the shift vector but we
will from time to time abuse language and refer to the scalar @xmath
simply as “the shift” since it is often more convenient to work directly
with this quantity.

We would like to show that the constant- @xmath hypersurfaces of the
line element ( 112 ) induce a maximal slicing, i.e., that the momentum
conjugate to the spatial metric has vanishing trace, @xmath . To this
end, consider Hamilton’s equation for the time derivative of the spatial
metric, which takes the form

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (33)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath denotes the lie derivative of the spatial metric along the
shift vector. Since the spatial metric is independent of @xmath we have
{dmath} L _ ξ q_ij = ∂_i ξ q_ ϕ j + ∂_j ξ q_i ϕ = 2ΩΨ δ ^ ϕ _(i ξ _,j)

where we have introduced the round parentheses for symmetrization of
indices and the comma for coordinate derivatives. Putting ( 4 ) into (
33 ), and noting that the spatial metric is independent of @xmath , we
obtain

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (34)
  -- -------- -- ------

Contracting with @xmath yields:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath               
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (35)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

Noting that @xmath is independent of @xmath , we find that

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (36)
  -- -------- -- ------

Thus we find that whenever a general relativity solution can be written
as ( 112 ), either it is maximally sliced or @xmath . We will assume
that @xmath and @xmath are bounded (have finite values on compact sets).
If furthermore @xmath can vanish only on singular subsets of @xmath ,
then it follows that @xmath everywhere except at most a singular subset
of @xmath . Continuity of @xmath then demands that it is zero everywhere
in space.

Furthermore, any stationary, axisymmetric solution of Einstein’s
equations can be put into the form ( 112 ) [ 30 ] , so in principle the
line element can be formed by a reconstruction of a shape dynamics
solution. We will see in section 5.2 that indeed there are no
obstructions on the shape dynamics side of the duality.

### 5 Rotating Black Hole Solution

#### 5.1 The Solution

The Kerr spacetime is a stationary, axisymmetric solution to Einstein’s
equations. As such, it must be possible (at least locally) to cast it in
the form ( 112 ). Indeed, it was shown in [ 30 ] that the Kerr metric
can be put in the form

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (37)
  -- -------- -- ------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (38)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and where @xmath and @xmath are the
mass and angular momentum. It is easy to see that the metric written in
terms of these (prolate spheroidal) coordinates is in the form ( 112 ),
so it can be mapped directly onto a shape dynamics solution via ADM
decomposition. The lapse and shift can be read from of the line element:

  -- -- -- ------
           (39)
  -- -- -- ------

Putting ( 39 ) into ( 34 ) and solving for @xmath , we find

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (40)
  -- -------- -- ------

It is easy to see that at the horizon, where @xmath , the lapse goes to
zero. One might then worry that @xmath might diverge there, violating
continuity of the phase space variables. However, we should note that
@xmath goes as @xmath , so clearly the prefactor in the ( 40 ) goes to
zero at the horizon.

Since it is more familiar, we would like to show that ( 37 ) is locally
diffeomorphic to the Kerr metric written in Boyer-Lindquist coordinates.
The coordinate transformation

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (41)
  -- -------- -- ------

brings ( 37 ) into the desired form:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (42)
  -- -------- -- ------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (43)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

It is interesting to note that the change of coordinates ( 41 ) is
purely spatial, so it would seem that the two forms are equally valid
from the point of view of shape dynamics. This is not the case, however,
since the transformation fails to be differentiable at the event
horizon, which is conveniently labeled in prolate spheroidal coordinates
by @xmath . The transformation is therefore not globally a
diffeomorphism, which is compatible with the fact that the ADM
decomposition of the Kerr metric in Boyer-Lindquist coordinates
constitutes a shape dynamics solution only outside the event horizon.
The solution written in prolate spheroidal coordinates possesses no such
deficiency, and represents a complete solution of the shape dynamics
equations of motion, even though it too breaks down at the event horizon
when viewed from the perspective of general relativity, as we will see
in following section.

#### 5.2 Completeness of the Solution

It is fairly easy to see that the Kerr metric written in prolate
spheroidal coordinates breaks down at the event horizon from the point
of view of general relativity. To make this breakdown explicit, we need
only consider the determinant of the spacetime metric.

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (45)
  -- -------- -- ------

Clearly, @xmath goes to zero at @xmath while @xmath and @xmath remain
finite, indicating that @xmath goes to zero at @xmath and consequently
that the spacetime metric is noninvertible there. This shows that the
Kerr metric written in terms of prolate spheroidal coordinates posesses
a coordinate singularity at the event horizon, @xmath . This is then not
a complete solution from the point of view of general relativity, but
must be regarded as a solution only in the region outside of the event
horizon. This is not the case, however, from the point of view of shape
dynamics, where the conformal spatial geometry, rather than the
spacetime geometry, is considered fundamental. It can be immediately
seen that the determinant of the spatial metric is given by @xmath for
all real values of @xmath , and diverges only as @xmath . This
represents a rather dramatic departure from the general relativistic
solution which requires an entirely different interior to the event
horizon, possessing well known technical problems such as physical
singularities and closed timelike curves.

#### 5.3 Shape Dynamic Horizons: Classical Firewalls?

It is interesting to note that while the breakdown in spacetime geometry
that occurs at the horizon is not forbidden by shape dynamics (in fact,
it is required ), it does have some interesting consequences for
infalling observers. The well known “no drama” result of general
relativity might not hold in shape dynamics because the equivalence
principle is an emergent property of shape dynamics, not an axiom, and
this property fails to emerge precisely at the event horizon. To better
understand the nature of the horizon, consider the following argument.

Let us assume that in the interior and exterior regions, the
trajectories of test observers are described by timelike geodesics of
the reconstructed line element. Since there are no outgoing timelike
geodesics in the exterior region that originate in the interior region,
reflection symmetry ⁵ ⁵ 5 We assume that a generic stationary shape
dynamic black hole will possess inversion, or reflection symmetry about
the horizon. Over-extreme black holes, which do not possess horizons are
exempt from these considerations. There is some evidence to suggest that
this assumption may be violated for boundary conditions other than
asymptotic flatness, but as of yet no such solutions have been found. We
will show in section 7 that the rotating shape dynamic black hole does
possess reflection symmetry. seems to demand that there are no ingoing
timelike geodesics originating in the exterior region. It would appear
then, that the horizon must be interpreted as the location where
timelike geodesics terminate in both regions. This is not the case,
however, as can be seen by noting that the lapse goes to zero at the
horizon, and becomes negative in the interior region. As a result, the
timelike geodesics in the interior region should be interpreted in a
time-reversed fashion [ 27 ] . Only in this peculiar manner can the
ingoing geodesics in the exterior region be continued to ingoing
geodesics in the interior region.

The consequences of the argument presented above can be significant for
infalling observers. Rather than passing through the horizon
uneventfully, infalling observers might be able to perform a measurement
to determine the instant at which they pass into the time-reversed
parallel universe. Indeed, it can be shown that the expansion scalar of
a congruence of time-like geodesics suffers a finite discontinuity,
changing signs at the horizon [ 27 ] . Although the expansion scalar of
an Eulerian congruence (i.e. one that is foliation orthogonal in the
reconstructed metric) is just the rate of change of the spatial volume
element, and thus can be argued to be pure gauge, it is conceivable that
for non Eulerian observers, and for instance for shear discontinuities
as opposed to expansion, one would obtain a gauge-invariant statement
regarding a discontinuity at the horizon. This might provide infalling
observers with a well-defined signal of having crossed the horizon. A
congruence of infalling observers recording measurements of the volume
and shape of a co-moving ball of matter will find that the recorded
values decrease up to the horizon, at which point the co-moving ball
will “bounce” outward, in an observable manner by the congruence. In
fact, even if one considers just the expansion scalar, since it has a
finite discontinuity at the horizon, there should be no continuous
spatial diffeomorphism or conformal transformation that will remove this
discontinuity. Hence, while different observers might disagree about the
details of the measurement, it is possible that all observe the volume
bounce. This matter should be further investigated in the context of the
infalling shell of dust.

Since the shape dynamic description of stationary black holes requires a
violation of the equivalence principle at the event horizon, it is an
exciting possibility that quantum shape dynamic black holes may change
the picture of the firewall paradox [ 31 ] . It is too early to tell at
this writing what, if any, insights shape dynamics can contribute to
this debate, but the author is currently investigating the properties of
shape dynamic horizons in this context.

### 6 Alternative Gauge-Fixing

#### 6.1 Equations of Motion

The spatial conformal invariance of shape dynamics allows us to cast the
solution in an alternative form by extracting a common scalar function
from the spatial metric. The transformed metric and conformal factor are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (46)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

where in the second line of ( 46 ) we have defined @xmath . We know from
the gauge symmetries of shape dynamics that the transformed solution
must also be a solution to the shape dynamics equations of motion. For
the spatially noncompact case, the equations of motion read

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (47)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                                
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is a lagrange multiplier associated with the conformal
constraint, and @xmath satisfies the Lichnerowicz-York equation:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (49)
  -- -------- -- ------

We can eliminate @xmath by putting ( 46 ) into ( 47 ), taking the trace,
and requiring that @xmath , which immediately yields @xmath . Putting
this back into ( 47 ), we find that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (50)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

While the equations of motion are somewhat more complicated in this
gauge, it can be shown that the transformed solutions ( 46 ), ( 6.1 ) do
indeed satisfy ( 47 ), ( 6.1 ). One key advantage of this alternative
gauge fixing is that the spatial metric now possesses only one
functional degree of freedom, @xmath . Now the entire spatial geometry
can be expressed in terms of @xmath and its derivatives alone. This
simplified form of the metric can be exploited for the purposes of
analyzing the spatial conformal structure of the solution. In
particular, it wll aid us in searching for singularities in the
conformal structure.

#### 6.2 Conformal Regularity of the Horizon

The simplified form of the metric arising from our change of conformal
gauge produces a correspondingly simplified connection and curvature
tensor. The interested reader is referred to appendix A for the
calculation of these quantities. We define the Cotton tensor by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (51)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath denotes covariant differentiation with respect to the
spatial metric. The rank-two Cotton-York tensor, @xmath , can be defined
by its relation to the Cotton tensor:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (52)
  -- -------- -- ------

The Cotton tensor contains all of the local information on the conformal
geometry of a three-dimensional Riemannian manifold [ 29 ] in much the
same way that the Weyl tensor (which vanishes identically in three
dimensions) captures local information on the conformal geometry in
higher dimensions. Like the Weyl tensor in higher dimensions, the Cotton
tensor is completely traceless, conformally invariant, and vanishes if
and only if the manifold is conformally flat. From ( 143 ), ( 145 ), and
( 52 ) we see that if @xmath diverges then there must be a singularity
in the Cotton tensor. A singularity in the Cotton tensor would signal
the presence of a breakdown of the conformal geometry, i.e it would be a
physical singularity from the perspective of shape dynamics. It is
therefore useful to show that @xmath is finite as a heuristic argument
that no such physical singularities are present. In this sense, although
@xmath is not strictly speaking conformally invariant (it transforms as
@xmath under @xmath ), it can be thought of in analogy with the
Kretschmann invariant in general relativity. Moreover, if we assume that
@xmath is bounded in the sense described in section 4 , then the
presence of conformal covariance as opposed to conformal invariance is
essentially irrelevant for the purposes of identifying singularities in
the conformal structure.

Intuition suggests that the points we should scrutinize most carefully
are the horizon and the limit as @xmath , since we have already noted
some peculiaraties about the former, and the latter seems analogous to
the singularity in general relativity. We should note, however, that the
latter is isomorphic to spatial infinity, so asymptotic flatness ensures
that there are no conformal singularities there.

To help simplify the calculation for the horizon, we can note that since
@xmath is an even function of @xmath , any odd number of @xmath
derivatives acting on @xmath will be zero when evaluated on the horizon.
Taking this into account we can put ( 145 ) in the simplified form

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (53)
  -- -------- -- ------

At the horizon, we have

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (54)
  -- -------- -- ------

which is nonzero except on the axis of rotation @xmath . We will
therefore have to carefully analyze the limits as we approach these
points. A lengthy but straightforward calculation yields the other
ingredients of ( 53 ):

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (55)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

Clearly, none of the functions in ( 6.2 ) can diverge for any values of
@xmath . Moreover, if we insert ( 6.2 ) back into ( 53 ), we see that
@xmath at @xmath and @xmath . So despite the peculiar behavior of the
horizon when viewed from the four-dimensional perspective, we do not see
any conformal singularities manifesting themselves in the Cotton-York
tensor at the horizon.

### 7 Zero Angular Momentum Limit

Finally, it will be demonstrated that in the zero angular momentum limit
@xmath of the solution presented in section 5 , we recover the
spherically symmetric solution ( 30 ) presented in [ 25 ] . From the
definitions of @xmath and @xmath , we can see that @xmath implies @xmath
, @xmath . Putting these limits into ( 12 ) we obtain

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (56)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- ------

Inserting ( 7 ) into ( 37 ) gives the spherically symmetric line element
written in terms of prolate spheroidal coordinates.

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (57)
  -- -------- -- ------

One can already see the isotropic character of the solution as written
in terms of prolate spheroidal coordinates. In order to obtain the form
of the solution presented in [ 25 ] we perform the spatial
diffeomorphism @xmath which can be checked to reproduce ( 30 ), as
desired. It is important to note that unlike ( 41 ), this transformation
and its inverse are differentiable everwhere, so it is a global
diffeomorphism– i.e. the transformation is pure gauge. It is interesting
to note that the inversion symmetry of the spherically symmetric
solution takes on a simplified form when written in terms of prolate
spheroidal coordinates. In this case the inversion symmetry is
manifested by the fact that the line element is an even function of
@xmath . Indeed, this is the case even before we take the limit @xmath ,
so we conclude that the axisymmetric solution also possesses an
inversion symmetry under @xmath . This is a nice representation of the
symmetry since it emphasizes that what we are doing is reflecting about
the event horizon @xmath into the corresponding point of the
time-reversed mirror universe.

### 8 Discussion

The most general local form of stationary, axisymmetric vacuum solutions
to the shape dynamics equations of motion have been derived and this
result was used to obtain the rotating black hole solution for shape
dynamics. The rotating black hole solution preserves many of the
striking features of the spherically symmetric case. It possesses a
powerful inversion symmetry about the horizon where it does not form a
spacetime, and it seems to completely avoid physical singularities. The
inversion symmetry and singularity avoidance are perhaps even more
surprising in the rotating case, since the corresponding general
relativity solution is so complicated in the interior region, possessing
a ringlike physical singularity, closed timelike curves and an inner
Cauchy horizon. The shape dynamics solution, by contrast, avoids all of
these difficulties by creating at the event horizon the time-reversed
mirror universe that allows the matter source to expand out to an inner
spatial infinity and avoid collapsing to a singularity.

The extreme and over-extreme Kerr solutions can be mapped onto their
shape dynamic counterparts using the same arguments presented above.
These solutions are also presented in [ 30 ] in the form ( 112 ), making
the mapping to shape dynamics almost trivial. In the overextreme case,
the four dimensional line element associated with the shape dynamics
solution is globally related to Boyer-Lindquist coordinates by a spatial
diffeomorphism. It is not yet clear whether the naked singularity
persists in the shape solutions—it is likely that this singularity is
fundamentally four dimensional in nature and does not appear in shape
dynamics.

Probably the most exciting feature of the black hole solutions for shape
dynamics is that they do not form a spacetime at the horizon. Susskind
and Maldacena have argued [ 32 ] that there is close relationship
between entanglement and (non-traversable) wormholes in the context of a
possible resolution to the firewall paradox. In shape dynamics, the
stationary black hole solutions seem to be traversable wormholes ⁶ ⁶ 6 A
more definitive answer to the question of traversability can only be
answered by coupling matter degrees of freedom. This has been done in
the spherically symmetric case for a collapsing thin shell of matter [
28 ] . that suggest two sources for a possible resolution to this
debate: black holes are correctly described by shape dynamics, and there
is no paradox because the equivalence principle breaks down at the
horizon and/or there is no singularity. The obvious next steps in these
considerations are to look at the semiclassical behavior of these
solutions, to analyze their thermodynamic properties, and to consider
the behavior of quantum fields in the presence of a stationary shape
dynamic black hole background.

The fact that the solution is well-behaved at the horizon gives it an
advantage over similar traversable wormhole models in general
relativity, which are generically unstable. Furthermore, since the
latter require a delta function contribution to the curvature scalar at
the horizon [ 33 ] , these solutions must be regarded as singular
spacetimes. Moreover, if traversable wormholes admit a more consistent
quantum mechanical interpretation than the standard stationary black
hole solutions in general relativity, then since these solutions arise
naturally in shape dynamics ⁷ ⁷ 7 It should be noted that these seem to
be the only stationary black hole solutions that arise naturally in
shape dynamics. The singularity avoidance theorems for Eulerian
observers in maximal slicing make it implausible that anything like
ordinary Schwarzschild or Kerr solutions could be made to satisfy the
shape dynamics equations of motion everywhere. this might be a hint that
shape dynamics is a more consistent classical theory of gravity than
general relativity for the purposes of quantization. As a last remark,
let us mention that since the shape dynamics solutions are
indistinguishable from the corresponding general relativity solutions in
the asymptotically flat region, they are on equally solid ground from
the point of view of current empirical astrophysical observations.

## Chapter \thechapter Towards Shape Dynamic Black Hole Entropy

It has been shown that the simplest asymptotically flat black hole
solutions admitted by shape dynamics disagree with general relativity at
and within their event horizons, and that a smooth spacetime geometry
fails to emerge on the horizon. Moreover, the areas of the horizons in
the shape dynamic black hole solutions are not invariant under spatial
Weyl transformations. The fact that these areas are not gauge-invariant
quanitities has cast considerable doubt on the prospect of recovering
the famous result that the entropy of a black hole is equal to one
quarter of the horizon area. The purpose of this chapter, which is
closely based on a paper by the author and V. Shyam [ 34 ] is to show
that by carefully treating the horizon as an interior spatial boundary
and analyzing the boundary terms needed to obtain well-defined equations
of motion in the sense first described by Regge and Teitelboim [ 35 ] ,
one can indeed recover the result that @xmath for a shape dynamic black
hole.

This is an important result for shape dynamics in light of the fact that
the proportionality of black hole entropy and horizon area has been
derived independently by state-counting arguments in a diverse array of
approaches to quantum gravity each of which count very different states
to arrive at the same result. The fact that these very different
approaches universally yield the same result is something of an
interesting problem in and of itself, and it has been argued by Carlip [
36 , 37 ] and others that this “problem of universality” may arise as a
result of a near-horizon conformal symmetry in the Einstein-Hilbert
action. At any rate, the ubiquity of the thermodynamic properties of
black holes has been so thoroughly demonstrated at the theoretical
level, that while we have yet to detect Hawking radiation by direct
observation, one would rightly be deeply skeptical of any theory of
gravity in which black holes do not admit this standard thermodynamic
interpretation.

### 9 Boundary Hamiltonian, Euclidean Gravity and Black Hole Entropy

It was first pointed out by Regge and Teitelboim [ 35 ] that in order to
properly formulate canonical general relativity with spatially
non-compact boundary conditions, one must add a boundary term @xmath to
the pure constraint ADM Hamiltonian @xmath so that the total Hamiltonian
is given by the sum

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (58)
  -- -------- -- ------

If one neglects the boundary term @xmath no well-defined equations of
motion are generated by @xmath —only the total Hamiltonian @xmath yields
well-defined equations of motion. This is essentially due to the fact
that when calculating Poisson brackets on a manifold with boundary, one
cannot discard the boundary terms that arise due to integration by
parts. Rather, these terms must be canceled with appropriate boundary
terms so that Hamilton’s equations can be recovered. Moreover, given
mild restrictions on the fall-off of the surface deformations, the
boundary term @xmath can be identified with the total energy of the
system. Let @xmath be a constant- @xmath hypersurface with boundary
@xmath . Including all boundary terms, the ADM action can be written as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (59)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

where @xmath (which is held fixed, i.e. @xmath ) is the metric induced
on @xmath by @xmath , @xmath is the outward pointing normal vector of
@xmath , @xmath is the trace of the extrinsic curvature of @xmath
embedded in @xmath , and @xmath and @xmath are the lapse function and
shift vector.

The connection between gravity and thermodynamics was first proposed by
Bekenstein in 1972 [ 38 ] and confirmed by Hawking in 1974 through the
discovery of thermal black hole radiation (Hawking radiation) [ 39 ] .
In 1976, Gibbons and Hawking introduced the Euclidean canonical
formalism in [ 40 ] . In this work, it was shown that the path integral
associated with the Euclideanized gravitational action has the exact
form of a canonical partition function at inverse temperature @xmath
where the path integral is taken over all field configurations that are
periodic with period @xmath . From the lowest order contributions to the
canonical partition function, one can then obtain all of the
thermodynamic quantities associated with the horizons of classical
solutions to the Einstein field equations, including the entropy.

Since these seminal works, many other approaches to black hole
thermodynamics have been developed. Here, I will make use of an approach
developed by Padmanabhan [ 41 ] that identifies the boundary action (or
Hamiltonian) evaluated on the horizon of a stationary black hole with
the entropy (or the temperature times the entropy) of the black hole. In
this approach, one considers the fact that horizons generically appear
for some families of observers (such as accelerated observers in flat
spacetime, and Eulerian observers in the exterior of the Schwarzschild
spacetime) but not for others (such as inertial observers in flat
spacetime or free-falling observers in the Schwarzschild spacetime). One
then argues that any family of observers should be able to use an action
principle that makes use only of the information available to those
observers. Since observers who see a horizon cannot receive information
from the other side of the horizon, the action integral for observers
who see horizons should only depend on the portion of the spacetime
outside the horizon. Since there is a “tracing out” of information about
what is on the other side of the horizon when one uses such a family of
observers, it is natural to identify the boundary term in the action
coming from the horizon with an entropy, and one indeed finds that for a
stationary horizon with @xmath , @xmath and @xmath where @xmath is the
surface gravity of the horizon, the boundary action equals one quarter
of the horizon area.

Now we would like to show that the same argument can be used to relate
the horizon contribution to the shape dynamics Hamiltonian with the
entropy of a shape dynamic black hole. The boundary Hamiltonian for
shape dynamics was derived in [ 15 ] and its variation was found to be

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (60)
  -- -------- -- ------

Eulerian observers ⁸ ⁸ 8 An Eulerian observer, also known as a
hypersurface orthogonal observer or zero angular momentum observer
(ZAMO), is an observer whose four-velocity @xmath is perpendicular to
@xmath , i.e @xmath , where @xmath is the volume form on @xmath . are
natural observers to choose in shape dynamics because they are at rest
with respect to the spatial geometry. These observers see a horizon in
stationary black hole solutions, so it is appropriate to include a
boundary contribution to the Hamiltonian from the horizon. For Eulerian
observers, one can use the same boundary conditions used in general
relativity: @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . When these boundary conditions
are imposed, the total variation of the boundary Hamiltonian becomes:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (61)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- ------

On the other hand,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (62)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

Equation ( 62 ) shows that the factor of @xmath appearing in the first
term of the last line of ( 61 ) should actually be a @xmath in order for
( 61 ) to be a total variation. It is absolutely essential that ( 61 )
be a total variation in order for the boundary conditions we imposed to
be consistent, since this term is by definition the variation of the
boundary contribution to the Hamiltonian. This suggests that we need to
impose additional boundary conditions on the conformal factor @xmath at
the horizon. An obvious choice is @xmath , @xmath since then we would
fully break Weyl invariance on the horizon, and our horizon Hamiltonian
would then be simply

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (63)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the same horizon area we would have found in general
relativity. Now, if we identify @xmath , @xmath , we find complete
agreement with the horizon thermodynamics of general relativity.

One might worry, however, that this condition is too restrictive. We
could consider restricting @xmath by requiring that it depend on @xmath
. For example, if we demand that @xmath for some constant @xmath .
However, this approach would require the conformal factor to transform
by a @xmath -dependent rescaling on the horizon, which can be shown to
be inconsistent with our boundary conditions at the level of the
constraints. The source of this inconsistency comes from the fact that
the bracket of the horizon Hamiltonian with the conformal constraint can
vanish only if @xmath , which implies that the spatial Weyl
transformations which are pure gauge in the presence of a horizon with
the boundary conditions we have specified are exactly those that
preserve the area of the horizon.

In anticipation of this restriction on the Weyl invariance of shape
dynamics in the presence of a horizon, we can obtain the same outcome as
if we had set @xmath without having to make quite such a rigid
restriction. Suppose we require that

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (64)
  -- -------- -- ------

If we further demand that @xmath lies in our solution space on the
horizon, so that we may recover a non-trivial intersection with GR, then
it is clear that what we are really demanding is not that @xmath be
fixed on the horizon, but rather that the allowed transformations of
@xmath are those that preserve the horizon area. With these additional
restrictions in place, we can integrate ( 61 ) to obtain

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (65)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath , @xmath is an arbitrary conformal factor satisfying the
usual asymptotically flat boundary conditions at spatial infinity, and
@xmath denotes the average over the horizon with respect to the induced
metric @xmath . Due to the area-preserving nature of the allowed Weyl
transformations, the horizon Hamiltonian can be written with or without
the smearing @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (66)
  -- -------- -- ------

which is identical the corresponding result for general relativity.
However, here we had to impose boundary conditions in two stages. First,
we imposed boundary conditions on the momentum, and on the lapse and its
normal derivative, in order to capture the essential features of a
horizon. Next, we were forced to impose boundary conditions on the
conformal factor as a consistency condition for the functional
integrability of the total boundary variation ( 60 ).

Next, we will show that the horizon Hamiltonian we have derived puts
restrictions on the smearing @xmath of the conformal constraint @xmath ,
by calculating @xmath and observing that it only vanishes for a certain
class of smearings @xmath . We find (see appendix B) that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (67)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

Since the horizon Hamiltonian is weakly non-vanishing, ( 67 ) tells us
that the bracket between the horizon Hamiltonian and the conformal
constraint cannot weakly vanish for arbitrary smearings @xmath . It is
possible to derive an elliptic differential equation for @xmath so that
( 67 ) vanishes, but this characterization of the allowed spatial Weyl
transformations is not particularly illuminating and technically
difficult to analyze. However, it is possible to “softly” modify the
constraints of theory in such a way that we can clearly show that in the
presence of a horizon satsfying the boundary conditions above, the
spatial Weyl transformations that are pure gauge are precisely those
that preserve the horizon area. This will be the subject of the
following section.

### 10 Modified Constraints and Area-Preserving Weyl Transformations

Another way to obtain a gauge-invariant horizon entropy for shape
dynamics is to softly modify the the conformal constraint in such a way
that the modification repects the boundary conditions and leaves the
horizon area invariant. The simplest realization of these conditions is
in writing the conformal constraint in the following manner:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (68)
  -- -------- -- ------

Here we have just rewritten the usual conformal constraint with the
addition of a new term which is identically zero on the interior
boundary due to the boundary conditions used to characterize the
horizon, i.e. given that @xmath the term within the angular brackets is
strongly equal to 0. Note that @xmath keeping in mind the boundary
condtitions imposed, so we are ensured that the constraint is not
altered in any violent manner. It is convenient to introduce the weakly
non-degenerate symplectic structure on the shape dynamics phase space to
ease our computations. The symplectic structure for shape dynamics is
defined by the two-form

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (69)
  -- -------- -- ------

The Hamiltonian vector field @xmath correponding to an arbitrary phase
space function @xmath is defined through the equation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The integral curves of the Hamiltonian vector field correpond to its
flow on phase space, and the vector field is identified with the
generator of infinitesimal transformations along said flow. When this
vector field corresponds to a first class constraint, it generates gauge
transformations along the orbits of this constraint on phase space. The
Hamiltonian vector field for the conformal transformations is thus given
by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (70)
  -- -------- -- ------

which satisifies the equation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus, the object given by ( 68 ) generates infinitesimal spatial Weyl
transformations on the shape dynamics phase space. A simple calculation
yields

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (71)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the area of the horizon. This unambiguously shows that
if the right form of the conformal constraint is chosen keeping in mind
the boundary conditions, the seemingly “soft” modification of the
constraint produces the correct flow on phase space. Given that the Weyl
transformations generated by the constraint given by ( 68 ) preserves
the horizon area, in terms of large spatial Weyl transformations, ( 71 )
is equivalent to the statement

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This implies for the variation of the conformal factor at the boundary
that:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (72)
  -- -------- -- ------

Going back to ( 61 ), we find that now,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as in general relativity, and from this, we can obtain the surface
Hamiltonian for the horizon @xmath Identifying the Hawking–Unruh
temperature @xmath the entropy is:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (73)
  -- -------- -- ------

which is completely identical to the area–entropy law of General
Relativity, just as we derived by more direct but less elegent means in
the preceding section.

### 11 Discussion

We have shown that by correctly identifying the spatial Weyl
transformations that remain pure gauge in the presence of a horizon
which acts as an interior spatial boundary, it is possible to identify
the gauge-invariant quantity that we have suggestively labeled @xmath
and which we believe plays the role of a thermodynamic entropy
associated with a shape dynamic black hole. Furthermore, if we assume
that that this quantity really is the entropy associated with a shape
dynamic black hole, then we can reproduce the standard area-entropy
relation of general relativity and various approaches to quantum
gravity. It is worth stressing that while our @xmath seems to have many
features that suggest it can be interpreted as an entropy (it arises
from “tracing out” information about the interior that exterior
observers do not have access to, it agrees with standard results from
black hole thermodynamics, it is gauge-invariant, etc.) I must admit
that until it can be shown that shape dynamic black holes emit Hawking
radiation and that the temperture and entropy agree with the @xmath and
@xmath we have identified, there is insufficient evidence to conclude
that these quantities really play the role of a physical temperature and
entropy.

It was conjectured in [ 26 ] that since the equivalence principle is an
emergent property of shape dynamics, rather than an axiom as in general
relativity, and that this property fails to emerge precisely on the
event horizon of a shape dynamic black hole, that a quantum theory of
gravity based on a canonical quantization of shape dynamics might
present a possible resolution to the firewall paradox introduced by
Almheiri et. al. [ 31 ] . In order to address this question in a more
systematic manner, it is once again essential to understand the
thermodynamic properties of shape dynamic black holes including the
radiative properties of quantum fields in a shape dynamic black hole
background (i.e. Hawking radiation).

The next step in the investigation of the thermodynamic properties of
shape dynamic black holes is to determine whether shape dynamic black
holes produce Hawking radiation. A preliminary analysis of the features
of shape dynamic black holes and the mechanism by which black holes
produce Hawking radiation in general relativity makes it seem very
likely that shape dynamic black holes produce thermal Hawking radiation
in essentially the same way as their general relativisic counterparts.
Ordinary Hawking radiation can be realized by coupling a scalar field to
the Einstein-Hilbert action and analyzing the resulting covariant wave
equation on the black hole background. One then identifies the zeroes of
the Regge-Wheeler potential where the covariant wave equation reduces to
the usual Klein-Gordon equation in flat spacetime, and expands the
solutions in Fourier modes. Since the zeroes of the Regge-Wheeler
potential occur at spatial infinity and on the event horizon of a
Schwarzschild black hole, and since the exterior region of a
Schwarzschild black hole is isomorphic to the exterior of the
spherically symmetric black hole solution derived in [ 25 ] , it seems
very likely that standard Hawking radiation can be recovered for shape
dynamic black holes. A more careful and systematic treatment of this
problem is left for future work.

## Chapter \thechapter Parity Horizons and Charged Black Holes

Originally [ 11 ] , shape dynamics was viewed as a reformulation of
canonical general relativity that traded the (on-shell) refoliation
invariance generated by the quadratic Hamiltonian constraint for spatial
Weyl invariance generated by a new, linear Weyl constraint. The theories
were quickly seen to agree for a broad class of known solutions to
general relativity---particularly those admitting globally defined
foliations by spatial hypersurfaces of constant mean extrinsic
curvature. ⁹ ⁹ 9 For compact spatial manifolds, shape dynamics agrees
with canonical general relativity when spacetime is foliated by
hypersurface surfaces of constant mean extrinsic curvature. For
asymptotically flat spatial manifolds, such as those considered here,
shape dynamics agrees with general relativity when spacetime is foliated
by maximal slices—meaning that the trace of the momentum conjugate to
spatial metric vanishes. However, questions remained about what the
corresponding solutions of shape dynamics would look like for spacetimes
that admitted such foliations only locally, or whether it was even
possible for shape dynamics to describe such systems.

A partial answer to this question was provided by [ 25 ] and [ 26 ] , in
which spherically symmetric and rotating asymptotically flat black hole
solutions of shape dynamics were presented. These novel solutions were
shown to agree with their general relativistic counterparts outside
their event horizons, but behave differently in their interior regions.
Both solutions possess an inversion symmetry about their event horizons,
which implies that the interior regions should be interpreted as a
time-reversed copy of the exterior regions, endowing the solutions with
the character of a wormhole . I will show in the remaining chapters,
based on my paper [ 42 ] , that these features are not peculiar to event
horizons, but arise naturally in solutions of shape dynamics with other
types of horizons as well. I analyze the properties of these horizons
and show that all of them are parity horizons, which are defined in 12 .

One way to understand the disagreement between shape dynamics and
general relativity when solutions develop horizons is to note that in
the canonical formalism, many types of horizons arise when the lapse
function either vanishes or diverges. Since the determinant of the
spacetime metric can be written @xmath where @xmath is the determinant
of the spatial metric and @xmath is the lapse function, it is clear that
on a horizon where the lapse vanishes or diverges, the determinants of
the spatial and spacetime metrics cannot simultaneously be finite and
non-zero—one must choose between a smooth spacetime and a smooth
conformal spatial geometry.

With the benefit of hindsight, it is not particularly surprising that
shape dynamics and general relativity disagree when solutions of either
develop horizons, however it is still interesting to consider the
particular ways in which the theories disagree in the presence of such
surfaces.

In the following section, I will review some properties of the
asymptotically flat black hole solutions for shape dynamics that have
been introduced so far, and discuss how they motivate the definition of
“parity horizons.” In 13 , I introduce a spherically symmetric, charged
black hole solution for shape dynamics analogous to the
Reissner-Nördstrom black hole of general relativity, and discuss the
properties of the solution. In chapter A Tour Through Shape Dynamic
Black Holes , I discuss the Rindler chart over Minkowski spacetime and
introduce a new solution of shape dynamics which shares many of the same
features. I will discuss how this new solution differs from its general
relativistic counterpart and emphasize the crucial role played by the
boundary conditions in shape dynamics. In chapter A Tour Through Shape
Dynamic Black Holes , I briefly review closed timelike curves and
discuss a family of solutions to Einstein’s equations known as the Van
Stockum-Bonner spacetimes, which except for the lowest order case, are
stationary, asymptotically flat and possess a compact ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 Here,
“compact” means that the Cauchy horizon is compact when viewed as a
(degenerate) two-surface embedded in any of the preferred spatial
slices. Cauchy horizon within which closed timelike curves pass through
every point. I will then present a novel solution of shape dynamics
which agrees with the next-to-lowest order Bonner spacetime outside the
horizon, but which does not develop closed timelike curves within—the
Cauchy horizon is replaced by a parity horizon in the shape dynamics
solution. I argue that this is evidence of a general chronology
protection mechanism in shape dynamics that is significantly more
parsimonious than many of the arguments that have been made for
chronology protection in general relativity.

### 12 Parity Horizons

Recall from chapter A Tour Through Shape Dynamic Black Holes that if we
assume asymptotically flat and Lorentz-invariant boundary conditions, ¹¹
¹¹ 11 For a more general analysis of spherically symmetric,
asymptotically spatially flat solutions of shape dynamics that are not
necessarily asymptotically Lorentz-invariant see [ 43 ] . shape dynamics
admits a unique spherically symmetric solution that can be described
globally by the Schwarzschild line element in isotropic coordinates:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (74)
  -- -------- -- ------

This line element is a solution of the Einstein field equations only for
@xmath , where @xmath is the location of the event horizon in isotropic
coordinates, whereas this solution is valid everywhere from the point of
view of shape dynamics. The line element is invariant under the
transformation @xmath . It can be seen from this inversion symmetry is
that the ‘‘interior” of this solution is a time-reversed copy of the
exterior, which makes manifest the wormhole character of the solution
and that the solution possesses no central curvature singularity. In
fact, from the point of view of shape dynamics, this solution is
completely free of physical singularities since there are no
singularities in the spatial conformal geometry. This can be seen by
noting that the Cotton tensor ¹² ¹² 12 The Cotton tensor is defined by
@xmath . The Cotton tensor possesses all of the local information on the
conformal structure of a three-dimensional Riemannian manifold just as
the Weyl tensor contains all of the local information on the conformal
structure of higher-dimensional manifolds [ 29 ] . vanishes identically,
which follows from the fact that the spatial metric is conformally flat.

This solution can be understood in relation to the maximally extended
Kruskal spacetime by considering the conformal diagrams displayed in 2 .
The conformal diagram of the Kruskal spacetime (Fig. 1(a) ) contains
four regions. Regions I and III are causally disconnected and each
possesses its own spatial infinity. Region II containing a future
space-like singularity and region IV contains a past space-like
singularity. On the other hand, the conformal diagram of the spherically
symmetric shape dynamic black hole (Fig. 1(b) ) contains only the two
regions labeled (somewhat arbitrarily) “interior” and “exterior.” Much
like regions I and III of the conformal diagram of the Kruskal
spacetime, the interior and exterior regions each possess their own
spatial infinity. However, unlike the Kruskal spacetime, the interior
and exterior regions meet along the event horizon @xmath , and are
therefore not causally disconnected. Observers can pass in one direction
across the horizon from the exterior region to the interior. The regions
containing the past and future singularities are absent in the shape
dynamics case, reflecting the global regularity of the solution.

The inversion symmetry of this black hole solution is known and has been
discussed in [ 25 ] and [ 26 ] . This property can be used to motivate
the following

  Definition: Let @xmath be a solution of the equations of motion of
  shape dynamics in the gauge in which @xmath , @xmath and let @xmath .
  Suppose @xmath admits a two-surface @xmath on which the lapse function
  @xmath either vanishes or diverges and if there exists a spatial
  isometry @xmath such that:

  1.  @xmath

  2.  @xmath

  3.  @xmath .

  Then @xmath is called a parity and @xmath is called a parity horizon.

It is possible that this definition might be improved upon by restating
it in a gauge invariant manner and/or extending it to include solutions
with @xmath . However, for our purposes the above definition is
adequate. Clearly, the event horizon of the spherically symmetric black
hole solution discussed above is a parity horizon. In the remainder of
this chapter, I will consider various examples of known and novel
solutions of shape dynamics which possess parity horizons and discuss
how the presence of this novel feature leads to physical differences
between solutions of shape dynamics and solutions of general relativity
that agree outside of horizons but disagree at and within them.

Let us now consider another shape dynamic black hole solution whose
event horizon is a parity horizon. It was shown in [ 26 ] that shape
dynamics admits a rotating black hole solution that also possesses an
inversion symmetry about the horizon manifesting its wormhole character,
and it was argued that this solution is also free of physical
singularities. The reconstructed line element associated with this
solution is reproduced here for the reader’s convenience:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (75)
  -- -------- -- ------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (76)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

The solution becomes spherically symmetric when @xmath , @xmath . The
location of the horizon in these coordinates is @xmath and the
transformation @xmath leaves the line element invariant and flips the
sign of the lapse, so this solution also possesses a parity about the
horizon. In addition to avoiding the ring curvature singularity that is
present in the interior of the Kerr spacetime, this solution also avoids
the closed timelike curves present in that region. Since shape dynamics
also has a preferred time variable, it is natural to wonder if it is a
general feature of solutions of shape dynamics that closed timelike
curves do not occur. This may indeed be the case, and in chapter A Tour
Through Shape Dynamic Black Holes I will show that this is true for
another solution of shape dynamics whose general relativistic
counterpart contains closed timelike curves but possesses no event
horizon. I will argue based on the generic features of this solution
that chronology protection may be a general feature of the theory.

In the following section, I introduce a charged black hole solution for
shape dynamics analogous to the Reissner-Nördstrom black hole in general
relativity. It is shown that the event horizon is again a parity horizon
and that the parity about the horizon leads to a fully CPT invariant
solution.

### 13 A Charged Shape Dynamic Black Hole

To address the question of whether charged shape dynamic black holes
possess some notion of CPT invariance, one must first couple the linking
theory to the electromagnetic field and perform a phase space reduction
to obtain shape dynamics coupled to electromagnetism [ 18 ] . The
Hamiltonian density for electromagnetism is given by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (77)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the vector potential and @xmath is its canonically
conjugate momentum. The physical electric field @xmath is related to the
vector density @xmath by @xmath . Coupling electromagnetism to general
relativity yields the system of constraints:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (78)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (79)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (80)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

The next step is to extend the phase space and perform the canonical
transformation of the constraints. Before proceeding, one must determine
how @xmath and @xmath transform under the canonical transformation
@xmath . Here it is assumed as in [ 18 ] , that @xmath and @xmath
transform trivially under @xmath so that one can retain a system of
first class constraints with well-defined global charges. With this
additional assumption, the transformed coupled scalar constraint becomes

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (81)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath . Imposing the gauge-fixing condition @xmath one obtains
the coupled second class constraint

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (82)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is now once again viewed as a first class constraint
generating spatial Weyl transformations. As in the uncoupled case, one
can also derive a consistency condition that fixes the lapse function:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (83)
  -- -------- -- ------

In order to find a simple solution to the coupled constraints, we
consider spherically symmetric conformal initial data which trivially
satisfy the coupled first class constraints if we choose @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (84)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the flat spatial metric written in spherical
coordinates, and the barred quantities are arbitrarily rescaled
according to their conformal weight by a conformal factor @xmath which
is to be determined by solving ( 82 ). Note that the chosen initial data
is static and spherically symmetric, so the equations of motion are
trivial, and that the spherically symmetric electric field @xmath is
just the Coulomb electric field in the flat background defined by @xmath
.

Since the conformal initial data is written in terms of the flat spatial
metric @xmath , the scalar curvature @xmath vanishes, and ( 82 ) becomes
simply

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (85)
  -- -------- -- ------

Putting ( 84 ) into ( 77 ) gives an explicit expression for @xmath which
can be substituted into ( 85 ) to give

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (86)
  -- -------- -- ------

where I have also used spherical symmetry to assume that @xmath depends
only on @xmath and primes denote differentiation with respect to @xmath
. Equation ( 86 ) is difficult to solve in its present form, but it can
be simplified by making the substitution @xmath , which yields

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (87)
  -- -------- -- ------

Now equation ( 87 ) can be solved by making the Laurent series ansatz:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (88)
  -- -------- -- ------

The derivatives of @xmath can be easily calculated from ( 88 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (89)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

Inserting ( 88 ) and ( 13 ) back into ( 87 ) yields the infinite double
sum:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (90)
  -- -------- -- ------

In order for ( 90 ) to be satisfied to all orders, all terms for which
@xmath on the left-hand side must vanish. This implies that @xmath for
@xmath , which means that the series terminates. Collecting the terms
proportional to @xmath on the left hand side gives:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (91)
  -- -------- -- ------

Imposing the generic boundary conditions ¹³ ¹³ 13 The choice to rename
@xmath can be justified a fortiori by noting that the ADM mass of the
resulting solution is equal to m. @xmath , @xmath , equation ( 91 ) can
be solved for @xmath in terms of the mass @xmath and electric charge
@xmath :

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (92)
  -- -------- -- ------

Inserting equation ( 92 ) back into equation ( 88 ) and recalling that
@xmath for @xmath :

  -- -- -- ------
           (93)
  -- -- -- ------

Putting equations ( 93 ) and ( 84 ) into ( 83 ), one obtains the
homogenous, linear, second order ordinary differential equation:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (94)
  -- -------- -- ------

which given asymptotically flat boundary conditions, has the unique
solution:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (95)
  -- -------- -- ------

Rescaling the conformal initial data by the appropriate powers of @xmath
according to their conformal weights gives the spatial metric and
physical electric field:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (96)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (97)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

The reconstructed line element associated with this solution of shape
dynamics is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (98)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ------

where @xmath is the metric on the unit two-sphere. Equation ( 98 ) is
just the line element of the Reissner-Nördstrom black hole written in
isotropic coordinates, which is well known in the context of general
relativity, and has been derived by similar methods in for example [ 44
] . The physical difference between this shape dynamics solution and the
Reissner-Nördstrom black hole is once again that the shape dynamics
solution has a wormhole character manifested by the presence of a parity
horizon. The event horizon of this black hole solution is located at
@xmath where the lapse vanishes. In the limit @xmath , one recovers the
uncharged spherically symmetric shape dynamic black hole and the
location of the horizon reduces to @xmath . Just as in the uncharged
spherically symmetric black hole, the spatial metric is invariant under
the parity @xmath , while the lapse changes sign under this
transformation. Thus, the surface @xmath is a parity horizon.

It is interesting to consider how the electric field @xmath transforms
under parity. One can check that

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (99)
  -- -------- -- ------

so the electric field transforms like a vector under parity and
transforms trivially under time reversal @xmath . The lapse changes sign
under time-reversal, which can be seen by noting that N can be defined
through the linking theory as @xmath where @xmath is the unit normal ¹⁴
¹⁴ 14 In the present setting, where the lapse can naturally take on both
positive and negative values, the normal vector is taken to be fixed
under time reversal. to the maximal space-like hypersurface of constant
@xmath . Finally, the electric field changes sign under charge
conjugation @xmath while the spatial metric and lapse are invariant
under this transformation. Putting all this together, it is clear that
the charged spherically symmetric shape dynamic black hole solution
derived above is CPT invariant.

It is worth noting that while the uncharged spherically symmetric shape
dynamic black hole is fully (C)PT invariant, the rotating solution is
not. It is easy to see that while the parity preserves the spatial
metric and changes the sign of the lapse, the shift vector transforms
like a pseudo-vector under parity (i.e. it does not transform) while it
changes sign under time-reversal. Thus, the combination of parity and
time-reversal has the effect of changing the sign of the angular
momentum.

However, one can still recover PT invariance of the rotating shape
dynamic black hole as an asymptotic symmetry which is approximate in the
bulk but becomes exact on the horizon. This can be done by noting that
the spacetime coordinate transformation @xmath where @xmath is the
angular velocity of the horizon measured at spatial infinity, preserves
the Weyl constraint and is thus a residual gauge symmetry inherited from
the linking theory. The effect of this transformation is that the new
time coordinate @xmath is defined so that its associated coordinate
derivative @xmath is the stationarity Killing vector defining the
bifurcate Killing horizon of the reconstructed spacetime. In terms of
this adapted time coordinate, ( 75 ) becomes:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (100)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is easy to see that in these coordinates the shift vector vanishes on
the horizon, and the time reversal @xmath combined with the parity
@xmath is an asymptotic symmetry of the horizon. In the static cases,
there is no difference between t and @xmath since the angular velocity
of the horizon is zero. This suggests that in defining time-reversal for
stationary shape dynamic black holes, one should take @xmath rather than
@xmath . Based upon these considerations, one would expect that a
Kerr-Newman-like shape dynamic black hole would possess an asymptotic
CPT invariance that becomes exact on the horizon, but this is left for
future work.

While all of the black hole solutions I have considered are electrovac
solutions, there is reason to think that parity horizons might emerge in
the near horizon limit of black hole solutions of the shape dynamics
equations of that contain matter in the exterior region as well. Medved,
Martin and Visser have studied static and spherically symmetric but
otherwise generic “dirty” black holes [ 45 ] in the canonical formalism
¹⁵ ¹⁵ 15 By using a time function whose associated coordinate derivative
coincides with the static timelike Killing vector field, the momentum
conjugate to the spatial metric naturally vanishes ensuring the Weyl
constraint is trivially satisfied. by expanding in powers of the radial
proper distance from the horizon. Their results show that the lapse and
spatial metric define a parity horizon at least up to cubic order for
lapse and up to quadratic order for the spatial metric. It is noteworthy
that this is a local construction and does not make any assumptions,
such as asymptotic flatness, about boundary conditions at infinity.

Next, I will show that Rindler space can be viewed as a solution of
shape dynamics and that the Rindler horizon is also a parity horizon.

## Chapter \thechapter Rindler Space as a Solution of Shape Dynamics

### 14 The Rindler Chart

The Rindler chart represents a congruence of uniformly accelerating
observers over a portion of the Minkowski spacetime. It is of particular
interest because despite the fact that it is related to ordinary
Cartesian coordinates in flat spacetime by a spacetime coordinate
transformation, the Rindler chart contains an observer-dependent horizon
which has a non-zero surface gravity, and hence a non-zero temperature,
much like the event horizon of a black hole. ¹⁶ ¹⁶ 16 This is a physical
effect: If one considers a Klein-Gordon field propagating in Minkowski
space, one can identify the vacuum state with respect to inertial
observers, but this state is not a vacuum with respect to accelerated
observers—rather accelerated observers see a thermal bath of excitations
of the Klein Gordon field with temperature equal to @xmath where @xmath
is the surface gravity of the Rindler horizon [ 46 ] . This is entirely
analogous to what happens when one considers a scalar field in a black
hole background— initial asymptotic vacuum states are not final
asymptotic vacuum states, and the result is that the black hole creates
particles in the form of Hawking radiation [ 39 ] . The fact that
accelerated observers in flat spacetime observe a thermal bath is known
as the “Unruh effect.”

In order to construct the Rindler chart, one can begin with Cartesian
coordinates over Minkowski spacetime. The line element is simply:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (101)
  -- -------- -- -------

If one then introduces the coordinate transformation

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

one obtains the Rindler chart with the line element

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (102)
  -- -------- -- -------

The congruence of uniformly accelerating observers see a horizon located
at @xmath , which can be seen by noting the time-time component of the
metric goes to zero there. It is worth noting that the coordinate
transformation ( 14 ) defines @xmath only for @xmath . For this reason,
the chart is often called the “right Rindler wedge,” and the left wedge
must be defined separately with @xmath defined to have the opposite
sign. Since this solution was obtained by performing a coordinate
transformation that mixes space and time, it is not obvious that it is
physically equivalent to the Minkowski spacetime from the point of view
of shape dynamics; spacetime diffeomorphisms are not a gauge symmetry of
shape dynamics, only spatial diffeomorphisms and spatial Weyl
transformations are. Note however, that this coordinate transformation
preserves the Weyl constraint, so Rindler space should indeed be a
solution of shape dynamics. Next, I will show how Rindler space can be
derived as a solution of shape dynamics from first principles.

### 15 Rindler Space in Shape Dynamics

As mentioned earlier, shape dynamics trades the refoliation invariance
generated by the Hamiltonian constraint of general relativity for
spatial Weyl invariance generated by a new Weyl constraint. One
consequence of this symmetry trading is that the lapse function is not a
Lagrange multiplier in shape dynamics, but must instead satisfy the
lapse-fixing equation ( 24 ), which is reproduced below for convenience.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now choose the flat initial data @xmath , @xmath , and choose the gauge
@xmath , so that the spatial slices in the reconstructed spacetime are
flat, as opposed to conformally flat as they are in the spherically
symmetric black hole cases. If the shift vector is chosen to be zero,
then the reconstructed line element associated with this solution of
shape dynamics will have the form:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (103)
  -- -------- -- -------

In this simple case, the lapse-fixing equation ( 24 ) reduces to
Laplace’s equation, @xmath . The general solution of the lapse-fixing
equation for this initial data is now trivially given by the harmonic
functions. In spherical coordinates, this yields:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (104)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are spherical harmonics. First, consider asymptotically
flat boundary conditions @xmath and @xmath , where the latter condition
essentially imposes that the total energy of the solution is zero.
Obviously, the only way that the first boundary condition can be
satisfied is if @xmath , so the solution becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (105)
  -- -------- -- -------

But @xmath is just a constant, and the second boundary condition implies
that @xmath Putting this together, we have @xmath , and since @xmath ,
this means @xmath everywhere. Switching back to Cartesian coordinates,
one obtains the Minkowski line element:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (106)
  -- -------- -- -------

On the other hand, one can consider Cartesian spatial coordinates, and
demand that @xmath , @xmath , where @xmath is a constant. ¹⁷ ¹⁷ 17 It is
not necessarily obvious that such boundary conditions should be
permissible. Usually, in an asymptotically flat setting, one would place
boundary conditions on the lapse at infinity and it is not immediately
obvious that the “horizon” boundary conditions we have chosen, will
translate into a physically acceptable solution. However, this choice is
justified a fortiori, by noting that the resulting solution for the
lapse grows as the first power of @xmath , leading to a finite (zero)
energy for the solution. It is interesting to note that this problem can
be mapped onto the problem of finding the electric potential (for @xmath
) due to an infinite plane of surface charge at @xmath , so one can more
or less guess the solution @xmath , where is @xmath is some constant
playing the role of the electric field. It is a simple exercise to show
that the constant playing the role of the electric field is exactly
@xmath , and this is carried out in appendix C for the sake of
completeness.

The reconstructed line element has the form of the Minkowski spacetime
written in Rindler coordinates:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (107)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is not terribly surprising that non-inertial observers can be
obtained by changing the boundary conditions on the lapse; Eulerian
observers ¹⁸ ¹⁸ 18 Eulerian observers are congruences of timelike curves
whose tangent vectors are orthogonal to the spatial hypersurfaces of a
(reconstructed) foliation of spacetime. These are natural observers to
choose from the point of view of shape dynamics as they are “inertial”
with respect to the spatial geometry (hypersurface orthogonal), although
they are generally non-inertial in that their proper acceleration is
non-zero in the reconstructed spacetime. are generally non-inertial,
with their proper acceleration given by @xmath . What is more surprising
is that the spacetime reconstructions obtained from these different
boundary conditions on the lapse are related by a spacetime
diffeomorphism. The fact that this is a residual gauge transformation
from the point of view of shape dynamics—i.e. a large gauge
transformation inherited from the linking theory—may shed some light on
the fact that the accelerated Eulerian observers associated with the
Rindler chart observe physically different effects than their
non-accelerated counterparts in the usual Cartesian Minkowski chart—
they observe a thermal bath of Unruh radiation. Residual spacetime
coordinate invariance in shape dynamics was partially explored in [ 47 ]
, but it is still not completely understood what role these
transformations play in the theory. From the point of view of shape
dynamics, these symmetries, which as in the present case may be
disconnected from the identity, seem somewhat less fundamental than the
gauge transformations generated by the first class constraints which
make no reference to any properties of particular solutions, and are
pure-gauge even off-shell.

Finally, it is worth noting that while at a glance the line elements
seem to agree, the Rindler chart is a complete solution from the point
of view of shape dynamics. That is, the coordinate @xmath is well
defined for all real values and therefore covers both the right and left
wedges. As a solution of shape dynamics, the Rindler chart is therefore
globally different from the corresponding solution of general relativity
where it is defined only for the right and left wedges separately, and
globally also includes future and past wedges that are not present in
the shape dynamics solution. These global differences are entirely
analogous to those found when comparing the black hole solutions of
shape dynamics and general relativity, but in the case of the Rindler
chart, there is no event horizon. It can be easily seen that the spatial
metric is invariant under the parity @xmath , while the lapse changes
sign under this parity, just as in the black hole solutions. Thus, the
observer-dependent Rindler horizon is a parity horizon from the point of
view of shape dynamics. This suggests that global disagreement with
shape dynamics may arise whenever a stationary horizon of any kind is
present in a solution general relativity, and that the corresponding
solution of shape dynamics will contain a parity horizon.

In the following section, I will present yet another solution of shape
dynamics that possesses a parity horizon and that presents physical
differences from the corresponding solution of general relativity in
that the general relativistic solution contains closed timelike curves
while the shape dynamics solution does not. This can be seen as an
advantage for shape dynamics, as closed timelike curves violate
causality and solutions of general relativity containing closed timelike
curves are generally explained away on a case by case basis as being
“unphysical” for various reasons (e.g. they are quantum-mechanically
unstable or they require non-localized matter distributions). In shape
dynamics, no such ad hoc apologies are necessary—solutions of shape
dynamics simply seem not to contain these pathologies.

## Chapter \thechapter The Bonner Spacetime as a Solution of Shape
Dynamics

### 16 The Van Stockum Bonnor spacetimes

The Van Stockum-Bonnor spacetimes are a class of asymptotically flat
stationary, axisymmetric solutions of Einstein’s equations sourced by
rigidly rotating dust. The solutions are ultra-relativistic in the sense
that they possess no Newtonian limit. ¹⁹ ¹⁹ 19 (There is an exception to
this claim. The lowest order case is invariant under translations
parallel to the @xmath -axis, and is therefore not asymptotically flat.
Indeed, it was pointed out in [ 48 ] that any density gradient in the
@xmath -direction would produce gravitational forces parallel to the
@xmath -axis that would violate the assumption of rigid rotation. In
general relativity, solutions with rigidly rotating dust are possible
provided the angular velocity of the dust is sufficiently rapid.

Let us briefly review the properties of the Van Stockum-Bonnor
spacetimes. Our discussion closely follows that of [ 49 ] which the
interested reader may consult for further details. In cylindrical
coordinates, the Bonnor-Van Stockum spacetimes are described by the line
element

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (108)
  -- -------- -- -------

The Einstein field equations imply that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (109)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (110)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Differentiating ( 109 ) and ( 110 ) with respect to @xmath and @xmath
respectively, and noting that the partial derivatives commute then
requires that @xmath satisfy the linear, elliptic partial differential
equation:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (111)
  -- -------- -- -------

Given a solution of ( 111 ), one can solve the system ( 109 ), ( 110 )
for @xmath which completely determines the line element ( 108 ). On the
other hand, it was shown in [ 26 ] that the general line element (up to
coordinate transformations) representing a stationary, axisymmetric
solution of the Einstein field equations

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (112)
  -- -------- -- -------

induces a maximal slicing by hypersurfaces of constant @xmath . Putting
@xmath , @xmath , ( 112 ) can be put in the form of ( 108 ) by making an
appropriate choice of the metric functions @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
and @xmath :

  -- -- -- -------
           (113)
  -- -- -- -------

This implies that ( 108 ) induces a maximal slicing by hypersurfaces of
constant @xmath , which is precisely the criterion needed to map a
solution of general relativity onto a solution of shape dynamics, at
least locally. Every solution of ( 111 ) yields a solution of ( 108 )
that possesses a surface defined by the equation @xmath , and it can be
readily seen that such a surface has two important properties.

First, on such a surface @xmath , and it can be easily checked for any
solution that this divides the spacetime into two regions: an “exterior”
region defined by @xmath and an “interior region” defined by @xmath . In
the interior region, @xmath , and the coordinate basis vector @xmath is
therefore timelike in this region. Since the coordinate @xmath is
periodic with period @xmath , the integral curves of @xmath are closed.
Therefore, the interior region is filled with closed timelike curves.
Any surface which divides a spacetime into a causal region without
closed timelike curves, and an acausal region with closed timelike
curves is a special kind of Cauchy horizon called a chronological
horizon [ 50 ] .

The second important feature of this chronological horizon is that the
lapse function, @xmath goes to infinity there, as can be easily from the
first of equations ( 113 ). Recall that the determinant of the spacetime
metric can be written @xmath . If this quantity is finite, as it must be
for a non-singular region of spacetime, then if the lapse function
@xmath diverges on some surface, the determinant of the spatial metric
must vanish. This is indeed the case, since @xmath and there are no
off-diagonal terms in the spatial metric. This is a signal that the
“spatial” metric changes signature across this surface and is no longer
truly spatial in the interior region. This is physically unacceptable
from the point of view of shape dynamics, since shape dynamics is a
theory of the time evolution of conformal equivalence classes of
Riemannian three-manifolds. Nevertheless, the fact that the line element
( 108 ) induces a maximal slicing by hypersurfaces of constant @xmath in
the exterior region, means that this is a solution of shape dynamics in
the exterior region. In what follows, I will consider a spatial
coordinate transformation that is a diffeomorphism only in the exterior
region, but which takes the line element ( 108 ) into a form that makes
the spatial metric non-degenerate across the chronological horizon,
yielding a complete solution of shape dynamics that covers the whole
spatial manifold.

### 17 The Bonnor Solution for Shape Dynamics

Equation ( 111 ) is linear and invariant under translations in @xmath
-direction. Consequently, any linear combination of known solutions and
their @xmath -derivatives of any order is again a solution. A simple
class of solutions can be obtained by expanding @xmath in a
superposition of modes. The external multipolar solutions are given by

  -- -- -- -------
           (114)
  -- -- -- -------

where @xmath is the hypergeometric function defined for @xmath by the
infinite series

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (115)
  -- -------- -- -------

and @xmath is the Pochhammer symbol:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (116)
  -- -------- -- -------

When either @xmath or @xmath is a non-positive integer, as it is in the
expressions for the multipolar solutions for @xmath , the hypergeometric
function becomes a polynomial of finite order:

  -- -- -- -------
           (117)
  -- -- -- -------

For simplicity, I will consider a particular solution to ( 111 ) and its
associated line element ( 108 ) corresponding to the @xmath mode of (
114 ), for which

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (118)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (119)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a positive constant with dimensions of area
parametrizing the location of the chronological horizon. Details about
this solution can be found in [ 48 ] .

It is more convenient to work in spherical coordinates, where @xmath ,
and
@xmath . After changing to spherical coordinates, the line element ( 108
) becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (120)
  -- -------- -- -------

This solution is known as the Bonnor spacetime, and in spherical
coordinates, the equation defining the chronological horizon is given by

  -- -- -- -------
           (121)
  -- -- -- -------

The chronological horizon in the Bonnor spacetime has roughly the shape
of a degenerate torus, with its inner circumference shrunken to a point.
Figure 3 depicts the chronological horizon in the @xmath - @xmath half
plane.

Equation ( 121 ) depends on both @xmath and @xmath . To find coordinates
that make the spatial metric smooth across the chronological horizon, it
will be convenient to work in coordinates that are adapted to this
surface, so that ( 121 ) takes the form @xmath for some new spatial
coordinate @xmath . This can be accomplished by making the coordinate
transformation

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (122)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (123)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

In the @xmath system, the chronological horizon is located at @xmath ,
and the spatial part of the line element becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (124)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

In the near-horizon limit @xmath , ( 124 ) reduces to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (125)
  -- -------- -- -------

where I have defined

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (126)
  -- -------- -- -------

From equation ( 125 ) one can read off the determinant of the spatial
metric in the near horizon limit:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (127)
  -- -------- -- -------

Clearly, as @xmath , @xmath as well, indicating that the spatial metric
is still degenerate across the chronological horizon in the @xmath
system. This can be remedied by making one final spatial coordinate
transformation that is a diffeomorphism only for @xmath . Since the
determinant of the metric transforms as @xmath under a coordinate
transformation @xmath with Jacobian @xmath , one can make the
near-horizon spatial geometry non-degenerate by transforming the @xmath
coordinate so that the @xmath -dependence of the near-horizon
determinant of the spatial metric is canceled. This can be done by
choosing a new coordinate @xmath so that @xmath . Making an analogous
transformation of the @xmath coordinate to preserve the symmetry of the
metric, one can choose:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (128)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (129)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where the prefactors of @xmath appear so that the new coordinates have
dimensions of length. In the @xmath system, the spatial line element
becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath                     (130)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where I have defined

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (131)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the near horizon limit @xmath , one finds that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (132)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the near-horizon limit of the spatial determinant becomes

  -- -- -- -------
           (133)
  -- -- -- -------

which is finite and non-zero on the chronological horizon @xmath .

Clearly, the transformation ( 128 ) is a diffeomorphism only for @xmath
, i.e. outside the chronological horizon, as its inverse transformation
@xmath is not differentiable at @xmath . Nevertheless, the spatial
metric is non-degenerate across the chronological horizon, and the
coordinate @xmath can be extended to all real values. Noting that the
line element ( 130 ) is invariant under @xmath , it can easily be seen
that the spatial geometry possesses a reflection symmetry about the
chronological horizon. Moreover, in the @xmath system, the lapse becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (134)
  -- -------- -- -------

which changes sign under the parity @xmath . Just as in the other
solutions of shape dynamics with horizons that have been considered, the
“interior” region may be interpreted as a time-reversed copy of the
exterior region—the chronological horizon becomes a parity horizon. This
makes it obvious that no portion of the reconstructed spacetime
possesses closed timelike curves. Finally, it is worth emphasizing that
since the spatial geometry is non-degenerate for all values of @xmath ,
and since the line element ( 130 ) is globally related to ( 112 ) by a
spatial diffeomorphism (except on the horizon, which needs to be treated
with some care), this line element corresponds to a complete solution of
shape dynamics, covering the entire spatial manifold except the horizon,
@xmath which will be discussed in the following section.

### 18 Conformal Singularity of the Chronological Horizon

In the previous section, it was shown that in the @xmath system the
spatial metric ( 130 ) becomes non-degenerate and the chronological
horizon becomes a parity horizon. The canonical momentum in these
coordinates can be found by considering Hamilton’s equation for @xmath
²⁰ ²⁰ 20 The bar over the metric has been omitted for notational
convenience. :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (135)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath denotes the Lie derivative of the spatial metric along the
shift vector. With the gauge fixing conditions @xmath , @xmath , and
noting that @xmath , ( 135 ) yields the simple expression

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (136)
  -- -------- -- -------

for the canonical momentum @xmath . It is easily seen from ( 135 ) that
the trace of the momentum @xmath and this can be explicitly confirmed
from ( 136 ) and ( 130 ), so the Weyl constraint is satisfied. One can
also check that as @xmath , @xmath . This is not surprising as the
transformation to the @xmath system deliberately introduced a
singularity in the @xmath and @xmath components of the spatial metric in
order to cancel the degeneracy from the vanishing the of @xmath
component. Next, it will be shown that the singularities appearing in
spatial metric and its conjugate momentum are of a physical nature—i.e.
the chronological horizon of the Bonnor solution for shape dynamics is
an extended physical singularity. Finally, we argue that this result can
generically be extended to a broader class of solutions containing
chronological parity horizons.

Since shape dynamics is a theory of evolving conformal geometries, our
analysis will focus on invariants constructed from the conformally
invariant degrees of freedom of the spatial curvature. In three spatial
dimensions, the rank-three Cotton tensor

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (137)
  -- -------- -- -------

contains all of the local information concerning the conformal geometry
of space with the Cotton tensor vanishing if and only if the spatial
geometry is conformally flat. The algebraic complexity of the line
element ( 130 ) makes computation of the Cotton tensor difficult, but
one can analyze the behavior of the spatial conformal geometry of the
exterior by considering the Cotton tensor in spherical coordinates for
@xmath . When this is done, one can compute the square of the Cotton
tensor:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (138)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a polynomial of degree 32 in @xmath and @xmath with
integer coefficients and @xmath is a polynomial of degree 24 in @xmath
and @xmath with integer coefficients. It can be shown using numerical
methods that @xmath is non-zero on the horizon, while @xmath goes to
zero there. Plots of @xmath are shown below.

4 shows the general behavior of @xmath near the horizon, while the range
in 5 is restricted to @xmath in order to display the shape of the
horizon in the @xmath plane. One can see from figures 2 and 3 that
@xmath goes smoothly to zero along a curve in the @xmath plane, and it
can be shown that this curve exactly coincides with the chronological
horizon @xmath For values of @xmath and @xmath that lie in the interior
of the horizon, the plots have no physical significance, as the @xmath
system yields an ill-defined spatial conformally geometry for these
values. Nevertheless, we can gain insight from the behavior of the
invariant @xmath outside and on the horizon. Since this invariant
diverges smoothly as one approaches the horizon, and since it is an
invariant of the spatial conformal geometry, there exists no spatial
diffeomorphism of the exterior that can remove this divergence. Thus, we
are forced to conclude that the cost of removing the degeneracy of the
spatial metric in order to find a complete solution of shape dynamics is
that the parity horizon of the shape dynamics solution must be regarded
as an extended physical singularity. It is noteworthy that this is the
first known solution of shape dynamics that possesses a “shape
singularity”—i.e. a singularity in the spatial conformal geometry.

There is good reason to think that the feature we have just observed,
namely that the chronological horizon becomes an extended physical
singularity in shape dynamics, holds quite a bit more generally than in
the specific case we have considered above. If we consider the spatial
metric associated with the line element ( 112 ), we can compute the
general form of the invariant @xmath in cylindrical coordinates:

  -- -- -- -------- -------- -------
           @xmath            (139)
                    @xmath   
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- -------

Since the chronological horizon for any such solution is defined by
@xmath , we see that the invariant generically diverges for any
stationary, axisymmetric solution of shape dynamics with a chronological
horizon so long as the numerator of the invariant does not conspire to
cancel this divergence.

## Chapter \thechapter Concluding Remarks

The various known and novel stationary, axisymmetric solutions of
asymptotically flat shape dynamics presented in this work demonstrate
the pervasiveness of parity horizons in this context. The fact that
black hole solutions of shape dynamics are physically different from
those of general relativity opens up new possibilities for black hole
physics and thermodynamics if shape dynamics is the correct description
of the true degrees of freedom of the classical gravitational field.
Some very preliminary results on the thermodynamics of shape dynamic
black holes was discussed in [ 34 ] . A particularly striking feature of
these solutions is that they contain no central physical singularity, a
fact that strongly suggests that shape dynamic black holes do not suffer
from an information loss paradox as general relativistic black holes do.
The CPT invariance of electrovac black hole solutions with a high degree
of symmetry presents an interesting possible connection to the standard
model of particle physics. While shape dynamic black holes have some
promising features, there are still some important open questions that
need to be addressed, not least of which is whether such solutions can
form from collapse, a problem which is already being explored and which
promises to shed light on the known eternal solutions. Collapse models
are also an important step in understanding two features of shape
dynamic black holes which are currently poorly understood: First, what
does an observer see as she passes through the horizon of a shape
dynamic black hole? And second, do shape dynamic black holes evaporate
via Hawking radiation?

The first of these questions arises as a result of the fact that these
solutions do not form well-defined spacetime geometries on the horizon.
As a result, the timelike component of the geodesic equation is
ill-defined at the horizon, and the trajectories of observers that would
ordinarily be expressed as timelike geodesics con no longer be described
in this manner. This might be resolved by defining timelike geodesics
connecting points in the interior and exterior at different times as
piece-wise smooth curves that are timelike geodesics in the interior and
exterior regions and that minimize the proper time. In this way the
resulting degenerate spacetime becomes geodesically complete, although
the geodesics defined in this manner have a discontinuity in their
tangent vector at the horizon. While this seems like a reasonable
definition, it remains troubling that the trajectories of observers
cannot be determined locally as the solution of a second order
differential equation that is well-defined everywhere.

The second question was partially addressed in [ 34 ] where it was noted
that since shape dynamic black holes agree with general relativistic
black holes in the exterior region it may be possible to import
whole-cloth certain derivations of Hawking radiation that make no
reference to the interior region. This can be done by solving the
Klein-Gordon equation in the background of the exterior black hole
geometry, quantizing the Klein-Gordon field, and relating the ingoing
modes at past null infinity to ingoing modes at the horizon and outgoing
modes at future null infinity via Bogoliubov transformation [ 46 ] .
Still, it would be preferable to derive Hawking radiation in the context
of a collapse model in order to obtain a more concrete physical picture
of the dynamics of black hole formation and evaporation.

Rindler space provides a simple example of a solution of shape dynamics
that might be used to study black hole thermodynamics via the Unruh
effect. Moreover, all of the black hole solutions of shape dynamics
share the same global causal structure as Rindler space, so this simple
example might be used as a toy model to study more complicated questions
about shape dynamic black holes.

The singular parity horizon encountered in the case of the Bonner
solution clarifies the role of the assumption of global hyperbolicity in
shape dynamics, and suggests a general chronology protection mechanism
in shape dynamics. One can assume global hyperbolicity from the outset
and then solutions with closed timelike curves are automatically
excluded, but there remain solutions of general relativity which admit
maximal slicing outside of the chronological Cauchy horizon. The
procedure outlined in the case of the Bonner spacetime explains how
these two facts can be reconciled. By making a singular coordinate
transformation that makes the spatial metric invertible across the
Cauchy horizon, one obtains a global solution of shape dynamics in which
closed timelike curves do not form, and which contains closed null
curves only on a singular sub-surface of measure zero. If one demands
continuity of the phase space variables then these solutions must be
discarded, since the metric and momentum are divergent there and the
singularity in the square of the Cotton tensor ensures that there is no
spatial diffeomorphism which can remove these divergences.

Clearly, much work remains in understanding the physical differences
between shape dynamics and general relativity, but the solutions
presented in this work suggest that parity horizons, or some dynamical
generalization thereof my be of great utility in characterizing the
possible global differences between the two theories that can arise.

## Chapter \thechapter Conformally Reduced Connection and Curvature of
Kerr Metric in Prolate Spheroidal Coordinates

The non-zero connection coefficients associated with the metric ( 46 )
are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (140)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

from which we obtain the components of the Ricci tensor

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (141)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                                   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

and the Ricci scalar

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (142)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using ( A Tour Through Shape Dynamic Black Holes ), ( A Tour Through
Shape Dynamic Black Holes ), and ( 142 ) we can construct the
Cotton-York tensor

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (143)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is by construction symmetric, traceless and transverse. Putting (
A Tour Through Shape Dynamic Black Holes ), ( A Tour Through Shape
Dynamic Black Holes ), and ( 142 ) into ( 143 ) yield the components of
the Cotton-York tensor

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (144)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

from which one can form the scalar density

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (145)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

## Chapter \thechapter Poisson Bracket Between Horizon Hamiltonian and
Conformal Constraint

In order to calculate the bracket @xmath , it is first necessary to
transform @xmath back into a volume integral:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
                 (146)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- -------

Since the covariant derivative @xmath depends on the metric, it is not
immediately clear how to treat it under the Poisson bracket. Usually,
this can be taken care of using repeated integration by parts and making
use of compactness or boundary conditions. Here things are complicated
by the presence of the extra boundary at the horizon, so this is not the
most convenient way to compute the bracket. Rather, I make use of the
lapse-fixing equation obtained from phase-space reduction:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (147)
  -- -------- -- -------

Inserting ( 147 ) into ( 146 ) and acting with the conformal constraint
@xmath , I obtain:

  -- -------- -- -------
                 
     @xmath      (148)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- -------

By direct computation, I find

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (149)
     @xmath      (150)
  -- -------- -- -------

which finally yield the result

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (151)
  -- -------- -- -------

## Chapter \thechapter Identification of the Constant in the Rindler
Lapse Function as Surface Gravity

The general solution to Laplace’s equation in Cartesian coordinates can
be written:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (152)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- -------

Imposing @xmath , one obtains @xmath , so the solution ( 152 ) becomes:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (153)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- -------

If one then imposes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (154)
  -- -------- -- -------

the only allowed values of @xmath and @xmath are zero, so the A’s and
B’s corresponding to @xmath must all vanish, and one obtains

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (155)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . Solving ( 155 ) for @xmath and inserting the result back
into ( 153 ) gives

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (156)
  -- -------- -- -------

Clearly, this equation must be interpreted as a limit, which can be
evaluated using L’Hospital’s rule for indeterminate forms:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (157)
  -- -------- -- -------