### Overview

“Interdisciplinary research (IDR) is a mode of research by teams or
individuals that integrates information, data, techniques, tools,
perspectives, concepts, and/or theories from two or more disciplines or
bodies of specialized knowledge to advance fundamental understanding or
to solve problems whose solutions are beyond the scope of a single
discipline or area of research practice.”
National Academy of Engineering, National Academy of Sciences, Policy
and Global Affairs, Institute of Medicine, Committee on Science,
Engineering, and
Public Policy, Committee on Facilitating Interdisciplinary Research,
Facilitating Interdisciplinary Research , p. 39 (2005) [ 1 ] .

The synthesis of physics, chemistry and biology involves the development
of a wide arc of complementary techniques, and the exploration of new
methodologies for addressing key mysteries in nature. In combining
disparate fields, a cogent way forward is to apply the knowledge from
each discipline in order to pose questions that are not within reach of
any one field alone. In this thesis, such a synthesis is attained
through the use of fundamental physics principles applied to biological
cells.

While a range of scientific developments developed herein, both
technological and methodological, may be viewed as standalone
achievements providing value to their respective fields in their own
right, in the broader vision of the project, one may integrate the
experimental methodologies, the models, the findings, the analyses and
the conclusions in order to encapsulate the discoveries into a coherent
narrative.

I begin this narrative by noting a simple, compelling observation: that
symmetry can lead to resonance . In the context of photonics,
introducing light into a microscopic symmetrical object under specific
conditions will cause it to resonate in a way that is highly sensitive
to its immediate environment, as well as to its own geometry. In this
sense, a resonator can act as a sensor . The resonances, and their
behaviour under a variety of conditions, yield insights into both the
structure and the electromagnetic influences acting on the resonator,
and many instances where such effects represent a new frontier in
scientific understanding are in the field of biology.

To have a cell act as a resonator is to have a new window into its
internal structure and its immediate surroundings. The fundamental
symmetries extant in the building blocks of living matter present a
compelling new direction in biosensing, where cells and their
environments can be interrogated directly, producing or trapping photons
at the site of inquiry in order to provide crucial information on their
status and their features.

At the outset of the journey, one must take stock of the specific aims
and tools at one’s disposal for exploring the research question of the
present study. But first, I outline the vision.

### Vision

To begin, I pose the question of whether a biological cell can sustain
resonances, with the ultimate aim being the generation of such
resonances within a living cell. I explore the physical requirements for
achieving this goal, and the parameters that might serve to hamper its
realisation, making particular use of whispering gallery modes – a
phenomenon indicative of the resonant behaviour of waves within a
symmetrical object.

First, the underlying principles of resonators are investigated and
developed through a number of feasibility studies, with the focus on
resonators that either resemble cells or include features that are
useful for understanding the methodological requirements for cell
resonators. In pursuing such an investigation, new computational methods
and analytic models are developed, and as a result, new aspects of
resonator behaviour are uncovered that extend beyond the known work in
the field. Upon presenting the necessary tools for a systematic inquiry
into the possibility of a cell resonator, the cells that may provide an
adequate testing ground for this purpose are enumerated, and their
necessary physical requirements are explained. The most promising cell
candidate is then identified – the bovine embryo, which is then
subjected to a detailed analysis of its properties with respect to these
physical requirements. The results of the studies are verified through
the development of sophisticated modelling capabilities, each of which
has been carefully designed to address the key challenges that present
themselves at each milestone of the project. For example, bovine oocytes
comprise a spherical outer shell, known as the zona pellucida .
Unfertilised oocytes also exhibit special outer cells attached to the
zona pellucida known as cumulus cells , as shown in Fig. 1 , which
disengage and dissipate upon fertilisation. It will become clear through
the course of this thesis that for such a cell to be realised as a
viable resonator, these cells need to be removed before achieving a
resonance, either by selecting the right stage of embryo development
after fertilisation, or otherwise rendering the embryo free, or denuded
, of these extra cells.

The details involved in carrying out this process are then explained,
which involve complex logistical demands, and new developments in
interdisciplinary scientific methodology. Finally, the results are
summarised and interpreted in the context of the main research question,
reaching their denouement in Section 6.5 of the thesis.

With the overall vision in mind, this study represents a new step in
characterising the ability of biological cells to act as resonators, and
in outlining and explaining the methodological challenges faced by
researchers embarking upon a similar path in the future.

### Aims

In this thesis, the main aim is to develop the methodology required for
examining the key research question, namely, whether a biological cell
can act as a resonator, making use of whispering gallery mode
resonances. In order to achieve this aim, I will explore:

@xmath The development and tailoring of models designed to mimic
spherical, near-spherical and imperfect resonators;
@xmath The properties and use of hollow cavity resonators, such as
microbubbles, which share geometrical features with certain biological
cells;
@xmath A non-invasive method for extracting the geometric parameters
from well studied microresonator structures;
@xmath Multiple-layer resonator models that can account for a variety of
mode excitation strategies, including active fluorescent-layer coatings
such as those that have proved expedient in biosensing developments in
the literature;
@xmath The physical criteria required for a biological cell to act as a
resonator;
@xmath A number of candidate cell types that are most likely to be
feasible;
@xmath A variety of interrogation techniques, both passive and active,
for the detection of whispering gallery modes, including the prism
coupler, the fibre taper and doping with fluorescent materials;
@xmath A simple proof-of-concept using a similar-sized artificial
analogue of a cell in a sample of media; and
@xmath A critical study of the most promising cell candidate, using the
techniques listed above.

### Roadmap of the thesis

While the narrative of the thesis involves the advancement of knowledge
in a range of contrasting research areas, material pertaining to
separate disciplines has been grouped together in chapters, where
possible. Chapter 1 provides a summary of the field of biosensing,
specifically relating to whispering gallery mode resonators, and how the
project is to be formulated in the context of biosensing. Those from a
physics and engineering background will find particular value in
Chapters 2 and 3 , which explores the properties and the behaviour of
power spectra obtained from microsphere and microbubble resonators using
computational and analytic tools to yield new insights in facilitating
resonator design. The heart of the mathematical modelling work presented
herein is Chapter 4 , in which a unified description of general,
multilayer resonators is presented. Experts in the field of biology will
find Chapter 5 provides a comprehensive description of the challenges
encountered in measuring physical attributes of cells using a variety of
methods. The criteria developed in this chapter are applied
experimentally in Chapter 6 , in which the apparatus, measurements and
final analysis are presented, drawing together the multiple strands of
the thesis. This chapter contains a combination of experimental optical
physics, chemistry and biology.

In addition, it is intended that an exploration of these
interdisciplinary themes will yield new insights into the methods of
characterising resonances, the models used to investigate them, and the
physical parameters required of a resonator, as key developments in
themselves.

Therefore, as much as possible, each critical development explored in
this thesis is explained in terms of its wider application to the fields
of photonics and biosensing, as well as keeping with the directed
narrative of the interdisciplinary vision.

“Interdisciplinary thinking is rapidly becoming an integral feature of
research as a result of four powerful “drivers”: the inherent complexity
of nature and society, the desire to explore problems and questions that
are not confined to a single discipline, the need to solve societal
problems, and the power of new technologies.”
National Academy of Engineering, National Academy of Sciences, Policy
and Global Affairs, Institute of Medicine, Committee on Science,
Engineering, and
Public Policy, Committee on Facilitating Interdisciplinary Research,
Facilitating Interdisciplinary Research , p. 40 (2005) [ 1 ] .

[]

## 1 Introduction

This thesis primarily focuses on the investigation into the optical
phenomenon known as whispering gallery modes (WGMs), and its application
to biosensing and biological cells.

The use of WGMs for biosensing has risen to a prominent place in the
literature [ 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 12 , 13 , 14 ] .
Part of the reason for this is that the applications extend well beyond
physics, in the detection of biological matter such as macromolecules.
It has been demonstrated that devices known as microresonators –
microscopic objects exhibiting a degree of symmetry which can support
WGMs (described more precisely in Section 1.2 ) – can be sensitive to
the presence of virions, animal cells and bacteria [ 15 ] , as well as
proteins [ 16 , 2 , 3 , 4 ] and DNA [ 9 , 13 ] . In some cases this can
be achieved to the level of a single molecule [ 17 , 14 ] .
Consequently, WGMs can be used to circumvent the requirement of
fluorophore markers for the labelling of proteins, antibodies, amino
acids and peptides, which are restricted in their use to specific
biological targets [ 15 , 13 , 18 , 19 ] . Such label-free detection
technologies also include Raman scattering microscopy [ 20 , 21 ] ,
autofluorescence [ 22 ] , intracavity spectroscopy [ 23 ] ,
microphotonic sensors [ 24 ] and the use of surface plasmon resonances [
25 , 26 ] , to name a few, and have been widely used in the field of
biosensing for some time.

Parallel to the development of biosensing applications, WGMs have also
been used for a range of other fundamental scientific studies, such as
high-efficiency optical frequency combs [ 27 , 28 , 29 ] , nonlinear
optics [ 30 ] and quantum electrodynamics (QED) [ 31 , 32 , 33 , 34 ] .
The construction of chains or arrays of WGM resonators has also been
reported in the literature [ 35 , 36 ] , potentially leading to the
development of perfect absorbers for use in solar panels [ 37 , 38 ] ,
focusing microscopes, laser scalpels and polarisation filters [ 36 ] ,
and for the investigation of metamaterials [ 39 , 37 ] .

The specific topics that form the basis for this thesis are the
techniques for the generation of whispering gallery modes within a
cavity, the biosensing applications of WGMs, the development of
mathematical models of microresonator behaviour, including both analytic
and computational methods used in computing the resonances, and cell
biology. The goal will be to investigate the possibility of generating
whispering gallery modes within a biological cell, as explained in
Section 1.4 . A significant amount of physics will be involved in
interpreting both the computational results and the experimental
outcomes.

### 1.1 Whispering gallery modes

Whispering gallery modes can be produced in microresonators, which
exhibit a geometry that includes at least one axis of revolution, so
that electromagnetic waves travel along the interface between the two
materials. These waves largely remain bound due to total internal
reflection (TIR). Resonances occur when the round trip of a wave is an
integer multiple of the wavelength.

Consider, for example, a spherical object constructed from a material
with a refractive index higher than its surrounding environment, which
acts as a resonator. Figure 1.1 (a) depicts a circular cross section of
such a resonator. A microscope image of this effect in a silica
microsphere (diameter @xmath @xmath m) in the laboratory is shown in
Fig. 1.1 (b), with the same microsphere shown under a white light source
in Fig. 1.1 (c). The sphere is connected to a silica glass rod. The
central bright spot corresponds to the reflection of the white light
source into the objective. The WGMs are apparent around the equator of
the microsphere. The wave pattern near the outer boundary of the
resonator illustrates the minima and maxima of, for example, the
electric field. In this scenario, the wave returns to its original
position in phase, which will only occur for those specific wavelength
values that correspond to the WGM resonance positions. As a result, the
modes are quantised , in that only certain values are admissible as
resonances for a given resonator and its environment. A detailed
discussion on this quantisation condition, and the method for the
determination of the mode positions, is presented in Section 2.2 , and
developed as part of the multilayer model in Chapter 4 .

As will be seen in the discussion of microsphere sensors in Chapter 2 ,
the mathematical description of these modes requires the three
eigenvalues of the quantisation condition. These quantum numbers
correspond to the azimuthal ( @xmath ), polar ( @xmath ) and radial
directions ( @xmath ) in spherical polar coordinates, as illustrated in
Fig 1.2 . For an example circular cross section in the @xmath plane,
shown in Fig. 1.1 (a), the number of surface nodes required to bring the
wave back to its initial position in phase is related to the azimuthal
quantum number, whereas modes that extend further into the centre of the
microsphere are related to the radial mode number. The modes of the
microsphere also fall into one of two categories, describing their
polarisation – transverse electric (TE) or transverse magnetic (TM)
modes. Simply put, this notation states that the orientation of the
three-vector electric fields ( @xmath ) or magnetic fields ( @xmath )
have no component in the radial direction of the coordinates of the
sphere, shown in Fig. 1.2 . A more complete discussion of the
conventions that exist for the definition of the polarisations is given
in Section 4.2 and summarised in Appendix A . Although more complicated
mode patterns exist in general, the resonances of a microsphere can
always be decomposed into a superposition of modes corresponding to
these polarisations [ 40 ] .

WGMs include a set of radiation modes and bound modes, which are
discussed in the context of computational modelling in Section 2.3 , and
investigated within a unified framework in Section 4.2 . They produce an
evanescent field , which is the portion of the electromagnetic field
that extends beyond the surface of the resonator into the surrounding
medium. As a consequence, the wavelength values that correspond to the
resonances are highly sensitive to the geometric characteristics of the
resonator, such as its diameter, its asphericity, and the refractive
index contrast between the resonator and its surrounding medium [ 41 ] .
The index contrast determines the amount that the evanescent field
extends into the surrounding medium, thus affecting the refractive index
sensitivity of the modes within the resonator [ 3 ] . It is the mode
sensitivity in particular that makes the WGM resonator a compelling
candidate for biosensing applications.

### 1.2 Microresonator architecture

Whispering gallery modes can be generated in a wide range of different
geometries, including those with a circular cross section outlined in
Section 1.1 , as well as more exotic shapes, as follows.

The literature on microresonators includes a wealth of varied examples,
such as micropillars [ 42 , 43 ] , microbottles [ 44 , 45 , 46 ] ,
toroids [ 47 ] , disks [ 48 , 49 , 50 , 51 ] , rings [ 18 , 52 ] ,
photonic crystals [ 53 , 54 , 55 , 56 , 57 , 58 ] and other resonator
designs that exhibit some degree of symmetry in at least one axis of
revolution [ 59 , 60 , 61 , 62 , 63 ] , which can even include the cross
sections of waveguides or extruded slabs of dielectric material [ 64 ,
65 ] . The materials used in constructing artificial resonators include
amorphous [ 16 , 14 , 66 , 67 ] and crystalline [ 68 , 69 , 70 , 71 , 72
, 34 , 73 ] inorganic materials and polymers [ 74 , 75 , 76 ] .

In this work, the primary focus will be on resonators in spherical or
microbubble form. The reason for this is that the biological cell
candidates considered in Chapter 5 are spherical at first approximation,
and can contain multiple protein layers. Spheres represent optimally
symmetric objects, and are often found in natural settings where the
external force of surface tension applied evenly to the outermost layer
of the cell encourages such shapes to form. Although cells exist that
are closely related to other symmetrical shapes (such as the erythrocyte
– the red blood cell, which resembles a biconcave disk [ 77 ] ), the
dependence of the quality of the modes on the diameter and the
refractive index of a resonator, described in Sections 3.2.3 and 5.3 ,
indicates that cells of much larger diameter represent the most viable
candidates for sustaining WGMs. The ensuing investigation will also
guide us towards those that are predominantly spherical in shape.

#### 1.2.1 Passive resonators

Although the wavelength positions of resonances are highly dependent on
the geometric parameters of the resonator, the measurement of these
resonances cannot occur in practice unless electromagnetic radiation is
introduced. In such circumstances the electromagnetic field is said to
couple to the resonances, and these resonances are then said to be
excited by the radiation.

A wide range of strategies has been investigated in the literature for
the excitation of WGMs in microresonators. Passive interrogation
describes the case where external radiation is introduced into the
resonator through the coupling of light at the material interface,
rather than active interrogation, where the excitation occurs from
within the resonator itself, such as via a fluorescent medium. These
methods will be explored more thoroughly in Chapters 5 and 6 , where the
advantages and disadvantages of each method are investigated in depth.
The methods of passive interrogation include the coupling of the light
through a prism via frustrated TIR [ 78 , 59 , 79 ] . Waveguides [ 35 ,
80 ] and fibre tapers [ 47 , 81 , 82 ] have also been used to achieve
mode coupling. In the case of the prism, the incidence angle must be
tuned to fulfill the phase-matching condition, describing the
equalisation of the propagation constant of the incident beam with the
WGMs of the resonator [ 83 ] . Phase-matching represents an important
topic in the generation of WGMs, and will be discussed in detail in
Section 2.2 , and used extensively in Chapter 6 , particularly for the
experimental interrogation methods reported in Section 6.4.2 . In the
case of optical fibres, the taper waist must be fabricated to fulfill
this same condition [ 59 , 79 ] in order to allow coupling to the WGMs,
as shown in Fig. 1.3 .

The requirement of an external evanescent coupling configuration, which
typically must be tuned or calibrated carefully in order to achieve mode
coupling, can render applications outside a laboratory setting
problematic. This is because the physical space and time constraints
involved in achieving on-site measurement within a biological
environment are often limited, especially if living matter is involved.
An alternative approach, which is able to ameliorate some of these
limitations, is that of active resonators.

#### 1.2.2 Active resonators

It is possible for the excitation of WGMs to occur from within the
resonator itself, using fluorescent nanocrystals [ 84 , 85 , 86 ] ,
quantum dots [ 87 , 39 , 88 ] or organic dyes [ 89 , 90 , 91 , 75 , 92 ,
93 ] . This allows for free-space excitation of the WGMs [ 94 , 75 , 95
] , in which the fluorescent medium is excited by a laser through a
microscope objective in the absence of a radiation coupling device, such
as those explored in the case of passive interrogation. This excitation
strategy is worth exploring in more detail, because it presents a range
of compelling features and advantages that passive techniques are not
able to match at the present time. The active interrogation method will
be a focus for the development of the models described in Chapters 3 and
4 .

The first report of an active WGM resonator in the literature occurred
in 1961, shortly after the construction of the first laser by T. Maiman
[ 96 ] . In this case, samarium-doped CaF @xmath microspheres were
excited using a flash-lamp. It was found that a major advantage of
active resonators is that they allow for remote excitation and
collection of radiation, ultimately allowing the resonators to probe
biological entities, or to sense macromolecules [ 15 , 16 , 2 , 3 , 4 ,
9 , 13 , 17 , 14 ] .

Active resonators contain a gain medium , described below, and upon
excitation, the emitted fluorescence intensity is modulated by the
resonance frequency. This is a direct result of the Purcell effect [ 97
] , which, in brief, describes the reduction of the lifetime of the
emission, thus increasing fluorescent intensity at resonant wavelength
values [ 98 , 99 , 100 ] . The Purcell effect will be explained in more
detail in Section 2.2 . The most important aspect of fluorescence-based
resonators, besides the selection of the resonator geometry, is this
gain medium, which provides the required fluorescence emission.

Fluorescent dyes are the most common gain medium used for active
microresonators, as they typically provide a broad range of emission
wavelengths, stretching from the ultraviolet to the visible [ 89 ] , and
in some cases, through to the near infrared [ 90 , 91 ] . The literature
on the chemistry of various organic dyes in polymer matrices is
extensive, and includes dyes for which the solubility and reactivity can
be classified on the basis of the presence of azo (–N=N–) groups,
quinone groups ( anthraquinone dyes), or phthalocyanines [ 101 ] . These
organic fluorophores are commonly mixed with a polymer, such as PMMA [
102 , 76 , 103 ] , SU @xmath [ 104 , 105 ] , PDMS [ 106 ] or polystyrene
[ 107 , 108 , 95 ] , and subsequently fabricated directly into a chosen
resonator design. Alternatively, fluorescent dyes can be introduced into
already-formed polymer microresonators. One common method, especially
for polystyrene microspheres, is to use a two-phase liquid system. In
this case, the resonators are suspended in an aqueous solution while the
fluorophore is dissolved in an organic dye that is not miscible with
water [ 75 ] . As an alternative, resonators can simply be coated with
fluorescent dye molecules using chemical moieties on both the dye and
the resonator surface [ 92 , 93 ] . It is this latter technique, in
particular, which is followed in Chapter 3 to examine the properties of
dye-coated silica microbubbles [ 109 ] , with a view toward simulating
the fluorescent signal obtained from biological cells.

Exactly which of these methods, both passive and active, is most
suitable for achieving the realisation of a functional, biological cell
resonator, and what methodological alterations need to be made to
accommodate this unique scenario, will be the principal subject of
Chapter 6 . It is clear, however, that it is important to understand how
each method relates to biosensing.

### 1.3 Biosensing

One particularly engaging aspect of modern research developments into
resonator technology is the application to the sensing or measurement of
important quantities in biology or medicine. WGMs represent a key
optical phenomenon for sensing due to the sensitivity of their
evanescent field to nearby entities, such as biomolecules, which break
the symmetry of the electromagnetic field, thereby causing a measurable
shift in either the resonance positions or intensities [ 110 ] .

In biosensing, the detection of single particles has become well
established using passive resonators, with multiple demonstrations being
documented [ 110 , 111 , 112 ] . However, the free-space excitation and
collection platform provided by active resonators enables novel
applications that cannot be achieved with passive resonators. For
example, free-floating resonators can be inserted into living cells for
sensing [ 107 ] , or tagging and tracking purposes, using the specific
spectral fingerprint of each individual WGM resonator [ 113 , 114 ] .
The development of WGM measurement techniques in the context of
biological cells is a key emphasis of this thesis, and will be discussed
in more detail as the project formulation is presented in Section 1.4 .

Fluorescent-based interrogation methods have also been used in
conjunction with smaller resonators, with extents of the order of @xmath
microns ( @xmath m) [ 75 , 115 , 116 ] . These resonators exhibit a
number of advantages over their larger counterparts. Firstly, they are
more localised, providing greater scope for placement of the resonator
at the site required for sensing. The size of a resonator, in addition
to the index contrast, also affects the refractive index sensitivity of
the modes, the combination of which has recently been explored through
the use of a figure of merit [ 115 ] . Smaller resonators constructed
from a given material with a certain refractive index, and in a given
medium, exhibit an evanescent field that extends further into the medium
than is the case for larger diameter resonators with the same index
contrast. In the context of biosensing, this means that less material is
required for observing a shift in the WGM positions, allowing scope for
the detection of single particles [ 117 , 111 , 112 ] , and in some
cases, single molecules [ 17 , 14 ] .

On the other hand, smaller resonators are more susceptible to loss of
confinement and more sensitive to geometric deformations or increased
ellipticity, as a consequence of their extended evanescent field [ 115 ,
118 ] . This has the effect of reducing the clear definition of the
modes, which is most commonly characterised by the quality factor , or
@xmath -factor – a quantity that will be a particular focus in this
thesis, and will be discussed in detail in Chapter 2 . It is worth
noting that active resonators typically exhibit lower @xmath -factors
than their passive resonator counterparts, owing to their reliance on
excitation methods that typically have no preferred electromagnetic
alignment, which offsets the practical advantages afforded by the
convenience of free-space interrogation.

It has been shown that fluorescent resonators can be turned into
microscopic laser sources using a lasing gain medium and a suitable pump
source, enabling higher @xmath -factors to be realised upon reaching the
lasing threshold [ 75 , 119 , 76 , 120 , 121 , 122 , 123 , 124 ] and
lowering the detection limits for sensing applications [ 94 , 119 ] .
The determination of the lasing threshold can be achieved numerically [
125 ] through use of the lasing eigenvalue problem (LEP) formulation,
which introduces the gain through an imaginary part of the refractive
index [ 126 , 127 ] . However, exactly how the @xmath -factor and the
effective mode volume of the resonator, @xmath , both influence the
lasing threshold and the mode behaviour above the lasing threshold
remains an unresolved issue. Early work by Sandoghdar et al. indicates
that the lasing threshold of neodymium doped silica microspheres has a
linear dependence on @xmath [ 128 ] , whereas Spillane et al. suggested
a dependence on @xmath [ 129 ] . More recently, Gargas et al.
established a dependence on @xmath for the lasing threshold of a ZnO
microdisk [ 130 ] , among other factors such as the diameter of the
disk, further indicating that the behaviour of the lasing WGMs and the
determination of the lasing threshold are not fully understood.

Single cells have been reported to be transformed into WGM resonators by
injecting a mixture of fluorescent dye and high refractive index oil,
thus providing the required laser gain medium to generate WGMs, as well
as some degree of confinement due to the refractive index contrast
between the oil droplet and its surrounding environment [ 114 ] .
Furthermore, by combining fluorescent microspheres with flow cytometry,
automated high-throughput sensing has been achieved, using a robust data
analysis algorithm to extract real-time information about resonator
properties from their WGM spectra [ 131 ] . Fluorescent cholesteric
liquid crystal core shell structures have also shown potential as
magnetically transportable light sources for in-channel illumination
applications [ 121 ] .

With such a wide variety of research avenues in the field of biosensing,
it is worthwhile reminding the reader how the research question is to be
formulated in the context of the techniques and methods developed in
this thesis.

### 1.4 Formulation of the project

As a complementary approach to the myriad techniques that have been
developed in the literature, the concept of a biological cell acting as
a resonator itself will be explored herein. This research direction is
conceptually quite separate from the integration of existing
microresonator sensors with biological cells, involving the introduction
of microspheres onto or within the cell membrane [ 107 ] . In effect,
what is being proposed is to investigate whether a cell is able to
support resonances on its own, that is, without the use of an artificial
cavity known to be able to sustain modes. By generating photons at the
site of inquiry through the aforementioned methods of active
interrogation, the measurement of resonances would, in a sense, be
reporting on the immediate internal and external environment of the cell
itself. If successful, this would represent an elegant conceptual
development in the field of biosensing. It is also possible that the
natural autofluorescence of cells themselves could potentially be
harnessed to generate modes, for example, in mammalian oocytes (such as
those shown in Fig. 1.4 , and described in more detail in Chapter 5 ).
The consequences of being able to measure modes sustained naturally by a
living cell could potentially lead to new insights into the complex
biological environment inhabited by living matter.

As a result, the microresonators that will be considered in detail will
be confined to those that act as a direct analogue for a particular
class of biological cell. The models developed in this thesis become
progressively more sophisticated as the understanding of the mode
behaviour and the criteria for sustaining WGMs are refined. The class of
biological cell identified in Chapter 5 is then explored for its
potential use as a biological resonator.

A detailed summary of the structure of the thesis is as follows.

### 1.5 Structure

Like the structure of a cell, the thesis is multi-layered. While the
roadmap presented in the Prologue indicates the respective disciplines
and areas of interest treated within each chapter, a technical summary
of the thesis structure is as follows.

In Chapter 2 , the technology underpinning WGM sensors is explained, and
a computational toolkit developed, which is able to handle deformations
and inhomogeneities in microspheres. The model is tested against known
and verified analytic models from the literature. Chapter 3 demonstrates
the customisability of the toolkit, incorporating a single-layer
‘bubble’ structure, as well as a uniform layer of dipole sources,
representing a fluorescent active medium. A non-invasive spectrum-based
method for the extraction of key geometric data from such resonators is
presented. In order to counteract the resource limitations of these
complex computational models, especially for large scale (diameter
@xmath @xmath m) cells, an efficient, multilayer microsphere model is
developed in Chapter 4 , and harmonised with the existing models in the
literature. The unique feature of this model is its ability to
incorporate a number of different excitation strategies, including any
number of dipole sources or active fluorescent layers, into a unified
formula.

Throughout the initial chapters, the vision underpins each summary
discussion, in order to maintain the scope of the topic on cell
resonators. This theme becomes the prominent discussion topic in Chapter
5 , where the search for a candidate cell, its required physical
criteria, and the feasibility of the most suitable choice are explored.
The technologies developed thus far are then applied to the best
candidate cell, and the experimental setup and methodology are expounded
in Chapter 6 , which represents the denouement of the thesis. With the
experiment and analysis concluded, the future impacts of the research
are discussed in Chapter 7 . The final evaluation of the work presented
herein, and a summary of the main contribution of this thesis, forms
Chapter 8 . After briefly exploring the status of this work in the
broader context of the vision, I append proofs, checks and ancillary
information ill-suited to the main body of the work, and supporting
publications for the thesis.

## 2 Spherical Sensors

### 2.1 Microsphere sensor technology

Modern sensing technologies form a vital part of photonics research
applications. Microspheres in particular have attracted much interest in
different fields of research, such as remote atmospheric sensing [ 132 ,
133 ] , photonic band-gap devices [ 80 , 134 ] , fluorescence
spectroscopy [ 135 , 136 , 137 ] , nonlinear optics [ 28 , 138 , 29 ,
139 , 140 , 141 ] , superscattering [ 142 ] , and metamaterial absorbers
[ 37 , 38 ] . There are also numerous theoretical works on light
scattering from microspheres [ 132 , 136 , 143 , 144 , 145 , 146 , 133 ,
147 , 41 , 148 ] , commonly based on the fundamental principles of Mie
scattering [ 149 ] , which even the most sophisticated models must be
able to reproduce.

It is of special interest in this thesis to explore aspects of
microspheres that can be adapted for biosensing applications [ 16 , 3 ,
5 , 150 , 151 , 11 , 13 , 152 , 75 ] . One should note that the
microsphere is the simplest three-dimensional test case for a more
extensive biological cell analogue, the development of which will occupy
Chapters 3 and 4 of this thesis. It is therefore worthwhile to
understand the key aspects of microsphere sensors, their WGM behaviour,
the models that describe them, and their expected similarities to and
differences from biological cell resonators. The development of a
customisable toolkit, based on the Finite-Difference Time-Domain (FDTD)
method, represents an important part of this exploratory study. FDTD is
particularly suitable in this context, because of its ability to
incorporate a range of deformations and novel structures, while at the
same time achieving a slice-by-slice record of the behaviour of the
electromagnetic fields. This wealth of simulated data can be analysed,
aggregated into a power spectrum, defined as the power emitted from the
resonator over a given wavelength range, or used to access transient or
emergent optical phenomena, as will be explained in Section 2.3 .

In FDTD, once the geometry of the microsphere resonator and flux
collection methods have been established, the WGM spectrum is
introduced, and a range of useful properties is analysed in a variety of
scenarios. The results of the simulations are connected to the well
established physical phenomenon of Mie scattering, and finally, the
distribution of the emitted radiation in the vicinity of a microsphere
is examined.

Recent technological advances have led to new possibilities for using
microspheres with several dielectric layers, coatings of active
materials, or doped with fluorescence nanoparticles, as described in
Chapter 1 . As a result, there is now a necessity to develop more
advanced models, as well as efficient numerical simulation tools, for
describing these resonators and their excitation schemes accurately.
Currently in the literature, a number of models exist that individually
describe one of the following: the wavelength values of microsphere
resonances [ 153 , 41 ] , the emitted spectra anticipated from embedded
dipole sources [ 154 , 143 ] or active layer coatings [ 136 ] , and also
single [ 147 , 148 ] and multiple layer [ 154 , 144 , 145 , 146 , 133 ]
microsphere scenarios that do not include the ability to calculate WGM
spectra. These models are not all written using the same notation,
making the combined use in their present forms impractical. Some
computational methods are numerically unstable in certain parameter
regions, such as resonators with very thin layers, introducing large
artefacts that adversely affect the simulated spectrum [ 155 ] . Some
approaches require a multitude of separate equations [ 133 ] , thus
making a unified analysis that incorporates all previously developed
features an attractive prospect. This unified model is developed in
Chapter 4 , and represents a chief accomplishment of this thesis.

The simulation techniques in the aforementioned works represent an
important class of tools for the interpretation of WGM spectra obtained
from optical resonators. They may be used to identify the mode orders in
a given WGM spectrum [ 152 , 156 ] , and facilitate resonator design [
157 , 115 , 158 ] . Furthermore, the ability to calculate the underlying
geometric parameters of a given resonator based solely on its spectrum [
109 ] makes the development of robust models for resonators of high
importance.

### 2.2 Analytic models for spherical resonators

In this section, the literature on the mathematical modelling of
microsphere resonators is summarised, as a prelude to development of a
new, unified model presented in Chapter 4 , which allows the features of
these previous models to be combined using a consistent notation. A
comparison of the different methods in the literature with the fully
developed model of Chapter 4 can be found in Appendix C .

To begin, I consider that analytic models describing WGMs in the
literature can be split into two categories: models that provide only
the positions of the TE and TM modes [ 153 , 41 ] , which are unable to
predict the profile of the output spectrum, and models that consider the
full behaviour of the electric and magnetic fields both inside and
outside the resonator [ 132 , 159 , 160 , 161 , 143 , 136 , 162 , 163 ,
164 ] . Although the simpler analytic models used in the literature are
comparatively efficient to calculate, the TE and TM modes obtained
through geometrical arguments [ 153 , 41 ] do not include the ability to
generate spectra, nor do they take into account radiation losses.

Both these two types of analytic model rely on the assumptions that a
microsphere resonator is perfectly spherical with no surface roughness,
that it consists of a medium that is homogeneous in refractive index,
and that the total radiated power is collected without directional bias.
The formulae for the resonance positions and spectra must therefore be
rederived separately for scenarios that consider different resonator
shapes or inhomogeneities, and this can become cumbersome.

#### 2.2.1 Johnson model for WGM mode positions in microspheres

The simplest analytic model that provides the positions of the TE and TM
modes is particularly useful for identifying the mode numbers of the WGM
peaks that occur in the spectrum of a dielectric microsphere resonator [
153 , 41 ] . For brevity, this model will be denoted the Johnson model [
153 ] . The resonance positions identified by this model exactly match
the results of Mie scattering theory [ 149 ] , and this will provide a
benchmark of comparison that will be used in Section 2.3.3 for the
investigation of alternative excitation strategies.

According to the Johnson model [ 153 , 41 ] , the derivation of the WGM
resonance condition for a dielectric sphere is now shown. Starting from
a general construction, a continuous electric field, oscillating with
frequency @xmath , takes the form @xmath , for a vector position @xmath
with respect to spherical coordinates, with the origin placed at the
centre of the microsphere. This satisfies the Helmholtz wave equation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

for a wave-number @xmath , where @xmath is the speed of light in a
vacuum. The refractive index function @xmath changes value across the
boundary of the resonator and its surrounding medium, and in the
simplest case of a microsphere of radius @xmath constructed from a
dielectric medium, without the inclusion of absorption loss, takes the
form

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.2)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The TE mode positions can be extracted from this equation using
separation of variables in spherical polar coordinates

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.4)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where the angular vector functions @xmath are defined in terms of the
associated Legendre polynomials @xmath . These functions @xmath [ 146 ,
165 ] occur in all models derived from the wave equation of Eq. ( 2.1 ),
and a consistent notation must be established. A summary of the vector
spherical harmonics (VSH), harmonising the notations in the literature,
can be found in Appendix A . In the formalism of the Johnson model, the
VSH contain contributions in the directions @xmath and @xmath . The
function @xmath in Eq. ( 2.4 ) satisfies the second order differential
equation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

From the differential equation in Eq. ( 2.6 ), the resonance condition
for the TE modes is obtained directly from an application of the
continuity condition across the boundary, in the transverse component of
the electric field

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.7)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

evaluated at @xmath , with a similar continuity equation for the
magnetic field @xmath applying for the TM modes.

The radial function @xmath takes a Riccati-Bessel form, which can be
expressed in terms of the spherical Bessel functions of the first kind,
@xmath , for the incoming waves, and the spherical Hankel function,
@xmath , for the outgoing waves

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

The use of the outgoing spherical Hankel function, @xmath takes into
account leaky WGMs, which radiate energy outwards, and are described by
normalisable quasi-modes [ 166 ] . Here, the arguments @xmath are
defined as a useful shorthand called the size parameters , and the
coefficients @xmath can be solved for using the continuity condition
above. The resonance condition for the TE modes of the sphere thus takes
the following form, for a radial coordinate equal to the boundary radius
of the sphere, @xmath [ 41 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

For the TM modes, take note that the form of @xmath contains both
angular and radial vector components (for @xmath as the unit vector in
the radial direction)

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.11)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.12)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where the function @xmath obeys the equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

The solutions to Eq. ( 2.14 ) for @xmath take a similar form to those of
@xmath above

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the coefficients @xmath may be defined through enforcing
continuity at the boundary in the same way as @xmath , thus leading to
the resonance condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus, the resonance conditions of Eqs. ( 2.10 ) and ( 2.16 ) may be used
to specify the positions of the modes as a function of wavenumber @xmath
, or wavelength, @xmath .

#### 2.2.2 Chew model for the power emitted from active microspheres

A more general type of analytic model, such as that developed by Chance,
Prock and Silbey using dyadic Green’s functions [ 159 ] and separately
by Chew et al. [ 132 , 143 , 136 ] , is able to simulate the full
electric and magnetic field behaviour both inside and outside the
resonator. These models deal particularly with the case of a dipole
source placed on the surface of the resonator. Both of these models were
shown to be equivalent to each other as formulations of spherical
resonators excited by a dipole source [ 143 ] , and were also shown to
obtain the same resonance positions as Mie scattering [ 149 ] . The
resonance conditions derived from the Johnson model can thus serve as an
excellent benchmark comparison for spectra generated from the variety of
models developed throughout this work, in order to check that each model
correctly reproduces the established Mie coefficients for known
resonance positions of a given radial and azimuthal mode order. This
checking process will be carried out explicitly in Section 2.3.3 .

A thorough discussion of the well known Chew model of @xmath [ 154 ] ,
and its relation to other models, including the unified multilayer model
developed in Chapter 4 , is left until Appendix C . The Chew model is
derived from the expansion of the vector electric and magnetic fields of
a radiating dipole in terms of the VSH [ 132 , 159 , 160 , 161 , 143 ,
136 , 162 , 163 , 164 ]

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.17)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where the convention used for the VSH, @xmath , defined in Appendix A ,
will be reformed when the unified model is presented, in Section 4.2 .
The quantities @xmath and @xmath are the electric and magnetic dipole
coefficients, respectively, defined in terms of the vector dipole moment
@xmath , the permittivity ( @xmath ) and permeability ( @xmath ) of the
surrounding medium, and specified at the radial position of the dipole
@xmath , with the gradient operator @xmath acting on this coordinate

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.19)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

For @xmath , the spherical Bessel functions @xmath must be interchanged
with @xmath .

In the Chew model, the scattered electric field in the outer region
takes a similar form to that obtained from a radiating dipole

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the coefficients @xmath and @xmath are related to the Mie
scattering coefficients of Ref. [ 149 ] , and may be expressed in terms
of the dipole coefficients @xmath and @xmath , making use of the
continuity condition of Eq. ( 2.8 ) and its magnetic field variant [ 143
] .

The total emitted power can be obtained by integrating the Poynting
vector @xmath with respect to the total solid angle @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the specific case of a dipole source oriented in the radial (normal)
or tangential (transverse) direction placed on the surface of the
sphere, the components of the emitted power take the following form when
normalised to the power of a dipole in the surrounding medium of index
@xmath [ 143 ]

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.23)
     @xmath               (2.24)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.25)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Note that the radial oscillations contain a single term, which encodes
the contributions from the TM modes only, as a consequence of spherical
symmetry, which will be discussed more thoroughly in Chapter 4 . In the
case of the tangential oscillations, contributions from both TE and TM
modes appear, as shown in Eq. ( 2.24 ). This observation will become
important for the interpretation of the results obtained from FDTD
simulations, described in Section 2.3.2 .

A range of models has been reported in the literature for the
incorporation of multiple dielectric layers. These include a version of
the Chew model for @xmath layers, in which the continuity equations for
the quantities @xmath and @xmath for both TE and TM modes are expanded
to a large matrix equation to calculate all @xmath unknown parameters [
154 ] . The calculation of the resonance conditions for a microsphere
with a single layer coating has also been solved explicitly by Teraoka
and Arnold [ 147 , 148 ] , presented in detail in Appendix C.3 . In
addition, there are several publications that solve the continuity
condition of an @xmath -layer microsphere system using a method known as
the transfer matrix approach . These include the study of Bragg ‘onion’
resonators by Liang, Xu, Huang and Yariv [ 144 , 145 , 146 ] and their
scattering cross sections in the far field region, and the WGM spectrum
for dipoles placed on the surface, as in the Chew model, by Moroz [ 133
] . Note that while the development of a model that incorporates the
ability to obtain the WGM spectrum, as well as to simulate the inclusion
of one or more dipole sources, or layers of dipole sources, will be left
until Chapter 4 , it will become necessary, as described in Section 2.1
, to unify the disparate conventions and frameworks so that the
behaviour of the WGMs in fluorescent, multilayer resonators can be
simulated and compared to experiment.

#### 2.2.3 Quality factor and loss

One particular performance characteristic of a resonator is the quality
factor, or @xmath -factor, which expresses the ability of a resonator to
store energy. A resonator with a high @xmath -factor is able to contain
the electromagnetic fields that circulate around the surface for longer
periods of time compared to resonators with a low @xmath -factor. For
each round trip taken by the field, an amount of energy leaks from the
resonator, and the time taken for a sufficient energy loss to transpire
is known as the cavity ring-down time. This relationship between @xmath
-factor and ring-down time is a consequence of the definition of the
@xmath -factor in terms of the exponential decay constant, as derived
from signal analysis [ 167 ] , and will be described below.

The resultant light scattered from the resonator during the process of
leaking radiation can be represented by the value of the emitted power
over a range of wavelengths or frequencies, known as the spectrum. The
usefulness of the spectrum in analysing the behaviour of WGMs is
introduced in Section 2.3.2 , and will comprise a significant portion of
this thesis.

One particular contribution to the @xmath -factor, the geometric
portion, @xmath , is the easiest to estimate theoretically, and is often
considered to be a reliable indicator of the performance of a resonator
[ 168 ] . The total @xmath -factor, as measured in experiment, includes
a range of other contributions to the loss of energy, such as material
absorption, surface scattering, topological deformations such as
asphericity, and the radiation loss, derived from the coupling condition
to the underlying geometric modes of the resonator [ 169 , 115 ] . These
contributions must also be considered, and are discussed later in this
section.

Consider @xmath , which has its origin in the signal analysis of
inductor-resistor-capacitor (LRC) circuits, where a resonant frequency
@xmath of an oscillating wave, @xmath , can be expanded to first order [
170 ]

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.27)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the wave amplitude and @xmath is the exponential time
constant. Substituting Eq. ( 2.28 ) back into Eq. ( 2.27 ), the
distribution of energy in the cavity is proportional to the Lorentzian
function

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

Essentially, @xmath describes the imaginary part of the eigenfrequency
@xmath , which is related to the time constant @xmath via [ 171 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

This relationship between the @xmath -factor and the decay constant is
an important point in the definition of the Purcell factor, a quantity
associated with the Purcell effect introduced in Section 1.2.2 .

If the wave is simply propagating along a waveguide, or within a prism
of uniform refractive index @xmath , as will be used in Section 6.2.1 ,
the propagation constant takes the form for a plane wave @xmath [ 170 ,
168 ] . For a wave travelling along a circular cross section of a
resonator of radius @xmath , the propagation constant can be obtained
from the mathematical form of the near (evanescent) field, or the bound
portion of the field in the vicinity of the outer boundary of the
resonator. Using separation of variables, this field takes the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

with component-wise contributions as follows [ 168 ]

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.32)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.33)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The coefficients in these formulae are defined as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.35)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.36)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Note that the radial component, @xmath , takes the form of a spherical
Bessel function within the resonator. However, immediately outside the
resonator the fields decay exponentially away from the boundary in the
radial direction, with a decay constant of @xmath . The propagation
constant @xmath , projected onto the equator of the sphere such that
@xmath , takes the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

As a result, the phase-matching condition for microsphere resonators,
introduced in Section 1.2.1 , can be specified explicitly, by setting
the propagation constants of a plane wave within a coupler to that of
the equatorial modes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus, noting that @xmath , and recalling that the complex wavenumber is
related to the eigenfrequency, @xmath , as stated below Eq. ( 2.1 ),
@xmath takes the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

for the wave number @xmath .

The scaling behaviour of this @xmath -factor for large resonators of
refractive index @xmath can be estimated using a model derived from an
asymptotic analysis of the resonance conditions of Eqs. ( 2.10 ) and (
2.16 ), as described in Refs [ 172 , 173 ]

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.40)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.41)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.42)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath , and the factor @xmath is equal to @xmath for the TM
modes, and equal to @xmath for the TE modes. The exterior refractive
index is assumed to be @xmath in this example. In this asymptotic form,
one may choose the order, @xmath , to which to calculate the ordered
zeroes of the Airy function, @xmath , which appears in the asymptotic
expansion of the characteristic equation. The formula above is only
valid for a large azimuthal mode number ( @xmath ) approximation, and
assumes that only the fundamental mode is observed, for which the
quantum numbers introduced in Section 1.1 and Fig. 1.2 take the values
@xmath , and @xmath . The value taken by @xmath in this case can be
related simply to the number of round trips taken by the resonating
waves, as shown in Fig. 1.1 (a), which depends upon the radius of the
microsphere, @xmath , and takes the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

This approach is not generally suitable for predicting the absolute
magnitude of the measured @xmath -factor, especially for small
resonators capable of small azimuthal mode numbers at their resonance
condition. Of course, to gain a more realistic value of the total @xmath
-factor, one must estimate the effect of other sources of loss.

While the geometric @xmath -factor expresses one portion of the loss,
there are other sources of loss that need to be accounted for before one
can attempt an accurate comparison with the @xmath -factors measured in
experiment [ 169 , 115 ] . These sources include material absorption,
scattering from surface roughness, and radiation loss, that is, loss
incurred from selecting a particular mode excitation strategy, with a
given coupling efficiency. The losses can be modelled, as in the case of
an LRC series circuit, where the total @xmath -factor is inversely
proportional to the loss over a resistance @xmath , @xmath [ 174 ] . In
the context of optical resonators, the total loss derived from the
imaginary part of the eigenfrequency @xmath , from Eq. ( 2.28 ), can
thus be added in parallel

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, the quantity @xmath is the @xmath -factor derived from material
loss such as absorption, @xmath is due to scattering from surface
roughness, and @xmath is the cavity tunnelling loss, which can derived
from one of several analytic models described in Section 2.2 . The
cavity tunnelling loss itself is composed of the geometric loss, @xmath
, and the radiation loss, which depends intimately on the method of
excitation [ 164 ] . Note that experimental measurement of the geometric
portion of the @xmath -factor cannot be conducted directly, as the
measurement can only take place in the presence of radiation through
which the modes are excited. Therefore, analysis of the spectrum
represents a more realistic assessment of the @xmath -factor, as the
selection of a specific excitation strategy is implicit in the
calculation of any spectrum. In the case of microspheres, it is also
possible to separate the asphericity component from the cavity loss in
the same way [ 118 ] , by introducing an extra term into Eq. ( 2.44 ).

The cavity @xmath -factor, @xmath , can be obtained directly from the
spectra, for a peak centred on a wavelength @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

WGM resonators can exhibit high performance in terms of their @xmath
-factors, which in some cases exceed @xmath [ 175 ] experimentally. In
most cases, however, the limiting factor on @xmath is the material
absorption or the surface scattering. The limit of the @xmath -factor
due to material losses can be determined by considering the absorption
of light by both the resonator and the surrounding medium using an
absorption decay constant @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

The magnitude of the absorption decay constant depends on how tightly
the light is confined within the resonator, the wavelength range, and
the surrounding refractive index. Scattering contributions can be
calculated by modelling the surface roughness as a changing dielectric
constant, and this has been used to determine upper limits on the @xmath
-factors of small silica spheres. One such expression for the limit of
the @xmath -factor due to surface scattering can be derived by
considering the scattered power @xmath in the case of an inhomogeneity
in the dielectric constant, @xmath , for a Dirac delta function @xmath [
176 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the correlation length and @xmath is the variance of the
surface roughness [ 85 ] . Each of these quantities can be determined by
measuring the extent to which a fluctuating beam exhibits coherence upon
being transmitted through the surface [ 177 ] . Using high-quality
polishing techniques, surface roughnesses of @xmath nm can be achieved
for some resonators. According to one study [ 85 ] , assuming that
@xmath and @xmath are roughly equal in magnitude at @xmath nm, the
scattering limitation of the @xmath -factor can be estimated as @xmath
for a diamond resonator with a radius of @xmath mm, at a wavelength of
@xmath @xmath m. For a polystyrene microsphere of radius @xmath @xmath m
in water, at a wavelength of @xmath nm, a limiting factor is reported
closer to @xmath – significantly less than the geometric @xmath -factor
expected from Mie scattering theory, @xmath [ 178 ] . It is important to
note that it is only when the roughness approaches the order of @xmath
nanometres (nm), that @xmath becomes a limiting factor for the overall
@xmath -factor, as estimated for the specific case of polystyrene
microspheres with radii of approximately @xmath @xmath m [ 178 , 179 ,
180 ] . While the biological cells considered as viable resonator
candidates in Chapter 5 are typically much larger in diameter than
@xmath @xmath m, it will be discovered that they can exhibit significant
surface roughness, and thus one must keep in mind these circumstances in
which scattering loss can dominate.

In the case of microspheres, it is sometimes convenient to define a
separate @xmath -factor corresponding to the asphericity, which can also
limit the value of the total @xmath -factor. This is useful when
considering active microspheres [ 118 ] , particularly the variety that
are coated with a fluorescent dye, which tend to emit without a
direction preference. Such active resonators are thus susceptible to
degradation of the @xmath -factor, even for relatively small deviations
in their sphericity – down to the nanometre level [ 115 ] . This is a
consequence of the presence of multiple microsphere diameters
experienced by rays propagating inside the resonator. For example, an
elliptical resonator is capable of sustaining modes along both its minor
and major axes, as well as skew rays, which propagate along a spiral
path, and thus experience a different effective diameter for each round
trip. The relatively uniform emission of radiation from active
resonators thus includes contributions from multiple paths, leading to
mode-splitting and reduced @xmath -factors [ 115 , 118 , 95 ] .

It is well known that the geometric portion of the @xmath -factor can
overestimate the measured @xmath -factor by many orders of magnitude, as
seen by comparing analytic models in the absence of radiation [ 168 ,
181 ] with methods that include the missing radiation losses [ 182 , 183
, 184 , 157 , 115 ] . The contribution to the total @xmath -factor from
Eq. ( 2.45 ) expresses both the intrinsic geometric loss and the loss of
radiation through the excitation strategy that was used to generate the
spectrum, effectively renormalising the width of the resonance.
Equation ( 2.45 ) describes a general way of extracting the @xmath
-factor of a cavity from a spectrum, irrespective of the specific
excitation method. However, in the case of active resonators, which
include an embedded emitter or fluorescent layer, additional spectral
features may be observed, such as the Purcell effect. The magnitude of
this effect is typically ascertained by calculation of a quantity known
as the Purcell factor [ 97 , 185 ] , which is defined in terms of the
decay rate of the emitter, @xmath .

It has long been known that the local environment is able to alter the
behaviour of an emitter [ 185 , 186 , 187 , 188 ] . In the case of a
resonant cavity, the presence of a refractive index contrast between the
resonator boundary and its surrounding medium can modify the local
density of states available for the emitted energy to be stored,
affecting both the emission rate and the emitted power [ 185 , 189 , 190
, 191 ] . Since the loss of radiation through emission into free space
is related to the solid angle into which it radiates (which is handled
explicitly when calculating the emitted power in Appendix B ), it is
useful to define the effective mode volume, @xmath , which can be used
to describe the distribution of power of the modes within a cavity. For
an electric field @xmath , permittivity @xmath and a radial coordinate
@xmath , one may define [ 97 , 192 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the integral is taken over all space.

If an emitter with a dipole moment @xmath and transition frequency
@xmath has an excitation rate @xmath near its emission frequency, then a
single-frequency approximation of the emission rate can be calculated in
terms of the radiative ( @xmath ) and non-radiative ( @xmath ) decay
rates, respectively [ 188 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since the excitation rate depends on local electric field @xmath such
that @xmath , and the total spontaneous decay rate can be calculated via
Fermi’s golden rule

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is Planck’s constant and @xmath is the density of states
available to the emitter, then the emission behaviour of the system can
be entirely determined by the dyadic Green’s function of @xmath , as
follows. Solutions to the Helmholtz equation of Eq. ( 2.1 ) can be
described by integrating a Green’s function @xmath , together with the
electric current @xmath , throughout a volume @xmath that entirely
encompasses the resonator [ 193 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

The local density of states, @xmath , can then be expressed in terms of
this function [ 190 , 194 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

for a unit vector @xmath . To take a simple example, in the case of an
emitter in free space, the density and decay rates simplify to @xmath ,
and @xmath . In the case of a dipole emitter with a high quantum yield,
@xmath , corresponding to an emitted electric field @xmath , the
non-radiative rate takes the form [ 159 ]

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.53)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.54)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

in terms of the emitted power of a dipole in free space, @xmath . The
normalised excitation rate from an incident radiation field @xmath that
interacts with the emitter takes the form

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.55)
  -- -- -- --------

The Purcell factor for a resonance near a wavelength of @xmath is then
defined as the ratio [ 97 , 185 ]

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.56)
  -- -- -- --------

By substituting the non-radiative and excitation decay rates into the
formula of Eq. ( 2.49 ), it can be seen that there is a relationship
between the normalised emitted power, @xmath , and the emission ratio [
190 ] . In some cases this can result in an emission of more power
within an environment than would have been the case in free space,
@xmath . This particular effect will be explored further in Section
2.3.2 .

#### 2.2.4 Free spectral range

WGM spectra exhibit relatively sharp peaks corresponding to the WGM
resonance positions, and can be well spaced, particularly for small
resonators. One can calculate the peak-to-peak wavelength range, or free
spectral range (FSR), and the relative linewidth, @xmath , in the
following manner. The FSR of a microsphere resonator of radius @xmath
and effective refractive index contrast of @xmath , for two consecutive
polar mode numbers @xmath and @xmath , can be approximated from [ 195 ]

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.57)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.58)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

such that the difference in the modes takes the following formula,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath , and the group refractive index @xmath takes the form
@xmath .

Alternatively, the FSR can be estimated from the wavelength dependence
of the propagation constant @xmath [ 196 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

such that the formula of Eq. ( 2.59 ) can be reproduced from

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

In Eq. ( 2.59 ), it can be seen that, as a general rule, the FSR
decreases as the radius increases. This will be an important
consideration in the analysis of the behaviour of the FSR in the
remainder of this chapter, as well as in Chapters 3 through 5 .

### 2.3 A customisable FDTD-based toolkit

The FDTD technique simulates the evolution of electromagnetic fields by
discretising a volume into a three-dimensional spatial lattice [ 197 ] .
Maxwell’s equations are then solved for every point on the lattice, for
a finite number of time increments. FDTD represents a critical tool in
the simulation of novel resonator architectures, specifically for its
ability to incorporate material inhomogeneities and a wide variety of
resonator shapes, such as shells, ellipsoids or deformations to a
microsphere.

The use of two-dimensional FDTD simulations to describe the resonance
peak positions has been used previously in the case of microdisks [ 50 ]
. However, the accurate prediction of the @xmath -factor of the
resonances represents a principal challenge due to the significant
dependence of the @xmath -factor on minute characteristics of the
resonator, such as the surface roughness, material inhomogeneities and
microscopic deformations in the shape of the resonator [ 198 ] described
in the previous section. As a result, theoretical @xmath -factors
evaluated through analytic models can be difficult to match
experimentally [ 198 , 199 ] .

The key flexibility of the FDTD method, however, is the ability to
address this issue by incorporating geometric, material and refractive
index features in a way that is both intuitive and easy to implement. In
addition, specific modes or wavelength regions can be reliably
identified, and tailored for specific tasks by altering the initial
configuration of the resonator. Furthermore, the ability to scan over a
wide range of parameters may lead to valuable design solutions for
biosensing that would not otherwise have been found.

The FDTD method can lead to the possibility of accessing transient or
emergent optical effects due to the fact that an emitter source that
covers a wide range of wavelength values is used (in this case a
Gaussian source), and each time step is evaluated separately, allowing
scope for tracking the intermediate configurations of the fields both
inside and outside the resonator. However, FDTD is computationally
expensive. For example, time steps totalling a few hundred wave periods
frequently require up to @xmath hours of simulation time, for
approximately @xmath CPUs on modern supercomputers. Table 2.1 summarises
typical computing resources for a range of spatial and temporal
resolutions. Nevertheless, for each simulation run, a large amount of
data can be extracted by accessing the electric, magnetic and Poynting
vector fields at each grid point. One particular feature of this
approach is that one is able to map out the angular distribution of the
energy density for a typical flux plane, which will be discussed further
in Section 2.3.4 .

FDTD is also able to consider any desired position or alignment of
dipole sources, including inhomogeneous distributions of dipoles placed
on the surface or throughout the medium. The freedom to define a
specific flux collection region at any point in space, or for any length
of time, is an important feature for ongoing investigations into a range
of coupling scenarios. Measuring the flux from a particular direction
and aperture automatically biases the shape of the collected power
spectrum. FDTD is therefore especially suitable for simulating the
effect of collecting radiation through a restricted region.

The principal drawbacks in the FDTD method are the computational load,
and systematic effects due to the discretisation of space. The accuracy
of each FDTD calculation is limited by the size of the Yee cell , which
determines the grid resolution of the simulated volume. An example Yee
cell is illustrated in Fig. 2.1 , showing the orientation of the
electric and magnetic field components, as well as the contributions
from both the TE and TM components. The Yee cell contains an electric
field ‘sub-cell’ and a magnetic field sub-cell, offset from one another
spatially by one half cell length in all three directions, so that the
cells intersect one another as shown. The components of the electric and
magnetic fields are simulated on the edges of each sub-cell. In the
following simulations, the cell width is @xmath to @xmath nm. A decrease
in the cell size increases the computing time requirement to the fourth
power (three spatial dimensions, and time) [ 200 ] . As a result, the
available hardware resources typically limit the improvement in accuracy
of the FDTD simulations. This has an additional impact on the behaviour
of a microresonator, as the surface of the resonator gains an ‘effective
roughness’, due to the finite cell size. This effect can be incorporated
into the systematic uncertainty of the calculation. An unanticipated
benefit of this effective roughness is a more realistic prediction of
the @xmath -factor of the resonator. Note also that the simulated
roughness is comparable in size to that of the typical surface roughness
of a physical polystyrene microsphere, which is approximately @xmath nm
or greater [ 179 ] .

The three-dimensional FDTD method is simulated using the free software
package, MEEP [ 200 ] . This work is presented in the publication, Ref.
[ 157 ] , which is listed as Item 1 in Section E.1 . For reference, code
and scripts associated with these calculations have been placed online
for public availability -- ¹ ¹ 1
https://sourceforge.net/projects/npps/files/FDTD_WGM_Simulator see
Appendix E.4 . Since the simulation includes the complete set of
radiation and bound modes occurring in the system, the only simulation
artefacts in an FDTD calculation involve discretisation and
finite-volume effects, and any assumptions of ideal material properties
one might make. By altering the grid size, the convergence of the
simulation can be estimated, and this can be quantified in the form of a
systematic uncertainty in the positions of the WGMs. The capability of
including and handling this effect is discussed in more detail in
Section 2.3.2 .

#### 2.3.1 Establishing the resonator geometry

The FDTD method is used to consider a variety of flux collection
scenarios, source distribution, and resonator properties. A specific
example scenario of a polystyrene microsphere in a surrounding medium of
air or water is considered, and the @xmath -factors obtained from the
simulation will then be compared to those of the Chew model [ 136 ] .

The geometry of the resonator is defined for a dielectric medium, and
placed in the discretised space, with the edges of the total
three-dimensional FDTD volume simulated as though padded with a
field-absorbing perfectly-matched layer . To generate an electromagnetic
current to excite the WGMs, one or several electric dipole sources are
placed in the vicinity of the sphere. These sources can be used to
simulate active resonators, such as those that incorporate fluorescent
nanocrystals [ 84 , 85 , 86 ] or quantum dots [ 87 , 39 , 88 ] . The
exploration of the electromagnetic effects of sources is of contemporary
interest due to the recent advancement of the detection of single
particles by WGM resonators [ 117 , 111 , 112 , 17 , 14 ] . In addition,
a distribution of a large number of dipole sources may be used to
simulate a fluorescent layer, analogous to active resonators that use
organic dyes, or to natural autofluorescence [ 89 , 90 , 91 , 75 , 92 ,
93 ] . However, since the focus of this chapter is to explore and verify
the FDTD approach by examining the behaviour of the TE and TM modes with
respect to the dipole orientation, and the spatial distribution of the
energy, this latter option will be dealt with chiefly in Chapters 3 and
4 .

In the first example, a microsphere with a diameter of @xmath microns,
as illustrated in Fig. 2.2 , is placed in the centre of the FDTD volume
described at the beginning of Section 2.3 . An electric dipole is then
placed on the surface of the sphere and oriented tangentially to the
surface, while a circular flux collection region is defined a distance
@xmath , normal to the sphere, with diameter @xmath . This region
aggregates the flux in the frequency domain. One may vary the
orientation and position of both source and collection region to build
up a map of the coupling efficiencies to different WGMs.

#### 2.3.2 Introducing the spectrum

The power output spectrum represents an important quantity for assessing
the @xmath -factors and the wavelength positions of the excited WGMs.
The total output power ( @xmath ) in terms of wavelength ( @xmath ) is
obtained by integrating the projection of the Poynting vector ( @xmath )
onto a flux region of area @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

for a unit vector @xmath normal to the collection region. Aggregating
the power flux at each time slice, as opposed to time-averaging, ensures
that the full electromagnetic behaviour is incorporated into the
spectrum, including all transient states.

The profile of the power spectrum, plotted as a function of wavelength
@xmath , will show sharp peaks that correspond to the positions of TE
and TM WGMs. The relative heights of the peaks indicate the coupling
efficiencies to different modes, which are highly dependent on the
geometry of the dielectric medium, the refractive index contrast, and
also the method of mode excitation, such as dipole sources of different
alignments, or other coupling scenarios. The power spectrum is then
normalised to the power output of the sources in the absence of the
dielectric sphere. This power, @xmath , is calculated in the same manner
as @xmath in Eq. 2.62 , with the dipole sources within the FDTD volume
emitted.

An FDTD simulation of a polystyrene microsphere, @xmath , with a
diameter of @xmath @xmath m, is carried out for a tangentially-oriented
electric dipole source emitting a Gaussian pulse with a central
wavelength of @xmath nm, and a width of @xmath femtosecond (fs), or a
spectral full-width at half-maximum of @xmath nm. Note that the pulse
width is narrower than the decay transition rate expected from a typical
fluorescent source, such as Rhodamine dye, which is roughly @xmath to
@xmath nanosecond (ns) [ 201 , 202 ] . The pulse is taken to be
effectively instantaneous with respect to the phenomena being measured.
The source is introduced in the form of a vector current that is
separable in the space and time components, @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath is a complex number that represents the total amplitude of the
source, which in this chapter will be set to @xmath . A circular flux
collection region with a diameter of @xmath @xmath m is placed a
distance of @xmath nm from the surface of the sphere in the @xmath
-direction, with its normal aligned along the same axis. Spectral
information is then collected for the wavelength range encompassed by
the Gaussian pulse. The finite grid resolution entails an asymmetry in
the Gaussian peak, which diminishes as the resolution increases.

A comparison of a variety of grid resolutions is shown in Fig. 2.3 (a),
using a total flux collection time of @xmath picosecond (ps) – @xmath
times the width of the pulse. The flux collection begins after the
Gaussian pulse has decayed, that is, after @xmath fs. For resolutions in
each spatial direction of @xmath to @xmath nm, one finds that as @xmath
decreases, that is, at higher resolution, the profile features of the
spectrum do not alter significantly; there is only a small offset in the
positions of the peaks, and the peak heights. The positions of the WGMs
are determined from collection of the frequencies, which are then
converted to wavelengths. The temporal resolution is then interpolated
to yield a value @xmath nm.

The systematic uncertainty in the resonance positions due to resolution
can be quantified by tracking the positions of the WGM peaks. By
examining the wavelength positions of the most prominent peaks, one can
obtain a converged result to a chosen tolerance, as shown in Fig. 2.3
(b). An error estimate in the peak positions can be obtained by
comparing the results for different grid resolutions. For example, using
the lowest simulated resolution of @xmath nm, the most-central peak has
a wavelength position of @xmath nm. For the highest simulated resolution
of @xmath nm, the position is @xmath nm. This yields an offset in the
position of the central peak of @xmath nm. For comparison, note that a
spectral resolution of approximately @xmath nm has been shown to be
necessary for the detection of nearby macromolecules by a microsphere [
203 ] . This offset, however, is uniform over a wide wavelength range,
and provides a reference spectrum from which any shifts in the
surrounding refractive index can be detected. In this investigation, it
is nevertheless important to emphasise that the FDTD-based method is
developed principally as a screening tool for assessing the feasibility
of new designs of biosensors at the proof-of-concept stage.

By changing the length of time allowed for flux collection, one can also
obtain important insights into the distribution of modes in the power
spectrum. Fig. 2.4 (a) shows the resultant normalised power spectrum for
a variety of flux collection times. A spatial resolution of @xmath nm is
chosen, and also a density of sampled wavelengths corresponding to
@xmath nm. As the collection time increases, the WGM

peaks become more prominent. Furthermore, double-peak structures seen at
small collection times are no longer apparent for larger collection
times, as the sampling of the full mode structure of the radiating
cavity does not have sufficient time to be measured by the flux region.
For the longer collection times, an enhancement in the normalised dipole
power is observed ( @xmath ), at wavelengths coinciding with the
dominant WGMs. This indicates that the power output of the source is
enhanced at these wavelengths by the presence of the dielectric
microsphere. This effect is due to the difference in time scales between
the cavity ring-down time and the time evolution in the spectrum. The
resonances with high @xmath -factors originate from field configurations
traversing paths around a highly symmetrical resonator as established in
Section 1.1 , however, these resonances also have longer ring-down
times, as discussed in Section 2.2 . As a result, a certain amount of
flux collection time is required to resolve the total underlying mode
structure. This collection time can be calculated by analysing the
structure of the spectrum as a function of collection time as follows.

The behaviour of the @xmath -factor as a function of the flux collection
time is shown in Fig. 2.4 (b) for three central WGM peaks. For the peak
at @xmath @xmath m, convergence is achieved beyond a collection time of
@xmath ps, with a variation of @xmath . For the other two peaks, @xmath
@xmath m and @xmath @xmath m, variations of @xmath and @xmath are
measured, respectively. Note that, while peaks with lower @xmath
-factors incur less variation with respect to collection time, peaks
with higher @xmath -factors are more affected. However, an increase in
collection time becomes increasingly computationally intensive, due to
the asymptotic behaviour in the @xmath -factor with respect to
collection time [ 204 ] . Nevertheless, the uncertainty in the @xmath
-factor due to the collection time can be quantified, and thus
incorporated into the systematic uncertainty.

Comparisons of the analytic model and the FDTD spectra for a microsphere
are shown in Figs. 2.5 and 2.6 for tangentially and radially oriented
dipole sources, in both air and water media, respectively. The WGM
positions from the analytic model are shown as vertical bands, with TE
@xmath modes in green and TM @xmath modes in red, for polar and radial
mode numbers @xmath and @xmath , respectively. The width of each band
indicates the estimate of the systematic uncertainty due to the finite
grid spacing of

FDTD. Specifically, the Johnson analytic model, based on Mie scattering,
is used to estimate the shift in the WGM positions due to uncertainty in
the sphere diameter, @xmath @xmath m @xmath . In this case, the spatial
resolution is held fixed at the value @xmath nm. For the temporal
resolution, which is related to the wavelength range (in this case
@xmath to @xmath nm), the spectral density of @xmath points yields an
uncertainty of
@xmath nm @xmath nm. The two uncertainties are added in quadrature.
Taking into account the finite grid resolution, the offset of each peak
from the position expected from the analytic model may also be due to
the fact that nearby modes, which can partially overlap with each other,
are capable of shifting the peaks away from the central positions
calculated from such an analytic model [ 40 ] .

Note that the TE and TM modes cannot be completely decoupled due to the
spherical symmetry in the case of a tangentially oriented dipole (
@xmath ), as expected from a comparison of the forms of Eqs. ( 2.23 )
and ( 2.24 ) occurring in the Chew model, for example. Thus
contributions from both TE and TM modes, including higher order modes,
are expected in the spectrum. Consider the case of Fig. 2.5 (a), for a
tangentially oriented dipole in a surrounding medium of air. One might
expect that the dominant WGMs excited are the lowest-order radial TE
modes, since the electric field of each of the TM modes contains a
radial component, which does not couple strongly to the tangential
source. It is found, in fact, that the dominant peaks have an FSR
consistent with a radial mode number of @xmath . The fundamental radial
modes ( @xmath ) cannot be resolved for this index contrast at this
finite grid size, since they are known to exhibit @xmath -factors of
order @xmath or larger, both experimentally [ 205 ] , and in analytic
models [ 168 , 181 , 198 , 199 ] . In FDTD, the discretisation of space
leads to an effective surface roughness, which broadens the peaks,
leading naturally to lower estimates of the cavity @xmath -factor,
@xmath , as shown in Table 2.2 . In the case of the radial electric
dipole, Fig. 2.5 (b), the dominant peaks exhibit FSRs that match the TM
modes for both @xmath and @xmath , with no contribution from the TE
modes.

For a lower index contrast scenario, such as polystyrene microspheres in
a surrounding medium of water, shown in Figs. 2.6 (a) and 2.6 (b), the
WGM peaks are broadened, and there is a reduced density of modes at
wavelengths in the range @xmath to @xmath nm. As a result, the peaks
observed in the FDTD simulation correspond to the fundamental radial TE
or TM modes, for a tangential or radial dipole source, respectively.

Note that in Fig. 2.6 (a), for a tangentially oriented source, the main
contribution is from the TE modes, while there is a relatively small
component originating from the TM modes – the ‘shoulders’ that appear to
the left of the dominant TE peaks, which are more apparent at lower
wavelengths where the peak positions are sufficiently separated.

The separation of the spectrum into components that correspond directly
to the TE and TM polarisations, derived from spherical symmetry, will be
investigated more comprehensively in Chapter 4 . However, for the
purposes of this study of the FDTD method, it is sufficient to note that
the total radiative contribution to the spectrum is included, and that
FDTD allows for the introduction of a number of different resonator
design, excitation and radiation collection scenarios to be simulated.
In fact, in this investigation, the FDTD tool has already provided
guidance for future designs of resonators, which can be adapted for
biosensing applications. Figures 2.5 and 2.6 confirm that the dominance
of TE or TM modes is dependent on the alignment of the dipole source on
the surface of the sphere, as described in Ref. [ 41 ] . Microsphere
sensors are thus able to detect the orientation of an external
biomolecule by recording the relative coupling strengths of TE to TM
modes.

#### 2.3.3 Connection to Mie scattering

Comparisons of the Chew model, the Johnson model and the FDTD
simulations are shown in Fig. 2.7 , for a surrounding medium of water.
In Fig. 2.7 (a), a tangential dipole source is used, and the fundamental
radial TE modes from the Johnson model, corresponding to Mie scattering
(green vertical lines), exactly match the peaks of the Chew model
(dashed blue line), as expected, by construction [ 136 ] . The peaks of
the FDTD simulation also correspond to these TE modes, and the FSR
matches that of the Chew model. Fig. 2.7 (b) shows the result for a
radial dipole. The peaks of both the Chew model and the FDTD simulation
correspond to the fundamental radial TM modes. Note that in both Figs.
2.7 (a) and (b) there is an offset in both the peak positions and the
total power due to the finite grid resolution, as explained in Section
2.3.2 .

Although this analytic model is better suited to simulating scenarios
that involve dipole sources at a variety of positions and alignments,
the FDTD method is able to collect flux from any desired collection
region, in the near or far field, for any length of time. This is an
important point, as this collection scenario will affect the measured
power spectrum profile. It is useful to be able to estimate the size of
the effect due to collection region, and this will be investigated in
the specific case of the angular distribution of the flux, in the next
section.

#### 2.3.4 Angular distribution of the modes

The simulation can also provide information about the angular
distribution of the flux, both directly and indirectly. First, the
configurations of the electric and magnetic fields in the simulation are
stored for each point in space, at every time slice, providing direct
access to the behaviour of the fields. Second, a less direct but
physically insightful method for assessing the angular distribution of
the fields is to

examine several modes in the spectrum, in this case four modes which lie
within the simulated wavelength window, TE @xmath , TE @xmath , TE
@xmath and TE @xmath , for a variety of flux collection scenarios. This
is of interest, particularly when comparing a variety of different
methods of collecting the emitted power, which have been shown to
influence the structure of the spectrum [ 118 ] . Since the FDTD
simulation records the electromagnetic field values, the flux density,
@xmath , may be projected onto the circular region of the @xmath -
@xmath plane (with normal vector @xmath ) for any wavelength value. An
analysis of this type is helpful for visualizing the distribution,
distinguishing the polar and radial modes at different time slices, and
identifying transient resonant features. By integrating the flux over a
collection time of @xmath ps, the distribution over the collection plane
indicates the angular dependence of the mode at a particular wavelength.

As an example, Fig. 2.8 shows the flux distribution over the collection
region, for a tangential dipole source, and a surrounding medium of air.
The four panels display the four most prominent WGM peaks occurring in
that wavelength region, corresponding to values of @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath @xmath m, respectively. It is apparent that the modes
at wavelengths of @xmath @xmath m (TE @xmath ) and @xmath @xmath m (TE
@xmath ) exhibit a flux distribution with peaks spread out in the flux
measuring region over a comparatively wide angle. The total power output
for these modes is likely to vary significantly if the diameter of the
region is reduced. In contrast, the mode occurring at @xmath @xmath m
(TE @xmath ) has a more focused concentration of flux in the centre of
the measuring region, corresponding to a narrower angular distribution
of flux. The power output for this mode is consistent over a wider range
of flux region diameters. In summary, it is clear that as the measuring
region changes, the simulations indicate that the radiation coupling to
each mode is changed by different amounts, altering the structure of the
spectrum.

Note that each circular plot of the flux density in Fig. 2.8 contains
alternating bright bands aligned horizontally along the @xmath -axis,
rather than a concentric circular pattern. This is a consequence of the
use of a single dipole placed on the surface of the resonator, which
breaks the symmetry of the distributions of the fields.

As a consequence of the nontrivial angular distributions of the modes,
changes in the power spectrum are also detected. Figure 2.9 shows the
spectrum for the @xmath @xmath m sphere for flux planes at different
distances from the sphere, as shown in Fig. 2.9 (a), and different
diameters, shown in Fig. 2.9 (b). In each case, a tangential electric
dipole is used, and the collection time is held fixed at @xmath ps. By
comparing the spectra from several flux collection plane sizes and
positions, changes in the peak heights are observed, indicating the
different angular behaviour of the modes. Changes in the distance of the
flux region, @xmath , result in a similar mode structure, but the
overall power output, especially for the dominant WGM peaks, changes as
the flux is sampled differently in each region. Alterations in the
diameter of the flux region result in more noticeable changes to the
mode heights, demonstrating the highly angular-dependent nature of the
relative contribution of each mode to the total flux.

### 2.4 Introducing layered spheres and microbubbles

It can be seen from this chapter that crucial insights into resonator
behaviour can be gleaned from a careful examination of microspheres, the
models that describe their resonances, and the behaviour of WGMs under a
variety of conditions. Specifically, alterations in the size, refractive
index, surrounding environment, excitation and collection methods all
impact on the resonance positions or their @xmath -factors.

Although microspheres serve as an important test case for understanding
the behaviour of modes in resonators, they have some crucial
limitations. Though many biological cells in nature have a symmetrical,
near-spherical or circular cross section shape, as will be seen in
Chapter 5 , they also contain complex internal and external features,
inhomogeneities and structures that need to be accounted for.

As a way forward for the specific application of this thesis, the next
development will be to take the general principles of resonator design
explored in this chapter and apply this knowledge to a novel resonator
design – microbubbles . These resonators differ from microspheres, in
that they contain a layer of material, constraining the modes to lie
within the narrow wall of the bubble.

Microbubbles serve as an improved analogue for biological cells, which
typically contain a layer or membrane. In the context of the vision of
the project, enriching and then testing the modelling capabilities in an
experimental setting brings us one step closer to addressing the
question of whether a biological cell can ever be a viable candidate for
a resonator.

Understanding how the introduction of these architectural features
affects the behaviour of the modes will occupy a significant portion of
the next chapter. Apart from their applications in a variety of
technological and sensing contexts, the use of layered resonators or
microbubbles allows one to investigate the effect of an internal cavity
of different refractive index to that of the resonator wall or shell.
How this affects the mode positions, free spectral range and @xmath
-factors using a variety of excitation strategies will be of interest in
assessing the feasibility of a biological cell resonator, and will lead
to a new technique for the determination of the geometric parameters of
these resonators purely from an analysis of their spectra.

## 3 Fluorescent Microbubbles as Cell Analogues

As a way forward in investigating the possibility of a biological cell
resonator, the principles examined for microsphere sensing technology
are extended to include resonators with a single dielectric layer of
finite thickness. One particular example of this layered resonator is
the microbubble, which consists of a shell of dielectric material and a
hollow interior. One of the main goals in these next two chapters is to
build a picture of the behaviour of multilayer resonators, which are
analogous to certain types of cells [ 154 ] , and a single-layer
scenario serves as an important test case for illustrating the
complexities and features that arise from multiple boundaries within a
symmetrical object.

There is extensive literature on the topic of microbubbles, which are a
specific example of a single-layer resonator (with a hollow interior).
It is therefore worth deliberating on this particular type of resonator,
not only to cross-check the soundness of the modelling capabilities that
will be introduced in the next two chapters, but also as a way of
introducing new features, such as layers of dipole sources, which can
mimic fluorescent coatings used in experiments [ 84 , 86 , 87 , 39 , 88
, 94 , 75 ] .

### 3.1 Microbubbles as an emerging sensing platform

Like their microsphere counterparts, microbubble resonators are also
able to support WGMs [ 206 , 207 ] , however, the advantages of
microbubbles over solid microsphere resonators are numerous.
Microbubbles exhibit improved refractive index sensitivity [ 184 ] .
That is, the shift in the mode positions due to the presence of a nearby
particle, which breaks the symmetry of the electric and magnetic fields,
is enhanced in resonators that have thin walls, such as microbubbles. A
hollow interior (of lower refractive index) impedes the fields entering
the cavity, and the field distribution is therefore more strongly biased
towards the outer region of the resonator, leading to a more extensive
evanescent field. One consequence of this is that microbubbles also
typically have smaller mode volumes than microspheres [ 208 ] . This
indicates that the modes are more tightly constrained to the outer
region of the resonator, serving to reduce the lasing threshold [ 129 ]
, as well as providing greater scope for applications of nonlinear
optics [ 30 ] and QED [ 34 ] . The ability of microbubbles to stretch
and deform mechanically has also been used to tune their FSRs across a
broad range [ 209 ] , allowing all characteristic modes within a
spectral interval to be accessed.

To make use of these advantages, microbubbles are in development for a
variety of applications, which include refractive index sensing [ 184 ]
, lasing [ 210 ] and frequency comb generation [ 28 , 29 ] . In fact,
the hollow cavity inherent in a microbubble can be used to develop new,
compact apparatus, such as integrated microfluidics, which has
demonstrated applicability in chemical and temperature sensing [ 211 ,
212 ] . Realising these benefits usually requires one to be able to
manufacture microbubbles that have comparatively thin shell walls.
However, in decreasing the shell-wall thickness, one encounters a
trade-off between the refractive index sensitivity and the maximum
values of the @xmath -factor [ 184 ] . Achieving an optimal trade-off in
the sensitivity and the @xmath -factors has therefore been the subject
of intensive study through a variety of methods in recent times [ 156 ,
213 ] , and still remains an open area of investigation.

In this chapter, the FDTD approach described in Chapter 2 is extended to
involve a single-layer architecture, including a layer of dipole sources
whose density can be freely varied. This work is presented in the
publication, Ref. [ 109 ] , listed as Item 2 in Section E.1 . Accurate
determination of the FSR plays an important role in identifying the mode
numbers from scattering theory [ 156 ] and the assessment of dispersion
[ 214 , 215 ] , and these attributes cannot be obtained from the
wavelength shift in the modes alone, which depends on a number of
factors, as described in Section 1.1 . Therefore, the behaviour of the
FSR and the @xmath -factors is examined as the diameter ( @xmath ) and
shell thickness ( @xmath ) of a microbubble are changed, and the effect
of the power collection region is also considered. Finally, the new
insights into the behaviour of the microbubble WGM spectrum are
incorporated into a new, non-destructive method for determining the
geometric parameters of a given microbubble. The method is then tested
for a real-life scenario of a silica microbubble.

### 3.2 Simulating fluorescent microbubble resonators

Early models for simulating WGMs in microbubble resonators tend to focus
on the wavelength positions of the resonances excited by a single
embedded dipole [ 132 ] . By adopting a simple generalisation of Mie
theory, it was found that the spectra could be simulated by making use
of the transfer-matrix approach [ 146 ] . Other approaches exist, such
as the multilayer version of the well known Chew model [ 154 ] , or the
extraction of the mode positions from the characteristic equation of a
microsphere with a single-layer coating [ 147 , 148 ] . However, it is
important to note that a unified description of resonators with
arbitrary numbers of layers for a variety of excitation scenarios,
including active layers, has not been developed until now, and its
description and explanation will occupy the majority of Chapter 4 .

Using the FDTD approach, the simulation of microsphere resonators can be
extended to include an outer shell of dielectric material with greater
flexibility in the ellipticity and homogeneity of the layer, allowing
for greater scope for the inclusion of deformations than for competing
models. However, because the simulations can suffer from artefacts
derived from the finite grid size, which typically take the form of a
systematic shift in the wavelength positions and @xmath -factors of the
simulated modes (as discussed in Section 2.3 ), in this chapter, the
grid resolution, @xmath , is varied depending on the physical scale of
the simulation, as set by the resonator diameter. The diameter, from
this point on, refers to the outermost diameter of the microbubble, so
that the outer boundary remains constant as the shell thickness is
changed. For each diameter simulated, a resolution is chosen such that
the positions of the modes reach convergence within a tolerance of
@xmath . ¹ ¹ 1 For the smallest and largest diameters considered (
@xmath @xmath m and @xmath @xmath m), the grid size varies from @xmath
nm to @xmath nm, respectively. This range of diameters is chosen to
overlap with the estimated diameter range of the silica microbubbles
used in the experiment described in Section 3.4 .

As mentioned in Section 2.3 , the simulation of large resonator
diameters becomes computationally challenging, particularly in terms of
RAM usage, ² ² 2 For the most demanding scenario considered in this
study in terms of RAM usage, the largest diameter simulated, @xmath
@xmath m, with a grid size of @xmath nm, typically requires 235 GB for
an unnormalised spectrum collection for a microbubble resonator. The
normalisation run (no microbubble present) requires 219 GB. For @xmath
@xmath m ( @xmath nm) RAM usages are 156 GB (microbubble) and 145 GB
(normalisation), and for @xmath @xmath m ( @xmath nm), the requirements
are 84 GB (microbubble) and 79 GB (normalisation), respectively. These
values are based on resources from the Raijin machine at the National
Computational Infrastructure (NCI) Facility, The Australian National
University, Canberra, Australian Capital Territory 0200, Australia (
http://nci.org.au/systems-services/national-facility/peak-system/raijin
). due to the difference in magnitude between the wavelength and the
diameter of the resonator. Although FDTD is in principle extendable to
larger diameters, as commonly used in the literature [ 216 , 206 , 217 ]
, the limitations of computing power, which scale proportionally with
@xmath to the fourth power [ 157 ] , need to be taken into
consideration.

#### 3.2.1 Uniform dipole coatings as an analogue for fluorescence

Let us consider how a fluorescent coating may be modelled in the context
of FDTD. First, a microbubble resonator is simulated by placing two
spheres concentrically, with refractive indices as shown in Fig. 3.1
(a). A distribution of electric dipole sources is then simulated on the
surface of the microbubble resonator. The density of dipoles on the
surface is kept constant for each simulated microbubble, as illustrated
in Fig. 3.1 (b), although varying the density is straightforward, and a
variety of different densities will be considered in Section 3.2.3 .

The algorithm for the placement of the dipoles is as follows. In
spherical coordinates, the polar angle ( @xmath ) is split into @xmath
increments, with @xmath , for @xmath . The azimuthal angle ( @xmath ) is
chosen to take the values @xmath , for @xmath , where the square
brackets indicate rounding to the closest integer. That is, to keep the
density of the sources uniform over the surface of the resonator, the
number of sources must increase as the value of @xmath moves away from
the pole at @xmath . The total number of sources placed on the surface,
@xmath , is then simply a function of @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

It can be seen that the surface density ( @xmath ) is uniform by showing
that the number of sources per infinitesimal solid angle ( @xmath ) is
constant as @xmath becomes large

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.2)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Each source is placed on the surface of the resonator, with diameter
@xmath , at the locations @xmath . The amplitude of each source is
represented by a single complex number premultiplying the source current
of Eq. ( 2.63 ). The total amplitude @xmath is normalised to the total
number of sources placed on the surface of the resonator, and is kept
constant throughout the simulation.

In order to model a fluorescent coating, which has no preferred
orientation, the alignment of each source must be randomly chosen. For
an amplitude of @xmath , the @xmath , @xmath and @xmath components of
each source take the form

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.4)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.5)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath take values from a uniform, random distribution
of polar and azimuthal angles in the alignment space, over the ranges
@xmath and @xmath , respectively.

This method of assigning the locations of dipole sources provides a
useful way of automating the simulation of an even coating of a
fluorescent material on a resonator, or the autofluorescence of a cell
membrane, and exploring the effect of different densities of the sources
on the emitted spectrum of a resonator. One advantage of the FDTD method
over the analytic models described in Chapter 2 is the fact that
interactions between the sources are automatically handled. This allows
one to probe more general properties of the electromagnetic spectra
derived from resonators with unconventional or anisotropic source
distributions that are otherwise difficult to model.

#### 3.2.2 Customising the fluorescent emitter density in FDTD

As an initial example, consider the polystyrene microsphere described in
Section 2.3.2 such that the implementation of the new mode excitation
method of Section 3.2.1 can be directly compared with the results in
Chapter 2 . The microsphere has a diameter of @xmath @xmath m, is
surrounded by water, and the radiation is collected from a box
surrounding the entire resonator. The dipole-coating algorithm is now
applied to this microsphere for a variety of different densities of
sources placed on the surface of the sphere. In this scenario, each
dipole emits a Gaussian pulse with a central wavelength of @xmath nm,
and an emission width of @xmath nm, which is chosen to match the
emission range of (4-(2-Carboxyphenyl)-7-
diethylamino-2-(7-diethylamino-2-oxochroman-3-yl)-chromylium
perchlorate) [ 218 ] as closely as possible, which is the organic dye
used in the experiment described in Section 3.3 .

The power is then aggregated in the wavelength domain, in the same
manner as Chapter 2 . Recalling that the total radiation collection time
necessary to achieve a converged WGM spectrum depends on the resolution,
it was found in Section 2.3.2 that a collection time of approximately
@xmath ps was sufficient to achieve a converged @xmath -factor for a
@xmath @xmath m diameter microsphere, using a shorter wavelength of
@xmath nm. In order to achieve the same level of convergence as the
diameter and wavelength are varied from these values, the collection
time must be scaled in proportion to @xmath , where @xmath is the
central wavelength of the dipole sources. For a resonator with a
diameter of @xmath @xmath m excited at a wavelength of @xmath nm, the
collection time is @xmath wavelengths (equivalent to @xmath ps). For a
diameter of @xmath @xmath m, a collection time of @xmath wavelengths (
@xmath ps) is required. Since the larger diameter resonators exhibit
larger @xmath -factors and thus longer ring-down times, a longer
collection time is required in order to reach a converged spectrum.

The behaviour of the WGM spectrum as a function of the number of
sources, and hence the source density, is important for developing a
reliable model of a uniform fluorescent coating. Figures 3.2 (a) and (b)
show the spectra within a wavelength window of @xmath to @xmath nm, and
illustrate how the relative peak heights are altered as the number of
sources is changed. This effect is due to the fact that randomly

oriented sources will exhibit a preference for WGMs depending upon their
specific alignment. For example, as was shown in Section 2.3.2 ,
electric dipole sources with a large tangential component to the surface
of the sphere will couple more strongly to the TE modes, whereas
electric dipole sources with a large radial component will couple only
to the TM modes, as shown in Figs. 2.5 and 2.6 . As the number of
sources is increased, this effect is averaged out, with additional
sources of any orientation making little difference to the spectrum if
the number of existing sources is sufficiently high.

Figure 3.2 (c) shows the trend in the difference in the height of a
given peak as the number of sources is changed to a higher value. This
procedure is carried out for @xmath prominent peaks within the
wavelength window, and the mean value is then taken. It is found that
the difference drops below @xmath % for @xmath , corresponding to more
than @xmath sources. Therefore, from now on, a value of @xmath is
chosen, corresponding to @xmath sources, which represents a sufficiently
even coating for the purposes of studying the behaviour of coated
resonators. Note that, for a small number of sources, there is a sharp
increase in the mean value of the peak-height difference, which is an
artefact of the coincidental alignment of small numbers of sources,
resulting in similar peak heights for the prominent modes.

A comparison of the spectra resulting from a distribution of @xmath
electric dipole sources, and a single dipole in a tangential or radial
orientation, is shown in Fig. 3.3 . The power is collected from a
circular or box region, as defined in Section 2.3.2 . It can be seen
that the distribution of sources, each with random orientation, couples
to both the TE and TM modes, while the single dipole source
preferentially couples to one particular polarisation exactly as
described above.

Although it has been shown that the flux collection region affects the
relative coupling strengths of the modes, for the purposes of analysing
the behaviour of the spectrum with respect to the geometric variables or
the refractive index contrast, the focus from here on will be on the
total radiation collected from a box region.

#### 3.2.3 Understanding the mode behaviour of microbubbles

The behaviour of WGMs as a function of microbubble shell thickness is
now analysed for a number of examples. Consider the case of the
polystyrene microbubble with an outer diameter of @xmath @xmath m, with
water both inside and outside the resonator, and coated with a
fluorescent layer. As the thickness of the shell wall is varied across a
range of @xmath to @xmath nm, as shown in Fig. 3.4 (a), several effects
are apparent. The mode positions do not remain the same as the thickness
changes, and this behaviour is not linear, but crucially dependent on
the structure of the characteristic equation, as seen in the
Teraoka-Arnold model introduced in Section 2.2 , and explored in more
detail in the case of the multilayer model in Section 4.3.1 . In
addition, the peak height dramatically changes as the thickness
decreases – an effect that will be investigated further in Section 4.4 .
Note that, for a sufficiently thin shell wall, there is a total loss of
modes, as the dielectric layer is not able to contain the radiation and
WGMs cannot therefore be sustained.

In Fig. 3.4 (b), the shell thickness is kept fixed at @xmath nm, but it
is the refractive index of the dielectric layer that is varied. As the
refractive index decreases, there is also a reduction of the peak
heights, resulting in mode loss if the index is too close to that of the
surrounding medium. This provides a preliminary indication of the effect
of the refractive index contrast from different materials in sustaining
WGMs.

These two simple illustrations serve to highlight an important feature
of layered resonators, namely, that the thickness of the shell and the
refractive index contrast function as dual criteria in determining the
ability of a structure to sustain WGMs. These effects will now be
investigated more quantitatively, which will then become an important
consideration in Chapter 5 when the results are applied to real-life
cells.

### 3.3 Fluorescent silica microbubble case study

Although polystyrene microresonators have been the focus thus far,
serving as a template to which additions and augmentations to the FDTD
method have been added, the focus is now shifted to microbubbles,
choosing a specific material that is easily

obtained for experimental purposes. Hollow silica glass beads ³ ³ 3
Polysciences, Inc., @xmath - @xmath Valley Rd, Warminster, PA @xmath ,
USA, Hollow Glass Beads , Catalogue Number: @xmath . will be used in
this section in order to verify the modelling capabilities explored up
to this point, and to aid the investigation into the spectral properties
of microbubble resonators.

Initially, batches of silica microbubbles, with refractive index @xmath
at @xmath nm, are inspected in order to obtain approximate ranges for
the size and shell thickness. They are then placed alternately in
liquids of different densities in order to provide bounds on the shell
thicknesses. The microbubbles are then suspended in ethanol, which has a
density of @xmath g/cm @xmath near room temperature. Those that sink to
the bottom of the container are re-suspended in water, with a density of
@xmath g/cm @xmath , and those that float to the top are thus considered
to have a density between that of ethanol and water. Using this
procedure, the behaviour of the microbubble density as a function of the
shell-wall thickness may be plotted, as shown in Fig. 3.5 for a range of
diameter values.

The results show that the shell thicknesses of the microbubbles lie in
the range @xmath to @xmath . In addition to this experimental
measurement, a visual inspection of a selection of microbubbles using
confocal microscopy yielded a similar result, with a slightly higher
upper bound of @xmath . As a result, a conservative estimate of the
shell thickness is @xmath to @xmath . This particular range of shell
thicknesses is considered in order to restrict the parameter space to
the values expected from the density measurements.

The microbubbles are then coated with the carboxyl-functionalised
organic dye (4-(2-Carboxyphenyl)-7-
diethylamino-2-(7-diethylamino-2-oxochroman-3-yl)-
chromylium perchlorate [ 218 ] , and a single droplet containing the
microbubbles in solution is placed onto a microscope coverslip, into an
oven at @xmath C, and left to dry.

The microbubble WGMs are excited in free space by a @xmath mW, @xmath nm
wavelength, continuous-wave laser, using an inverted confocal microscope
setup as shown in Fig. 3.6 . The emitted power is collected in free
space with the same microscope, and passed to a spectrometer.

The fluorescence excites modes in multiple planes of symmetry in the
resonator. Note that since only a small number of modes interacts with
the coverslip beneath, their contribution to the total spectrum
collected is minimised, and thus there is a negligible effect on the
spectrum as measured using this technique [ 219 ] .

The measured WGM spectrum is shown in Fig. 3.7 , with vertical lines
placed over the prominent modes to assist in the measurement of the FSR,
which is found to be @xmath @xmath m.

The FDTD method is now used to simulate silica microbubbles of
comparable size to the aforementioned experiment, and investigate the
properties of the WGMs. A number of representative diameters and shell
thicknesses is selected, and the change in the power spectrum with
respect to the shell thicknesses is shown in Fig. 3.8 . The positions of
the modes are indicated in the bottom row ( @xmath @xmath m), from which
the FSR can be calculated. The assignment of the mode numbers is
achieved by selecting the closest mode to each peak, as obtained from a
single-layer coated microsphere analytic model used to represent the
microbubble [ 147 , 148 ] .

For the smallest diameter value @xmath @xmath m in Fig. 3.8 (a), the
modes in the spectra are well spaced, and there are no higher radial
harmonics present, unlike the spectra for diameters @xmath and @xmath
@xmath m in Figs. 3.8 (b) and (c), respectively, which exhibit a number
of higher order modes, especially for larger shell thicknesses. This
larger quantity of nearly-overlapping modes makes the extraction of the
mode positions, and especially the @xmath -factor, problematic. When
examining purely the scaling behaviour of the @xmath -factor in Section
3.3.1 , it is convenient to focus only on the geometric component of the
@xmath -factor prior to the introduction of the radiative contributions,
which affect the @xmath -factor through the choice of excitation method
and the relative coupling strength of the emitted power to the modes.
However, an extraction of the @xmath -factor directly from the spectrum,
if it can be achieved, represents a more realistic assessment of the
@xmath -factor than the geometric component alone, and these effects are
incorporated into the @xmath -factor assessments performed in Section
3.4 .

For the larger shell thicknesses, the spectra are expected to converge
to the microsphere results, since the outer diameter remains fixed as
the thickness is increased. In addition, little variation in the WGM
spectrum is apparent for thicknesses greater than @xmath @xmath m;
however, for @xmath @xmath m, there is a sudden onset where the mode
positions become highly sensitive to the shell thickness.

Note that, as in Section 2.3.2 , the fundamental radial modes ( @xmath
), which typically exhibit high @xmath -factors, are not able to be
resolved at this grid resolution [ 157 ] , unless the @xmath -factor
drops within a measurable range. This can be seen in the top plot of
Fig. 3.8 (a), where the diameter and shell thickness are both
sufficiently low that the fundamental radial mode can be resolved. For
thin shell thicknesses (top row), it is the fundamental TE modes that
become the most prominent mode for small shell thicknesses, and the TM
modes become more difficult to resolve. In fact, the suppression of the
TM modes for small shell thicknesses has been noted in a previous study
[ 184 ] , where the rapid reduction in the @xmath -factors in thin shell
microbubble resonators was identified as an intrinsic property of
resonator geometry. As will be explored in more depth with the benefit
of the multilayer model developed in Chapter 4 , particularly in Section
4.4 , it will become apparent that the dominance of the TE modes
originates from the structure of the matrix element components that
comprise the separate polarisation components of the total emitted power
spectrum. Effectively, the component of the power in the radial
direction becomes suppressed as the thin shell thickness can no longer
support modes that oscillate with this orientation, which are TM modes.
Similar mode behaviour has also been predicted for the radiation of
dipoles in the vicinity of optical fibres [ 65 ] .

#### 3.3.1 Free spectral ranges and @xmath-factors

The free spectral ranges (FSRs) of microbubbles with the selection of
diameters and shell thicknesses considered are shown in Table 3.1 . Note
that the FSR should not be considered a constant quantity over a large
wavelength range, and care must be taken to ensure that this @xmath FSR
is consistent between simulation and experiment. This is addressed in
the following section.

For large shell thicknesses relative to the diameter of the microbubble,
the FSR does not vary significantly as the shell thickness changes,
since the WGMs travel almost entirely within the shell, and are
insensitive to the presence of the hollow interior region. As the shell
thickness decreases, however, the evanescent field extends partially
into the interior of the microbubble, and the FSR then begins to deviate
from the microsphere value.

To assist in characterising the behaviour of microbubbles within this
parameter space, contour plots for both the FSRs and the @xmath -factors
are presented in Fig. 3.9 . For each quantity, the TE and TM modes are
considered separately.

In order to facilitate the efficient calculation of these contours, the
single-layer analytic model [ 147 , 148 ] is used to validate the FDTD
results, as a complementary approach. The fundamental equatorial modes
only are selected, as described in Section 2.2.3 , centred around a
wavelength of @xmath nm. The reason for this is the fact that the FSRs
are dependent only on the mode positions, not the full spectrum, unless
the deviating effect from nearby overlapping modes is taken into
account. In addition, the most prominent modes within a spectrum
originate from different radial mode numbers as the thickness is
changed, as noted in Fig. 3.8 . Such effects, while useful for
characterising the spectrum, are disregarded for the time being in order
to build a picture of the analytic behaviour of the FSR and @xmath
-factors of fundamental modes by themselves.

In Fig. 3.9 (a) and (b), it is clear that the behaviours of the FSRs in
the TE and TM cases are almost identical. It is also apparent that, for
large shell thicknesses, the FSR is not strongly dependent on the shell
thickness, which is consistent with the analysis of the spectra. As the
diameter increases, the minimum shell thickness before encountering
deviations also increases, and the curvature shows a reduction in the
FSR from the value of a microsphere of the same diameter.

Figures 3.9 (c) and (d) show the purely geometric portion of the @xmath
-factor, from Eq. ( 2.39 ), which can be calculated independently from
the spectrum by finding the roots of the characteristic equations [ 147
, 148 ] . In this case, the magnitude of the @xmath -factor scales very
quickly, as described in Section 2.2.3 , and so the logarithm of the
@xmath -factor is plotted. The contours show a fairly stable magnitude
of @xmath with respect to the shell thickness, but that @xmath rapidly
decreases if the shell thickness becomes too small.

#### 3.3.2 Critical values of geometric parameters for sustaining WGMs

While it is useful to characterise the mode behaviour for silica
microbubbles as a test-case, when the knowledge is applied to the
possibility of biological cells, which are unlikely to function as ideal
resonators, it is useful to investigate under what conditions the
structure of a cell is unable to support WGMs. While it is clear that
sufficiently thin shell walls for silica microbubbles cannot support
modes, which is also the case for small outer diameters, as indicated by
the rapid reduction of the @xmath -factors, the critical values of these
geometric parameters for sustaining modes for a given refractive index
contrast will now be investigated.

Here, a silica microbubble resonator is considered as a cell analogue,
due to its refractive index being similar to most proteins associated
with the outer membranes of some cells [ 220 ] . Since cells are usually
suspended in a liquid medium, the scenario in the previous section is
altered so that the microbubble is placed in water. This also allows
greater scope for the FDTD method to probe the range of shell
thicknesses required for sustaining WGMs, including the fundamental
modes [ 158 ] . Furthermore, a larger diameter is considered, @xmath
@xmath m, in order to compensate for the ensuing decrease in the index
contrast, while remaining an example of a resonator that is close to the
mode loss condition.

WGM spectra for a variety of shell thicknesses are shown in Fig. 3.10 .
For larger values of shell thickness, there is little change to the
spectra, as expected. However, as the shell thickness is decreased,
there is a critical value, @xmath , below which no modes can be
sustained. This transition appears to occur rapidly, as a function of
the shell thickness. Representative values of the shell thickness are
shown in Fig. 3.10 (a), illustrating the transition. For @xmath @xmath
m, and a refractive index contrast of @xmath within this wavelength
range, the critical value is close to @xmath nm. For shell thicknesses
below @xmath , the scattered spectra are quite similar in shape, with
little WGM structure apparent, as shown in Fig. 3.10 (b). The reduction
of the @xmath -factors as the shell thickness decreases allows adjacent
modes to overlap, which are no longer distinguishable.

The implications of this regime of the geometric parameters where modes
cannot be sustained are significant with regard to the search for a
biological resonator. While it has been established in Section 1.2 that
certain classes of biological cells can exhibit degrees of symmetry, in
order to sustain resonances, such cells must also fall within the
required geometric parameter regime, for their refractive index,
diameter and layer thicknesses. If this is not the case, then cells can
only be used as resonators with the addition of artificial components or
equipment that can facilitate the trapping of modes, such as mirrors [
221 ] , or the use of pre-existing resonators incorporated into the cell
[ 107 , 114 ] . An estimation of the bounds of the geometric parameters
required to sustain resonances in the context of cells is included in
Section 5.3 .

### 3.4 Non-destructive determination of the geometry

The ability to extract the geometric parameters of a given microbubble
resonator in a non-destructive manner is an important step toward
reusable sensing apparatus. In particular, the spectra obtained from WGM
devices used for sensing are more easily interpreted if the outer
diameter and the thickness of the shell wall are well known. Specific
examples of apparatus that benefit from detailed knowledge of the
resonator geometry include microbubble-based aerostatic pressure sensing
[ 206 , 222 ] , and frequency comb generation technologies [ 28 , 29 ] .
Such techniques are sensitive to the precise value of the shell
thickness of the resonator, and make the development of an accurate
method of extracting this information without destroying the apparatus
itself an attractive prospect. To date, modeling-based methods of
extracting the shell thickness rely heavily on assuming that the surface
area of the resonator is preserved during the melting and expansion
stages of fabrication, and their accuracy is limited to about @xmath for
a @xmath @xmath m diameter microbubble [ 223 , 206 ] .

While alternative non-destructive methods exist for the determination of
these parameters, such as confocal reflectance microscopy [ 223 ] , they
are limited by the axial resolution of the microscope. Here, a new
spectrum-matching method is developed, which utilises the sensitivity of
the mode positions and the behaviour of the spectrum to the geometric
parameters. The value of such a method is the ability to perform on-site
identification of the parameters, as well as the identification of both
the mode number and polarisation of each mode within a specific
wavelength range.

Using a linear form, @xmath [ 224 ] , fits are produced for a range of
simulated shell thicknesses, as shown in Fig. 3.11 . By performing a
sufficient number of simulations, the mode positions of the simulated
spectra can be fitted to those of the measured spectrum. The shaded band
indicates the statistical uncertainty at each value of @xmath , obtained
from the covariance matrix of the linear fit.

Combinations of @xmath and @xmath for which the extrapolations in Fig.
3.11 attain the measured value of FSR are summarised in Table 3.2 . The
simulated spectrum, whose prominent resonance positions match those of
the experimental results most closely, corresponds to a diameter of
@xmath @xmath m, and a shell thickness of @xmath @xmath m. The criteria
used in determining the best match is as follows. For each of the trends
considered in Fig. 3.11 , the values of @xmath and @xmath corresponding
to the measured FSR are selected. The spectra for each of these
combination of @xmath and @xmath are compared to the measured spectrum,
and the simulated spectrum that corresponds to the minimum difference in
the positions of the prominent modes is selected.

In Fig. 3.12 , the measured spectrum is represented by the dotted line,
and the simulated spectrum is represented by the solid line. The
resolution used in the simulation corresponds to @xmath @xmath m, with a
wavelength resolution of @xmath nm. Note that the experimental results
have been smoothed to match the wavelength resolution of the FDTD
simulation, to remove part of the noise. Unlike the experimental
results, the simulation results are normalised, and so the @xmath -axis
is offset appropriately for the simulated spectrum.

The mode positions are identified using the single-layer microsphere
model [ 147 , 148 ] . The positions of the prominent TE and TM modes are
shown by dotted and dash-dotted vertical lines, respectively. The
finite-width vertical bands indicate the uncertainty derived from the
spatial and temporal resolutions added in quadrature. For two selected
higher order modes, TE @xmath and TE @xmath , a fit of the measured
spectrum, using two Lorentzians, is able to resolve the underlying
doublet mode structure as shown by a thick solid line placed over the
experimental spectrum. The

peak positions from these fits lie within the systematic uncertainty
bands of the simulated higher order modes, denoted by dashed and solid
vertical lines, respectively. This indicates that the underlying mode
structure of the experimental results is consistent with the FDTD
simulations for these modes.

The most prominent modes excited by a fluorescent dye are not easily
predicted. In this experiment, it appears that the first radial TM modes
received the largest coupling. The first radial TE modes and higher
order modes that appear in the simulation are not readily apparent in
the experiment. Deviations from perfect sphericity in the experimental
case can reduce the @xmath -factors to the point where these modes are
not easily measurable. This occurs due to the generation of extra
overlapping modes, i.e. mode-splitting, corresponding to deviations in
the mean diameter in different axes of rotation of the resonator [ 115 ,
225 , 118 ] .

The @xmath FSR over the wavelength range @xmath to @xmath nm is expected
to be non-zero, and should be taken into account when performing the
fit, since it affects the value of the measured and simulated FSR. The
@xmath FSR can be estimated for the two spectra displayed in Fig. 3.11 .
The results are shown in Table 3.3 . In both the experiment and the
simulation, there is a systematic trend for the FSR to increase as the
wavelength increases. The @xmath FSR is larger in the case of the FDTD
simulation, with a shift of @xmath in the FSR over this wavelength
range. This difference in the @xmath FSR between the measured and
simulated spectra makes a precise matching of all the mode positions
problematic at first glance. However, it should be noted that the
systematic uncertainty in the mode positions of the FDTD simulation
overlaps the peak positions from the experimental results, and thus
agrees within the uncertainty.

A comparison of the @xmath -factors of the prominent modes is given in
Table 3.4 . The mean @xmath -factors from FDTD are statistically
consistent with those of the experiment. Furthermore, the @xmath
-factors are fairly comparable with those expected from a finite element
model (FEM) [ 182 , 183 , 184 ] , @xmath , for a diameter of @xmath
@xmath m.

The non-destructive extraction of the geometric parameters of a given
microbubble purely from its spectrum is a valuable technique in
resonator design. While it is possible to refine the estimation of the
geometric parameters further by considering an expanded range of initial
diameter values to increase the tightness of the extrapolation,
requiring the use of more computing resources, the study presented in
this chapter serves as an example of the practical use of the method. It
is clear that FDTD simulation represents an important tool for
predicting the performance and behaviour of microbubbles prior to
fabrication, allowing for realistic imperfections to be incorporated.

### 3.5 Microbubbles as a prelude to biological cells

In this chapter, the properties of microbubble resonators have been
explored, with a view to understanding the fundamental features of
whispering gallery modes, and the limitations on sustaining them. A
model was developed to include a distribution of dipoles placed on the
surface of the resonator, to allow for the simulation of the
mode-coupling expected from fluorescent dyes used in recent biosensing
experiments. Furthermore, a method for extracting the geometric
parameters of microbubble resonators was presented.

As an application for modelling biological cells, the FDTD method itself
presents some opportunities, but also limitations. The general nature of
FDTD allows arbitrary shapes, deformations, inhomogeneities and
radiation collection regions to be incorporated into the resonator
structure. Investigating how these different scenarios impact the
measured spectra is a worthwhile exercise, especially for understanding
the key criteria required of a resonator, in particular, a biological
resonator, which will be explored in Chapter 5 . However, it is clear
that the range of diameters and shell thicknesses that can be feasibly
simulated presents a crucial limitation. It may be that biological cell
resonators required a larger diameter than is easily simulated in FDTD,
especially, as it will become apparent, as the refractive index contrast
of the protein structures surrounding many cells compared to their
native media is not large. Therefore, in the next chapter, a new model
is developed, which incorporates the most useful features of each of the
modelling approaches explored thus far. The new model is able to handle
an arbitrary number of dielectric layers and excitation methods,
including dipole sources, and any number of uniform layers of sources,
as well as the underlying fields that produce the spectra. The model
unifies the formulae of previous approaches in the literature, and
encompasses a number of scenarios such as source placement, and dipole
polarisation, expressed as a single equation. Furthermore, the code
produced for Chapter 3 has been structured so that the algorithm runs
efficiently over a wide range of wavelength values, as described in
Appendix C.5 .

It is the development of this general, multilayer model that will form
the cornerstone for the modelling side of the investigation for the
remainder of this thesis. Since the model is able to encapsulate a wide
variety of scenarios and parameters, it is the ideal tool for assessing
the feasibility of a biological cell resonator, and for assisting in the
task of narrowing the search for a cell to a few most likely candidates.

## 4 A Unified Model for Active Multilayer Resonators

While the principal focus of this thesis is to understand the behaviour
of whispering gallery modes in the context of biological resonators, and
under what conditions a cell could support these modes, it is worthwhile
to explain in detail the construction of a new, general model [ 40 ]
that combines many useful aspects of the existing techniques described
in the previous chapters, while remaining fast and efficient to use.

This model allows for an arbitrary number of concentric, spherical
dielectric layers, and any number of embedded dipole sources or uniform
distributions of dipole sources, to be included in the resonator. These
methods for exciting the modes are analogous to embedded nanoparticles,
or fluorescent dye coatings, respectively. The latter of these options
may also potentially be used to model the natural autofluorescence of a
cell. While the focus of the model is limited to spherically-shaped
multilayer resonators, it represents a suitable choice for the most
promising candidate cells to be investigated, introduced in Chapter 5 .

Included in this model is the ability to simulate the spectrum, which
has been shown to be a powerful and instructive technique for analysis
of WGMs in Chapters 2 and 3 . The efficient generation of power spectra,
together with accurate calculation of the mode coupling efficiencies
that are comparable with experiment in a multilayer scenario, represents
an important step forward for tools that aid microresonator design. In
each mode coupling scenario, the emitted power is expressed conveniently
as a function of wavelength, making use of the transfer matrix approach,
and incorporating improvements to its stability, resulting in a
reliable, general set of formulae for calculating WGMs.

In the specific cases of the dielectric microsphere and the single-layer
coated microsphere, the derivations of the formulae are shown explicitly
in Appendix B . In these cases, the model has been verified by known
formulae in the literature, as described in Appendix C . This work is
presented in the publication, Ref. [ 40 ] , listed as Item 3 in Section
E.1 .

### 4.1 Motivation for a unified description

The derivation of a model that contains multiple layers of concentric
spheres has, until now, not been treated comprehensively. The WGM
spectrum model developed by Chew et al. [ 154 , 143 ] considered
spherical dielectric particles with embedded dipole sources, with the
motivation being the modelling of Raman and fluorescence scattering. The
Chew model was then extended to include a uniform distribution of dipole
sources placed on the surface of a sphere [ 136 ] . A multilayer variant
of the Chew model exists, but contains no method for calculating the
power spectrum [ 154 ] and uses a different notation to other methods in
the field [ 133 ] . Meanwhile, a generalisation of Mie scattering
theory, which is constrained to model the excitation of modes by an
external ray, has been developed for spherical concentric ‘onion’
resonators [ 144 , 145 , 146 ] . While the long-range scattering
behaviour of an external ray is an important test case, this latter
approach does not provide an emitted power spectrum with which to
compare with measured WGM resonances.

Analytic models typically make use of the transfer matrix approach [ 133
] , which is faster and more convenient to construct mathematically than
the multilayer Chew model. However, this approach suffers from numerical
instabilities for certain parameter values, in particular, resonators
with very thin shell layers [ 155 ] , and thus needs to be treated
carefully by computing the Wronskian for transfer matrices with
determinants near zero. More recent studies on single-layer coated
microspheres clearly separate the spectrum into TE and TM polarisations,
allowing for greater flexibility in analysing the mode behaviour [ 147 ,
148 ] . Although this Teraoka-Arnold model can accurately calculate the
resonance positions for a single-layer coated microsphere, the spectrum
is not derived for this case, and therefore quantities such as the
@xmath -factor can only be estimated by considering their geometric
components, @xmath .

To summarise, the main advancement of the present work is the derivation
of a multilayer microsphere model, which may include dipole sources in
any layer, or an active layer of sources, and which is able to generate
the wavelength positions of the TE and TM modes. The model can also be
used to calculate the emitted power spectrum from a formalism that is
easily extended to include a number of other excitation strategies.

### 4.2 Defining the multilayer model

In this section, the methodology for calculating the quantities needed
to find the wavelength positions of the resonances and the radiation
power spectrum of a multilayer microsphere is stated. In general, one
must calculate coefficients that determine the relative contributions of
the components of the electric and magnetic fields in a specific region
of space – either in the central part of the resonator, one of the
internal layers, or in the outermost medium. The coefficients in each of
these regions will be shown to be related to one another through the use
of boundary conditions at the interfaces between layers. Therefore, by
knowing a set of field coefficients in one specific layer, and knowing
the boundary conditions required for a multilayer scenario, the
coefficients, and their corresponding fields, can be calculated for any
other layer.

The coefficients encode the behaviour of the electric and magnetic
fields within the structure, from which the power spectrum can also be
calculated by integrating the Poynting vector over the total solid
angle. That is, the coefficients can be used to access the geometric
attributes of the resonances. This is useful in itself – while the
absolute values of the coefficients may not be known in the absence of
radiation, it will be discovered that resonance positions of the WGMs
are determined by ratios of the coefficients, as described in Section
4.3 . The general formalism of this model also allows radiation to be
included, which is incorporated into the coefficients as well. This
feature imbues the model with a powerful and general functionality.

#### 4.2.1 Geometry

In describing the model in detail, first, the geometry of the multilayer
scenario will be explained. Consider a microsphere with an arbitrary
number of concentric layers, @xmath . The refractive index distribution
and thicknesses are illustrated in Fig. 4.1 . Let us assume that each
layer includes a dipole emitter located at position @xmath , where
@xmath is the layer number and the prime symbol is specifically used for
the position of the sources . The radial coordinate @xmath will be used
to represent the fields at an arbitrary point in space, and the quantity
@xmath will be used to specify unambiguously the radius of the boundary
between the @xmath and @xmath region. The outermost region, @xmath , is
extended to infinity, and the innermost region is denoted as @xmath .
Hence, as an example, the radius of the inner region is called @xmath ,
and the outer boundary of region @xmath is @xmath .

It is required that the model describe solutions to Maxwell’s Equations,
which take the following form in Gaussian units

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

and also take into account the appropriate boundary conditions of the
scenario. The solutions for the fields can generally be decomposed into
radial and angular components using vector spherical harmonics (VSH).
While there is a number of different notations for the VSH occurring
throughout the literature [ 226 , 165 , 146 , 133 ] , the notation used
here is @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , the properties of which, and their
relations with the other notations, are described in Appendix A . These
three functions form an orthonormal, complete set. That is, any vector
field in spherical coordinates can be expanded based on these functions.
For example, the electric field can be expanded as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the coefficients @xmath and @xmath can be found by using
orthogonality relations (see Appendix A ). Note that the vector @xmath
is oriented in the radial direction and @xmath and @xmath are oriented
in the transverse plane, perpendicular to the unit vector @xmath , and
hence @xmath and @xmath represent the coefficients of the transverse
field.

The total electric and magnetic field in each region @xmath can be
written as the sum of the fields – first, those originating from a
dipole within the layer @xmath itself, denoted @xmath and @xmath , and
second, those associated with the reflection and transmission of the
fields from other layers, denoted @xmath and @xmath . Hence, the total
fields may be found simply by taking the superposition of these two
contributions for each field, @xmath and @xmath

The general form of the fields @xmath and @xmath in an arbitrary layer
@xmath can be written in terms of a radial component and a transverse
component, each with a related incoming and outgoing wave, described by
@xmath and @xmath , respectively [ 132 ]

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.3)
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

One may then show explicitly how the fields can be written in a form
consistent with Eq. ( 4.2 ) in terms of the orthonormal functions @xmath
, @xmath and @xmath , by appealing to the properties from Appendix A for
the VSH

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.5)
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Here, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are coefficients that are
determined through the boundary conditions of the multilayer structure.
Note that @xmath and @xmath describe the transverse component of @xmath
and thus the TM modes, whereas @xmath and @xmath describe the TE modes,
as defined by Jackson [ 165 ] . In this notation, the TM modes are
defined as the modes for which @xmath has no component in the radial
direction, whereas the TE modes are those for which @xmath has no such
radial component.

At this point, it is important to emphasise that the forms of Eqs. ( 4.3
) through ( 4.6 ) could be written using alternative sets of linearly
independent Bessel and Hankel functions to describe the incoming and
outgoing waves. Here, the functions @xmath and @xmath have been chosen
throughout so that, as far as possible, the form of the fields and the
contributions to them from radiation sources are in the same format as
each other. This ensures that appropriate functions of @xmath can be
constructed for any layer, including the innermost and outermost
regions, in a unified way. This will become apparent when the
contributions from dipole sources are included in the field
coefficients, in Eq.( 4.30 ). But first, the transfer matrix method will
be explained for an arbitrary layer @xmath in the absence of dipole
sources.

#### 4.2.2 Transfer matrix method

##### Fields in an arbitrary layer

The transfer matrix method is a way of computing the boundary conditions
for an arbitrary number of interfaces, and particularly useful for
adaptation in the multilayer microsphere scenario. The boundary
conditions at the interfaces of the layers imply that the transverse
components of the fields are continuous, while there is a discontinuity
in the normal components of the fields. In order to enforce continuity,
the focus must then be on transverse components of the fields in layer
@xmath , indicated by the superscripts on @xmath and @xmath in Eq. ( 4.2
). These components may be written in matrix form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a four-component vector of the transverse components of
the electric and magnetic fields, and @xmath includes the four field
coefficients as follows:

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The matrix @xmath is a block diagonal matrix, and can be derived from
Eqs. ( 4.5 ) and ( 4.6 )

  -- -------- -- -- -------
     @xmath         (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -- -------

In arriving at Eq. ( 4.9 ), the relation @xmath has been used, as well
as the Riccati-Bessel and Riccati-Hankel functions, @xmath and @xmath
and their derivatives with respect to their arguments, @xmath and @xmath
.

Consider the top left block of the matrix @xmath . It is clear from
Eq. ( 4.7 ) that these terms have coefficients of @xmath or @xmath , and
thus represent the field contributions to the TM modes, whereas the
bottom right block corresponds to the TE modes, @xmath . The terms in
the top row, from left to right, correspond to the incoming and outgoing
contributions to a transverse component of the electric field @xmath ,
respectively. The second row represents the equivalent contributions to
the magnetic field component of the TM modes, @xmath .

In the transfer matrix method, it is necessary to invert the matrices
@xmath , and therefore it is important to ensure that the determinant of
the matrices is well characterised, so that parameter regimes that are
problematic can be identified ahead of time. It is already well known
that a calculation of the transfer matrix method that is not sensitive
to this effect can lead to instabilities for very thin layers, and that
these can be avoided numerically by pre-calculating the known, analytic
Wronskian form of the determinants [ 155 ] . For the Wronskian defined
as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the derivative with respect to @xmath , and using the following
equation derived from the properties of the Riccati-Bessel and
Riccati-Hankel functions [ 133 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

the determinants of @xmath blocks, @xmath and @xmath , can then be
simplified in the following manner

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.12)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

This concludes the discussion of the form of the matrix @xmath , which
operates in the absence of radiation from dipole or other sources, in
this notation. In order to incorporate the radiation effects into the
field coefficients, the form of the contributions from the dipole
sources must be explained. While this choice of source has become the
focus of the investigation because of its usefulness in considering
fluorescent layers or embedded nanoparticles, as mentioned in Section
3.2 , it does not preclude the use of alternative methods of excitation,
the contributions from which can be obtained in a straightforward manner
using the following technique for modifying the field equations.

##### Fields generated by dipole sources

The contributions to the electric and magnetic fields from a single
dipole located in layer @xmath and at position @xmath are denoted @xmath
and @xmath , in a similar way to Eq. ( 4.7 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath is the Heaviside step function ( @xmath for @xmath and
@xmath for @xmath ), which ensures that the correct Bessel or Hankel
function, @xmath or @xmath , is selected when evaluating the fields at
point @xmath . In the case where @xmath , a subscript @xmath is used,
such as in @xmath , whereas, for @xmath a subscript @xmath is used. The
vectors corresponding to the dipole source, @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
take the following forms

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

The quantities that occur inside the dipole vectors, @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath are special coefficients that correspond to the dipole
radiation Ansatz [ 143 ] :

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.16)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.17)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.18)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Since the coefficients @xmath and @xmath correspond to an electric field
in the radial direction, they contribute only to the TM modes, whereas
@xmath and @xmath contribute only to the TE modes [ 165 , 149 ] , a fact
that has sometimes caused the labels to be interchanged in the
literature [ 133 ] . In this notation, the subscripts @xmath and @xmath
of these dipole coefficients indicate their origin in the electric and
magnetic multipole expansions, respectively. The @xmath symbol indicates
derivatives with respect to the position @xmath , and the symbol @xmath
refers to the dipole moment vector, which may be freely chosen.

Now that the field components in the layer @xmath due to a dipole have
been established in Eq. ( 4.14 ), and noting that it has essentially the
same format as Eq. ( 4.7 ) where a vector of coefficients is
pre-multiplied by a matrix @xmath , the total field can be found by
simply adding the two equations together

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

With the total fields now specified above, the continuity condition
across each boundary can be enforced, and performing this process will
lead to the definition of the transfer matrix.

##### The continuity equation

The continuity of the transverse components of the electric and magnetic
fields at the interface of the adjacent regions @xmath and @xmath leads
to the following relationships among their respective field coefficients

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.21)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.22)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Equation ( 4.22 ) can be used recursively to connect the coefficients in
the outermost region, @xmath , to the innermost region, @xmath . This
encodes the continuity condition. By applying this recursive process,
the coefficients in the inner and outermost regions can be related to
each other, using the following compact notation, which includes a new
composite matrix @xmath , and a constant vector @xmath that includes the
contributions from the dipole radiation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

The matrix @xmath , which relates the coefficients in the outermost
region @xmath to a layer @xmath (for which @xmath is a special case), is
known as the scattering matrix, and is defined by the repeated matrix
multiplication occurring in the first term of the right hand side of
Eq. ( 4.23 )

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.25)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.26)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Note that the scattering matrix @xmath is always composed of repetitive
blocks of matrices in the form of @xmath . These blocks are the transfer
matrices, as they encode the continuity condition across the boundary at
a radius @xmath for two adjacent media with wave-numbers @xmath and
@xmath . Explicitly writing the form of these matrices, it can be found
that

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.27)
              @xmath      (4.28)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

As expected, the transfer matrices are block diagonal matrices, since
they are composed entirely from the block diagonal matrices. The blocks
@xmath and @xmath can be computed directly from Eq. ( 4.9 ) and written
in the same way for both TE and TM polarisations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the shorthands for the size parameters @xmath and @xmath are
introduced, as well as @xmath and @xmath in the case of @xmath , whereas
@xmath and @xmath in the case of @xmath .

The vector @xmath , which includes the dipole contributions, can be
written in a way that is general for any choice of @xmath from @xmath to
@xmath , given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Kronecker delta functions ensure that the limiting cases of @xmath
and @xmath have the correct form. Taking the example of @xmath , the
dipole would be in the innermost medium, and it is thus strictly the
case that @xmath , and therefore only the @xmath term contributes to
@xmath . In contrast, for @xmath , the dipole is in the outermost
medium, and since there is no radius of the structure greater than the
radial location of the dipole, @xmath , only the @xmath term
contributes. In all the other intermediate values of @xmath , there is a
contribution to the field coefficients in layer @xmath , @xmath , from
dipole sources placed at radii above @xmath and sources placed at radii
below @xmath , if such sources exist within the structure. The sum in
Eq. ( 4.30 ) is effectively over the regions that contain dipoles, since
terms associated with regions with no dipoles are zero.

Equation ( 4.24 ) can be inverted to obtain @xmath in terms of @xmath as
follows,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that the vector @xmath contains both information about the
structure through the scattering matrix @xmath , and information about
the dipole sources through @xmath and @xmath . However, the matrices
@xmath and @xmath are independent of any source, depending only on the
parameters of the structure. To avoid confusion between the elements of
matrices @xmath and @xmath , from now on, the notations @xmath and
@xmath for @xmath are used.

The matrices of the form @xmath are block diagonal matrices, since they
also have been built based on block diagonal matrices @xmath . One can
define an inverse scattering matrix @xmath , which allows the equations
for the resonances positions and the power spectra to be put in the most
convenient form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the innermost region, the coefficients of the outgoing waves in Eq. (
4.3 ) and ( 4.4 ) are zero, and hence the vector @xmath has the form
@xmath . Using this observation, the recursive formula in Eq. ( 4.31 )
can be simplified and then solved to find @xmath in terms of @xmath and
@xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.33)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.34)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.35)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.36)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Since the coefficients @xmath determine the fields in the outermost
region, they are the scattering coefficients of the whole system of the
microsphere and its sources . By way of comparison, these coefficient
are equivalent to the @xmath and @xmath coefficients of Mie scattering (
@xmath corresponds to @xmath , and @xmath corresponds to @xmath ), and
represent the different polarisations of the dipole moments.

Once the values of the field coefficients in the outermost layer are
known by calculating Eqs. ( 4.33 ) through ( 4.36 ), the coefficients in
any other layer, @xmath , can be obtained from the recursive formula of
Eq. ( 4.23 ). Then, the coefficients @xmath may be substituted back into
Eqs. ( 4.5 ) and ( 4.6 ), in order to obtain the values of the total
fields in any layer @xmath , including dipole radiation, @xmath and
@xmath .

In this section, the transfer matrix approach has been explained. The
form of the transfer matrix has been shown explicitly, and its use in
obtaining the field coefficients in any layer of a multilayer
microsphere resonator has been described. For reference, a MATLAB code
for the numerical calculation of these quantities, and the formulae in
the next section, has been placed online for public availability- ¹ ¹ 1
http://www.photonicsimulation.net see Appendix E.4 . While access to the
field coefficients allows a wide range of quantities of potential
interest to be calculated, it is important to enumerate some examples
that are of particular relevance to this thesis. In the next section,
recipes will be provided on how these quantities may be extracted from
the general equations laid out in this section, and how to interpret
them.

### 4.3 Simulation recipes

In simulating physical processes that are of phenomenological interest,
such as WGMs, one must be clear in determining what aspect of the
process to draw out from the formulae. Two particular examples of this,
encountered in Chapter 2 , are the positions of the WGMs and the emitted
power spectrum. In the former case, the method of excitation of the
modes is irrelevant – the positions of the modes are dependent purely on
the structure of the resonator in a given medium. However, in the case
of the spectrum, the relative coupling of energy to different modes is
highly dependent on the technique used to excite them. In fact, the
@xmath -factor that is extracted from a measured spectrum takes into
account this radiation component, as well as the intrinsic geometric
@xmath -factor, and other sources of loss described in Section 2.2.3 .

In the first recipe, the method for extracting the positions of the
structural resonances from the transfer matrix approach is stipulated.
Then, the formulae for the scattered power as a function of wavelength
are shown for several excitation scenarios (focusing on dipole sources
in particular), which can be used to simulate spectra. While the results
are summarised here for reference, full derivations of these formulae
can be found in Appendix B . But first, the use of Eqs. ( 4.33 ) through
( 4.36 ), which are general, is explained for a range of scenarios:

Scenario 1. No sources are present: If there are no dipoles in the
structure, and no incident wave on the resonator, then one can assign
@xmath . In this case, one may calculate the ratios of the far-field
scattering coefficients @xmath and @xmath from Eqs. ( 4.33 ) through (
4.36 ), which removes the dependence of these quantities on the unknown
coefficients @xmath and @xmath for the innermost layer. From these
ratios, the denominators @xmath and @xmath specify the structural
resonances since they become zero at the resonance wavelength. By
searching for roots in these two denominators, one can find the TM and
TE mode positions, respectively, as described in Section 4.3.1 .

Scenario 2. Dipole sources are present: If there are dipole sources in
the structure, then, without loss of generality, one may choose @xmath ,
solve for @xmath and @xmath from Eqs. ( 4.33 ) and ( 4.35 ), and then
find @xmath and @xmath from Eqs. ( 4.34 ) and ( 4.36 ), respectively.
The reason why it is permissible to do this is due to the fact that the
total emitted power must be the same in both the near and far fields.
Therefore, by freely selecting the values of @xmath and @xmath , the
total power is not altered; however, it is more convenient to select a
notation whereby the radiation, in the absence of structure, is simply a
plane wave with a Bessel function. If a structure is present, then the
extra scattering component is entirely incorporated into the
coefficients @xmath and @xmath , rather than being distributed
arbitrarily across all four coefficients. This flexibility is
essentially a consequence of the extra degrees of freedom afforded by
the model in order to keep the notation of Eqs. ( 4.3 ) through ( 4.6 )
in the same, general format for any layer, including the innermost and
outermost regions.

Scenario 3. There is an incident field only: If there is only an
incident plane wave interacting with the structure, then once again one
may set @xmath . In addition, the coefficients @xmath and @xmath are
known from the incident wave expansion. This provides enough information
to solve the system of Eqs. ( 4.33 ) and ( 4.35 ), including @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

#### 4.3.1 Structural resonances

Consider the case where there are no sources – neither plane waves nor
dipoles, as described in Scenario 1 . By setting @xmath in Eqs. ( 4.34 )
through ( 4.35 ), one finds

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.37)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.38)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Recall that, in the expansion of the electric field in terms of the VSH
in Eq. ( 4.3 ), @xmath is the coefficient of the @xmath term and @xmath
is the coefficient of the @xmath term in the outermost region @xmath .
Hence, it is expected that the ratio @xmath should approach infinity
near a resonance with a transverse magnetic component only,
corresponding to the TM modes. Similarly, in the magnetic field of Eq. (
4.4 ), @xmath is the coefficient of the @xmath term and @xmath is the
coefficient of the @xmath term, in the outer layer @xmath . In this
case, the ratio of @xmath should approach infinity near a resonance with
a transverse electric component only, corresponding to the TE modes. As
a result, both @xmath and @xmath can be used to calculate the TM and TE
modes, respectively, meaning

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.39)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.40)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Note that these equations are, in general, multivalued. For a given
azimuthal quantum number @xmath , the solutions to Eqs. ( 4.39 ) and (
4.40 ) form the fundamental radial modes and their harmonics. Since the
higher order harmonics have larger values of the Bessel function
argument ( @xmath ) at their root values than the fundamental modes, all
modes that appear within a given wavelength range, including higher
order modes, can be obtained. The numerical code associated with this
thesis (Appendix E.4 ) uses the optical and geometrical properties of
any structure, to find the scattering matrix @xmath , and numerically
solves Eqs. ( 4.39 ) and ( 4.40 ) for any range of wavelengths. Note
that in the single-layer case, where @xmath , these equations become
exactly equivalent to the corresponding characteristic equations of the
Johnson model [ 153 ] introduced in Section 2.2 , as shown in Appendix
C.2 .

#### 4.3.2 Scattered power

In order to be able to simulate a spectrum, a method for explicitly
calculating the total radiated power of the system including any dipole
sources, as described in Scenario 2 , must be outlined. The first step
is to note the behaviour of the electric and magnetic fields in the
far-field region, that is, for @xmath . In the outermost region, for
@xmath , the forms of the scattered fields in Eqs. ( 4.3 ) and ( 4.4 )
may be simplified in the same manner as in Ref. [ 132 ] , using the
property that the Bessel function of the first kind is suppressed at
long range.

By performing the angular integration over the Poynting vector,
constructed from the scattered @xmath and @xmath fields, the total
radiated power takes the following form

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.41)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

This equation is general , and is valid for any number of dipole sources
present within the multilayer structure. When there is no dipole in the
outermost region, the formula can be further simplified, using @xmath .
However, to unpack this equation, a range of special cases will now be
considered in order to demonstrate how the formula can be simplified to
a given form.

##### An embedded nanoparticle

For the specific case where only a single dipole is placed in one of the
regions @xmath , which may be the innermost or outermost region, the
scattering coefficients of Eq. ( 4.41 ) can be written in a convenient
form

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.42)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.43)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.44)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.45)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Using this notation, it is clear that @xmath and @xmath correspond to
the contributions from the TM modes , whereas @xmath and @xmath
correspond to the contributions from the TE modes .

By substituting in the forms of the dipole coefficients from Eqs.( 4.16
) through ( 4.19 ), radial (normal) and tangential (transverse)
components of the total power can now be specified separately:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.46)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

The normalisation of the emitted powers have been carried out with
respect to the medium that contains the dipole, such that

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.48)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.49)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath @xmath and @xmath are the polar components of the
polarisation vector @xmath . Equations ( 4.46 ) and ( 4.47 ) are
essentially more generalised versions of Eqs. ( 2.23 ) and ( 2.24 ) from
Chapter 2 , respectively. It is shown in Appendix C.1 that in the
special case of a single layer @xmath , corresponding to a microsphere,
these sets of equations are equivalent.

Note that the formulae for the emitted power shown thus far, Eqs. ( 4.41
), ( 4.46 ) and ( 4.47 ), are functions of the wave-number @xmath , and
thus functions of the wavelength @xmath . The emitted power may be
computed as the wavelength @xmath is input for a range of values. The
wavelength values that coincide with the resonances will encounter
strong contributions to the emitted power, corresponding to the WGMs.

##### An active layer

While the inclusion of any number of separate dipole sources represents
an important, general functionality of the transfer matrix model, it
will be useful to be able to replicate the fluorescent-layer approach,
developed in Chapter 3 for FDTD, in this general multilayer setting.

Consider a multilayer structure where one of the layers consists of an
active material. By applying the same technique employed in the Chew
model [ 136 ] , a uniform distribution of randomly-oriented dipoles,
represented by a density function @xmath , is introduced into a layer
@xmath . Since it is assumed that the orientations of the constituent
dipoles are averaged over the distribution, the emitted power can be
written in the form

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.50)
  -- -- -- --------

the greater weighting of the transverse component originating from the
two degrees of freedom associated with tangential oscillations [ 136 ] .
The normal and transverse components can be calculated separately by
integrating the power with respect to the parameter @xmath over the
shell region @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.51)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.52)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The shell region has a volume @xmath , noting that if @xmath , that is,
the innermost layer is chosen to be populated with dipoles, then by
convention, @xmath is taken to be zero as the volume is simply a sphere
bounded by the innermost radius. The integral components of the above
equations take the forms

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.53)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.54)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.55)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Note that the TE modes are entirely contained within @xmath , with the
remaining components containing the TM modes. These integrals can be
computed by appealing to the properties of the Bessel and Hankel
functions, using the functional form in Eq. ( B.30 ) of Appendix B.3 .
The expressions that follow constitute a tractable form, which has been
included in the code online (see Appendix E.4 ). Estimates of the
computing time for the normalised emitted power at a single wavelength
are discussed in Appendix C.5 . With the expressions @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath now known, the total averaged power can be calculated by
combining Eqs. ( 4.51 ) and ( 4.52 )

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.56)
  -- -- -- --------

In the special case of a microsphere, a numerical calculation testing
that this formula correctly reproduces a spectrum from the Chew model [
136 ] is shown in Appendix C.1 .

### 4.4 Demonstration of a coated microsphere including dispersion

In order to demonstrate the functionality of the multilayer model, a
scenario of contemporary relevance is considered, which can be uniquely
treated by the model. Consider a microsphere with a solid core of
silica, which is then coated with a thin polymer (PMMA) layer [ 102 ] ,
leading to an outer diameter of @xmath @xmath m. This scenario
corresponds to the number of layers, @xmath . PMMA is simulated in this
example because it can act as an active layer [ 152 ] and is a
straightforward way of testing the functionality of the model. Both
materials include dispersion through their respective Sellmeier
equations [ 227 , 228 ] , and across the range of wavelengths simulated,
@xmath to @xmath nm, the refractive index of silica varies from @xmath
to @xmath , whereas the index of PMMA varies from @xmath to @xmath . The
resonator is also surrounded by water ( @xmath , without dispersion).

The behaviour of the WGM spectra as the thickness of the coating @xmath
is varied is shown in Fig. 4.2 . At the diameter considered, higher
order modes are not strongly coupled to, and so both the TE and TM modes
remain distinct, as can be seen in Fig. 4.2 (a). The refractive index
contrast between silica and PMMA is relatively small, and so the
dependence of the mode positions on the thickness of the coating is more
mild. A close-up view of the plot is shown in Fig. 4.2 (b). The vertical
lines indicate the full-width at half-maximum (FWHM) positions for a
variety of peaks, from which the @xmath -factors can be extracted, using
Eq. ( 2.45 ). @xmath -factors corresponding to a selection of TM and TE
modes are also shown above each peak. Note that for the TM modes (the
left three peaks) there is a decrease in the @xmath -factor as @xmath
increases, but not for the TE modes. This is a consequence of the
structure of the matrix elements that comprise the scattering
coefficients of Eqs. ( 4.42 ) and ( 4.43 ). This observation is
consistent with the results in Section 3.3 , and in the literature,
which note the reduction of the @xmath -factors of the TM modes for
resonators with thin dielectric layers [ 184 , 109 ] .

The sensitivity of the WGM peaks can be examined by varying the
refractive index of the surrounding medium, @xmath . In Fig. 4.3 (a),
the thickness of the layer is @xmath nm, and the mean TE peak shift
leads to a sensitivity of @xmath nm per refractive index unit (RIU). A
figure of merit (FOM), here defined as @xmath [ 115 ] , is also provided
to assess the sensing performance of the microspheres. For a given
sensitivity @xmath , the value of @xmath chosen is the mean value of the
peak as it shifts to its new position as a function of @xmath . The
inset of Fig. 4.3 (a) shows a decrease in the FOM as a function of
@xmath . The total spectrum for @xmath is shown in Fig. 4.3 (b), along
with the separate TE and TM contributions. By looking at the position of
a particular mode in the total power spectrum, it is clear that it is
affected by the close proximity and broad width of the TE and TM modes.
This shows that in the simulation it is sometimes instructive to
decompose the modes and analyse the structure in terms of the separate
polarisation components, as the resonances that appear in a spectrum may
indeed be superpositions of multiple modes.

In Figs. 4.4 (a) and (b), a thicker layer is simulated, @xmath nm, and
both the sensitivity and the FOM are larger, with @xmath nm/RIU. For
both choices of layer thickness, the TE and TM modes are broad and
overlapping in the case of a surrounding index of @xmath , and an
extraction of the @xmath -factor using the FWHM approach will
necessarily include contributions from both mode polarisations. This is
a consequence of the fact that the @xmath -factors obtained from the
spectrum include both intrinsic, non-radiative contributions from the
geometry of the structure, and contributions from the relative coupling
of the active layer to the modes. This makes it more difficult to
separate nearby modes and define independent @xmath -factors, as
illustrated in this analysis.

### 4.5 Broader capacity of the model

The development of a method for the modelling of whispering gallery
modes in multilayer resonators represents an important tool for
assessing the feasibility of a cell resonator. The model is able to
handle an arbitrary number of concentric,

spherical dielectric layers, and extract the resonance positions from
the characteristic equation, and the emitted power, to obtain the
spectrum. Because of the attributes of the specific cells considered in
the next chapter, these features provide the best chance of giving a
reliable assessment of a cell’s ability to sustain resonances. While the
focus of this thesis is to explore this possibility, first by developing
the tools necessary for a systematic inquiry into the topic, including
the functionalities required for this task, and then, by applying them
to the search for a cell, the tools are able to contribute more widely
to the field.

Various excitation scenarios that closely mirror the experimental
techniques are included in the model, and the model is cast in a
framework that is easily extendable to consider other excitation
strategies, which is a vital step toward facilitating the design of
novel resonator architectures. Improvements to stability issues inherent
in the transfer-matrix approach have also been addressed. Furthermore,
alongside the development of the model and its formulae for the power
spectrum, an efficient numerical algorithm was also produced, which may
be of interest to the scientific community by adapting it for use in
other scenarios that require multilayered dielectric structures.

## 5 The Search for a Cell

“But as soon as we touch the complex processes that go on in a living
thing, be it plant or animal, we are at once forced to use the methods
of this science. No longer will the microscope, the kymograph, the
scalpel avail for the complete solution of the problem. For the further
analysis of these phenomena which are in the flux and flow, the
investigator must associate himself with those who have labored in the
fields where molecules and atoms, rather than multicellular tissues or
even unicellular organisms, are the units of study.”
J. J. Abel, “Experimental and Chemical Studies of the Blood with an
Appeal for More Extended Chemical Training for the Biological and
Medical Investigator. II”, pp. 176-177 (1915) [ 229 ] .

The modelling methods developed in Chapters 2 through 4 are integrated
with the experimental investigations and methodologies reported in
Chapters 5 and 6 in order to obtain a complete multi-layered solution of
the study of resonances within biological cells. Upon arriving at a
robust understanding of resonator behaviour through the development of
sophisticated models, the goal of determining the existence of a
biological candidate that can function as a resonator comes within
reach. This is an attractive prospect, since the discovery of biological
resonators would allow the useful properties of whispering gallery
modes, especially their sensing applications, to be applied in a new
setting. By producing light directly at the site of inquiry, a new level
of access to the properties of the cells themselves, and their immediate
environments, can thus be obtained.

In the search for a cell resonator, one must first develop an
understanding of precisely which physical qualities are required for
resonances to be realised. Thus, in this chapter I seek to address a
particular aspect of the vision of the project, as outlined in the
Prologue, encapsulated by the question: ‘How imperfect can a resonator
be?’. To make this research question more precise, the goal of this
chapter is to develop an original set of selection criteria, which may
be used to narrow the search for a prospective biological resonator, and
provide guidance as to the maximum amount of deviation from an ideal
resonator such a candidate can exhibit before modes can no longer be
sustained at a measurable level.

### 5.1 Outline of the challenge

As a preliminary step towards classifying biological cells in terms of
their viability as resonators, the challenges of this task are now
outlined. First, the methods and tools available for the measurement of
the physical qualities of a prospective biological resonator are
documented, and their roles explained. A wide variety of physical
qualities is considered with regard to their impact on the ability of a
given cell to sustain WGMs. Second, various physical properties that
could in principle affect the resonances are enumerated. The next step
is to narrow the list of conceivable physical influences on the
resonance behaviour to a few key measurable features, which distil what
is required of a resonator into a checklist of selection criteria. This
list can be used to assess the feasibility of a candidate biological
resonator for both this project and future research activities embarking
on a similar path.

Upon development of the selection criteria, a variety of candidate cells
is analysed, and their likelihood of being able to support WGMs is
subsequently assessed. This is an important exercise in the context of
this thesis, because it not only demonstrates how the selection criteria
should work in practice with real-life examples, but it also shows that
a range of options has been considered in the event that the most viable
candidate cells encounter challenges in sustaining WGMs that require
more concerted research focus in future endeavours.

### 5.2 Resonator assessment methods and tools

The physical parameters of a cell can be quantified by the following
methods and tools. Typically, the biological cells discussed herein
exhibit some transparency in the visible spectrum. As a result, confocal
microscopy and scanning electron microscope (SEM) imagery can resolve
the geometric properties of the cell [ 230 ] , such as the diameter and
the relative membrane thicknesses. Accurate knowledge of the structure
of the cell, and its approximate physical parameters, allows
modelling-based methods described in Chapters 2 through 4 to make
predictions for the refractive indices and other properties relating to
the scattering signal. For example, calculating the dependence of the
mode positions and @xmath -factors on the thickness of the outermost
layer of a cell is particular suited to modelling-based approaches,
while the absolute values of the @xmath -factors are known to be more
difficult to estimate [ 168 , 181 , 198 , 199 ] .

The symmetry of cross sections of a candidate cell can be similarly
measured using conventional microscopy. Although there are a variety of
shapes of cell with at least one axis of symmetry, such as the biconcave
(lozenge-shaped) erythrocyte [ 77 ] , or animal red blood cell, the
focus will primarily be on those of approximately spherical shape. The
reason for this focus is that the majority of cells of the appropriate
size for sustaining modes (see Section 5.3 ) exhibit a level of symmetry
predominantly due to forces such as surface tension, which are applied
isometrically to the outer surface of the cell, and as such, demonstrate
no preferred orientation in the development of the cell.

In estimating the surface roughness of a resonator, the precision of
conventional microscopy is generally insufficient, as it is limited to
the scale of a micron [ 223 ] , whereas it has been shown that the
positions and @xmath -factors of the WGM modes in, for example, a
microsphere, are sensitive to deformations in diameter down to the
nanometre scale [ 231 , 115 ] . Thus, atomic-force microscopy (AFM), in
which the surface roughness is measured by a mechanical probe attached
to a piezoelectric filament, represents a more suitable method for
studying the surface properties of microscopic resonators [ 66 ] .

The ‘stiffness’, or elasticity of the surface, presents an interesting
challenge to resolving whether or not WGMs can be sustained.
Conventional artificial resonators are typically constructed from
substances that are highly unmalleable at room temperature, such as
crystals [ 68 , 69 , 70 , 71 , 72 , 34 , 73 ] , glass [ 16 , 14 , 66 ,
67 ] , metal layers [ 162 , 181 , 232 , 233 , 234 ] and even certain
types of polymers [ 74 , 75 , 76 ] , as mentioned in Section 1.2 . One
benefit gained as a result of these choices is the subsequent
minimisation of the distorting effects of a resonant wave on the
geometry of the resonator, which could disrupt the path of the
electromagnetic waves near the surface, leading to mode-splitting, and
thus reducing the @xmath -factors [ 115 , 118 , 95 ] . However, the
specific proteins from which cells are constructed differ widely in
their mechanical properties [ 235 ] , and depend on their chemical
configuration. To what extent the surface elasticity affects the
positions and behaviour of the modes has been studied in the field of
cavity optomechanics [ 236 , 237 ] . While it has been noted that the
introduction of optomechanical behaviour in shell resonators yields
acoustic modes with strong velocity dispersion characteristics causing
deformations at the inner surface of the shell [ 238 ] , the critical
value beyond which WGMs can no longer be sustained has not been
considered exhaustively in the literature. A study of the surface
elasticity of a prospective cell will help to place bounds on the @xmath
-factor anticipated for potential resonances present during passive or
active excitation. It is reported that one can minimise the elasticity
by selecting a cell at a specific stage in its development [ 235 , 239 ]
, discussed in more detail in in Section 5.5 for the cells that form the
primary focus of this thesis as most viable resonator candidate.
Alternatively, the elasticity can be altered by placing the cell in a
medium that exhibits chemical properties that alter the stiffness of the
surface layer. Examples of such handling media and the reasons for this
effect on the elasticity are studied in detail in Section 5.5.4 , and
their recipes included in Appendix D . The effect of the surrounding
medium on the ability for a resonator to sustain WGMs forms the basis of
the experiments described in Section 6.4.1 .

The refractive index experienced by WGMs will also be determined by the
specific protein, or mixture of proteins, that constitutes the outermost
layers of the cell. Measuring the refractive index of a protein can be
achieved by collecting a quantity of the protein and precisely measuring
the angle of the transmitted light at a specific wavelength [ 240 , 241
, 220 ] . However, there is a practical limitation in collecting a
sample of protein from a specific region of a cell in order to be able
to carry out the measurement – the largest cell considered in this
thesis is approximately @xmath microns in diameter, and other kinds of
cells of near-spherical shape are up to two orders of magnitude smaller.
More elaborate methods of measuring the refractive index have also been
attempted, such as the use of two adjacent fibres to emit and collect
light from a low-power white-light source, in conjunction with a
micromanipulator holding-pipette to guide the cell into position [ 242 ,
243 ] .

Refractive indices can potentially be measured using WGMs themselves.
WGMs provide precise information about the structure of a resonator
while simultaneously presenting an opportunity to observe the optical
behaviour of a cell, for which extant information in the literature is
limited. As an example, a high refractive index coupling prism can be
used to tune the coupling condition required for generating WGMs, and
the angle of incidence depends on the refractive index experienced by
the WGMs, explained in Section 6.2.1 . It is important to keep in mind
that the proteins that comprise the layers of real-life cells may not be
uniform, and that the value of the refractive index ultimately measured
through the use of WGMs will likely be an averaged value, as the
detection of modes requires multiple trips of the electromagnetic waves
returning in phase within the cell, and any inhomogeneities in the
refractive index will serve to broaden these modes and reduce the
measured @xmath -factors.

In addition to the refractive index of the biological material itself,
the confinement of radiation within the cell is dependent on its
surrounding environment. The behaviour of the WGMs as a function of the
surrounding refractive index is a measure of the sensitivity of the
resonator, which in turn depends on the refractive index of the cell
itself and its geometric attributes, as described in Chapter 1 .
Equally, a measurement of the sensitivity of a cell of known diameter
and layer thickness can be used to estimate the refractive index of the
cell. This technique is explored in Chapter 7 , which describes the flow
of a glycerol-water solution over the cell as WGMs are being measured.
This increases the refractive index of the surrounding environment by a
known amount.

The presence of contaminants in the surrounding medium can confer
practical limitations to the experimental measurement of radiation modes
within a cell. Detritus and dust that accumulates within a droplet of
medium can interfere with or damage delicate apparatus such as fibre
tapers. These contaminants must be removed, minimised, or their effects
taken into account without compromising the other physical properties of
the cell, in order to optimise achieving WGMs.

The generation of WGMs and values of their @xmath -factors are, of
course, dependent on the excitation strategy used. For a given method,
it is possible to tune the coupling efficiency in order to improve the
@xmath -factors and the clarity of the modes in the spectrum. Prism
coupling [ 78 ] introduces a reusable method for testing cell
candidates, as the prism and laser setup does not require realignment
after each test. This method is mode selective, and the coupling
condition is extremely sensitive to both the exact placement of the
laser spot on the surface of the prism and the distance of the cell
above the prism. Coupling into a specific mode can therefore become a
challenging procedure, especially for a resonator with geometric
parameters that are not well known prior to mode coupling. Furthermore,
the spot size of the laser must be constrained so that the propagation
constant is phase-matched at the boundary of the prism, as described in
Eq.( 2.38 ) of Section 2.2 , in order to achieve tunnelling into the
resonator. Since laser spot diameters below @xmath @xmath m become
difficult to collimate, relaxing the requirement of beam collimation
becomes mandatory; however, it poses an additional difficulty in the
placement of bulky detectors in a confined region around the resonator.
As an alternative, one may use free-space optics to stimulate
autofluorescence of the cell [ 22 ] , fluorescent emission of
incorporated nanoparticles [ 87 , 39 , 88 ] , or an active material
coating [ 94 ] . Such active resonators typically exhibit lower @xmath
-factors than those expected using passive interrogation, as discussed
in Sec 1.2.2 , but in return, they provide some distinct practical
advantages. In the specific case of free-floating resonators, such as
microspheres or cells, these advantages include the fact that the
coating of fluorescence emitters can be prepared prior to the
experimental measurement, and requires no special alignment in order to
generate WGMs. Each of these methods is applied in Chapter 6 in order to
build a picture of the viability of the chosen cell candidate as a
biological resonator.

The coupling efficiency of the prism may be tuned by altering both the
spot size of the beam on the upper surface of the prism, and the angle
of incidence of the incoming beam, so that the propagation constant near
the surface of the prism matches those of the WGMs near the interface of
the resonator and prism, fulfilling the condition in Eq. ( 2.38 ) of
Section 2.2 . This process achieves the phase-matching condition
necessary for the experiments reported in Section 6.2.1 .

Optical waveguides [ 35 , 80 ] or fibre tapers [ 47 , 81 , 82 , 118 ]
provide coupling to a range of modes for sufficiently small waveguide or
taper waists that ensure phase matching at the resonator boundary. While
alterations to the taper during measurement are impractical, this is
effectively achieved by tuning the distance of the taper to the
resonator until they are phase-matched, as demonstrated in Section 6.2.2
. Fibre tapers have been shown to lead to particularly high @xmath
-factors relative to other mode coupling methods [ 83 , 244 , 118 , 245
] , since placement of the taper tangentially in the vicinity of the
resonator allows radiation from WGMs along a single axis of revolution
to be isolated, as illustrated in Fig. 1.3 of Chapter 1 . However, the
manufacturing process of the tapers is time-consuming, and being
fragile, their longevity is somewhat limited, and thus present practical
restrictions on testing a large number of candidate cell resonators.

In the case of an active layer coating, there is little control over the
phase-matching condition. A layer of fluorophores will encompass a range
of different orientations so that the excitation occurs at all points on
the resonator uniformly. While a simple free-space power collection will
not be able to isolate modes from a single axis of symmetry, it is
nevertheless possible to use excitation and collection methods in
combination, such as a resonator including an active coating that is
excited, with power collected via a fibre taper.

The absorption and scattering of light by a resonator represent crucial
limiting factors that must be taken into account in the determination of
a candidate cell resonator. For an amount of energy @xmath either
transmitted or incident upon a surface, the radiant flux is defined as
@xmath . The absorbance, a dimensionless quantity, denoted @xmath , can
be defined in terms of the ratio of the radiant flux transmitted through
a surface ( @xmath ) to radiant flux received by a surface ( @xmath ) [
246 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath can be measured using an ultraviolet–visible–near-infrared
(UV–Vis–NIR) spectrophotometer, making use of the Beer-Lambert Law

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

for a mixture of @xmath protein types with molar attenuation
coefficients of @xmath , and concentrations of @xmath along a path
length @xmath . The attenuation coefficients, @xmath , represent an
intrinsic property of a given chemical species, with SI units of cross
sectional area per mole. The concentrations are defined in terms of
moles of solute per unit volume. While contemporary developments in the
measurement of the properties of biological tissue have yielded
interesting behaviour in the UV region [ 247 , 248 , 249 ] , DNA, and
its constituent proteins, are strongly absorbing in the UV [ 250 , 251 ]
. In the context of this investigation, one consequence of this
absorbance profile is the difficulty in sustaining WGMs in this
wavelength range. While two-photon fluorescence microscopy has been used
to determine architectural features of cells, particularly for
photosensitive varieties such as mammalian embryos [ 252 ] , the
existence of underlying modes within such cells and their spectroscopic
properties remains uncharted territory.

Scattering, on the other hand, can be related back to the surface
roughness of the resonator. Both the scattered and transmitted light can
be measured using the prism coupler technique, described in more detail
in Section 6.2.1 , and this simultaneous measurement provides critical
real-time information on how the cell is behaving as a resonator. If the
transmitted signal is very weak, it indicates that the cell is absorbing
or scattering the light to a high degree. Careful monitoring of the
collection of the scattered light thus serves to identify the source of
the low transmission, and possible causes for poor resonator performance
such as unoptimised coupling, the presence of surface defects, or
contamination of the surrounding medium.

Mie scattering models have long been used to estimate scattering effects
[ 253 ] , and more recently, FDTD has been applied to assess the general
properties of free-floating cells [ 254 , 255 ] . Other methods that
have been used in the literature to consider scattering effects in cells
include Fourier Transform Light Scattering (FTLS) [ 256 ] and Fourier
Transform Infrared (FTIR) Spectroscopy [ 257 ] . While power spectra
associated with scattering from mammalian oocytes have been reported in
the literature [ 258 ] , they are typically adopted for medical imaging
of tissue. Studies that explore coupling methods for generating
resonances, such as WGMs, within cells such as oocytes are practically
nonexistent. With the aid of the sophisticated modelling tools developed
in Chapters 2 and 4 , and the non-destructive method for the
determination of the geometric parameters of a resonator developed in
Chapter 3 , the work in this thesis is ideally poised to address the
problem of matching the theoretical predictions of scattered spectra
with experimental results.

The physical parameters described above represent the main features to
be investigated in the search for a cell resonator. Now that these
parameters and their methods of measurement have been enumerated, the
specific selection criteria for a candidate cell resonator, which has
been narrowed down to seven key requirements, can be summarised.

### 5.3 Selection criteria

In this section, the key selection criteria are stated and explained
based on the properties required of a resonator, as well as the range of
complexities introduced by biological material that can serve to
frustrate, enhance or otherwise modify these properties.

Criterion 1. Size and index contrast: The ability of a resonator to
sustain modes depends on the relative values of the size and refractive
index contrast, as introduced in Section 3.2.3 . The relationship
between size and index contrast has been well studied [ 115 ] . A large
refractive index contrast will typically allow higher order modes to be
sustained [ 157 ] , and the same is true for large diameter resonators [
109 ] . The two are not directly equivalent, however, and an increase in
size with a corresponding proportional decrease in index contrast does
not result in an identical mode pattern. This is illustrated in Fig. 5.1
, where the emitted power from a microsphere in water is plotted for a
range of diameters @xmath and refractive indices @xmath , such that the
quantity @xmath remains constant. The diameter and index values chosen
in this example correspond closely to those of the most likely cell
candidate described in Section 5.5 . This effect is a consequence of the
mathematical form of the emitted power formulae of Eqs. ( 4.46 ) and (
4.47 ), derived from the matrix elements of Eq. ( 4.29 ), which are
functions of size parameters @xmath , and @xmath . While the spectrum
remains unaltered in the case where the length scale @xmath is held
constant, changes in @xmath and @xmath such that @xmath remains constant
will still result in a different value of @xmath , unless the index of
the surrounding medium, @xmath , is also altered by the same
proportional factor.

Of particular interest is the limiting case of the minimum viable size
for a typical range of refractive indices, which for cells is generally
dependent on the optical properties of the proteins that constitute
them. A conservative estimate for these proteins suggests the range to
be @xmath to @xmath , with some proteins approaching @xmath [ 220 ] .
These estimates are important for the discussion of glycoprotein layers
in Section 5.5.2 . For example, using a nominal criterion that the
@xmath -factor must be greater than @xmath to be adequately detected,
the minimum viable diameter for these lower and upper values of the
index are calculated from the multilayer model of Chapter 4 to be @xmath
@xmath m and @xmath @xmath m, respectively. Note that analytic models
typically overestimate the measurable @xmath -factors [ 168 , 181 ] ,
and that without the inclusion of surface roughness [ 85 ] or
asphericity [ 118 ] it is difficult to match the @xmath -factors derived
from models with those obtained experimentally [ 198 , 199 ] . As a
result, it is important to note that the minimum viable diameters
obtained from the multilayer model are conservative, and realistically,
it is expected that diameters should be substantially larger than the
minimum values calculated below for the adequate detection of WGMs
experimentally.

The spectra derived from the two limiting cases from the multilayer
model, @xmath @xmath m and @xmath @xmath m, are shown in Fig. 5.2 , as
estimated from the central modes of TE/TM @xmath and TE @xmath ,
respectively. Note that, in the former case, the resonance envelope
contains contributions from nearby overlapping TE and TM modes of the
same azimuthal order. In both of these plots, the wavelength window is
chosen to coincide with @xmath nm, for consistency with the distributed
feedback (DFB) laser used for the experiments described in Chapter 6 .
Note that in the case of Fig. 5.2 (a), the lower refractive index
contrast leads to a mode with a relatively small fluctuation in the
emitted power. This is a consequence of the fact that a low index
contrast impacts strongly on the ability to detect modes. While it is
possible to resolve such small power fluctuations, the purpose of this
exercise is simply to establish the extreme limits from the @xmath
-factor derived from the multilayer model. It is clear that the minimum
viable diameter varies widely for this range of possible index values.
To ensure the best possible chance of selecting a viable cell resonator
candidate, without knowing the specific value of the refractive index in
advance, the diameter must be larger than the value of @xmath @xmath m.

Criterion 2. Sphericity: Deformations of the resonator that impact upon
the sphericity have been shown to have an effect on the @xmath -factors
of the WGMs [ 259 , 260 , 118 ] . According to one study, FDTD
simulations of a prolate polystyrene resonator excited by an incident
beam exhibit a decrease in @xmath -factor that is roughly proportional
to the ellipticity of the resonator (measured in terms of its aspect
ratio) [ 260 ] . In the case of microspheres with only small
asphericities, it is useful to incorporate this limiting factor into the
@xmath -factor by adding an elliptical contribution, @xmath , in
parallel, as in Eq. ( 2.44 ). While this poses a potential difficulty in
sourcing a resonator that is

sufficiently spherical to sustain modes, there is a number of techniques
that can serve to mitigate this effect. In particular, excitation of
WGMs preferentially along one equatorial plane can minimise the
contributions from the different path lengths experienced by the
internal fields that contribute to mode-splitting and mode-broadening,
as described in Section 2.2.3 . This may be achieved using fibre taper
couplers, which are able to isolate a single axis of revolution of a
resonator in order to achieve higher @xmath -factors and coupling
efficiencies [ 118 , 83 , 244 ] , as mentioned in Section 5.2 . This
represents an attractive feature of fibre tapers, particularly when
considering resonators that are unlikely to exhibit a perfectly
spherical shape, such as biological many cells.

Criterion 3. Surface roughness: It has been shown that the @xmath
-factors of WGMs are extremely sensitive to surface roughness [ 231 ,
115 ] , with deviations down to the scale of a single nanometre
significantly affecting the wavelength positions of the modes [ 66 ] . A
study of the behaviour of the WGMs within a microdisk cavity has
demonstrated a reduction of the normally high @xmath -factors by several
orders of magnitude for an edge roughness of less than @xmath [ 231 ] .
This makes the isolation of any one single mode potentially difficult
task, placing additional burden upon this criterion as an important
selection characteristic to be addressed for the range of cells
considered in Section 5.4 .

Criterion 4. Elasticity: The mechanical properties of resonators,
particularly of the surface or outermost layer, can affect its ability
to support WGMs for the following reasons. Bound states of radiation
located near the surface of a resonator will tend to dissipate heat and
cause mechanical stress. The fluctuations in the power corresponding to
the modes thus introduce perturbations that are capable of disrupting
the path travelled by the bound waves, especially for malleable
materials. This can lead to shorter ring-down times, shifts in the
wavelength positions of the modes [ 107 ] or even total mode loss, which
may occur sooner than anticipated compared to a rigid resonator, as
explained in Section 5.2 . It is therefore important to consider the
mechanical properties of biological cells, and in particular, the
protein structures that form the outer layers of the viable cell
candidates. This will be discussed in Section 5.5 .

Criterion 5. Osmolarity: The total concentration of soluble particles,
or osmolarity of the surrounding medium, affects the ability to measure
WGMs in a resonator. Lasers can serve to ionise the salts in the
solution, which can accumulate on the surface and compound the
contamination of the medium. This effect is particularly detrimental to
the functioning of fibre tapers. While this issue can be alleviated by
reducing the laser power, the binding of non-soluble particles to a
fibre taper can contribute a non-specific background signal as well as
lowering the overall transmission through the taper, making the
detection of WGM signals more challenging [ 261 ] . This is particularly
important when considering the cells described in Section 5.5 , since
the media used to store the cells typically contain certain quantities
of salts (see Appendix D ), and even a relatively small osmolarity (
@xmath mOsm) can serve to hamper measurement. Furthermore, in small
volumes of liquid medium, the heat caused by the energy from the laser
will eventually evaporate the liquid, occurring within minutes for large
power outputs such as those above @xmath mW. As a result, the increased
concentration and subsequent crystallisation of residual salt within the
medium can cause physical damage to the cell and to a fragile coupler
such as a taper. Before performing a measurement, it is vital to ensure
that the medium is as dilute as possible without indirectly altering the
morphology of the cells. This is handled on a case-by-case basis, as the
chemical composition of media can differ widely, as shown in Appendix D
. In the specific case of the most viable cell candidate, the methods
outlined for handling this effect are described in Sections 5.5.4 and
5.7 .

As an additional point, it is interesting to note that the chemical
composition of the surrounding medium chosen for a specific biological
cell can affect the elastic properties of its outermost layer, such as
in the case of the bovine oocyte [ 262 ] .

Criterion 6. Excitation method: The successful measurement of WGMs is
intimately connected to the method of introducing radiation into the
resonator. As has been explained in the case of the fibre taper in
Criterion 2 , one may isolate specific resonances, or classes of
resonances (such as those stemming from a single axis of symmetry), by
carefully choosing an appropriate coupling method. As an example, the
approximate @xmath -factors for the fundamental modes in silica
microspheres, in a surrounding medium of air, have been quantified as a
function of diameter [ 78 ] . In the case of a diameter within a broad
range of @xmath to @xmath micron, noting that the cells considered as
optimal candidates in Section 5.5 fall within this range, it is expected
that waveguide couplers lead to @xmath -factors of less than @xmath .
Prism couplers, on the other hand, are expected to provide @xmath
-factors in excess of @xmath . Finally, tapers are potentially able to
access the highest @xmath -factors, in excess of @xmath for resonators
of this size. Using the phase-matching methods described in Section 5.2
, the prism coupler, taper coupler, and fluorescent coating methods are
explored in Chapter 6 in order to assess the ability of a cell to
sustain WGMs.

Criterion 7. Loss (absorption and scattering): It is known that some
biological cells exhibit changes in their electrical capacitance from
absorption of light in the IR spectrum [ 263 ] due to the fact that
water, which dominates the spectral behaviour of the surrounding medium,
is highly absorbing in this region, generating heat that can affect the
cells. It is also known that the DNA in cells is strongly absorbing in
the UV spectrum [ 250 , 251 ] . As a result, the visible and NIR regions
represent the optimal windows for achieving resonance.

Both scattering and absorption directly affect the @xmath -factor, as is
evident in the first two terms on the right hand side of Eq. ( 2.44 ).
Clearly, absorption of energy due to material properties will prevent
electromagnetic radiation from circulating continually, thus preventing
clear modes from being observed. In this case, the challenge is to
achieve a sufficient signal-to-noise ratio in the spectra for
determining the presence of modes. Similarly, if the surface properties
of a given cell allow scattering effects to dominate, any underlying WGM
spectrum will be difficult to measure.

### 5.4 Candidate cells

In this section, a range of candidate cells is explored, and their
suitabilities as resonators are assessed using the newly-developed
selection criteria. Upon selecting a candidate cell, the refractive
index and size are estimated, since it is this criterion to which it is
most difficult to make significant alterations. If such kinds of cells
lie in the viable range of geometric parameters established in Fig. 5.2
, then the surface properties are subsequently considered. As will be
seen, careful consideration of surface effects is critical. However, it
is not always straightforward to be able to assess in advance whether
surface deformations will prevent the observation of WGMs. The type of
medium used to store or handle the cells can also play a pivotal role in
facilitating or preventing the generation of modes, through
contaminants, high salt content and effects on the surface properties of
the cells themselves. While it is important to establish that a number
of candidates has been considered carefully, the purpose of this section
is to identify the most viable candidate, which is then used for a more
in-depth study in Chapter 6 using the techniques described in Section
5.2 .

Erythrocytes: The first cell considered in this thesis is the animal red
blood cell, which resembles a biconcave disk, depicted in Fig. 5.3 (a).
One particularly attractive feature of this cell is the disk shape,
which could potentially assist in constraining the modes to a more
limited geometric orientation, leading to increased @xmath -factors [ 2
, 47 ] . Considering Criterion 1 , erythrocytes have diameters of the
order of @xmath to @xmath micron – approximately the size of the
smallest resonators considered in Chapters 2 and 3 [ 77 ] . Cells within
this range of diameters are unlikely to be able to support modes, since
in order to do so, the refractive index must be sufficiently large, as
determined by the material properties of the cells. It is found that
erythrocytes are composed of a combination of proteins and lipids, with
a refractive index in the range @xmath to @xmath [ 264 , 265 , 266 ] .
The limiting values estimated in Fig. 5.2 indicate that an erythrocyte
would require a diameter approximately one order of magnitude larger in
order to sustain modes, and thus cannot be considered a viable
biological resonator. It should be noted, however, that while this
choice of cell will not become the basis of study in this thesis, it
should not be ruled out for future technological developments that may
be able to overcome the limitations of the diameter.

Cryptosporidium oocysts: The next cell to be examined is that of
Cryptosporidium . This eukaryotic cell, while hazardous to humans [ 267
] , forms a distinctly spherical oocyst, as illustrated in Fig. 5.3 (b).
The size of the oocyst varies depending on the species of
Cryptosporidium . For example, C. parvum , a smaller variety, is
reported with planar dimensions of @xmath @xmath m. The ratio of the
major and minor axes corresponds to a shape index (or shape factor) of
@xmath . On the other hand, C. muris , a slightly larger but less
symmetrical variety is reported to have dimensions of @xmath @xmath m,
corresponding to a shape index of @xmath [ 268 ] . As with the
erythrocite, an application of Criterion 1 indicates that these cells
are too small to be likely to sustain WGMs given the range of refractive
indices exhibited by proteins [ 220 ] . While the range of sizes
provides some indication that genetic variations in certain cells can
provide increased diameter values, in this case, the asymmetry increases
with size, limiting the opportunity for investigation into resonance
behaviour. However, in other cases, it is indeed possible to genetically
modify cells so that they are less limited in size [ 269 ] . One
particular example of such a cell, which is both commonly used and
relatively straightforward to source, is yeast.

Genetically modified yeast: The eukaryotic fungus known as yeast, of the
species Saccharomyces cerevisiae , is both widely available, and
reasonably well understood genetically compared to other cells [ 269 ] .
In cell biology, cells that exhibit one complete set of chromosomes are
called haploids , whereas those that incorporate two complete sets of
chromosomes are known as diploids . Diploid yeast cells can exhibit
twice the cell volume of haploids [ 270 ] . Furthermore, it is possible
to cultivate particularly large yeast cells by altering their genetic
makeup, typically through gene deletions [ 269 ] . These modified cells
are usually labelled, by convention, with the gene that has been
deleted. For example, the strains that have had the genes deleted that
express @xmath (denoted @xmath ) or @xmath (denoted @xmath ) are
described in Ref. [ 269 ] . As an example, the @xmath strain has a
median cell volume of @xmath @xmath m @xmath . Of these strains, the one
that is able to produce the largest and most spherical cell type, with
diameters of the order of @xmath @xmath m is known as @xmath .

Figure 5.3 (c) shows an image of the @xmath strain, with each square
marked on the scale as @xmath @xmath m in length. While cells of the
order of @xmath to @xmath @xmath m in diameter are still relatively
small for the purposes of sustaining modes according to Criterion 1 ,
the upper diameter values are close to the minimum limiting diameter
considered in Fig. 5.2 so long as the refractive index is sufficiently
large [ 220 ] . While this cell is not optimal, it is worth
investigating its other properties with respect to the selection
criteria. While several of the @xmath cells are near spherical,
satisfying Criterion 2 , it is difficult in general to gauge the surface
attributes, Criteria 3 and 4 ; these will often represent the last
criteria to be considered in each case of cell. The media, excitation
and loss properties ( Criteria 5 through 7 ), however, are more easily
examined. First, the absorption properties of these cells are
considered.
Method: The yeast are streaked onto agar plates, grown for a period of
@xmath to @xmath days and stored at @xmath C with the plates inverted.
Each of the three strains, @xmath , @xmath and @xmath is cultivated in
standard, non-selective yeast media (YEPD), described in Appendix D ,
and placed into aliquots. While this medium contains quantities of
proteins, glucose/dextrose and yeast extract, little quantities of salt
are present (which would impede the growth of yeast), nominally
satisfying Criterion 5 . An initial concentration of cells in media
corresponding to a haemocytometer reading of @xmath cells/mL is used.
Next, a hypodermic syringe and fine needle is used to agitate and
distribute the cell constituents throughout a medium of water. The
debris is removed via a centrifuge, and the remaining supernatant liquid
is then diluted to a concentration of @xmath and re-centrifuged. The
spectra corresponding to each stage of the process are shown in Fig. 5.4
(a), as measured from solutions placed in @xmath mL cuvettes, by a
UV–Vis–NIR spectrophotometer. The absorbance spectra of water is
subtracted from these results. Acetone is not used in this case to
assist the solvency,

as it can cause a proportion of the starches and sugars to precipitate,
leaving only DNA and protein. The absorbance of the resultant solution
is measured using a spectrophotometer, shown in Fig. 5.4 , and
corresponding to Criterion 7 . Figures 5.4 (a) and 5.4 (b) show that the
DNA is nevertheless the dominant source of absorbance, with the
principal peak occurring at @xmath nm, while there is little discernible
effect in the visible region. The ribosome content, given by the ratio
of the absorbance at @xmath nm to that at @xmath nm, @xmath [ 271 ] ,
leads to a value of @xmath . Based on the known results for DNA for the
quantity @xmath , as described in Ref. [ 271 ] , this result indicates
that the solution consists primarily of DNA. Thus, any absorbance from
sugars and starches left in the solution have a negligible effect on the
absorbance compared to that of the DNA. As a result, the absorbance
spectrum indicates that the choice of wavelength in this case is not
strongly constrained, offering scope for the generation of WGMs.

Finally, the excitation and scattering behaviour of Criteria 6 and 7 ,
are considered by applying a fibre taper placed above a glass coverslip
on an inverted confocal microscope, similar to the setup illustrated in
Fig. 3.6 . A droplet of water is placed on top of the fibre taper to
prevent breakage due to surface tension effects. The droplet is then
inoculated with yeast cells of the @xmath strain. It is found that the
yeast cells do not interact with the fibre taper, nor produce any
measurable autofluorescence. The reason for this is that the coupling of
light into a resonator from a fibre taper is extremely sensitive to the
phase-matching condition of Eq. ( 2.38 ), determined by the diameter of
the taper waist, and the distance of the taper to the resonator. For
cells of this diameter, approximately @xmath @xmath m, a taper waist of
@xmath @xmath m is insufficient to achieve such a coupling. While the
evanescent field of a thin taper extends further into the surrounding
medium, it renders the taper extremely sensitive to contamination from
dust, detritus or biological matter introduced into the droplet. As a
result, it is unlikely that these cells represent a pathway toward a
biological cell resonator that can be easily achieved at this time.

Eudorina - Pandorina algae: The next cell to be considered is a much
larger variety of eukaryota , from the family Volvocaceae . These
varieties of algae are known for their symmetrical geometric shapes,
through conglomerations of cells into microspheres significantly larger
in diameter than the aforementioned candidates, as well as macroscopic
structures formed by the conglomerates themselves. Note that each
structure can also be surrounded by a faint, translucent layer, roughly
spherical in shape. Examples of these formations are displayed in Fig.
5.5 for the Eudorina - Pandorina genus. Figures 5.5 (a) and (b) depict
examples of the structures and meta-structures formed by the algae. An
image of an algal microsphere placed within the evanescent field of a
fibre taper, with a waist diameter of @xmath @xmath m, and using a
wavelength of approximately @xmath nm, is shown in Fig. 5.5 (c)
producing significant autofluorescence.

Considering Criterion 1 , an analysis of the geometric properties from a
sample of algae (full results shown in Appendix D ) indicates a mean
value of the equivalent circle diameter of @xmath @xmath m, and a mean
aspect ratio of @xmath . Note that the maximum value of the equivalent
circle diameter is over @xmath @xmath m, which is a useful feature given
that the refractive index of algal cells exceeds that of water by a
factor of no more than @xmath [ 272 ] . In the case of Criterion 2 , the
mean sphericity is measured to be @xmath ; however, for some algal
particles, the sphericity is as high as @xmath . Finding an optimal
combination of size and sphericity is achievable given the large
quantity of algae available. It is these large spherical cell
conglomerates that are selected preferentially for experiment.

The Eudorina - Pandorina variant are successfully cultivated in a medium
known as MLA, the recipe for which can be found in Ref. [ 273 ] ,
reproduced in Appendix D . While this media stock requires a range of
salts and micronutrients, they are in relatively small quantities, and
the resultant medium is very dilute from the point of view of the WGM
coupling apparatus, such as the prism coupler or the fibre taper, thus
providing little concern regarding Criterion 5 .

Considering the absorption properties, Criterion 7 , for these algae,
the conglomerates are relatively bulky compared to the other cells
examined thus far, and a sample of algal cells suspended in MLA (which
has a refractive index close to that of water) is unlikely to be
homogeneous. A measurement of the absorbance of this mixture yields a
relatively smooth spectrum, increasing towards the UV region. This is
due to the scattering of the light from the cells, which serves to
broaden the peaks that would correspond to the algae, as shown in Fig.
5.6 (a) for a number of dilutions. Note that the absorbance spectra of
the MLA medium alone is subtracted from these results. Since the goal is
not to activate a solution of many cells to explore the possibility of
generating WGMs, but rather, to activate a single cell with a laser and
mode coupler, it is the properties of the contents of the algae cells
themselves that must be examined as follows.

Method: First, samples of the algae solution with a volume of @xmath mL
are centrifuged into pellets. Then the pellets are dissolved and
combined in acetone in order to break down the biological material into
a translucent, homogeneous fluid. Two pellets are added per @xmath mL of
acetone, thus doubling the concentration. This solution is then agitated
using a weighted test tube designed to distribute the constituents
within the cells throughout the solution and remove the resulting
debris. The translucent

solution is measured against a background of buffered acetone. As a
result, the constituent chemicals of the algae are more homogeneously
distributed through the media.

The absorbance spectrum now contains much clearer peaks, as shown in
Fig. 5.6 (b) for a number of dilutions, with the dominant spectral peaks
originating from chlorophyll shown as vertical dotted lines. In
particular, the absorption peak at @xmath nm is known to originate from
chlorophyll [ 274 ] . While not all algae display identical spectra, the
shape is similar to Fig. 8 in Ref. [ 275 ] . Note that the absorbance
becomes difficult to measure in the UV region due to the DNA present in
the sample. It is clear that within the visible region, particularly for
wavelengths between @xmath and @xmath nm, the absorbance is relatively
low, and thus this region is the most optimal for attempting to generate
WGMs. While the Eudorina - Pandorina algae represent an initially
promising direction in the search for a cell resonator, the difficulty
with sustaining modes stems from Criterion 3 . While the groups of algal
cells are predominantly round, the surface roughness and defects are
significant – approximately half the diameter of a single daughter
colony within the conglomerate – @xmath @xmath m. However, some colonies
are much more compact with reduced surface roughness, as shown in Fig.
D.1 of Appendix D . Recalling that modes of microspheres are sensitive
to surface roughness at the nanometre scale [ 231 , 115 ] , it is thus
difficult to obtain resonant behaviour of light returning in phase for
any more than an extremely limited number of round-trips.

Volvox algae: This algae is a relative of the Eudorina - Pandorina
variety, in the same family Volvocaceae . What distinguishes this algae
from its relatives is its propensity to form approximately-spherical
macroscopic colonies up to a millimetre in diameter, constructed from
large numbers of algal cell conglomerates. While this potentially
provides scope to explore the resonance properties of these structures,
the multicellular roughness is of a similar magnitude to that of
Eudorina - Pandorina , limiting the likelihood that modes could be
sustained, according to Criterion 3 .

Other studies on WGMs in biological cells: Competing studies in the
literature on cell based WGMs include the placement of cells expressing
green fluorescent protein (GFP) within a cavity, with the modes excited
by the emission from the GFP within the cell. Lipid droplet based lasers
have also been reported in Ref. [ 114 ] , in which spherical droplets of
oil or natural lipids within porcine adipocyte cells are able to sustain
WGMs. Alternatively, free-floating beads of polystyrene [ 107 , 114 ] or
GFP coated BaTiO @xmath [ 276 ] have been inserted into living cells or
allowed to be engulfed by phagocytes for the purposes of tagging and
tracking. Of these studies, the closest counterpart to the research
presented in this thesis is that of the Harvard-MIT group’s porcine
adipocyte based lasers, which demonstrate the fact that WGMs can be
sustained within naturally occurring subcutaneous fatty cells. Adipocyte
cells contain a single lipid droplet ( @xmath ) that exhibits a high
degree of spherical symmetry, and it is this droplet that is reported to
act as an optical cavity with a sufficient refractive index contrast
between the droplet and the surrounding tissue. The adipocytes were
treated with a lipophilic dye (Nile red) and collagenase in order to
release them from the surrounding subcutaneous tissue and to induce
lasing in situ . This experiment is of relevance to the present study,
as it represents the first example of WGMs reported as sustainable
within a completely natural cavity within a biological cell. While the
focus on cells containing lipid droplets limits the ability to extend
the study to a range of other cells, it nevertheless demonstrates an
important validation for the concept of a naturally occurring optical
cavity in nature.

Recalling the formulation of the project in Section 1.4 , the ability
for a biological cell to act as a resonator without the introduction of
an artificial cavity is of particular interest conceptually. The
development of a sensing modality for providing information of the
internal structure of an untampered cell is not only complementary to
existing label-free technologies [ 20 , 21 , 22 , 23 , 24 , 25 , 26 ]
but has potentially broad implications on health sciences. A sensing
modality based on cells that can sustain WGMs on their own may also
avoid the immune responses of an organism from the introduction of
foreign materials.

Mammalian oocytes: The final cell to be considered in this thesis is the
mammalian oocyte. A variety of types of oocyte will be studied, and how
each of the selection criteria are addressed will be examined in detail
and expanded upon in the next section. The reasons for this particular
kind of cell being an attractive choice are manifold. First, they
exhibit significant diameter values of the order of @xmath @xmath m
(depending on species). Second, the life cycle of an oocyte,
particularly after fertilisation, has been well studied in the health
literature. As a result, there is some indication as to the surface
roughness and elastic properties of the outer layers, which depend on
the stage of the fertilised oocyte, or embryo. Finally, measuring the
resonant properties of embryos presents a major opportunity to make an
impact on health sciences in the future. As WGM sensing technologies are
developed, the ability to characterise the status of an embryo through
WGM interrogation comes within reach.

### 5.5 Oocyte and embryo structure

The structure of an oocyte can be divided into the following regions, as
illustrated in Fig. 5.7 . The primary regions are known as the nucleus ,
where the majority of the oocyte DNA is stored, the cytoplasm , the
mitochondria , and the zona pellucida , which is of particular
importance in this work. Unfertilised oocytes may also be surrounded by
cumulus cells, known as the corona radiata when adjacent to the zona
pellucida , which are critically involved in the fertilisation process,
and dissipate shortly afterwards. An oocyte surrounded by cumulus cells
is known as a cumulus-oocyte complex (COC) , and if the cumulus cells
are removed, it is called denuded .

While the biological functions of these regions is a rich and complex
subject, this thesis seeks to explore the physical properties of the
oocyte, and in particular, its ability to sustain electromagnetic
resonances. Optical attributes of oocytes, such as the refractive index,
have not been comprehensively studied in the literature, and as a
result, this work represents a pioneering attempt to characterise some
of the properties necessary for a biological cell to exhibit WGMs. Thus,
to begin, the potential influence of each of the regions of an oocyte on
the generation of WGMs

will be studied.

Recall that the behaviour of the modes of a layered resonator is highly
dependent on the properties of the outermost layer, as demonstrated in
in Chapters 3 and 4 . This is because of the fact that the fundamental
radial modes are confined to the surface of the resonator. If the outer
layer becomes sufficiently thick, for a given refractive index and outer
diameter, the mode behaviour becomes insensitive to further increases in
the layer thickness, as described in the case study of fluorescent
microbubbles in Section 3.3 . As a result, the structure of the
cytoplasm, which lies within the zona region, has less influence on the
structure of any modes confined within the zona . For this reason, more
attention is paid to the physical properties of the zona for the
purposes of optical resonance. The structure of the zona pellucida will
now be considered.

The zona pellucida , illustrated in Fig. 5.7 , is a semi-transparent
coating that surrounds mammalian oocytes and embryos, which allows for
communication among oocytes, follicle cells and sperm, as well as
providing mechanical protection during embryo development [ 277 ] . In
embryology, the zona pellucida is of particular interest because of its
role in regulating the interactions of the oocyte with its surrounding
environment [ 278 ] , especially at the moment of fertilisation from
free-floating sperm, which represents a rich area of ongoing research [
279 ] .

The zona comprises an extracellular matrix that consists of a mixture of
glycoproteins [ 278 ] , and is held together in long, interconnected
fibrils by non-covalent interactions. These proteins involve sugar
groups (certain oligosaccharides known as glycans ) attached to the
constituent molecules, which affect their molecular weights [ 280 ] . A
simplified molecular structure of a nitrogen(N)-linked glycosylation ,
or attachment of the glycan to a nitrogen atom, is shown in Fig. 5.8 .
The molecular weights vary across a significant range, from @xmath to
@xmath kilodalton (kDa), depending on the protein type, and species to
which it belongs [ 280 ] . The glycoproteins are not laid down in
uniform layers, but are intermixed with varying relative densities at
different points in the zona , as illustrated in Section 5.5 . The
reduction of the more bulky protein structures yields a more compacted
mechanical structure, which not only increases the refractive index [
220 ] ( Criterion 1 ), but also leads to reduced surface roughness (
Criterion 3 ) and elasticity [ 235 ] . One interesting phenomenon in the
development of mammalian oocytes is that the elastic and surface
properties change after fertilisation. This is an important feature of
the current work. In the case of bovine oocytes, AFM reveals the
greatest density of networked glycoproteins, the most significant zona
hardening, and the minimum surface roughness all occurring immediately
after fertilisation [ 235 ] . Similar mechanical changes have been
observed recently in murine and human oocytes [ 239 ] . For these
reasons, the majority of the cell experiments presented in Chapter 6
will involve presumptive zygotes , that is, oocytes that have undergone
fertilisation, and are subsequently either placed in a fixing solution
or otherwise immediately tested at this phase of their development.

In the case of murine oocytes, the proteins are labelled in descending
order of molecular weight: (m)ZP @xmath ( @xmath kDa), (m)ZP @xmath (
@xmath kDa) and (m)ZP @xmath ( @xmath kDa) [ 280 ] . In the case of
other mammalian oocytes, such as those of bovine, porcine and human, a
fourth protein of intermediate weight is present, ZP @xmath [ 282 ] .
The molecular weights of these proteins differ from species to species,
and each protein functions differently with regard to fertilisation [
282 ] . For the purposes of the experiments described in Chapter 6 , it
is important to note that, while all available glycoproteins are present
throughout the zona , the distribution of the proteins within the zona
region is inhomogeneous [ 283 ] . For example, a greater proportion of
the protein ZP @xmath is found near the outer boundary of the zona ,
since it is the protein that is predominantly involved in binding to
sperm [ 284 ] . Furthermore, it has been well documented that the
distribution of proteins is highly dependent on the stage of
fertilisation [ 285 , 286 ] . Therefore, it will become important to
choose an oocyte or embryo from a stage in the fertilisation process
that presents the best opportunity for sustaining WGMs. It is possible
that this distribution of proteins results in a refractive index
gradient that would serve to broaden the higher order radial modes,
which extend further into the zona region. While the optical properties
of these proteins, especially in intact oocytes, is not well understood,
the intention of this investigation is to elucidate how the physical
parameters can affect the generation of WGMs.

#### 5.5.1 Size and topology

At the most basic level, the range of diameters exhibited by mammalian
oocytes satisfies Criterion 1 . In the case of bovine oocytes, it is
reported in the literature that the outer diameters (including the zona
regions) take values @xmath to @xmath @xmath m [ 287 ] , with a
variation of @xmath %. The thickness of the zona itself takes values
@xmath to @xmath @xmath m [ 287 ] . In this study, measurements taken
for the bovine oocytes used in this project yield smaller mean outer
diameter values of @xmath @xmath m, that is, with a variation of @xmath
%. Excluding the zona region, the diameter is consistently in the range
@xmath to @xmath @xmath m, in agreement with the literature [ 288 ] .
Figure 5.9 shows examples of bovine embryos in Figs. 5.9 (a) and (b),
and a scale image of a presumptive zygote, a fertilised embryo that
remains undeveloped, which has been chemically fixed , in Fig. 5.10 (c).

A similar study is conducted on murine embryos, as shown in Fig. 5.10 .
The images shown in Figs. 5.10 (a) through (c) correspond to the
autofluorescence captured from a single murine embryo using a confocal
microscope, for two channels ( @xmath nm and @xmath nm), as well as a
merged image of both channels and a phase-contrast image. The scale
image in Fig. 5.10 (d) indicates an outer diameter of @xmath @xmath m.
The sphericity appears optimal for biological cells, particularly for
the bovine samples, nominally satisfying Criterion 2 . The effect of
autofluorescence in oocytes and embryos will be discussed in more detail
in Section 5.5.5 .

While the refractive index values of the glyocoproteins that comprise
the zona layers have not been clearly characterised in the literature,
as discussed in the next section, a comparison of these diameter values
with the limiting results of Fig. 5.2 indicate that the bovine oocytes
and embryos are in the suitable region for sustaining WGMs according to
Criterion 1 .

#### 5.5.2 Glycoprotein refractive index

While the refractive index does not represent a property that is
typically of immediate interest to practitioners in the field of
embryology or cell biology, several measurements have been reported in
the context of determining the optimal fertilisation time using optical
microsystems [ 242 , 243 ] . The refractive indices in this case are
measured by collecting the transmission spectra from two adjacent
fibres, one of which is connected to a low-power white-light source, in
close proximity to an oocyte. The values obtained from this method vary
widely depending on the stage of fertilisation, from @xmath to @xmath ,
with statistical uncertainties ranging from @xmath to @xmath . The index
values above @xmath are, however, unrealistically high for organic
matter, which does not exhibit any high-index crystalline structural
properties that would be expected for refractive indices of this
magnitude. This study represents one of the only attempts to obtain the
refractive index directly from an intact oocyte, providing scope for an
improved estimate using WGM-based techniques. Measurements of the
refractive index of the glycoproteins that comprise the zona pellucida
lead to a more conservative range of @xmath to @xmath [ 220 ] . While
this range of values is still comparatively wide given the sensitivity
of the WGM spectra to changes in the index, it is possible to tune the
coupling condition of the excitation method, particularly in the case of
the prism coupler, to sweep this range of values.

#### 5.5.3 Surface properties

A consideration of the surface properties of oocytes, including the
roughness (microscopic surface deviations) and the elasticity (
Criteria 3 and 4 ) will become particularly important in assessing the
feasibility of generating WGMs in these kinds of cells. Focusing on the
most likely candidate, that of bovine oocytes, a topographic analysis of
the zona region has been conducted in Ref. [ 235 ] , leading to
quantitative measures of several of the surface features. These include
the density of the mesh of fibril bundles that comprise the zona , the
roughness as measured by the root mean square (RMS) values of cantilever
deflections using AFM, and the plastic deformation force as estimated
through Young’s modulus. It is found that the surface of the zona
contains thicker and more compact fibril bundles, with diameters of
@xmath to @xmath nm, for oocytes that are either immature or only
recently fertilised. The RMS deformations corresponding to the surface
roughness reach a minimum for the recently fertilised oocytes, at @xmath
nm [ 235 ] . Comparing this result to the maximum surface roughness
permitted for sustaining modes, @xmath nm, leading to @xmath -factors of
@xmath [ 231 ] , the minimum surface roughness exhibited by bovine
oocytes indicates the possibility of measurable WGMs. Furthermore, the
plastic deformation force corresponding to these oocytes is @xmath nN,
greater than that of matured oocytes at @xmath nN, which indicates a
reduction in elasticity immediately after fertilisation. Studies on
human oocytes have yielded similar dependencies of the surface
properties on the stage of development [ 239 ] . As a result,
presumptive zygotes, oocytes that have been recently fertilised and then
placed in a fixing solution, will be predominantly used in the
experiments presented in Chapter 6 in order to ensure the optimal
likelihood of measuring WGMs. Note that both the chemicals selected for
the fixing procedure and the composition of the surrounding media will
also influence the surface properties and potentially the size of the
oocytes, and must be taken into account.

#### 5.5.4 Surrounding media

In the case of oocytes and embryos, the surrounding media is
predominantly water based, and exhibits equivalent optical properties,
as described under Criterion 7 . However, a number of media variants
exists in practice, depending on the storage method selected, and the
concentration of salts must be monitored carefully, according to
Criterion 5 . The chemical composition of the two most common fixing
procedures, and their corresponding media, can be found in Appendix D ;
namely, the zona salt solution – phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), and
the paraffin formaldehyde (PFA) method, which uses a special handling
medium composed of 3-(N-morpholino) propanesulfonic acid (MOPS) buffered
wash and bovine albumin serum (BSA). In the particular case of the fibre
taper coupling method, any dissolved salts become strongly ionised by
the evanescent radiation from the tapered section of the fibre, causing
contamination to the taper, rendering it insensitive. Stray detritus
from damaged cell fragments can also act as contaminants during the
experiments. Subsequently diluting the surrounding medium imposes
additional considerations, since a forced reduction of the osmolarity of
the medium can impose osmotic pressure on the cell, altering its
topology and size. It will become apparent in Chapter 6 that while the
dilution of a droplet of media with Milli-Q @xmath water for the
purposes of measurement causes no major topological defects of the zona
pellucida , it experiences uniform hypo-osmotic pressure on the inner
wall, enlarging the cell volume by @xmath %, and the diameter by @xmath
% or greater [ 289 , 290 ] . The discussion of Fig. 5.2 under
Criterion 1 indicates that the increased diameter may serve to
facilitate the generation of modes.

#### 5.5.5 Autofluorescence

Autofluorescence describes the process of light that is absorbed and
re-emitted by certain biological materials [ 22 ] or crystals [ 84 , 85
, 86 ] . It can be difficult to distinguish autofluorescence signals
from scattering mechanisms, such as Mie scattering, and thus it is
important to identify the extent to which the cell candidates
autofluoresce. This directly affects Criterion 7 . On the other hand,
extensive autofluorescence also provides an opportunity to realise
active biological resonators without the requirement of introducing an
external fluorescent agent, such as a foreign organic dye, which can
sometimes exhibit unwanted toxicity [ 89 , 90 , 91 , 75 , 92 , 93 ] .
While the introduction of dyes or artificial emitters may represent a
viable initial pathway to achieving a biological resonator, as argued in
Chapters 3 and 4 , if autofluorescence can be harnessed, it would
present a conceptually elegant methodology for on-site cell
interrogation, where measurement of resonances would necessarily report
information pertaining to the internal and external environment of the
cell in question.

This method has already been trialled in the literature through
two-photon fluorescence microscopy, which is able to determine
architectural features of cells, particularly for embryos, which are
photosensitive [ 252 ] . For an CW excitation laser with a wavelength of
@xmath nm, and using the setup shown in Fig. 3.6 , the images taken in
Figs. 5.10 (a) through (c) show that, in the case of murine embryos,
there is indeed an underlying autofluorescence signal, particularly in
the green portion of the visible spectrum ( @xmath nm). In order to
estimate the relative intensity and the spectrum of the fluorescence
signal from the typical fixed cells that will be used in Chapter 6 , a
single murine embryo in a droplet of PBS media is placed on a glass
coverslip, and excited with a green ( @xmath nm) CW laser, and collected
with a spectrometer, in the same manner as in Fig. 3.6 . The result is
shown in Fig. 5.11 . By examining Fig. 5.11 (a), it is clear that there
is indeed an autofluorescence peak in the green visible region (near
@xmath nm). The plateau region between @xmath and @xmath nm is derived
from the nearby and overlapping peaks corresponding to the complex
protein and lipid structure of the oocyte. Outside the region, however,
the signal is negligible. In cases where it is required that the
autofluorescence signal be removed for a clean measurement of the
scattered radiation, such as in the case of passive interrogation,
selecting a wavelength region such as the NIR, which does not encounter
the absorption effects inherent in the UV or the far IR regions, will be
mandatory. For comparison, a single Eudorina - Pandorina microsphere
conglomerate of cells suspended in MLA medium is placed on the
microscope under the same conditions. The algae exhibit a much larger
autofluorescence signal, particularly at @xmath nm, as shown in Fig.
5.11 (b).

#### 5.5.6 Absorptive properties

The final consideration for assessing the viability of mammalian oocytes
as biological resonators is the extent to which they absorb light across
the spectrum, as described in Criterion 7 .

The absorbance spectral profile of murine oocytes in the IR region is
shown in Ref. [ 291 ] , which includes spectral peaks corresponding to
lipids and acyl chains, proteins with amide groups, nucleic acids, and
carbohydrates. Similarly, FTIR spectra obtained from these oocytes [ 257
] indicate that while the sources of absorbance are well characterised
and suitable for detection of structural defects in oocytes, there is
little control over the regions of high absorbance. Since amino acid
chains involved in DNA are highly absorbing in the UV region [ 250 , 251
] , the focus of this investigation is constrained to the visible and
NIR regions, for which wavelengths in the range @xmath to @xmath nm will
be considered. The lower wavelength light is absorbed efficiently by a
range of organic dyes, including those of the Rhodamine group [ 202 ] ,
which can be used as a fluorescent dopant, and will be explored briefly
with respect to Criterion 6 in Section 6.2.4 . As an alternative, the
upper wavelength values correspond to a tunable DFB laser, which is used
for the passive interrogation of a resonator.

### 5.6 Selecting a viable cell

Upon consideration of a range of cells through Sections 5.4 and 5.5 ,
mammalian oocytes, in particular, bovine embryos in the presumptive
zygote phase of development, are selected for further study. While each
of the cells considered has displayed a variety of compelling
properties, in each case, except for the mammalian oocytes, one or more
of the selection criteria are not able to be fulfilled.

In the case of the erythrocite, the diameters are simply not large
enough to sustain modes for the refractive index of their constituent
material, despite their symmetrical

shape. Similarly, the Cryptosporidium oocysts, while potentially larger
than the erythrocytes, would not reasonably be able to support WGMs. One
possible avenue of investigation considered was the genetic modification
of cells, taking the example of Saccharomyces cerevisiae , or yeast, for
which much literature on the topic exists. However, the largest variety
of modified yeast did not respond to fibre taper excitation. The next
most promising candidate, the varieties of algae, are able to produce
compelling structural arrangements with a high degree of symmetry, but
are unfortunately hampered by large surface defects that prevent
resonances from being realised in their case. Lastly, the mammalian
oocytes are found to be in the viable regime for their diameter and
refractive index, display a high degree of sphericity and exhibit an
acceptable degree of scattering and absorption loss. While the handling
media used for oocytes can include a high degree of osmolarity and
debris, with adverse effects on the ability to measure WGMs, these can
be controlled by choosing an appropriate handling medium with a low
osmolarity and a sufficient level of dilution. A cell candidate
comparison matrix is provided on the next page.

To what extent subtle microscopic deformations on the surface of the
zona or the inherent elasticity of this layer will play a role in the
successful generation of modes is, at this point, largely unknown. The
investigation of the surface properties, as well as the experimental
confirmation of the viability of the oocyte with respect to the other
selection criteria, will be the subject of intensive study in Chapter 6
.

### 5.7 Sample preparation

The extraction, preparation, storage, mounting and manipulation of the
biological cell samples, particularly in the case mammalian oocytes,
represent tasks that must be handled carefully according to the
procedure outlined below.

First, bovine or murine ovaries are sourced from the Robinson Research
Institute – The University of Adelaide. Upon extraction from an ovary,
the oocytes must then be denuded in order to remove the residual cumulus
cells, shown in Fig. 1 in the Prologue, increasing the smoothness of the
outer surface of the zona pellucida . They are then cleaned and fixed
using either of the methods described in Appendix D.4.1 and D.4 . Note
that the fixing method influences the osmolarity of the handling medium
that is used in the experiment. Upon fixing, the oocytes can then be
stored in a refrigerator at @xmath C.

Immediately prior to mounting the cells onto the experimental setup,
either on the top surface of the prism coupler or on the glass coverslip
(see Section 6.2 ), the medium must be diluted in order to control the
inhibiting effects of salt contamination, described under Criterion 5 .
It is found that a dilution by a factor of @xmath is sufficient for the
MOPS+BSA medium, whereas a much greater dilution factor of @xmath is
required for the PBS medium.

In order to investigate the coupling of light into an oocyte, its
position must be controlled precisely so that it is directly above the
laser spot in the case of the prism, or within the evanescent field of
the fibre taper. This is achieved through the use of a suction
holding-pipette, as shown in Fig. 5.12 . The sample preparation
procedure is summarised on the next page, while the specific
configurations of the experimental setups will be described in the
Chapter 6 .

While it is by no means certain that clearly identifiable whispering
gallery modes will be measured within a biological cell, in this
chapter, a concerted effort has been made to identify the most likely
challenges, and the physical parameters of the cell and its environment
to which they pertain.

Although a number of cell candidates has been examined, the primary
focus of the experiments presented in the next chapter will be the
bovine oocytes, presumptive zygotes and embryos, which are deemed to
satisfy the selection criteria most closely. Thus difficulties in
isolating WGM signals from the transmitted and scattered spectra can be
clearly explained, and a pathway to overcoming them can be developed.

## 6 Whispering Gallery Modes in an Embryo

This chapter describes both the experimental setups and the results for
the study of WGMs within embryos. After an introduction as to how
embryos may feasibly function as resonators in Section 6.1 , the various
experimental configurations and their respective methodologies and
procedures are described in Section 6.2 . Modelling predictions of the
FSR, @xmath -factors and sensitivity of a simulated cell are
investigated in Section 6.3 . Then, in Section 6.4 , the experimental
results are explained and compared, and the new understandings of
resonator behaviour that can be gleaned from each technique are
summarised. Finally, the conclusions drawn from the results are stated
in Section 6.5 . The experimental results and the model simulations are
thus tied together, with a view towards the next key steps and future
direction of research on this topic.

### 6.1 Embryos as resonators

In Chapter 5 , the structure of mammalian oocytes and embryos was
explored and, after an analysis of their potential resonance properties
using the selection criteria developed in Section 5.3 , these cells were
deemed the most viable candidates considered in Section 5.6 . These
embryos are thus chosen for a more in-depth experimental analysis,
presented herein. While biological cells are not ideal resonators, in
that they present challenges that can serve to frustrate the generation
of WGMs, the mammalian oocyte exhibits some attractive features that
make it particularly noteworthy as a resonator candidate.

First, its size and refractive index combination are estimated to lie in
a region of the parameter space that can ostensibly support modes.
Bovine oocytes in particular have an outer diameter of approximately
@xmath @xmath m, and a refractive index of @xmath to @xmath for the
outermost layer, known as the zona pellucida [ 220 ] . Next, the surface
roughness, while presenting the potential for hampering the generation
of WGMs, can nevertheless be potentially reduced by selecting a specific
period in the life-cycle of the cell, and then exposing it to a
carefully selected fixing solution, as outlined in Section 5.5.3 .
Bovine embryos – specifically presumptive zygotes , are used
predominantly in these experiments for precisely this reason. It is
these cells, when denuded, as described in the Prologue, that exhibit
the most favorable surface properties in surface roughness, elasticity,
and also potentially higher refractive index values via their greater
density of surface fibril bundles in the zona pellucida region [ 235 ] .
These attributes, together, present the greatest likelihood for
sustaining modes within a cell. As a note on nomenclature, since these
kinds of oocytes are fertilised, the removal of the cumulus cells
(depicted in Figs. 1 and 5.7 ) is expedited by the underlying biological
processes that govern zygote development. For convenience, the term
embryo will be used from now on.

The embryos are studied using a number of excitation methods, namely,
the passive interrogation methods – the prism coupler and the fibre
taper technique, and the active interrogation methods – fluorescent
dye-doping, and quantum dot coating. By using these methods alongside
one another, and in combination, a picture of the resonance properties
of the embryos is unveiled, including the sources of both scattering and
loss. As a result, the vision of a WGM spectrum detected in a
self-supporting biological resonator in a realistic environment becomes
a real possibility.

### 6.2 Experimental methodology

In this section, the experimental methodologies, preparation procedures
and measurement apparatus and techniques are described in detail. Each
technique requires a coupling method, in which the radiation is
introduced into the resonator, and energy is stored in the modes that
are subsequently excited.

Coupling represents a vital experimental consideration in the generation
of WGMs, as it profoundly affects the ability to detect modes, as well
as the structure of the spectrum. Thus, a significant portion of this
chapter is dedicated to the presentation and comparison of a range of
coupling methods.

The coupling methods can be split into two categories: passive and
active interrogation, as described in Section 1.2 . Recall that passive
interrogation involves tunnelling radiation into a resonator by placing
an evanescent field from a coupler, such as a prism or fibre, in the
vicinity of the surface. The radiation from the coupler must be
phase-matched with the WGMs at the surface. The first passive
interrogation technique to be discussed is the prism coupler.

#### 6.2.1 Prism coupler method

The coupling of the light into a resonator through the use of a
high-index coupling prism has long been used in the field [ 79 , 78 ,
292 , 59 , 67 , 293 ] , and in this investigation it represents the
first screening tool applied to the candidate cells passing the
selection criteria of Chapter 5 . The strength of this method is its
reusability, in that samples of prospective biological resonators can be
examined in quick succession. However, this method does require careful
alignment to be maintained throughout the experiment, presenting
practical challenges for the development of robust devices for WGM
detection.

The experimental setup used for mounting, interrogating and measuring
the scattered and transmitted signal from an embryo is shown in Fig. 6.1
. A tunable DFB laser is used to scan across a wavelength range of
@xmath to @xmath nm, which lies in the NIR portion of the
electromagnetic spectrum – the optimal wavelength window for reducing
absorbance in the embryo, as explained in Section 5.5.5 .

The beam is collimated with an objective ( @xmath magnification), and
passed through a focusing telescope constructed from a convex followed
by a concave lens, with an overall magnification of @xmath . Then the
beam is filtered through an adjustable polariser in order to provide
some control on the excitation of WGMs. Since it is clear from the
investigation into the decomposition of the power spectrum in Section
4.4 that the polarisation of the radiation couples selectively to
certain modes only, the use of a polariser filter facilitates the
acquisition of a cleaner spectrum and more convenient identification of
any WGMs present in the signal.

The material used for the prism coupler can be chosen according to
purpose. In the case of the bovine embryos, both a borosilicate Schott
BK @xmath glass prism ¹ ¹ 1 Thorlabs, Inc., @xmath Sparta Ave, Newton,
NJ @xmath , USA, N-BK7 Right-Angle Prism, 15 mm , Catalogue Number: PS
@xmath . and a titanium dioxide (TiO @xmath ) or rutile prism ² ² 2 Team
Photon, Inc., @xmath Carmel Mountain Rd, Suite @xmath - @xmath , San
Diego, CA @xmath , USA, Rutile prism , Catalogue Number: TiO @xmath -
@xmath - @xmath - @xmath . were tested. Since the ability of a prism to
couple into WGMs requires that the refractive index of the prism exceed
that of the prospective resonator, and since the precise value of the
index of the glycoproteins that comprise the zona region of the bovine
embryo is not known, the more conservative option of a rutile prism is
selected. This is done in order to accommodate the possibility of larger
refractive indices exhibited by the zona , suggested in Refs. [ 242 ,
243 ] . While the transmittance of rutile is @xmath % compared to that
of BK @xmath glass at @xmath % at a wavelength of @xmath nm, the
reduction of input power is not an issue for the generation of WGMs
using the DFB laser, which has a maximum output power of approximately
@xmath mW. Power values of the order of milliwatts are sufficient to
excite modes.

In order to fulfill the phase-matching condition, the propagation
constant of the portion of the incident beam that is parallel to the
surface of the prism must match that of the WGM modes, @xmath . Within
the prism with refractive index @xmath , the incident beam has a
propagation constant @xmath . According to Fig. 6.2 , the parallel
portion of the beam corresponds to @xmath . The corresponding
propagation constant of the WGMs can be estimated for the fundamental
modes of a microsphere with mode numbers @xmath , from the derivation in
Section 2.2 leading to Eq. ( 2.38 ), @xmath . Thus, the phase-matching
condition can now be specified in terms of the angles of refraction and
incidence from the entry point of the beam into the prism, @xmath and
@xmath , respectively, using Snell’s Law

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.1)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.2)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.3)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Note that, in these experiments, the prism is always surrounded by air,
@xmath .

Using Eq. ( 6.3 ), the angle of the incident laser beam upon the prism
can be adjusted, and the coupling in the WGMs of the resonator thus
optimised. Values of the angle @xmath are shown in Table 6.1 for a range
of typical values of the resonator refractive index @xmath . By
performing incremental adjustments to @xmath , the propagation constant
@xmath can be swept across a range of values, providing the optimal
chance of observing WGMs in a cell. This technique will be used in
particular in Sections 6.4.1 and 6.4.2 .

#### 6.2.2 Fibre taper method

The fibre taper represents an alternative coupling method to the prism
coupler for the passive interrogation of modes in a resonator. While the
prism coupler is highly mode selective, thus making the detection of a
single mode within an imperfect resonator a particular challenge, the
fibre taper has been shown to couple effectively to a large number of
modes across a wide wavelength range with comparatively high @xmath
-factors, in the case of microspheres [ 118 , 83 , 244 ] . However, the
prolific use of tapers for large-scale batch measurements is limited, as
mentioned in Section 5.2 , by the fact that the effective life-times of
fibre tapers are typically less than a few hours after fabrication, due
to their fragility, and by the ease of collecting contaminants that can
greatly affect their signal-to-noise ratios.

The manufacture of the fibre tapers may proceed in a number of ways. The
method outlined in this chapter makes particular use of a Vytran, ³ ³ 3
Thorlabs, Inc., @xmath Sparta Ave, Newton, NJ @xmath , USA, Vytran
@xmath Filament Fusion Splicer , Catalogue Number: LFS @xmath . which
uses a high-power filament to anneal a section of fibre a few
centimetres in length down to a diameter of approximately @xmath @xmath
m.

In producing a fibre taper of sufficient quality for the measurement of
WGMs in resonators, a strict procedure must be followed. A filament that
is capable of annealing an optical fibre evenly for an extended period
(approximately @xmath minutes), such as graphite or iridium, must be
loaded into the Vytran, and the corresponding software settings
selected. A sufficient argon flow is mandatory to avoid damaging the
filament. After activating the Vytran and its attached vacuum pump, a
connectorised optical fibre, such as an SMF @xmath , must be prepared by
‘window-stripping’ the outer cladding, and cleaned using isopropyl
alcohol and abrasion. The fibre is then mounted on the Vyrtran, and
secured either side of the filament in @xmath @xmath m @xmath -grooves,
ensuring that less than @xmath grams of tension is applied prior to
activating the filament. While the program executes, the filament will
evenly reduce the diameter of the stripped section of fibre to a
prescribed value, while keeping the fibre taut. Upon completion of the
fabrication process, it is important to adjust the tension of the taper
to avoid breakage or loss due to deviations in the tapered section. Once
this has been done, a fork-shaped brace is raised up underneath the
taper, which is then clamped securely in place. After deactivating the
vacuum pump, the brace and its attached taper are then transported to
the experimental setup, and connected to the tunable DFB laser.

A diagram of this setup is shown in Fig. 6.3 . A confocal microscope
setup is used, similar to Fig. 3.6 , with the addition of a fork-shaped
brace mounted above the glass coverslip and resonator, as shown. The
brace is attached to a stage of adjustable height so that the taper and
its evanescent field can be lowered accurately in order to couple light
into the resonator. The height of the taper above the resonator controls
the phase-matching condition, and consequently, fine adjustments are
required in order to efficiently couple radiation into WGMs. This will
be explored in Section 6.4.2 .

#### 6.2.3 Fluorescence methods

The excitation of WGMs may occur through use of an active layer or
dopant, as introduced in Chapter 1 . While the uses of fluorescent
materials such as organic fluorophores [ 102 , 76 , 103 , 104 , 105 ,
106 , 107 , 108 ] , crystals [ 84 , 85 , 86 ] or quantum dots [ 87 , 39
, 88 ] have been explored extensively in the literature, the majority of
WGM resonators studied in the literature nevertheless rely predominantly
on passive interrogation techniques. While the advantages of active
resonators are manifold, as described in detail in Section 1.2.2 , of
particular note is their convenience in allowing free-space excitation,
alleviating the practical challenges involved in the alignment of
complex apparatus. The key disadvantage of active interrogation also
poses a quandary in the case of biological resonators, namely, the
reduction in @xmath -factor inherent in the inability to specify a
preferred orientation along a single axis of symmetry. The @xmath
-factors of biological resonators are expected to be orders of magnitude
lower than those of artificial resonators due to surface imperfections
and asphericity. Additional reduction of the @xmath -factor due to the
method of excitation, Criterion 6 , may prevent the detection of any
underlying modes altogether.

Assessment of the @xmath -factor is thus important in this investigation
as it acts as an indicator as to whether WGMs have been measured. The
feasibility studies presented in Chapter 5 place bounds on the values of
the @xmath -factors and FSRs expected from a resonator with given
physical characteristics. Thus, by analysing the @xmath -factors of
features within a signal, as well as the FSR and the index sensitivity,
evidence for or against the identification of WGMs can be established.

The presence of a uniform dye also has the effect of reducing the @xmath
-factors, when compared to excitation via a dipole with a single
orientation. This is a consequence of closely-spaced or overlapping
modes, as shown in the FDTD simulations of Fig. 3.3 , which are excited
simultaneously, thus making the distinction of separate modes more
difficult. The isolation of a fundamental radial mode, for example,
using the selective prism method, also presents a challenge in the
absence of well documented material properties, such as the glycoprotein
refractive index. This, however, can be ameliorated with the
introduction of an adjustable polariser, depicted in Fig. 6.1 , as
discussed in Section 6.4.1 . The measurement of modes within a
biological resonator provides the added advantage of providing a new
methodology for the characterisation of the refractive index of
glycoproteins.

In the case of biological cells, the exhibition of autofluorescence
provides an additional method for the exploration of active mode
coupling. While the genetic modification of cells to exhibit enhanced
fluorescence properties is an intriguing prospect, discussed in Chapter
7 , the natural autofluorescence of mammalian oocytes and embryos is
typically insufficient for the purposes of generating WGMs, as evident
from Fig. 5.11 in Chapter 5 .

Since the principal intention of this thesis is to investigate the
possibility of realising a biological resonator, both passive and active
techniques are brought to bear, and the insights drawn from each
experiment are used to establish a proof-of-concept. Thus, future work
focused on developing this concept into practical applications may be
informed, and scientific insight into biological systems may be
revealed.

#### 6.2.4 ICSI dye injection and co-culturing method

The introduction of an organic dye into a embryo can allow it to perform
as an active resonator, and can proceed in a number of ways. Two
particular methods that are used in this thesis are the intracytoplasmic
sperm injection (ICSI) method, and the co-culturing method. In each
case, an organic dye is selected that can be efficiently excited at
@xmath nm wavelength, and also emits in the visible region – in this
case,
[9-(2-carboxyphenyl)-6-diethylamino-3-xanthenylidene]-diethylammonium
chloride, otherwise known as Rhodamine B. The peak excitation and
emission wavelengths of this dye are @xmath nm and @xmath nm,
respectively [ 294 ] . Note that in the case of active resonators, which
exhibit a broad range of emitted wavelengths, there is greater
flexibility in selecting a suitable wavelength region, since a tunable
laser is no longer a requirement in order to scan across a wavelength
range.

ICSI must be performed on an embryo prior to fixing. This is due to the
fact that the fixing procedure alters the mechanical properties of the
zona pellucida region in such a way that the ICSI needle can no longer
penetrate its outer layer. This introduces a time constraint, in that
fresh cells must be sourced and ICSI performed immediately upon arrival.
ICSI proceeds by placing an embryo on a micromanipulator setup, as shown
in Fig. 6.4 . The embryo is placed in conjunction with a suction
holding-pipette, and a specialised ICSI injection needle is manoeuvred
into position using the micromanipulator. This configuration is shown in
Fig. 6.5 (a). The ICSI needle is then used to puncture the zona region
and inject a quantity of dye into the cytoplasm (see Fig. 5.7 ). The
volume of dye solution that is able to be injected is relatively small,
less than @xmath picolitre. Attempting to inject a greater volume
typically results in rupturing of the zona , causing the embryo to lose
structural cohesion, and the leaking of both cytoplasm and dye into the
surrounding medium. Therefore, a concentrated solution of dye, @xmath
@xmath mol, is used in order to offset the small volume. The injection
stage is shown in Fig. 6.5 (b). Upon completion of ICSI, the embryo is
then fixed in PFA using the method described in Appendix D.4 .

The behaviour of the dye within the cytoplasm represents an important
consideration. Rhodamine B diffuses quickly, so that it is evenly
distributed throughout the cytoplasm within a few minutes. One potential
difficulty is that the dye is not adequately contained within the zona
structure and quickly diffuses into the surrounding medium. The puncture
region of the embryo post-ICSI is shown in Fig. 6.5 (c). While this
diffusion is a critical factor, it is well documented that intracellular
mitochondria absorb and retain quantities of dye of the Rhodamine group
[ 295 , 296 ] . The co-culturing method relies on this fact in order to
achieve uptake of dye within the embryo.

The co-culturing method must proceed prior to fixing. Living embryos are
placed in a culture medium that contains the dye, and left to develop
until the presumptive zygote stage. Then, the embryos undergo fixing in
PFA, as in Appendix D.4 . The uptake of Rhodamine dye is investigated
for a variety of concentrations. It is found that the small quantities
of dye retained in the mitochondria are not sufficient to generate
substantial fluorescence for the generation of modes. However, sources
of fluorescent materials other than organic dyes, such as quantum dots,
present some unique advantages that will now be explored.

#### 6.2.5 Quantum dot coating method

One potential method for facilitating the retention of an active
material, either within or attached to the outer surface of the cell, is
to make use of fluorescent nanoparticles that have been functionalised
for such a purpose. Quantum dots represent a convenient form of
fluorescent particle, which have proved successful in generating WGMs [
297 , 87 , 39 , 88 ] . They generally have a broad excitation range and
can thus be readily excited using the @xmath nm CW laser. Furthermore,
quantum dots can be produced with a range of chemical functional groups.
Two such examples, amino (PEG) group ⁴ ⁴ 4 Life Technologies Australia
Pty Ltd, PO Box @xmath , Mulgrave, VIC @xmath , Australia, Qdot @xmath
705 ITK Amino (PEG) Quantum Dots , Catalogue Number: Q @xmath MP. and
carboxyl functionalised ⁵ ⁵ 5 ibid. Qdot @xmath 705 ITK Carboxyl Quantum
Dots , Catalogue Number: Q @xmath MP. quantum dots are used in Section
6.4.3 . It will become apparent that the use of the functionalised
quantum dots alone does not result in an emitter density on the surface
of the zona sufficient for the generation of modes. However, the
functional groups of the quantum dots are able to be attached to a
polyelectrolyte layer that can be added to the embryo. This new layer is
able to support a much higher density of quantum dots, and a sufficient
fluorescence signal can be generated. In this manner, the problem of dye
retention within a cell can be averted, providing the most reliable test
scenario for the observation of WGMs through active interrogation.

#### 6.2.6 Polyelectrolyte layers and crosslinking for quantum dots

Polyelectrolytes are electrically charged polymers that are able to form
thin films that can be attached to a surface of opposite charge.
Positively and negatively charged polyelectrolytes can be combined to
form alternating layers to which floating particles in solution can be
adsorbed [ 298 ] . Quantum dots can be immobilised by transforming the
amino/carboxyl functional groups in order to facilitate crosslinking .
This process involves the bonding of one polymer chain to another, or to
a functional group [ 299 ] . In this case, the negatively charged
polyelectrolyte is polyallylamine hydrochloride (PAH), and the
positively charged polyelectrolyte is poly acrylic acid (PAA) [ 300 ] .

The process for adding a polyelectrolyte layer to each embryo is
achieved by adding either a negatively or positively charged
polyelectrolyte solution to the suspended embryos in media. The choice
depends upon the electric charge of the surface of the embryo.
Alternatively, if the electric charge of a surface is not known in
advance, as is the case for embryos, one of each polyelectrolyte will be
attempted, ensuring that the suspended embryos are thoroughly rinsed
between each attempt. This procedure is summarised in the box on the
next page.

First, @xmath @xmath L of the cationic PAH is added to the embryos in
solution. The concentration of the PAH is @xmath mg/mL in @xmath mol/L
of NaCl. The mixture is agitated, and allowed to settle for @xmath -
@xmath minutes. Second, the solution is rinsed, by removing the
supernatant, refilling with water, and agitating. This rinsing process
is repeated until a dilution of @xmath times is achieved, which was
found to be sufficient to limit unintended interaction between the
polyelectrolytes PAH and PAA. This process is then repeated for a @xmath
@xmath L volume of PAA at the same concentration, rinsing thoroughly. At
this point, the embryos are coated with a polyelectrolyte layer, which
can be crosslinked with the functional groups of the quantum dots to
achieve the coating.

Volumes of @xmath @xmath L of amino group functionalised quantum dots,
as well as carboxyl group activating reagents, @xmath -ethyl- @xmath -(
@xmath -dimethylaminopropyl) carbodiimide (EDC), and
N-hydoxysuccinimide, are then added to the solution. The compounds EDC
and NHS act as crosslinking reagents that are able to adsorb the
floating quantum dots to the polyelectrolyte layer. After the solution
is left for @xmath hour to interact, the embryos are rinsed, and the
fluorescence properties analysed. The study of the generation of WGMs
using this form of active interrogation will be integrated with
predictions derived from the multilayer model presented in Chapter 4 ,
and will be implemented experimentally in Section 6.4.3 .

### 6.3 Modelling predictions

Having established the bovine embryo as the most viable candidate cell
for the generation of WGMs, it is important to perform an assessment of
the most likely spectral features using the modelling techniques
developed in Chapters 2 through 4 . In particular, the precise values of
the FSR, the @xmath -factors and the refractive index sensitivity @xmath
for a given diameter, zona thickness and refractive index profile of the
components of the embryo, shown in Fig. 5.7 , remain an open question.

An analysis of the scale image in Fig. 5.9 (c) reveals an approximate
outer diameter of @xmath @xmath m, with a variation of @xmath across a
range of embryos. Recalling Section 5.5.1 , the thickness of the zona
region is typically @xmath @xmath m, and does not deviate below @xmath
@xmath m unless specialised chemical or enzyme-based annealing
procedures are used, described in Section 7.2 .

Simulated spectra are shown in Fig. 6.6 , using a nominal diameter of
@xmath @xmath m, and cytoplasm and zona refractive index values of
@xmath and @xmath , respectively, as an example. Since the cytoplasm is
less compacted and more granulated than the zona region [ 235 ] ,
measurements reported in the literature suggest it has a lower
refractive index than the zona [ 243 ] , and thus the lower value for
the glycoprotein refractive index range from Chapter 5 is chosen. The
zona region, on the other hand, is estimated as the mean value of the
refractive index range, conservatively, @xmath . The surrounding medium
is set to that of water @xmath , since the use of a specialised handling
medium does not make a significant alteration to this value, and modes
are excited by a dipole source with both radial and tangential
components. The wavelength range is chosen to fit within the sweep range
of the DFB laser, @xmath to @xmath nm. Note that each resonance in Fig.
6.6 comprises both TE and TM modes, which in this case are broad and
overlapping, in the same manner as reported in Figs 4.3 (b) and 4.4 (b).

It is found that the behaviour of the spectrum is extremely insensitive
to the thickness of the zona pellucida for @xmath @xmath m. This effect
has been noted earlier, in the discussion of Fig. 3.10 in Section 3.3.2
. In this case, while the refractive index of the outer layer is less
than that explored in Section 3.3.2 , the diameter of the resonator is
significantly larger, leading to a more tightly constrained evanescent
field, as described in Section 1.3 . Radiation corresponding to WGMs
does not penetrate the zona region sufficiently to feel the effects of
the cytoplasm. Thus, the outer diameter and the refractive index can now
be obtained exactly from measurements of the FSR and the sensitivity.
Note that this discovery crucially depends upon the multilayer model
developed in Chapter 4 , which is ideally placed for automating the
non-destructive determination of the geometric parameters of a cell,
developed in Section 3.4 .

The example in Fig. 6.6 (a) also provides guidance on how to estimate
the approximate values of the FSR, the @xmath -factors and the
sensitivity as follows. The FSR as measured across this wavelength range
has a mean value of @xmath nm, consistent with the value estimated from
Eq. ( 2.59 ): @xmath nm near the central peak.

The @xmath -factors may also be extracted from a spectrum. Recall that
the matching of simulated @xmath -factors with those of experiment is
typically a difficult prospect, especially without the inclusion of
surface roughness and asphericity [ 168 , 181 , 198 , 199 ] . While the
multilayer model includes the radiation component to the @xmath -factor
described in Section 4.3 , values of the @xmath -factor should be
understood only as a guide to the order of magnitude expected. The
sample spectrum of Fig. 6.6 yields a @xmath -factor of @xmath , which
lies at the lower limit of detectability. This is due to the fact that
@xmath -factors below @xmath are similar in magnitude to the FSR, and
begin to overlap, thus making adequate detection of WGMs a challenge – a
point which is explored in more detail in Section 6.4.2 .

Experimentally, the addition of surface effects, such as those described
under Criteria 3 and 4 in Section 5.3 , are expected to reduce the
@xmath -factors of the fundamental modes by more than an order of
magnitude, reaching values as low as @xmath for RMS deformations in the
diameter of @xmath nm, according to one study [ 231 ] . Higher values of
the zona refractive index may be accessible, however, by carefully
selecting embryos that have been fixed at a certain developmental stage.
In the next section, bovine embryos in the presumptive zygote phase have
been measured with an nominal roughness of @xmath nm [ 235 ] . The
introduction of osmotic pressure from the surrounding medium can also
serve to increase the diameter of the embryos by a small amount, as
explained with respect to Criterion 5 in Section 5.5.4 . As a result, a
conservative estimate places the @xmath -factors measure in the
laboratory in the order of @xmath .

By systematically altering the refractive index simulated for the
surrounding medium, @xmath , in regular intervals, Fig. 6.6 (a) yields a
sensitivity value of @xmath nm/RIU. Having access to a prediction of the
sensitivity can assist in determining whether the experimental shift is
indicative of the presence of WGMs, and in assessing the likelihood of
spectra features to be modes. In Section 6.4.3 , the refractive index
sensitivity is used specifically to identify whether modes are present.
The surrounding index is increased with the addition of a droplet of
glycerol, thus quenching any modes present in the cell. Furthermore, in
Section 7.1 , an experimental procedure is summarised whereby the
refractive index of the local environment around the embryo is increased
systematically using a more precise glycerol injection method. Thus, it
is useful to determine the behaviour of the spectrum as the surrounding
index approaches that of glycerol, @xmath , and at what value of @xmath
modes can no longer be sustained. Figure 6.6 (b) shows that a
surrounding index of @xmath is sufficient to quench the modes present in
the signal completely for resonators at @xmath @xmath m. Note that in
Figure 6.6 both plots exhibit small highly localised peaks within the
main envelopes of the spectra, which are part of the underlying mode
structure as simulated by the multilayer model.

Considering now a broad range of diameters, the limiting refractive
index values of the outer layer, @xmath , may also be calculated, as a
counterpart to the limiting diameters estimated in Fig. 5.2 . Using the
range of diameters measured in Section 5.5.1 , @xmath @xmath m, the
resulting signals simulated using the model are shown in Fig. 6.7 . Note
that, as with Fig. 5.2 (a), the relatively small fluctuation in the
emitter power is a consequence of the diameter and index set at the
limit of detectability, however, the purpose here is to establish this
extreme limit. For the smaller diameter bound, @xmath @xmath m, the
minimum refractive index for a resolvable mode in the multilayer model
is @xmath , while for the larger bound, @xmath @xmath m, the minimum
index is @xmath . Note that minimum refractive index required to measure
WGMs experimentally in an imperfect multilayer structure, such as an
embryo, will be larger than these values obtained from simulation. It is
clear that the behaviour of the resonance is more sensitive to changes
in the refractive index near the boundary of the resonator than for
changes in the diameter. Thus, the broad range of diameters expected for
an embryo ( @xmath to @xmath @xmath m) result in a relatively
constrained range of minimum required index values ( @xmath to @xmath ),
respectively.

With these modelling predictions in mind, attention will now be turned
to the

experimental results, beginning with an intermediary test case in which
each of the selection criteria of Chapter 5 can be examined, before
continuing to the passive and active interrogation techniques as applied
to embryos.

### 6.4 Experimental results

The presentation of the experimental results follows the same order as
Section 6.2 . First, the prism coupler method is used in the case of a
silica glass microsphere that is known to support WGMs, and each of the
selection criteria is examined. The successful tests in both water and
handling medium narrow the challenges of producing modes within a
biological cell to a few key possibilities. The microsphere is then
replaced with a bovine embryo. Both the prism and taper coupling methods
are applied in order to assess the scattering and absorption behaviour
of the embryo. Finally, the active interrogation methods are applied in
order to explore effects that could not have been achieved with a
tunable DFB laser alone. It is discovered that while passive
interrogation leads to the measurement of modes close to the lower
detection limit in the @xmath -factors, the inability of free space
excitation of an active medium to excite modes along a preferred
orientation renders the modes undetectable without further treatment of
the surface effects. Therefore, a combination of multiple measurement
techniques is required for active interrogation of embryos, such as the
addition of a fibre taper to excite the active layer and collect the
emitted radiation. A systematic study of the WGM peaks detected using
the prism coupler method also leads to estimates of the geometric
parameters of the embryo, including the refractive index of the zona
pellucida , using the methodology developed in Section 3.4 . These
values can then be compared to the geometric proportions estimated from
confocal microscopy in order to assess the accuracy of the WGM
measurements.

#### 6.4.1 Test case: the silica microsphere

Recall that biological cells exhibit number of physical characteristics,
each of which can have an impact on their ability to sustain WGMs. The
relative effect of each of these characteristics on the resonance
behaviour is non-trivial, and a thorough discussion and enumeration of
these features can be found in Section 5.3 . As a way forward in
removing the ambiguity of the competing effects of these physical
characteristics, silica glass resonators are manufactured with diameters
comparable to those of the bovine embryos. These resonators are known in
advance to support WGMs, and thus the effect of a range of selection
criteria can be tested one by one.

Silica glass ( @xmath for @xmath nm) is chosen as the material that is
closest in refractive index to the suggested values in the literature
for glycoproteins of the type that comprise the embryo zona pellucida ,
and are manufactured to diameters within the most conservative
specifications of embryo diameter, @xmath @xmath m ( Criterion 1 ). Each
microresonator is formed as an elongated spheroid to provide scope in
testing the sphericity ( Criterion 2 ), by altering the contact angle at
the interface of the prism coupler or taper. The surface properties of
the resonator ( Criteria 3 and 4 ) represent the richest source of
scientific investigation in this topic, particularly due to their
intimate connection with the composition and chemical properties of the
surrounding media ( Criterion 5 ), which can affect the physical
attributes of the zona region in embryos. This will be investigated by
exploring the behaviour of different media, particularly with respect to
their salt content, and the effect of crystallisation on the generation
of WGMs. The spot size and phase-matching condition of the coupling
method ( Criterion 6 ) is also refined in this test scenario, and the
coupling to WGMs in imperfect resonators represents a crucial step in
addressing the vision of the project as outlined in the Prologue.
Finally, the scattering and absorption profiles of the silica
microspheres and bovine embryos are directly compared ( Criterion 7 ),
and insights are drawn with regard to the outstanding challenges in the
realisation of a biological resonator.

Images of the microspheres are shown in Fig. 6.8 (a), comparing the
diameters of each. An image of the scattered radiation from a silica
resonator supporting WGMs excited using the prism coupler method is
shown in Fig. 6.8 (b). Selecting the microsphere with a diameter of
@xmath @xmath m, the signal obtained from the scattered light is shown
in Fig. 6.9 , scanning over a wavelength range of @xmath to @xmath nm,
or roughly half the anticipated FSR. The surrounding medium, in this
case, is air, thus removing any possible contaminating effects
introduced by embryo handling media (the effect of the presence of media
will be studied presently). In this case, the coupling efficiency is
approximately @xmath %. The coupling condition is coarsely adjusted, and
it is found that an angle of @xmath leads to @xmath -factors of @xmath .
Further refinement of the angle leads to an experimental upper limit of
@xmath [ 78 , 301 ] . The polariser, shown in Fig. 6.1 , filters any
erroneous polarisations emanating from the laser so that the incident
beam couples selectively to certain modes only. Note that the results
have been clarified by removing part of the fluctuation noise in the
same manner as in Fig. 3.12 of Chapter 3 .

The silica microsphere is now immersed in Milli-Q @xmath water, and the
experiment described above is repeated. A critical study of the WGM
behaviour is then conducted by examining zoomed-in plots of a few
example modes, shown in Fig. 6.10 . ⁶ ⁶ 6 The detection of WGMs in this
experiment was confirmed independently by Dr. Wenle Weng, The University
of Adelaide. Note that the presence of WGMs is indicated definitively by
the fact that each peak in the scattered spectrum corresponds exactly to
a dip in the transmitted spectrum at the same wavelength. That is, as an
increase in the power is measured from the scattered light, there is a
corresponding reduction in the transmitted light owing to the presence
of a resonator. Since these fluctuations are confined within a narrow
wavelength region, they indicate the resonant behaviour associated with
WGMs, as described in Section 1.1 . Note that the noise in the scattered
signal is much larger than for the transmitted signal since less
scattered light reaches the detector. To remove part of the noise, the
wavelength resolution has been smoothed in the same way as in Fig. 3.12
.

In Fig. 6.10 (a), the angle of incidence, @xmath as shown in Fig. 6.2
(a), is chosen to be @xmath , near the critical angle for coupling to
the fundamental modes of a silica microsphere, with a wavelength range
scanned by the DFB laser of @xmath pm, centred on @xmath nm. By altering
the angle of incidence, different modes may be selected using the prism
coupler. In Fig. 6.10 (b), an angle of @xmath is selected, which allows
the incoming beam to couple to modes that extend deeper within the
resonator. The @xmath -factor of the mode centred at @xmath nm in the
scattered spectrum is @xmath , reflecting the fact that the angle has
been deviated from the critical angle. The mode selectivity of the prism
coupler method gives rise to a high sensitivity of the coupling
condition on the angle of incidence, requiring extremely precise
determination of both the refractive index and angle in order to select
a given mode.

##### Osmolaric contamination and surface properties

Recalling Criterion 5 from Section 5.3 , the total concentration of
soluble particles in the medium surrounding the resonator and coupler
apparatus can affect the detectability of WGMs. In order to determine
whether the surrounding environment used in the case of real-life
embryos has an adverse effect on the clear measurement of modes, the
microsphere is immersed in several different forms of media.

In the first case, a droplet of PBS media, defined in Appendix D , is
placed over the resonator. Because of the high salt content of this type
of medium, no WGMs are observed across a range of angles of incidence.
Furthermore, after the removal of the droplet, and the subsequent
decontamination of the prism surface, the silica resonator is replaced
at the interface. Once again, no WGMs are detected, regardless of the
incoming beam angle. The reason for this mode loss is that residual salt
from any evaporated PBS media, which is heated by the radiation
introduced from the DFB laser, crystallises and encrusts the resonator,
affecting the surface properties, and drastically reducing the @xmath
-factors of the modes. This is a crucial point in the investigation into
the limiting factors that apply to biological resonators, offering
guidance with the direction of scientific inquiry that represents the
next key challenge to be addressed on this topic. While the surface
properties undoubtedly have a profound impact on the ability of a
prospective resonator to sustain WGMs, any methods that can assist in
the smoothness, reduction of contamination, or removal of extraneous
detritus can significantly improve its resonance properties. Techniques
for smoothing or annealing the outer surface of the zona pellucida of an
embryo are discussed in more detail in Chapter 7 .

The next case to be considered for the surrounding environment of the
microsphere is an equal-parts mix of MOPS+BSA handling medium (see
Appendix D ) and Milli-Q @xmath water. The experiment is then repeated.
For this medium, a much lower salt content leads to improved resonance
properties. The reduced osmotic pressure serves to increase the outer
diameter of the embryo by a small fraction, leading to an improved
@xmath -factor, as described under Criterion 1 in Chapter 5 . The
dilution of the handling medium will prove useful in the next section
for the case of real-life embryos.

WGM spectra measured in this scenario are shown in Fig. 6.11 . One key
feature of these spectra is that very little degradation of the @xmath
-factor is apparent. In Fig. 6.11 (a), the polariser shown in Fig. 6.1
is orientated so that a single polarisation is selected, as well as
suppressing competing modes. In Fig. 6.11 (b), an alternative
orientation of the polariser is selected, revealing a less prominent
mode near the wavelength of @xmath nm. This test serves to illustrate an
important point – the selection of modes using the prism coupler method
is greatly aided by the ability to remove competing modes of different
polarisations, which are capable of overlapping, increasing the
effective value of the @xmath -factor, and thus making the detection of
clear modes more difficult. With these powerful tools in mind, an
investigation of the resonance properties of embryos is now conducted.

#### 6.4.2 Passive interrogation of modes in embryos

##### Prism coupler results

Using the setup illustrated in Fig. 6.1 , fixed, denuded embryos are
prepared and mounted in the same manner as the silica microsphere,
making particular use of the suction holding-pipette to guide the cell
precisely into position, as explained in Section 5.7 . Each embryo is
placed in a small droplet of MOPS+BSA/water mixture

at the edge of the rutile prism to ensure the minimum spot size is
achieved. Figure 6.12 (a) shows a zoomed-out view of the prism setup,
which includes the suction holding-pipette for positioning the embryo
within the droplet of the solution so that it exactly aligns with the
laser spot on the surface of the prism. In Fig. 6.12 (b), the glow of
the embryo is apparent, indicating that real-life embryos do indeed
scatter a portion of the incident radiation at approximately @xmath nm,
and that not all the light is absorbed. This addresses Criterion 7 , in
that the relative magnitude of the absorption and scattering behaviour
of embryos can potentially be measured using this technique.

A visual inspection of the embryo via the mounted camera is shown in
Fig. 6.13 , where the light appears as a ring or corona around the
embryo. While this observation does not of itself indicate the presence
of WGMs, nor that the radiation is entirely constrained by the zona
pellucida region, it is useful for distinguishing the individual
structural components of the embryo. The zona pellucida can be seen as a
faint ring around the central globe of the cytoplasm. By continuously
deviating the laser spot position, a reflection from the inside of the
top boundary of the zona is seen moving in the opposite direction. The
droplet of solution is indicated by the sharp boundary (identified by
the small air bubble on the right hand side). By comparing the effect
with a silica microsphere resonator in the same solution, the measured
scattering effect does not originate from residual salt within the
media.

An investigation of the scattered and transmitted spectra may now be
carried out, as shown in Fig. 6.14 . The angle of incidence used to
isolate the clearest signal is @xmath , with a DFB laser sweeping a
range of wavelengths from @xmath to @xmath nm. The polariser is adjusted
in order to clarify any underlying modes. Note that the magnitude of the
collected transmitted power is two orders of magnitude greater than the
scattered signal. The spectra have therefore been scale-adjusted in
order to compare the positions of the broad envelopes in the spectra.
While both signals contain high frequency noise, which appears as
oscillations (particularly in the transmitted spectrum), this can be
treated by resampling the data, applying a low-pass Fourier discrete
cosine transform (DCT). It is clear from Fig. 6.14 that there is a broad
peak in the scattered signal, with a corresponding dip in the
transmitted signal. This observation, taken together with the
photographic information, is strongly indicative of the presence of
modes. In fact, this is the first observation of WGMs sustained within
an embryo. A range of other tests will now be carried out before a
definitive answer is established.

The spectrum may be used to estimate the physical parameters of the
embryo. If the estimates lie within the bounds of the physical
properties of the embryos, as established in Section 5.5 , this lends
credence to the supposed generation of WGMs in cells. The angle of
incidence for which the best set of spectra was achieved may be used to
obtain a value for the refractive index of the material in which the
radiation propagates, the zona pellucida . Using Eq. ( 6.3 ), a value of
@xmath is estimated. While this value is slightly larger than the upper
estimate considered in Chapter 5 , it is worth noting that Ref. [ 220 ]
indicates that certain protein structures may exhibit refractive indices
as high as @xmath . In addition, the value of @xmath may be increased
relative to unfertilised embryos. This can occur due to the greater
density of networked glycoproteins in the zona pellucida immediately
after fertilisation. Such an effect is present in the presumptive
zygotes chosen for these experiments. This phase of embryo development
also leads to a degree of zona hardening [ 235 ] , in conjunction with
the increase in stiffness contributed by the fixing procedure of
Appendix D.4 . As a result of these factors affecting the surface
properties of the embryo, the measured @xmath -factor from the spectrum
is @xmath . This value agrees well with the modelling predictions of
Section 6.3 that the @xmath -factor is expected to be of the order of
@xmath , including the effects derived from the physical parameters,
described in the selection criteria of Section 5.3 .

The spectra in Fig. 6.14 may also be used to estimate the FSR, in the
same manner reported in Section 3.3 . The approximate peak positions in
the scattered spectrum are shown as vertical dotted lines. Measuring an
FSR of @xmath nm, an approximate value for the outer diameter may be
determined using Eq. ( 2.59 ), as @xmath @xmath m. Note that the FSR
must be equal to or larger than the width of the envelope in the spectra
to satisfy the Rayleigh criterion [ 302 ] . A full-width at half-maximum
value less than a third of the FSR indicates that the envelopes are
well-spaced within the spectrum. While this outer diameter lies within
the normal range of diameters for bovine oocytes as reported in Ref. [
287 ] , @xmath to @xmath @xmath m with a variation of @xmath %, it is
larger than the mean value of the sample of embryos used in the
experiment, @xmath @xmath m, by @xmath – outside of one standard
deviation. According to Criterion 1 , a larger diameter embryo is more
likely to exhibit modes than those with smaller diameters, for a fixed
refractive index, @xmath . Therefore, it is reasonable that a large
number of experimental measurements should be required in order to
obtain an embryo with a diameter this size. This, in part, explains why
the generation of modes within embryos is not readily apparent,
requiring multiple experimental techniques to answer the research
question outlined in Section 1.4 .

The larger diameter can also be explained by the fact that a diluted
mixture of handling medium is used to minimise any detrimental effects
on the acquisition of the spectrum caused by residual salts or stray
detritus in the solution. It has been reported that a decrease in oocyte
volume of up to @xmath % can occur during hypo-osmolaric processes that
occur naturally post-ovulation [ 290 ] , while the linear Boyle van’t
Hoff relationship between cell volume and osmolarity [ 303 ] indicates
that the radii of bovine embryos can be deformed up to @xmath % when
placed under osmolar stress [ 289 ] . Thus, the reduction in the
osmolarity, Criterion 5 , applies a uniform negative pressure on the
zona wall causing significant expansion of the surface of the embryo.

##### Taper results

The taper coupler method potentially offers some advantages over the use
of a prism, particularly the fact that it is able to constrain the
orientation of the modes excited to within a single plane, leading to
improved @xmath -factors and coupling efficiencies [ 118 , 83 , 244 ] .
An image of the experimental setup immediately prior to exposure of the
taper to an embryo is shown in Fig. 6.15 (a). The additional space
afforded by the use of a broad coverslip, rather than a
restrictively-sized prism, allows a number of experimental
configurations to be incorporated, such as the refractive index
sensitivity measurement apparatus, discussed in Chapter 7 . However, the
fabrication of a fibre taper, described in Section 6.2.2 , is a
precarious process, and the fragility of the taper leads to a number of
drawbacks. First, a new taper must be manufactured immediately prior to
each experiment. While fixed embryos need simply to be kept in a
handling medium, the use of living cells in future experiments may
present timing difficulties in carrying out measurements, since their
survival rates drop severely after @xmath minutes without proper
incubation. Second, the waist diameter required of a taper to achieve
coupling to WGMs in resonators of the order of @xmath @xmath m in
diameter is approximately @xmath to @xmath @xmath m [ 304 ] . One study
found that waist diameters of @xmath @xmath m were required to obtain
suitable coupling efficiency to smaller diameter ( @xmath @xmath m)
high-index polystyrene microspheres [ 118 ] . While this is feasible
through the use of a Vytran, the large extent of the evanescent field
within a droplet of solution exposes the taper to contamination from a
range of biological debris, dust, and small particles that are difficult
to filter out entirely. This effect can severely compromise the
transmission of the taper while adding non-specific background, making
the detection of a WGM signal difficult [ 261 ] .

During the setup procedure, it is important to ensure that the taper is
lowered close to the glass coverslip prior to the introduction of the
droplet of solution containing the embryo. This prevents the fragile
taper from experiencing upward pressure from the surface tension of the
droplet, which may cause physical damage to the taper. A droplet of
media of approximately @xmath @xmath L is then added to the coverslip.
Particularly in the case of larger volume pipettes, one must ensure that
the nozzle velocity is sufficiently low to avoid breakage of the taper.
Abrasion of the taper against the glass coverslip can be reduced by
using a customised narrow sliver-shaped glass coverslip that does not
extend beyond the tapered region, shown in Fig. 6.15 (b).

Images of the taper coupling method applied to an embryo are shown in
Fig. 6.16 . While there appears to be a glow from the light scattered by
the embryo, it is unclear whether this effect is due to the resonance
behaviour observed using the prism coupler method. In order to
investigate whether any underlying modes have been detected, the
transmitted spectrum is measured several times, each time detaching the
taper from the embryo and replacing it so that the evanescent field is
in the vicinity of the zona pellucida .

In carrying out the measurement in conjunction with the taper, the high
level of noise makes identification of modes inconclusive. Examples of
signals collected using passive taper excitation are shown in Fig. 6.17
. The high noise within these signals is a consequence of the small
diameter of the taper waist required for the phase-matching condition.
Small waist diameters lead to a large evanescent field, resulting in
high levels of loss, as well as increasing the sensitivity of the taper
to contaminants in the surrounding medium, as described in Sections
5.5.4 and 6.2.2 .

#### 6.4.3 Active interrogation of modes in embryos

##### Quantum dot results – combining interrogation methods

Results for the quantum dot-coated embryos are now discussed, with a
view to providing independent corroborating evidence for the generation
of WGMs within embryos. While the introduction of either amino or
carboxyl group functionalised dots directly into the handling media of
the embryos does not result in significant emitter density on the
surface of the zona of each embryo, the use of crosslinked
polyelectrolyte layers, described in Section 6.2.6 , is more successful.

Following the procedure outlined in Section 6.2.6 , amino group quantum
dot coated embryos are prepared and excited with a @xmath nm wavelength
CW laser. Images of the fluorescence emission from a sample embryo are
shown in Fig. 6.18 . The zona and cytoplasm regions are clearly visible
under a white light source in Fig. 6.18 (a). When the white source is
removed, in Fig. 6.18 (b), it is evident that the emitter density is
well distributed over the surface of the embryo.

The interrogation of the coated embryo can proceed in a number of ways.
Free space excitation and collection is the simplest technique from a
logistics standpoint, requiring no additional apparatus beyond that
shown in the confocal microscope setup of Fig. 3.6 . However, the
inability to select modes along a specific orientation limits the @xmath
-factor and renders any underlying modes difficult to detect, as
described in Section 6.4 . To mitigate this effect, a combination of
techniques is employed to maximise the likelihood of measuring WGMs in
the embryo. Specifically, a fibre taper may be used to collect the
emitted radiation along a specific axis of revolution. The practical
limitations of using fibre tapers for the collection of WGM signals
explored in Section 6.4.2 are ameliorated in this case, since the taper
waist does not need to be perfectly phase matched with the WGMs within
the resonator. In this case, tapers with diameters of @xmath to @xmath
@xmath m are employed in order to excite the quantum dots and/or collect
the fluorescent radiation.

A comparison of the signals obtained using free space or taper
collection from the quantum dot coated embryo of Fig. 6.18 is shown in
Fig. 6.19 . The broad emission of the quantum dots allows a wider range
of wavelengths to be investigated compared to that of the passive
interrogation results. The results are normalised to the maximum value
of the power, @xmath . In Fig. 6.19 (a), it is initially unclear whether
the envelope, corresponding to the scattered signal from the quantum
dots, contains WGMs. By using the taper collection method, a portion of
the background signal can be removed. The result is shown in Fig. 6.19
(b), noting that the plot has been re-normalised with respect to the new
value for the maximum power recorded. The signal now exhibits a
modulation atop the scattered signal, which may indicate the presence of
modes. However, in order to clarify the result, a number of signal
processing and experimentation techniques are used. First, the
contribution to the signal from the quantum dots, in the absence of a
structure, should be removed. While the signals shown in Fig. 6.19 have
already been normalised to @xmath , the background signal, @xmath , must
also divide the power spectrum to isolate the portion of the signal
derived purely from the presence of the embryo. The result of this
treatment of the taper collection results is shown in Fig. 6.20 (a).
Note that, for clarity, the wavelength axis has been scaled to @xmath to
@xmath @xmath m, in which the anticipated FSR of an embryo from the
prism experiment, @xmath nm, can be clearly resolved when present. While
this signal shows modulation of the main envelope, it is unclear whether
there are embedded modes. A Fourier decomposition can determine whether
a specific repeating pattern embedded in the data dominates. The result
of this treatment of the taper collected signal with @xmath s
acquisition time is displayed in Fig. 6.20 (b).

The dominant peak in this Fourier spectrum is around @xmath nm,
corresponding to a diameter of approximately @xmath @xmath m, through
use of Eq. ( 2.59 ). While this value lies outside the range of embryo
diameters determined from Ref. [ 287 ] , and obtained from the embryos
studied in Section 6.4.2 , the peak is quite broad, indicating that a
repeating pattern corresponding to WGMs is not easily determined. This
may be a result of the effect noted in Sections 2.3.2 , 3.3 , and
particularly in Section 4.4 , where nearby overlapping modes form
composite peaks that alter the structure of the spectrum.

Next, the presence of modes in the signal shown in Fig. 6.20 (a) can be
tested experimentally by altering the refractive index of the
surrounding medium. This is achieved by adding a droplet of glycerol
solution to the surrounding medium of the embryo. Since glycerol is both
soluble and has a higher refractive index ( @xmath ) than that of water
and handling media ( @xmath ), any WGMs present inside the embryo will
become quenched by the decrease in the refractive index contrast, as
simulated in Section 6.3 . A comparison of the normalised signals
collected with a @xmath second exposure time, averaged over @xmath
acquisitions, is shown before and after the addition of a @xmath %
glycerol solution in Fig. 6.21 (a). This concentration of glycerol
solution is sufficient to achieve the critical surrounding index beyond
which no WGMs can be sustained. While there is a marginal decrease in
the clarity of mode structure in the signal, the reduction is
nevertheless fairly subtle. An analysis of the Fourier spectrum after
the addition of the glycerol solution, displayed in Fig. 6.21 (b), shows
that the main peak near the FSR value of @xmath nm is much less than
that of Fig. 6.20 (b). This indicates that the repeating pattern
embedded within the signal is less prominent after glycerol is added.

While the analysis of the results obtained through active interrogation
of embryos is not as definitive as those obtained from the prism method,
a number of other methods may be utilised in order to improve the
distinctiveness of the measured modes. Examples such as the use of
chemical or enzyme-based annealing of the zona pellucida are anticipated
to reduce the detrimental effect of surface roughness on the @xmath
-factors of the modes, particularly the fundamental modes [ 231 ] .
These

future directions are outlined more comprehensively in Chapter 7 .

### 6.5 Conclusions from the experiments

In this chapter, the measurement of WGMs within bovine embryos was
sought, and a positive result was recorded.

Using passive mode interrogation, modes present within the scattered and
transmitted signals led to an estimate of the zona pellucida refractive
index of @xmath , an FSR of @xmath nm, and a diameter of @xmath @xmath
m. While the value of the diameter was consistent with the values
expected from the literature [ 287 ] , it was larger than the mean
oocyte diameters measured prior to dilution of the handling medium,
@xmath @xmath m. While the dilution of the handling medium explains the
increase in cell volume, due to the Boyle van’t Hoff relationship
between cell volume and osmolarity [ 303 ] , a large number of trial
experiments were required to obtain an embryo of optimal size and
sphercity. The @xmath -factor of @xmath was also consistent with the
expected values from both modelling and experiment.

In the context of the detection of WGMs in porcine adipocyte cells
reported in the literature [ 114 ] , a critical evaluation is necessary.
A careful investigation of the generation of WGMs in a range of cells
considered in this thesis, under ideal conditions, demonstrates that the
challenge inherent in the detection of a clear signal. Successful
detection is highly dependent on the interrogation method used, and the
chemical preparation and handling of the cells prior to experimentation.

In active interrogation of embryos, a fibre taper was required for
collection of the scattered light in order to resolve the modulation of
the background signal, potentially corresponding to WGMs. The presence
of a background signal is a result of the imperfect phase-matching of
the embryo with the taper waist, with diameters of @xmath to @xmath
@xmath m. To investigate the presence of WGMs, a range of signal
processing and experimental techniques were employed. First, the signal
was normalised to the residual background envelope. This served to
isolate the contribution from the presence of the embryo. Second, a
Fourier decomposition of the signal revealed a peak corresponding to an
FSR of @xmath nm, corresponding to embryos of diameter @xmath @xmath m –
a value that lies outside the bounds determined from the literature, and
from observation of the embryos used for this thesis. However, the
addition of a droplet of glycerol solution, reducing the refractive
index contrast of the embryo with its surrounding medium, led to the
reduction of the dominant peak at @xmath nm in the Fourier spectrum,
indicating the quenching of modes.

The results derived from the model, the experiments and the analysis
integrate to form a prediction that WGMs can be generated within a
biological cell, and this effect was observed within the bovine embryo.
The development of embryos as viable biological resonators can advance
in a range of directions from this point onwards. In the next chapter,
key techniques are explained, which are able to address and refine the
limiting factors, including the surface properties, and a number of
innovative directions are proposed for future research endeavours in the
field.

## 7 Future Directions: Towards a Biolaser Sensor

The investigation of biological resonators represents the chief aim of
this thesis, along with an understanding of the physical characteristics
that underpin the ability of biological cells to exhibit WGMs.

Refining the cell preparation methods, and introducing innovative
techniques to facilitate the detection of WGMs, would serve to pave the
way towards reliable cell resonator-based technologies in the future,
including the ability to identify and track the behaviour of WGMs in the
context of external macromolecules, or changes to the refractive index
contrast of a cell. Such technologies are particularly attractive
because resonances that are sustained by the cell itself are extremely
sensitive to its internal features, as well as the surrounding
environment. This means that, in principle, further development of WGM
detection within a cell could provide vital information on the internal
structure or status of the cell, as a complementary approach to the
other label-free detection technologies [ 20 , 21 , 22 , 23 , 24 , 25 ,
26 ] mentioned in Chapter 1 . Examples of this include the ability to
detect macromolecules in the vicinity of the cell; the cell can be
introduced to known biomolecules of interest, such as viruses or
proteins, and the characteristic shift in the WGM positions due to
changes in the surrounding refractive index can be assessed [ 15 ] .

In the specific case of embryo resonators, such innovations can have
broad implications on health sciences, where the ability to avoid immune
responses in an organism by using biological sensing modalities presents
an attractive feature for technological development in the near future.

The following sections include a few examples of the methods that can be
used to improve the performance of biological cell resonators, as well
as summarising key directions of future research that may facilitate the
construction of a fully-fledged cell-based modality for sensing
applications.

### 7.1 Glycerol-based index sensitivity measurement

The measurement of the refractive index sensitivity of a biological cell
resonator represents the next step in being able to identify modes and
characterise the WGM shift in the presence of an external agent
affecting the surrounding medium. While predictions of the sensitivity
of an embryo from the multilayer model of Chapter 4 are presented in
Section 6.3 , a comparable measurement of the sensitivity can be
performed using the following method.

A fluid with a higher refractive index than the medium surrounding the
embryo, such as glycerol, can be circulated around the embryo during WGM
measurement. The resultant change in the surrounding index, @xmath , can
be estimated based on the relative refractive index difference between
the two fluids and their relative molecular weights. This change in the
index can be detected as a shift in the WGM peaks of the spectrum, and
thus the sensitivity can be calculated using the definition, @xmath [
115 ] .

By using a series of different dilutions of glycerol ( @xmath ) in water
( @xmath ), a range of refractive indices can be trialled, by adopting a
tube-rigging system, shown in Fig. 7.1 . Recalling the discussion in
Section 6.4.2 , the introduction of index sensitivity measuring
apparatus requires physical space not easily afforded in the compact
prism coupler setup described in Section 6.2.1 . The inverted confocal
microscope setup of Fig. 3.6 provides sufficient room to employ the
glycerol flow method, shown in Fig. 7.1 (a). However, one potential
drawback is that the commencement of any flow of fluid causes the embryo
to shift position, thus making consistent WGM measurements extremely
challenging without more sophisticated optical compensation mechanisms.
An alternative for handling this effect is to fix the embryo in place.
This can be carried out conveniently in the case of the fibre taper
coupling method. It is found that the taper itself acts as a brace,
preventing the embryo from being dislodged from its initial position, as
shown in Fig. 7.1 (b). While the taper remains intact during this
procedure, it is not known in what way this pressure applied from the
embryo affects the behaviour of the resonances, and this would require
further exploration.

A specific concentration of glycerol solution can be chosen from a range
of values shown in Table 7.1 , and placed in one of two SGE syringes,
@xmath @xmath L in volume, each connected to a length of yellow IDEX
@xmath tubing with an inner diameter of approximately @xmath @xmath m.
The tubes can then be placed opposite each another, leaving @xmath to
@xmath nL of fluid between them in which the embryo will be situated.
The tube ends and embryo are then situated within a droplet of handling
media. The upper tube expels the glycerol solution, while the lower tube
collects the expelled fluid at the same rate, so as to avoid
contamination of the droplet of media. Since the flow between the tube
ends must be kept low, for example, less than @xmath @xmath L per hour
to avoid dislodging the embryo, the diffusion rate of the glycerol
solution in media plays an important role in assessing when the flow
rate is consistent across the embryo. When this condition is met, the
shift in the WGM peaks reaches its converged value.

### 7.2 Zona pellucida annealing procedures

One of the principal discoveries in Chapter 6 is the dramatic influence
of the surface roughness on the ability of a resonator to sustain modes.
While the bovine embryo is able to sustain modes at the limit of
detectability, there is scope for improving the @xmath -factors of the
modes by applying a specialised range of annealing procedures selected
for these kinds of cells.

The annealing procedures can be divided into two groups: chemical-based
erosion of the zona pellucida [ 305 , 306 ] , and enzyme-based thinning
methods [ 307 , 308 ] . The motivation for the use of these techniques
in reproductive biology is to induce qualitative changes in the zona
region in order to facilitate hatching of the blastocyst [ 305 , 306 ] ,
and to collect cells for biopsies for preimplantation genetic screening
[ 309 ] , for which competing methods such as partial zona (mechanical)
dissection and the use of a diode laser are used for assisted hatching [
310 , 309 ] . An investigation of annealing with respect to cell
resonators should focus on the relative smoothness of the cells after
treatment. One particular advantage of the zona thinning techniques over
the total mechanical removal of the zona itself, apart from avoiding
exposure of the embryo to chemical, mechanical and bacterial risks, is
that the chemical and enzyme-based annealing can partially thin the zona
uniformly [ 306 ] . Thus, the innermost layer of the zona is retained,
offering control over the thickness of the remaining zona , as well as
the @xmath -factor, sensitivity and FSR of any modes sustained within,
as described in Chapters 3 and 4 .

Of the chemical annealing methods, the use of an artificial interstitial
fluid known as Acidified Tyrode’s Solution (ATS) has shown success in
thinning the zona . (The recipe for ATS is reproduced for reference in
Appendix D .) An embryo is attached to a holding pipette, with a
secondary micropipette containing the ATS to induce an even flow over
the embryo through expulsion for a limited duration [ 306 , 309 ] . The
solution dissolves the outer layer of the zona , with the inner layer
remaining, which is both more compact and resilient after treatment [
306 ] . Thus, the exposed inner layer of the zona has the potential to
exhibit superior surface properties to the untreated zona , improving
the quality of the modes.

The enzyme annealing method uses pronase to achieve similar results in
removing the zona through digestion [ 307 , 308 ] . By using a low
concentration of pronase ( @xmath IU/mL) diluted with G- @xmath media, ¹
¹ 1 Vitrolife, Västra Frölunda, Västra Götalands Län, Sweden, G- @xmath
media , see http://www.vitrolife.com/en/Products/G-SeriesTM-media/G-2/
an initial stretching and softening of the zona can be achieved, and the
rate of digestion can be controlled [ 310 ] .

While both these methods of annealing are capable of exposing the inner
layer of the zona through partial removal of the glycoproteins, ATS is
usually preferred in clinical practice, due to the fact that it allows
the embryo to survive during parthenogenic activation in the absence of
calcium [ 311 ] . For the purposes of sustaining modes, both these
methods are expected to be comparable with each other.

### 7.3 Use of lasing to enhance detection of resonances

The autofluorescence properties of cells, and the introduction of
artificial fluorescent coatings have been studied throughout this
thesis; however, the possibility of constructing a biological cell laser
has not been explored in the context of self-supported WGMs, such as
those within an embryo. While the use of resonator technology within
biological cells has been demonstrated in the literature, either by
implanting microspheres in vivo [ 107 ] , or exploiting natural oil
cavities within certain animal cells [ 114 ] , the capability of
biological cells to exhibit lasing unassisted has not yet been fully
realised.

The potential of biological cells to support lasing modes was first
studied in Ref. [ 221 ] , where GFP was used to excite modes,
facilitated by placing the cell in a mirrored cavity. Achieving lasing
within a resonator can potentially enhance the @xmath -factors of the
modes [ 312 , 76 , 119 , 95 ] , as well as lower the detection limit for
sensing applications [ 94 ] . While this is an attractive prospect,
biological cells are significantly more fragile than most artificial
resonators, and thus the lasing threshold may lie beyond the inherent
damage thresholds of the cells. Since the lasing threshold takes the
form @xmath for an effective mode volume @xmath [ 129 ] , where the gain
coefficient @xmath is highly dependent on the distribution of the
fluorescent medium, high density of fluorophores can lead to
self-quenching [ 313 ] . This indicates that there is an optimal
fluorophore density for achieving a low lasing threshold. However, the
low @xmath -factors of the embryos studied in Chapter 6 ( @xmath ) lead
to a strong opposing effect whereby the lasing threshold is increased
significantly, due to the fact that @xmath . The damage threshold, on
the other hand, is likely to be less than that of polystyrene
microspheres – @xmath mJ/cm @xmath using a pump wavelength of @xmath nm
[ 314 , 116 ] . One recent study reports the damage threshold for
nucleolus-like bodies in mammalian oocytes as less than @xmath W/cm
@xmath using a @xmath fs pulse ( @xmath mJ/cm @xmath ) [ 315 ] .

As a result, the realisation of a biological cell laser will require
careful management of the lasing and damage thresholds. A solution for
pursuing this particular direction, however, may lie in the field of
genetic engineering.

### 7.4 Genetic modification

While the genetic modification of cells has been discussed in Chapter 5
in the case of yeast, specific isolation of genes that control
fluorescence represents an important sub-branch of genetics that has
seen much use in sensing applications since the discovery of GFP within
jellyfish of the species Aequorea Victoria [ 316 ] . While recent
studies of cells that incorporate GFP have shown an ability to sustain
WGMs with artificial assistance from a pre-built mirrored cavity [ 221 ]
mentioned above, the genetic modification of the cell itself to express
GFP on its own may alleviate the practical difficulties in introducing
an artificial fluorophore explored in Section 6.2.3 . This avoids
toxicity issues altogether, as well as the challenges in attaching or
otherwise incorporating fluorescent material into a cell.

One such method for the modification of a cell to express fluorescent
proteins is clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats ,
or CRISPR [ 317 ] . While CRISPR has been used to carry out gene tagging
[ 318 ] , and to insert genetic sequences into embryonic stem cells in
mice [ 319 ] , and while oocytes have been used to improve the gene
editing methodology behind CRISPR [ 320 ] , its use as an efficient
method for the introduction of fluorescent proteins into oocytes remains
to be fully explored.

### 7.5 Living resonators

The interrogation of living matter represents the culmination of the
interrogation methods presented herein, since the ability to report on
the status of a living cell has the potential to impact health sciences
by leading to new diagnostic tools, aiding in the early identification
of diseases and pathologies that cannot easily be studied using more
conventional techniques. However, the use of living cells presents the
researcher with a number of additional complications to address.

The first complication is simply a logistical one – the life-time of
many living cells, particularly embryos, is limited to a window of
approximately @xmath minutes or less, without a thermal mount or
carefully prepared oxygen/carbon dioxide control system to maintain the
required environment provided by a standard incubator. Compounding this
limitation with the additional treatments of the cells to incorporate
fluorophores or quantum dots, and the fabrication of fibre tapers, the
future development of these techniques as applied to living cells is
initially a daunting proposition. However, these challenges can, in
principle, be readily addressed with proper engineering to facilitate
the preparation, mounting and interrogation of cells within this limited
window of time. As an additional direction, the use of genetically
engineered cells, which require no additional in vitro processes to be
carried out post-incubation, presents an enticing opportunity for future
development.

An additional feature in the context of living cells is the fact that
they are in a state of continual growth, and in the case of embryos,
progressing through the stages of maturation at a rate of a stage per
day or faster. The notion of using embryos in the presumptive zygotes
phase can no longer be treated as a static quality of the cell. As the
cells mature, their surface properties inevitably change [ 235 , 239 ] .
This presents an opportunity to gain an understanding of how the WGMs
change within a living cell. If WGMs can be sustained in one phase of
development while they are unable to be sustained in other stages, the
generation of modes may be used as an indicator to gauge the stage of
development of the embryo, their health, and their responses to the
surrounding media, including neighbouring macromolecules contained
therein.

### 7.6 Cells as sensors

In this chapter, a variety of methods for extending the work of this
thesis on generating WGMs within biological cells has been presented.
While the immediate focus of the next challenges in this area of study
is on the surface properties of the cells, annealing procedures for
smoothing the outer layers of embryos, improving the @xmath -factors
through lasing, and improving the fluorescent signal via genetic
modification, the long-term goal remains the development of a sensing
modality for cells.

Since cell biology represents a crucial area of study in pathology,
diagnosis and medical technology, steps toward a novel sensing
technology capable of exploring new aspects of cells is of paramount
importance. Whispering gallery modes represent one such research
direction in the development of sensing technologies, not only because
of their high sensitivity to the internal and external environment of
the cell, but because it is the cell itself that is capable of
supporting the modes. Without the requirement of labelled proteins using
specialised fluorophore markers, the light can be generated on site –
within the cell itself, and the natural geometry of the cell provides a
reporting modality for its current status. Using the cells themselves to
report on their own status, without the addition of complex machinery or
probes that must enter the cell, avoids the risks of contamination,
immune response or physical damage. In summary, the generation of
whispering gallery modes within a biological cell represents a
conceptually elegant paradigm for the future realisation of autonomous
biological cell sensors.

## 8 Conclusion

### 8.1 Summary

In this thesis, the ability to sustain whispering gallery modes in
biological cells was explored, by considering the conditions under which
resonances can take place in an optical cavity. In the first chapters of
the thesis, the properties of the emitted energy spectra from resonators
were examined, and the behaviour of the wavelength positions of the
modes, the free spectra range and the quality factors were investigated
in order to interpret the critical conditions beyond which no modes can
be sustained.

This understanding was applied to single and multilayer resonator
architectures, and the principles of Mie scattering theory were extended
to develop an efficient, general model for multilayer microspheres in
Chapter 4 . The unified nature of the multilayer model permitted its
application in a number of settings, including a range of mode
excitation strategies typically used in the field of biosensing that
have resisted the development of a comprehensive model up to the present
time. One such method in particular, active mode interrogation involving
a uniform layer of fluorescent material, was able to be simulated for
the first time in multilayer resonators, and the spectral properties
were examined.

The development of sophisticated models for understanding the properties
of resonators was accomplished in order to target the main research
objective – to discover whether whispering gallery modes can be
sustained within a biological cell. A detailed study of the physical
parameters associated with resonators, with cells as a particular
example, was conducted to distil the critical selection criteria
required of a resonator, in Chapter 5 . In this study, the limit of the
detectability of WGMs within imperfect resonators was investigated.
Criteria for the cases where modes can no longer be sustained or
detected were developed, as well as the mechanisms for the deterioration
of the spectrum. These criteria were applied in a range of examples of
biological cells to demonstrate how they can be used in practice.

After a comprehensive analysis of the features inherent in the range of
biological resonator candidates considered, the bovine embryo was
selected as the most viable choice for further study and experimental
treatment. The models, methods, understanding of the spectra and
experimental techniques explored in this thesis were brought to bear in
combination in order to analyse the resonance properties of embryos in
Chapter 6 . This work demonstrated that, through the measurement of
scattered and transmitted spectra, as well as visual confirmation,
whispering gallery modes can be sustained within a biological cell, in
this case, the embryo.

### 8.2 Methodological evaluation and final analysis

An analysis of the techniques and findings of the thesis are as follows.

While Chapters 2 and 3 developed the Finite Difference Time Domain
method, employing state-of-the-art supercomputing resources to examine
the transient behaviour of the electromagnetic fields, the principal
focus has been on understanding the properties of the whispering gallery
mode spectra. By carefully examining the radiation collection time and
the grid resolution, converged spectra derived from this general
computational framework were matched to the results of Mie scattering
theory, providing a robust and comprehensive calculation methodology for
future research endeavours into novel resonator architecture. These
methods are, in essence, exploratory technologies, which require
significant computational resources in practice.

With the understanding gained through the computational methods, the
research aim could be further refined, focusing only on the conditions
of mode loss for a multilayer resonator. The development of the
multilayer model in Chapter 4 , while valuable in its own right as an
efficient and general tool, was used principally to address this aim.
The extraction of the free spectral range, quality factors and index
sensitivity from a simulation, using carefully chosen input parameters
to align closely with those of a candidate cell, yielded a robust
prediction to which experimental results could be compared.

Since the modelling predictions do not incorporate all the physical
parameters and defects of a real-life cell, an understanding of which
physical parameters impact the generation of whispering gallery modes,
and their relative impact on the quality of the modes, was necessary to
establish prior to measurement. As a result of this evaluation, the
studies conducted in Chapter 5 clearly illustrate how the selection
criteria are applied in practice, as well as determine the most likely
viable candidate cell to be used in the remainder of this project.

Extensive characterisation of the physical properties of the bovine
embryo represented an important step in understanding how the modes
might be realised, and which geometric and material parameters could
serve to hamper the detection of modes. Studies of the shape, diameter,
refractive index, surface properties, scattering and absorption profiles
and the effect of the osmolarity of their surrounding handling media
were conducted in order to isolate the most crucial physical feature to
be addressed by way of improving the clarity of the modes in the future.
It was found that the selectivity of the prism coupler method resulted
in the clearest detection of modes in the experiments conducted in this
project. The use of the polariser was a vital tool for the clarification
of the modes, by suppressing nearby competing modes of differing
polarisations, thereby allowing a mode structure to be detected.
Furthermore, the surface properties of the resonator were identified as
the principal physical attribute leading to reduced quality factors, and
thus highest priority to be addressed in the future for embryo-based
resonator technology.

A number of experimental methods were employed in order to measure the
underlying modes within the structure, in Sections 6.4.2 and 6.4.3 . It
was found that the free spectral range and quality factors of the
resonances obtained from the prism coupler method were consistent with
the predictions from the modelling, and the selection criteria-based
feasibility study. In the case of active interrogation using quantum dot
coated embryos, a modulation of the fluorescent envelope was detected,
and taper coupling was employed to remove a portion of the background
radiation, as an attempt to resolve the underlying modes. A Fourier
signal analysis of the measured radiation revealed a resonance
corresponding to a resonator diameter lying outside the bounds
determined in Section 6.4.2 , placing tension upon the clear
identification of modes. The broad peak in the Fourier decomposition
indicated that a repeating pattern corresponding to WGMs was not easily
determined in this experiment. While further development in measurement
techniques will no doubt elucidate more properties of the detected
signal modulation, the structure of the Fourier analysis is anticipated
to originate from broad, composite peaks within the emitted power
spectrum that exhibit significant overlap with each other. Finally, the
behaviour of the spectrum was recorded while a droplet of glycerol
solution was added to the surrounding medium of the embryo, as a method
for increasing the refractive index of the medium, and thus quenching
any WGMs that may be present. A marginal decrease in the clarity of the
mode structure was noted; however, this result taken alone on its own
merits was inconclusive.

A complete summary of the evidence for each experiment, discussed in
Section 6.5 , presents a compelling picture of resonances within an
embryo. While the detection of clear modes posed many technical
challenges as outlined in Chapters 5 and 6 , each experimental method
revealed unique advantages that shed light on different aspects of the
viability of biological cells as resonators. While it is clear that
further refinement and investigation will be necessary for the effective
utilisation of the definitive proof-of-concept contained in this thesis,
it is anticipated that these research endeavours will become a vital
asset for the future realisation of autonomous biological cell sensors.

Thus, I shall conclude with the following summary statement:

#### 8.2.1 Concluding statement

The understanding of the spectral behaviour of resonators, together with
the predictions from sophisticated models and carefully-chosen selection
criteria, have been applied to a biological cell – the bovine embryo,
leading to the detection of whispering gallery modes sustained within
the cell. This is an original contribution of this thesis.

[]

## \decofourright   Epilogue

“In a thought experiment the scientist puts nature to the test in his
mind’s eye. The thought experiment combines the visual and abstract
mathematical modes of thinking in a manner that can permit the scientist
to “see” the deep structure in a problem situation.”
A. I. Miller, “Imagery and Intuition in Creative Scientific Thinking:
Albert Einstein’s Invention of the Special Theory of Relativity,” in
Creative People at Work, Twelve Cognitive Case Studies , (D. B. Wallace
and H. E. Gruber, eds.), p. 172 (Oxford University, 1989 Ed.) [ 321 ] .

### Novel sensing technologies and beyond

The journey laid out in this thesis has traversed across multiple
disciplines, and incorporated many different aspects of science that
play an important role in contemporary research. In the quotation above,
Einstein’s scientific approach successfully integrated experimental data
from the laboratory and conceptual frameworks in order to explore
natural processes. Recalling the motivation for the vision described in
the Prologue, “to have a cell act as a resonator is to have a new window
into its internal structure and its immediate environment”, the
realisation of this vision opens the door into new directions in
biology, chemistry and physics.

While the discovery of embryos as novel resonators is a compelling
result, and the development of biosensing in a way that circumvents the
need for cumbersome interrogation methods is a promising possibility for
the future, laying the groundwork for new technologies represents only
one aspect of the value of integrative research. Beyond facilitating the
development of novel utilities, science involves the exploration of the
mysteries of nature to gain a new understanding of the world. In this
context, the goal of a scientific endeavour is not merely to predict,
nor simply to measure or analyse, but to take these aspects together in
order to synthesise a coherent picture that provides new meaning and
insights into the whole.

In this thesis, the understanding gained in how whispering gallery modes
behave in novel resonator architectures prompted the development of a
unified multilayer model. The physical limits for non-ideal resonators
were distilled into selection criteria, using the predictions afforded
by the model. The predictions, the measurement of the modes within a
biological cell, and the analysis of the results, together form an
integrated picture of resonances within a cell, and the discovery of
purely biological resonators.

“If we microscope inward, we see molecules underlying our physical
structure. Go even more micro, and we see atoms comprising the
molecules. An even more fine-grained focus gets us to the now accepted
reality that the vast majority of an atom itself is empty space…  we can
see that even what we think of as the physical nature of the world, the
world of things comprised of mass, is actually made up of very dense
energy.”
D. J. Siegel, Mind, a journey to the heart of being human , p. 318 (W.
W. Norton, 2017) [ 322 ] .

[]

## Appendix A Vector Spherical Harmonics

In this appendix, the notation and properties of the vector spherical
harmonics used in Chapter 4 and Appendix B are explained.

### a.1 Notation

Considering the spherical symmetry of the resonators used in Chapter 4 ,
the use vector spherical harmonics (VSH) is important for the
construction of a general model from first principles. Different
conventions exist for the definitions of the VSH in the literature, for
example, in atomic physics, or electrodynamics (see Refs. [ 149 ] and [
323 ] ). For this work, the definitions given by Barrera [ 324 ] are
modified to the following form

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.1)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.2)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.3)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are standard scalar spherical harmonics [ 165 ] , and
@xmath and @xmath are the azimuthal and polar quantum numbers,
respectively.

These definitions of the VSH can be related to the other forms that
appear in the literature. Key examples are as follows

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.4)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.5)
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (A.6)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Comparing these equations with the orthonormal functions used in this
work, Eqs. ( A.1 ) through ( A.3 ), the following relations hold

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.7)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.8)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.9)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

### a.2 Properties

Several salient properties of the VSH are now summarised. First, the VSH
are
orthogonal

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Second, they are orthonormal in Hilbert space

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.11)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The following summation rules apply to dyadic products of the VSH

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.12)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.13)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.14)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath represents unit vectors in the basis of the coordinate
space.

In addition, the following vector properties are used explicitly in the
derivation of the model described in Chapter 4 , as shown in Appendix B

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.15)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.16)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.17)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

## Appendix B Multilayer Examples

The general formulae presented for the multilayer model in Chapter 4 can
be adapted to consider a number of specific scenarios, particularly in
terms of the number of dipole sources, their orientation, or if a
uniform layer of sources is used. This appendix presents the more
detailed derivations of these formulae, which could not be presented in
Chapter 4 without compromising the flow of the narrative structure of
the thesis.

### b.1 Scattered power in the outermost region

The first example involves the derivation of the general formula for the
total radiated power of the system. First, the behaviour of the electric
and magnetic fields in the far field must be considered. The total
transverse parts of the fields in Eq. ( 4.20 ) in the outermost region
@xmath , and for @xmath , are given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the limit of @xmath , this equation leads to the following forms for
the scattered fields

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (B.2)
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (B.3)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

In the above equations, the property @xmath as @xmath has been used. The
total scattered power through a sphere of radius @xmath can then be
calculated:

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (B.4)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where the orthonormal properties of @xmath and @xmath functions given in
Eq. ( A.10 ) through ( A.16 ) have been used. Note that in the limit of
@xmath , it can be shown that @xmath and @xmath [ 133 ] , and hence

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (B.5)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The coefficients @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are known, based on
Eqs. ( 4.34 ), ( 4.36 ), ( 4.15 ), and ( 4.16 ) respectively. Note that
if there is no dipole in the outermost region, then @xmath .

### b.2 Single dipole embedded in a layer

In this section, the scenario is selected where there is only one dipole
in the layer @xmath , for @xmath . This is useful when comparing
simulations with results from embedded nanoparticles [ 84 , 85 , 86 ] .
In this case, according to Scenario 2 of Section 4.3 , the following
field coefficients may be obtained using the transfer matrix approach

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.6)
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.7)
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.8)
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.9)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

In addition, the dipole vector introduced in Chapter 4 takes the
following form

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
                          (B.10)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Thus, the coefficients required for the general formula in Eq. ( B.5 )
can be obtained for this specific case of a single dipole in a layer.
For the contributions to the TM modes, it is found that

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (B.11)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath . Similarly, for the contributions to the TE
modes one may write

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (B.12)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath . Equations ( B.11 ) and ( B.12 ) are general,
and can be applied to a dipole in any layer @xmath , including the
outermost layer @xmath or the innermost layer @xmath .

By considering the forms of the dipole coefficients that appear in
Section 4.2.2 , the field coefficients @xmath and @xmath , which appear
in the total scattered power of Eq. ( B.5 ), may be found explicitly

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.13)
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.14)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Using the properties of orthonormal functions @xmath , @xmath , and
@xmath as stated in Appendix A , in conjunction with Eq. ( A.16 ), the
coefficients may be written in the following forms

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.15)
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.16)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are functions of @xmath . Hence, the
properties of the dyadic products of @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath from
Eqs. ( A.12 ) through ( A.14 ) may be used to perform the summation over
@xmath and simplify the field coefficients that appear in the general
formulae of Eq. ( B.5 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
                 
     @xmath      (B.17)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (B.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that the quantities @xmath @xmath and @xmath are the polar
components of the polarisation vector @xmath . Based on the above
equations, the total scattered power from a sphere can be expressed as
the sum of the emitted powers due to the normal and transverse
components of @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (B.19)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

One can normalise the powers @xmath and @xmath to powers radiated by a
dipole in a bulk material with material properties @xmath , using @xmath
and @xmath to obtain

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
              @xmath      (B.20)
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (B.21)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

These two equations exactly match Eqs. ( 4.46 ) and ( 4.47 ) in Chapter
4 .

### b.3 Deriving an active layer case

Consider a multilayer structure where one of the layers, @xmath ,
consists of active material. In this context, a uniform distribution of
randomly-oriented dipoles, with density @xmath is introduced into that
layer. As a result, one must integrate Eqs. ( B.20 ) and ( B.21 ) with
respect to the variable @xmath , which is located within the layer
@xmath . Since the dipoles are randomly oriented, and the orientations
of the constituent dipoles are averaged over the distribution, @xmath ,
one may calculate the normal and transverse components of the emitted
power independently, even in the case of an active layer. In the case of
the normal component, one finds

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (B.22)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

which can be simplified to a summation over a one-dimensional integral
over the shell region that forms the @xmath layer

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.23)
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.24)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

As explained in Chapter 4 , the volume of the shell, @xmath , is defined
so that if @xmath , then @xmath is taken to be zero, since the relevant
volume is simply a sphere bounded by the innermost radius.

In the case of the transverse component of the power, one may similarly
express the result as a summation over a set of one-dimensional
integrals, in this case, @xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
                          (B.25)
              @xmath      (B.26)
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.27)
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.28)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The total emitted power then takes the form

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath               
              @xmath      (B.29)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

While this result exactly matches Eq. ( 4.56 ), the computation of the
integrals may be carried out prior to numerical calculation, using the
properties of the Bessel and Hankel functions as follows.

Let the following functional form be defined, which relates the integral
over the Bessel and/or Hankel functions to a sequence of terms and their
derivatives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath and @xmath can be any of the Riccati-Bessel or
Riccati-Hankel functions, @xmath or @xmath . One may then expand the
integrals appearing in Eq. ( B.29 ), beginning with the contributions to
the TM modes

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (B.31)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the radii of the upper and lower interfaces
of the region @xmath , respectively. The contributions to the TE modes
may be calculated in a similar fashion

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.32)
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (B.33)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

With @xmath and @xmath now known, they may be substituted into Eq. (
B.29 ) in order to calculate the total averaged power for an uniform
distribution of dipoles in one of the layers of a multilayer
microsphere. This result is computed numerically, and the results are
presented in Chapter 4 and Appendix C .

## Appendix C Transfer Matrix Method Verification

The active multilayer microsphere model introduced in Chapter 4 has been
shown to provide powerful functionality and guidance in examining the
properties of whispering gallery modes within resonators.

While the highlights of the results are explained in the body of the
thesis, it is important, for due diligence, to outline exactly how the
multilayer model has been verified with extant models in the literature.
This is achieved by selecting the special cases that correspond to each
of the models mentioned throughout the thesis, and described in this
appendix. Since the multilayer model is more general than these previous
models, prompting its development as a powerful tool for examining a
number of resonator designs not easily studied thus far, the comparisons
between it and extant models predominantly involves a simplification of
the multilayer model, followed by a mathematical check to ensure that
identical results are produced.

### c.1 Chew model for an unlayered microsphere

Consider the Chew model, from which one is able to calculate the emitted
power of an unlayered microsphere in a dielectric medium [ 132 , 143 ,
136 ] . The first scenario of interest is the case where a dipole source
is placed in the outermost region.

#### c.1.1 Single dipole in the outermost region

Assume that a dipole source is located in the outermost region, which
corresponds to the choice @xmath , in the multilayer model. Then, the
vector @xmath defined in Eq. ( 4.30 ) simplifies to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using Eq. ( B.11 ) and ( B.12 ) from Appendix B , one can then find the
field coefficients @xmath and @xmath in this scenario, which take the
forms

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.2)
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.3)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Having identified the coefficients @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ,
the normal and transverse components of the emitted power simplify to

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.4)
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (C.5)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Since @xmath is defined as @xmath , it follows that @xmath and @xmath .
In addition, the scattering matrix takes the form @xmath , and hence the
continuity condition of Section 4.2.2 can be used to find the ratios

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.6)
              @xmath      (C.7)
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.8)
              @xmath      (C.9)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Having found the coefficients @xmath and @xmath , one may directly
calculate @xmath and @xmath . It is found that Eqs. ( C.6 ) and ( C.8 )
are identical to Eqs. (6) and (7) of Ref. [ 143 ] .

#### c.1.2 Single dipole in the innermost region

Now assume a dipole is in the innermost region, then @xmath , and from
Eqs. ( 4.15 ), ( 4.2.2 ) and ( 4.30 ) it is found that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using Eq. ( B.11 ) and ( B.12 ), the coefficients @xmath and @xmath can
be found

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.11)
              @xmath      (C.12)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

and similarly

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.13)
              @xmath      (C.14)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Now the forms of the scattering matrix, @xmath , and its inverse, @xmath
, can be specified. According to Eq. ( 4.30 ), @xmath , and hence @xmath
. As a result, the following simple forms for the coefficients can be
found, @xmath and @xmath . Furthermore, since @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
, and hence Eqs. ( 4.28 ) and ( 4.29 ) can be used to find the matrix
element corresponding to the TM modes

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath               (C.15)
              @xmath      (C.16)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

In the same manner, the matrix element corresponding to the TE modes
takes the form

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.17)
              @xmath      (C.18)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Now that the TE and TM contributions have been simplified from the
general transfer matrix approach to a a form composed of Bessel and
Hankel functions and their derivatives, the formulae for the normalised
emitted powers @xmath and @xmath may be written

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.19)
     @xmath               (C.20)
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.21)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

These equations exactly match Eqs. (1), (2) and (3) of Ref. [ 136 ] ,
respectively.

#### c.1.3 Active inner regions

Assume that the inner region is now filled with randomly oriented
dipoles. Then, Eqs. ( B.29 ), ( B.31 ), and ( B.33 ) may be used,
together with @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath , calculated in the
previous section, to simplify the form of the integral components of the
TM modes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that in the case of a microsphere, @xmath is set to zero, as well
as all functionals of the form @xmath from Eq. ( B.30 ). Similarly, for
the TE modes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

Possessing known forms for @xmath and @xmath , and substituting into the
equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

one may check to see if this result is consistent with the Chew model
through numerical analysis. A numerical comparison of both the single
dipole of both normal and transverse polarisations, and a uniform layer
of dipoles, is shown in Fig. C.1 . The multilayer model for a single
layer matches the microsphere case for a vanishingly small layer
coating, or a vanishingly small internal sphere size. Furthermore, it is
found that both of these limits converge to within numerical precision.

### c.2 Johnson model for an unlayered microsphere

Recall the Johnson model [ 153 ] for the mode positions of a
microsphere. Setting @xmath , and then using Eq. ( 4.2.2 ), the
scattering matrix takes the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

The elements of the scattering matrix can then be extracted

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.26)
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.27)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

By making the assumption that @xmath , which is a required condition in
the derivation of the Johnson model, the TM and TE resonance conditions,
@xmath and @xmath , lead to the following characteristic equations

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.28)
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.29)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Equations. ( C.28 ) and ( C.29 ) exactly match Eqs. (19) and (13) in [
41 ] , respectively. Furthermore, these equations are consistent with
the formulae for the Mie scattering coefficients as stated in Eq. (4.53)
of Ref. [ 149 ] . It should be noted that in Eq. (33) of Ref. [ 133 ]
the labels of the TE and TM modes are interchanged.

### c.3 Teraoka-Arnold model for a microsphere with a single layer

In the case of a microsphere coated by a single layer, @xmath , and the
following form for the scattering matrix, @xmath , is found

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

One can find the TM and TE resonances of this coated microsphere by
setting @xmath and @xmath , respectively

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.31)
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.32)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

This results in the following characteristic equations for the resonance
positions

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.33)
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.34)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.35)
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.36)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The characteristic equations in Eqs. ( C.33 ) and ( C.34 ) exactly match
Eq. (7) in [ 148 ] and Eq. (10) in [ 147 ] , respectively. Furthermore,
a consistency check is carried out by comparing the mode positions of
the spectrum and the behaviour of the positions as a function of layer
thickness, for both the multilayer model and the Teraoka-Arnold model.

Consider an example of a silica microsphere, with dispersion included
through the Sellmeier equation [ 227 ] , coated with a single high
refractive index layer of the same value as in Ref. [ 147 ] , @xmath .
The microsphere is surrounded by water, @xmath , and the thickness of
the coating @xmath is changed from @xmath nm to @xmath nm. Figure C.2
shows the results obtained from the multilayer model for an electric
dipole placed just outside the surface, with normal and transverse
orientations considered separately. A range of wavelengths @xmath to
@xmath nm is simulated, and the outer diameter is kept fixed at @xmath
@xmath m. The thin vertical lines marking the position of the
resonances, with their corresponding mode numbers and labels, are
obtained from the structure resonance positions of Eqs. ( 4.39 ) and (
4.40 ) for a two-layer microsphere, setting @xmath in the general
multilayer formalism. The thick vertical lines indicate the resonance
positions obtained from the Teraoka-Arnold model [ 147 , 148 ] , which
agree exactly. Note that in the case of the parallel excitation in Fig.
C.2 (b), there is a small additional contribution from the TM mode, as
expected from Eq. ( B.21 ). It is found that in both models there is a
systematic shift in the prominent WGM peaks towards higher wavelengths
as the thickness of the layer is increased. The free spectral range,
however, remains largely unchanged over this range of wavelength values.
In the limit @xmath , the results match the simple case of the Chew
model [ 143 ] as anticipated.

### c.4 Yariv model of scattering for concentric resonators

In the model that has been developed for spherical concentric ‘onion’
resonators [ 144 , 145 , 146 ] , denoted the Yariv model, the transfer
matrix approach is adopted, and therefore a comparison with the
multilayer model introduced in Chapter 4 becomes more straightforward. A
crucial difference between the Yariv model and the other models
discussed in this thesis is that, in this case, the modes are excited
via an incident wave only, and the scattering cross section is
considered, rather than the emitted power. Since the incident field
takes the form [ 146 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

it is clear that the quantum number @xmath takes only the values @xmath
. Therefore, there is no summation, as was performed in the case of
Eqs. ( B.2 ) and ( B.2 ). The form of the field coefficients in each
layer, however, is consistent with the multilayer model, as can be seen
in Eqs. (7a) and (7b) of Ref. [ 146 ]

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.38)
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.39)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is an impedance function, and @xmath . By recognising that
the definition of the transverse VSH, @xmath in Refs. [ 146 , 165 ] , is
equivalent to the function @xmath in Eq. ( A.7 ), the relations among
the field coefficients and the values of the fields may be compared to
Eqs ( 4.3 ) and ( 4.4 ) in the multilayer model, and the forms are found
to be consistent with each other.

### c.5 Algorithm scaling behaviour

The precise implementation of the algorithm for the calculation of the
emitted power is presented in the code online (see Appendix E.4 ). In
this version of the code, the summation, @xmath , is calculated to an
upper bound, @xmath , determined by a prescribed tolerance @xmath , so
that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

This prescription is sufficient so long as the behavior of @xmath is
convergent, which is the case unless unstable parameter regions are
selected [ 155 ] . At each value of @xmath , the spherical Bessel and
Hankel functions are calculated using their recursion relations [ 325 ]
, and function calls are minimised within the algorithm in order to
improve the efficiency of the calculation.

Examples of the scaling behavior of the execution times ( @xmath ) for
the functions @xmath with respect to wavelength, for numbers of layers
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath , are shown in Fig. C.3 for a fixed outer
diameter of @xmath @xmath m. The results are fairly insensitive to the
layer thickness, allowing Fig. C.3 to be an accurate measure of the
execution time for a given number of layers and prescribed tolerance,
@xmath . Furthermore, it is found that the implementation of the
recursion relations results in an improvement of approximately one order
of magnitude in the execution time compared to function-call based
methods. This represents a significant improvement in the performance
efficiency of the algorithm for the calculation of the WGM spectrum from
a multilayer resonator.

## Appendix D Chemical Compositions of Media

### d.1 Standard non-selective yeast media (YEPD)

Yeast Extract Peptone Dextrose (YEPD) agar promotes the growth of
Saccharomyces cerevisiae . For more information, see the HiMedia product
documentation .

The proportions of the ingredients in solid or powder form are as
follows.

{mdframed}

[backgroundcolor=boxcol,hidealllines=true]

{mdframed}

[backgroundcolor=boxcold,hidealllines=true] YEPD Recipe

@xmath yeast extract – @xmath
@xmath agar – @xmath
@xmath peptone – @xmath
@xmath dextrose – @xmath
Method: A YEPD solution of concentration approximately @xmath mg/mL is
made with Milli-Q @xmath water and placed in an autoclave at @xmath C
for @xmath minutes for sterilisation. The resultant pH at @xmath C is
@xmath .

### d.2 MLA algal media

A variety of algae of the family Volvocaceae , including Eudorina -
Pandorina , may be cultivated in MLA media [ 273 ] . For more
information, see the CSIRO media recipes .

{mdframed}

[backgroundcolor=boxcol,hidealllines=true]

{mdframed}

[backgroundcolor=boxcold,hidealllines=true] MLA Recipe

Stock solutions (per litre Milli-Q @xmath ):
@xmath MgSO @xmath H @xmath O  – @xmath g
@xmath NaNO @xmath – @xmath g
@xmath K @xmath HPO @xmath – @xmath g
@xmath H @xmath BO @xmath – @xmath g
@xmath H @xmath SeO @xmath – @xmath mg
@xmath NaHCO @xmath – @xmath g
@xmath CaCl @xmath H @xmath O  – @xmath g
Vitamins (per 100 mL Milli-Q @xmath ):
@xmath Biotin   – @xmath mL primary stock
@xmath B @xmath – @xmath mL primary stock
@xmath Thiamine HCl   – @xmath mg

Vitamin primary stocks (per 100 mL Milli-Q @xmath ):
@xmath Biotin primary stock   – @xmath mg
@xmath B @xmath primary stock   – @xmath mg
Micronutrients (per 800 mL Milli-Q @xmath ):
@xmath Na @xmath EDTA   – @xmath g (dissolve on low heat)
@xmath FeCl @xmath H @xmath O   – @xmath g
@xmath NaHCO @xmath – @xmath g
@xmath MnCl @xmath H @xmath O   – @xmath g
@xmath Micronutrient primary stocks   – @xmath mL each
Micronutrient primary stocks (per litre Milli-Q @xmath ):
@xmath CuSO @xmath H @xmath O  – @xmath g
@xmath ZnSO @xmath H @xmath O  – @xmath g
@xmath CoCl @xmath H @xmath O  – @xmath g
@xmath Na @xmath MoO @xmath H @xmath O  – @xmath g
Method: Autoclave the distilled water to sterilise. Make up
micronutrient stock to @xmath litre. Store all stock solutions in a
refrigerator at @xmath C. Then, prepare MLA @xmath 40 concentrated
nutrient mixture to @xmath mL.
MLA @xmath 40 concentrated nutrient mixture (per @xmath mL Milli-Q
@xmath ):
@xmath MgSO @xmath H @xmath O stock   – @xmath mL
@xmath NaNO @xmath stock   – @xmath mL
@xmath K @xmath HPO @xmath stock   – @xmath mL
@xmath H @xmath BO @xmath stock   – @xmath mL
@xmath H @xmath SeO @xmath stock   – @xmath mL
@xmath Vitamin stock   – @xmath mL
@xmath Micronutrient stock   – @xmath mL
Filter-sterilise using @xmath mm filter into a sterile @xmath mL Schott
bottle. To make @xmath litre of MLA, add @xmath mL of Milli-Q @xmath
water into a sterile @xmath litre Schott bottle, add @xmath mL of MLA
@xmath nutrients, @xmath mL of NaHCO @xmath stock, @xmath mL of sterile
CaCl @xmath H @xmath O stock and mix well.

### d.3 Eudorina-Pandorina geometric analysis

Once algae of the Eudorina - Pandorina genus have been cultivated in
sufficient quantity, an analysis on their geometric characteristics is
carried out. An example of a sample of the solution containing the
Eudorina - Pandorina algae suspended in MLA media is shown in Fig. D.1 .
This image is used as a representative sample for extracting the
geometric parameters of the identifiable particles. The results of the
analysis are shown in Table D.1 .

### d.4 Paraffin formaldehyde (PFA) oocyte fixing method

One of the most common ways of fixing oocytes and embryos, which
essentially entails placing the cells into a permanently storable state
and preventing all metabolic activity, is that of washing them in
paraffin formaldehyde (PFA). Typically, the cells are placed in PFA of a
concentration of between @xmath and @xmath for approximately @xmath
minutes at @xmath C, and then placed in one of the following handling
media.

#### d.4.1 Phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) media

The handling and storage of mammalian oocytes and embryos can involve a
number of different procedures and media. In this thesis, two methods in
particular are investigated. The zona salt solution, or PBS, represents
the first of these media, and the method for fixing these cells is as
follows. For more information, see Protocols Online .

{mdframed}

[backgroundcolor=boxcol,hidealllines=true]

{mdframed}

[backgroundcolor=boxcold,hidealllines=true] PBS Recipe

@xmath NaCl – @xmath g
@xmath KCl – @xmath g
@xmath Na @xmath HPO @xmath – @xmath g
@xmath KH @xmath PO @xmath – @xmath g
Method: @xmath litre of @xmath PBS media is prepared with @xmath mL of
Milli-Q @xmath water, and sequentially adding the ingredients above.
After this has been achieved, add HCl to the mixture so the pH of the
solution has decreased to @xmath at @xmath C. Sterilise using an
autoclave for @xmath min at @xmath C and store at @xmath C.

#### d.4.2 MOPS-buffered wash and bovine serum albumin (BSA) handling
media

The second choice of media for storing mammalian oocytes and embryos
considered in this thesis is that of a solution composed of
(3-(N-morpholino)propanesulfonic acid (MOPS)-buffered wash ¹ ¹ 1 Cook
Medical Australia, @xmath Brandl St, Brisbane Technology Park, Eight
Mile Plains, QLD @xmath , Australia, Research Vitro Wash , Catalogue
Number: K-RVWA- @xmath . and bovine albumin serum (BSA). This medium has
a lower salt content than PBS, and its recipe is as follows.

{mdframed}

[backgroundcolor=boxcol,hidealllines=true]

{mdframed}

[backgroundcolor=boxcold,hidealllines=true] MOPS+BSA Recipe

@xmath MOPS-buffered Research Vitro Wash @xmath – @xmath mOsm
@xmath BSA – @xmath mg/mL
Method: A MOPS-buffered solution of wash medium is diluted to an
osmolarity of @xmath mOsm. BSA is added to a concentration is @xmath
mg/mL. The final pH should be in the range @xmath to @xmath . Live
culturing must be handled at @xmath C. However, this medium may also be
used for fixed cells and stored in a refrigerator at @xmath C.

### d.5 Chemical annealing - Acidified Tyrode’s Solution

In Section 7.2 of Chapter 7 , the method for thinning or annealing the
zona pellucida region of embryos is described. This can be achieved
using other chemical-based or enzyme-based solutions, exposed to the
outer layer of the zona for a limited time. The predominant
chemical-based annealing procedure uses Acidified Tyrode’s Solution
(ATS), whose recipe is as follows [ 326 ] . For more information, see
the Origio product datasheet .

{mdframed}

[backgroundcolor=boxcol,hidealllines=true]

{mdframed}

[backgroundcolor=boxcold,hidealllines=true] ATS Recipe

@xmath NaCl – @xmath mM
@xmath KCl – @xmath mM
@xmath MgCl @xmath – @xmath mM
@xmath CaCl @xmath – @xmath mM
@xmath Na @xmath HPO @xmath – @xmath mM
@xmath NaHCO @xmath – @xmath mM
@xmath D-glucose – @xmath mM

## Appendix E Lists of Publications

The following lists of published journal articles, conference papers and
open-source code were produced during the time of candidature, based on
work submitted to the degree of Doctor of Philosophy. For more
information, visit my academic website:
http://drjonathanmmhallfrsa.wordpress.com .

### e.1 Peer-reviewed published journal articles

##### Lead author:

1. “Method for predicting whispering gallery mode spectra of spherical
microresonators”; J. M. M. Hall , S. Afshar V., M. R. Henderson, A.
François, T. Reynolds, N. Riesen, T. M. Monro; Optics Express, Vol. 23,
Issue 8 , pp. 9924-9937 (2015) – in-text Ref. [ 157 ] ;
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1364/OE.23.009924 ,
web: http://www.opticsinfobase.org/oe/abstract.cfm?uri=oe-23-8-9924 .

2. “Determining the geometric parameters of microbubble resonators from
their spectra”; J. M. M. Hall , A. François, S. Afshar V., N. Riesen, M.
R. Henderson, T. Reynolds, T. M. Monro; Journal of the Optical Society
of America B 34 , pp. 2699-2706 (2017) – in-text Ref. [ 109 ] ;
DOI: http://doi.org/10.1364/JOSAB.34.002699 ,
web: https://www.osapublishing.org/josab/abstract.cfm?uri=josab-34-1-44
.

3. “Unified theory of whispering gallery multilayer microspheres with
single dipole or active layer sources”; J. M. M. Hall , T. Reynolds, M.
R. Henderson, N. Riesen, T. M. Monro, S. Afshar, V.; Optics Express,
Vol. 25, Issue 6 , pp. 6192-6214 (2017) – in-text Ref. [ 40 ] ;
DOI: http://doi.org/10.1364/OE.25.006192 ,
web: http://www.osapublishing.org/oe/abstract.cfm?uri=oe-25-6-6192 .

##### Co-author:

4. “Optimization of whispering gallery resonator design for biosensing
applications”; T. Reynolds, M. R. Henderson, A. François, N. Riesen, J.
M. M. Hall , S. Afshar V., S. J. Nicholls, T. M. Monro; Optics Express,
Vol. 23, Issue 13 , pp. 17067-17076 (2015) – in-text Ref. [ 115 ] ;
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1364/OE.23.017067 ,
web: http://www.osapublishing.org/oe/abstract.cfm?uri=oe-23-13-17067 .

5. “Combining whispering gallery mode lasers and microstructured optical
fibers: limitations, applications and perspectives for in-vivo
biosensing”; A. François, T. Reynolds, N. Riesen, J. M. M. Hall , M. R.
Henderson, E. Zhao, S. Afshar V. and T. M. Monro; MRS Advances,
2059-8521 , pp. 1-12 (2016) – in-text Ref. [ 116 ] ;
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1557/adv.2016.342 ,
web:
http://journals.cambridge.org/action/displayAbstract?fromPage=online
&aid=10321592&fileId=S205985211600342X .

6. “Fluorescent and lasing whispering gallery mode microresonators for
sensing applications”; T. Reynolds, N. Riesen, A. Meldrum, X. Fan, J. M.
M. Hall , T. M. Monro and A. François; Laser & Photonics Reviews ,
1600265, – in-text Ref. [ 95 ] ;
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/lpor.201600265 ,
web: http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/wol1/doi/10.1002/lpor.201600265/full
.

### e.2 Published conference proceedings

7. “Predicting the whispering gallery mode spectra of microresonators”;
J. M. M. Hall , S. Afshar V., M. R. Henderson, A. François, T. Reynolds,
N. Riesen, T. M. Monro; Proc. SPIE 9343, Laser Resonators,
Microresonators, and Beam Control XVII , 93431Y (2015) – in-text Ref. [
158 ] ;
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1117/12.2078526 ,
web:
http://proceedings.spiedigitallibrary.org/proceeding.aspx?articleid=2194939
.

### e.3 Press releases

8. “Shining new light on the body”; A. Greentree and J. M. M. Hall ;
National Computational Infrastructure (NCI) , press release,
web: http://nci.org.au/research/shining-new-light-on-the-body/ .

9. “WGM Laser-Tipped Fiber for Biomedical Applications”; A. François, S.
Afshar V., T. M. Monro, T. Reynolds, N. Riesen, J. M. M. Hall and M. R.
Henderson; Optics & Photonics News , Year in Optics 2015, Nano-optics,
web:
http://www.osa-opn.org/home/articles/volume_26/december_2015/extras/wgm_laser-tipped_fiber_for_biomedical_applications/#.VmDGrPl94fQ
.

### e.4 Code produced as part of this thesis

The following directories of original code, produced for this thesis,
have been placed online for public availability.

https://sourceforge.net/projects/npps/files/FDTD_WGM_Simulator —
associated with Refs. [ 157 , 109 ] .

http://www.photonicsimulation.net — associated with Ref. [ 40 ] .

### e.5 Conferences and workshops organised

In organising the following conferences and workshops, I functioned as
the Chair and Founder of the IPAS Science Network (ISN) in the Institute
for Photonics and Advanced Sensing (IPAS), Chair of the International
Conference on Optics, Atoms & Laser Applications (IONS-KOALA) 2014
Organising Committee, Inaugural Elected Representative of the Faculty of
Sciences on the Alumni Council of The University of Adelaide, Secretary
of the Optical Society of America (OSA) and International Society for
Optical Engineering (SPIE) Adelaide Chapters, Listed Expert of the
Australian Science Media Centre (AusSMC) and Committee Member of the SA
Branch of the Australian Institute of Physics (AIP) and the Australian
Research Council (ARC) Centre for Nanoscale BioPhotonics (CNBP) Early
Career Researcher (ECR) Committee. In chronological order:

@xmath OSA Scientific Photography Competition 2013, The University of
Adelaide, SA, Australia.

@xmath IONS-KOALA 2014 Welcome Reception and Opening Address, The
University of Adelaide, SA, Australia.

@xmath IONS-KOALA 2014 Industry Workshop, representative of the OSA and
SPIE, The University of Adelaide, SA, Australia.

@xmath IONS-KOALA 2014 Banquet Presentation Day and New Horizons in
Science Grant Award Ceremony, McLaren Vale, SA, Australia

@xmath IONS-KOALA 2014 Scientific Seminars, Session Chair,
The University of Adelaide, SA, Australia.

@xmath OSA / IONS-KOALA Co-sponsored Scientific Photography Competition
2014, The University of Adelaide, SA, Australia.

@xmath IONS-KOALA 2014 Closing Address and Prize Ceremony,
The University of Adelaide, SA, Australia.

@xmath IPAS Research Presentation Event 2015, Convenor as Chair of the
ISN,
The University of Adelaide, SA, Australia.

@xmath Alumni Council Convenor for Alumni Ambassadors and Class
Champions 2015, Engagement Branch, The University of Adelaide, SA,
Australia.

### e.6 Conferences and workshops participated

@xmath 2014 International Conference on Nanoscience and Nanotechnology
(ICONN) / 23 @xmath Australian Conference on Microscopy and
Microanalysis (ACMM), The University of Adelaide, SA, Australia.

@xmath CNBP Inaugural Workshop 2014, The University of Adelaide, SA,
Australia.

@xmath Australian Nanotechnology Network (ANN) ECR Workshop 2014,
University of Technology Sydney (UTS), NSW, Australia: Developing a
method for predicting the whispering gallery mode spectrum of
micro-resonators .

@xmath CNBP Workshop 2014, Macquarie University, NSW, Australia: Living
resonators: cells as sensors .

@xmath Royal Institution of Australia (RiAus), ECR Grant Writing
Workshop, Science Exchange Centre, SA, Australia.

@xmath CNBP Annual Retreat 2014, Port Lincoln, SA, Australia:
Towards living cell sensors .

@xmath IONS-KOALA 2014, The University of Adelaide, SA, Australia:
Resonator sensors .

@xmath 5 @xmath Mount Lofty Workshop on Frontier Technologies for
Nervous System Function & Repair 2014, Mount Lofty, SA: Contribution to
seminar Biophotonics: living resonators , via Prof. Andre Luiten.

@xmath University of Adelaide Research Symposium 2014, Cells as Lasers .

@xmath IPAS Research Presentation Event, The University of Adelaide, SA,
Australia: Toward cell-lasers in biophotonics .

@xmath SPIE Photonics West, LASE (Laser Technology and Industrial Laser
Conference), Laser Resonators, Microresonators and Beam Control XVII,
Moscone Center, San Francisco, CA, USA 2015: Predicting the whispering
gallery mode spectra of microresonators .

@xmath CNBP ECR Presentation Series 2015, The University of Adelaide,
SA, Australia: Living cells: sensors of the future?

@xmath ETHOS Australia Pty Ltd Workshop, “Industry engaged research:
Seven principles guiding an enduring relationship”, Adelaide, SA,
Australia.

@xmath Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology (RMIT) CNBP Launch,
Melbourne, VIC, Australia.

@xmath Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation
(CSIRO) and CNBP Partnership Launch, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.

@xmath IPAS Scientific Management Committee, Strategic Planning Meeting
2015, The University of Adelaide, SA, Australia.

@xmath The Australian and New Zealand Conference on Optics and Photonics
(ANZCOP) 2015, The University of Adelaide, SA, Australia: Multilayer
resonator sensitivity analysis .

@xmath Australian Conference on Optics, Lasers and Spectroscopy (ACOLS)
2015, The University of Adelaide, SA, Australia: Microbubble resonator
simulation using FDTD .

@xmath 40 @xmath Australian Conference on Optical Fibre Technology
(ACOFT) 2015, The University of Adelaide, SA: Contribution to seminar
Combining whispering gallery mode lasers and microstructured optical
fibres for in-vivo biosensing applications , via Dr. Alexandre François.

@xmath Innovation Voucher Program Workshop 2016, Flinders University,
Tonsley, SA, Australia.

@xmath CNBP Annual Retreat 2015, Lake Macquarie, NSW, Australia:
Biolaser .

@xmath Contribution to seminar Unlocking the secrets within, using light
- from wine to embryos , via Prof. Tanya Monro, The Shine Dome, Acton,
ACT, Australia.

@xmath Robinson Research Institute in reproductive health, group
research presentation, CNBP, SA, Australia.

@xmath ACOFT 2016, The Australian National University (ANU), Canberra,
ACT, Australia: Contribution to seminar A Unified Model for Active
Multilayer Microsphere Resonators , via Assoc. Prof. Shahraam Afshar V.

@xmath SPIE BioPhotonics Australasia 2016, Adelaide Convention Centre,
SA, Australia.

@xmath CNBP Annual Retreat 2016, Victor Harbor, SA, Australia: Towards
an Embryo Laser.

@xmath CSIRO ON Prime Pre-Accelerator Program 2016, Australian
Technology Park, Sydney, NSW, Australia.

@xmath Australian eChallenge Venture Showcase 2016, Adelaide Convention
Centre, SA, Australia.

### e.7 Journals - acting as reviewer

@xmath Applied Optics (OSA)

@xmath The Journal of the Optical Society of America A (OSA)

@xmath Optics Express (OSA)

@xmath IEEE Photonics Technology Letters

@xmath Physical Review Letters, American Physical Society (APS)

@xmath Physical Review A, C and D (APS)

### e.8 Grants and funding

@xmath ARC Laureate Scholarship 2014-2017.

@xmath ANN Invited Presenter Travel Grant, UTS, 2014.

@xmath ISN Funding 2014-2016 - $10,000 p.a.

@xmath IONS-KOALA 2014 Institutional and Industry Sponsorship - $56,000
+ in-kind support:
Gold sponsor : OSA;
Silver sponsors : SPIE, The ARC Centre of Excellence in Ultrahigh
Bandwidth Devices for Optical Systems (CUDOS - Universities of Sydney,
Macquarie, Monash, Swinburne, RMIT, UTS and ANU), The Centre for
Micro-Photonics: Swinburne University of Technology, MQ Photonics:
Macquarie University, Lastek Pty Ltd (Industry), IPAS, CNBP and The
Australian Optical Society (AOS);
Bronze sponsors : The AIP National Executive, Maptek (Industry),
Coherent Scientific (Industry), Grey Innovation Technology
Commercialisation (Industry), The Photon Factory: University of Auckland
(New Zealand), Edmund Optics (Industry), NewSpec (Industry), Griffith
University, The ARC T-ray Facility, School of Electrical & Electronic
Engineering (The University of Adelaide) and The Department of State
Development (DSD) (formerly Department for Manufacturing, Innovation,
Trade, Resources and Energy (DMITRE)), Government of South Australia.
Auxilliary sponsors : Photon Scientific (Industry), Melbourne School of
Physical Sciences (formerly School of Chemistry and Physics, The
University of Adelaide);
Travel grant sponsors : OSA, Lastek Pty Ltd, IPAS and The New Zealand
Institute of Physics.

@xmath IPAS Pilot Project Scheme 2016 - $5,000.

### e.9 Recognition and presentations

@xmath Election to the Alumni Council of The University of Adelaide as
Representative for the Faculty of Sciences 2014-2015.

@xmath Australian Academy of Science EMCR Forum Nomination 2014.

@xmath Australian Academy of Science Young Tall Poppy Award Nomination
2015.

@xmath IPAS Research Presentation Awards 2016 - Honourable Mention.

@xmath Australian eChallenge 2016 - Research Commercialisation 1 @xmath
Prize - $10,000.

@xmath Australian eChallenge 2016 - Medical Innovations 1 @xmath Prize -
$10,000.

[ ]
