Faculty of Sciences

School of Physical Sciences Doctor of Philosophy

by Jonathan M. M. Hall

Modern sensing technologies developed within the field of photonics
incorporate a number of optical and acoustic phenomena. One such effect
that has become a focal point in biosensing is whispering gallery modes
. These modes occur within optical cavities that exhibit a degree of
symmetry, and are thus able to support resonating waves. This thesis
develops the theory of resonances, exploring under what conditions a
micro or nanoscale device can sustain these resonances, and for which
physical criteria the resonance conditions deteriorate. The study is
then extended to consider the biological cell. The discovery of a
biological cell resonator, in which modes are definitively sustained
without artificial assistance, represents the culmination of this
thesis.

The properties of resonators and their emitted energy spectra are
studied within the general framework of the Finite Difference Time
Domain method, requiring supercomputing resources to probe the transient
behaviour and interactions among the electromagnetic fields. The formal
theory of Mie scattering is extended to develop a cutting-edge,
computationally efficient model for general, multilayer microspheres,
which represents a valuable achievement for the scientific community in
its own right. The model unifies the approaches in the field of
mathematical modelling to express the energy spectrum in a single
encompassing equation, which is then applied in a range of contexts.

The gulf between modelling and biological resonators is bridged by an
in-depth study of the physical characteristics of a range of biological
cells, and the selection criteria for viable resonator candidates are
developed through a number of detailed feasibility studies. The bovine
embryo is consequently selected as the optimal choice.

The scientific advancements contained within each chapter, including the
improved models, the selection criteria and the experimental techniques
developed, are integrated together to perform the principal measurements
of the spectra within a biological cell. Evidence is established for the
ability of a bovine embryo to sustain whispering gallery modes. This is
a significant finding covering extensive research ground, since it is
the first such measurement world-wide. The ability of a cell to sustain
modes on its own represents a conceptually elegant paradigm for new
technologies involving on-site cell interrogation and reporting of the
status and health of a biological cell in the future. The methodological
and technological developments contained within this interdisciplinary
thesis thus become a vital asset for the future realisation of
autonomous biological cell sensors.
