## Chapter 1 Introduction: on the need for alternative theories of
gravity

General theory of relativity (GR) founded by Albert Einstein in 1915 has
been a very successful, self-consistent theory of gravity, not only
accounting for different phenomena which until the moment of its
formulation had not been satisfactorily explained, but also predicting
existence of objects that would seem exotic, such as black holes. The
theory itself has been thoroughly tested in the course of last century,
confirming that the theory’s foundations are well-motivated. For
example, the Einstein Equivalence Principle (EEP) which can be regarded
as a cornerstone of GR states that: the Weak Equivalence Principle (WEP)
is valid, together with local Lorentz invariance (LLI) and local
position invariance (LPI) saying that the outcome of any experiment
cannot depend on the observer’s position in the Universe [ 1 ] . If EEP
is valid, then gravity is necessarily an effect of curved spacetime.
Practical consequences of EEP are the following: spacetime must have a
symmetric metric of a Lorentzian signature, which, in turn, determines
geodesics on that spacetime; also, locally in a freely falling frame one
can use special relativity (SR) to describe all non-gravitational laws
of physics. Since EEP narrows down the number of possible theories of
gravity and compels us to choose a metric theory of gravity satisfying
the postulates written above, the principle must be carefully tested.
WEP was tested in the famous E @xmath tv @xmath s experiment [ 2 ] , LLI
in Michelson-Morley-type experiments [ 3 ] , [ 4 ] , [ 5 ] , in test of
time dilation [ 6 ] , tests of independence of the velocity of light of
the source [ 1 ] , [ 7 ] , tests of isotropy of the speed of light [ 1 ]
, [ 8 ] , and LPI has been tested by the gravitational redshift
experiment [ 9 ] . Results of these experiments indicate unequivocally
that EEP is valid, so that any meaningful theory of gravity should give
the same predictions. Moreover, predicted by GR gravitational waves have
been (finally) found [ 10 ] , which proved also the existence of black
holes.

Despite many experimental triumphs, GR is not considered a fundamental
theory describing gravitational interactions. There are various -
theoretical and experimental - arguments for modifying the Einstein
theory of gravity. First of all, GR cannot be satisfactorily quantized,
as the attempts to renormalize it were futile [ 11 ] . It was shown that
adding extra terms to the Einstein-Hilbert Lagrangian was necessary,
which led to a vast modification of the standard theory, yielding
fourth-order equations of motion. Secondly, GR is not a low-energy limit
of theories regarded as fundamental. Low-energy limit of the string
theory reproduces Brans-Dicke theory, not GR [ 11 ] , since dilaton
fields couple non-minimally to the spacetime curvature. Another reason
is that we have not hitherto carried out any reliable tests of GR
working on the large scale. As far as cosmology is concerned, it is
rather a dubious way of confirming the Einstein’s theory on a scale of
galaxies and the whole Universe since most of alternative theories of
gravity admit Friedman-Lemaitre-Robertson-Walker metric. Conversely,
cosmology suggests that in fact GR should be modified in order to
account for the accelerated expansion of the Universe.

A sound reason to modify GR is an attempt to incorporate fully the
Mach’s Principle (MP) into the theory. General relativity admits
solutions which are anti-Machian, such as G @xmath del Universe [ 11 ] ,
[ 12 ] . MP states that a local inertial frame is influenced by a motion
of all matter in the Universe which, in practical terms, means that the
Newton constant @xmath is not a real constant, but its value varies with
the spacetime position. A theory which incorporates MP is the
Brans-Dicke theory [ 13 ] , conceived mostly because of a philosophical
need for including that principle in the formalism of the theory.

Another problem with the @xmath CDM model, based on GR and Standard
Model of particles enriched with the cosmological constant playing the
role of the dark energy, and the mysterious dark matter, is that the
value of @xmath being responsible for the current acceleration of the
expansion of the Universe is incomprehesibly small when compared to the
value predicted by quantum field theory (by 120 orders of magnitude
smaller). Also, it is unclear why the value of energy density associated
to the cosmological constant is comparable to matter energy density (the
so-called coincidence problem) [ 11 ] .

In fact, adding cosmological constant to Einstein Field Equations (EFE)
is not the only way to achieve accelerated expansion of the Universe.
The cosmic speed-up requires only a component of negative pressure which
dominates the energy content at the present epoch. This general
requirement does not tell us anything about the nature of the component.
Due to this fact, it is possible to explain the cosmic acceleration
adding a fluid which behaves like dark matter at high densities and dark
energy at low densities. For example, it can be achieved by introducing
the Chaplygin gas (which may also account for the cosmic inflation) [ 11
] , [ 14 ] , [ 15 ] . It is also possible to explain the accelerated
expansion by modifying the geometric part of EFE. Instead of adding yet
another component, we can simply introduce extra terms to the FRWL
equations, leaving the matter unchanged [ 16 ] , [ 11 ] .

As far as the mathematical reasons for modifying the Einstein’s gravity
are concerned, we can take the so-called Palatini formalism into
consideration. Palatini formalism is going to be discussed at length in
the first chapter, but here we can sketch out the general idea. In the
standard gravity, the underlying assumption of geometric structures
defined on spacetime is that the affine connection is the Levi-Civita
connection of the metric. In Palatini approach, however, we regard these
two objects as unrelated, since there is no reason whatsoever we should
impose a relation between them a priori. In case of Einstein gravity,
introducing Palatini formalism does not affect the resulting field
equations in any way; however, in case of more complicated theories,
such as scalar-tensor or @xmath theories of gravity, both approaches
usually give us different results, describing different physics [ 11 ] .

The scalar-tensor theories of gravity, which will be diligently analyzed
in this paper, are a very promising modification of the Einstein
gravity. The main idea of the scalar-tensor theories of gravity is going
to be introduced in the second chapter. In these theories, a scalar
field is nonminimally coupled to the curvature scalar [ 17 ] ;
provenance of the field will be discussed later on. Historically, the
prototype of all contemporary scalar-tensor theories was the Brans-Dicke
theory, already mentioned. An interesting feature of the scalar-tensor
theories of gravity is their equivalence to @xmath theories, which
basically means that the latter can be analyzed using the ’mathematical
machinery’ developed for the former. The reason why the scalar-tensor
theories deserve some attention is that they can be successfully used to
build credible models for cosmic inflation (where a scalar field called
’inflaton’ is driving the accelerated expansion of the Universe [ 19 ] ;
this field, however, is introduced somehow ad hoc since a detailed
particle physics mechanism remains unknown) and dark energy [ 21 ] .

So far, the scalar-tensor theories of gravity have been considered
mostly in a purely metric approach [ 11 ] , [ 17 ] , [ 21 ] , [ 22 ] and
the possible effects of adopting the Palatini approach have not been yet
investigated in the literature. The idea that changing the formalism may
lead to a different theory and thence to different experimental
predictions which can help with discriminating between competing
theories seems plausible. The main goal of this paper is to develop
mathematical background for investigating scalar-tensor theories of
gravity in Palatini approach and preparing them to be verified by means
of comparing their predictions (especially post-Newtonian parameters)
with actual data.

In the second chapter we give a brief overview of two alternative
theories which are of a great importance to this paper - scalar-tensor
and @xmath theories. The notion of conformal transformation will be then
introduced. The chapter will end with a discussion of Palatini
formalism. The way it changes our view on the geometric structure of
spacetime will be particularly stressed. In the third chapter the
analysis of the scalar-tensor theories in Palatini approach will begin.
Modified formulae relating geometric quantities of two different
conformal frames will be presented. Next, we will postulate an action
functional for scalar-tensor theories whose form remains invariant under
a conformal transformation. This will be followed by a detailed analysis
of how the arbitrary coefficients entering the action must transform. In
the subsequent section the notion of invariants will be introduced.
Having obtained quantities which remain invariant under the conformal
change, we will attempt at writing the action fully in terms of them.
Field equations will be also obtained, and conservation laws shall be
discussed. In the fourth chapter, we consider practical applications of
the formalism we developed. @xmath theories will be analysed using the
language of invariants and Friedmann equations will be presented (in
case of vanishing spatial curvature and without any sources). At the
very end of the paper, we present the conclusions we draw from the
analysis and give a possible outline of future investigations in this
field.

## Chapter 2 Preliminaries

In this chapter certain notions essential for understanding the
following parts of the thesis will be discussed. First off, the notion
of a ’conformal transformation’ will be introduced, together with
formulae relating two geometric objects calculated in two distinct
conformal frames. Conformal transformation itself will be a very
important tool since it establishes a mathematical equivalence between
different parametrizations, although physical predictions may be
incommensurable. Then, we will give a description of two aforementioned
theories belonging to the big and fertile family of extended or modified
theories of gravity: @xmath and scalar-tensor theories. These theories
will be discussed in the purely metric approach. At the end of the
chapter Palatini approach - one of the possible ways of modifying
theories of gravity - will be introduced and thoroughly discussed.

### 2.1 Conformal transformations

In this section a mathematical tool called ’conformal transformation’
will be introduced. This notion is of great relevance to the following
parts of the thesis. The main idea of the conformal transformation is
that it transforms a metric tensor on a given spacetime into another
metric tensor according to the rule:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is an arbitrary, nonvanishing function of spacetime
position. This transformation is not equivalent to a change of
coordinate frame since it does not preserve the line element:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This implies that conformal transformation changes distance between two
points in a way that is not uniform, but depends on the position. What
the conformal transformation leaves unchanged is the quotient of lengths
of two vectors attached to the same point. For any two vectors @xmath
and @xmath , we have:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which also means that the angle between two vectors remains unchanged [
20 ] :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Of course, on manifolds with a pseudo-Riemannian metric tensor the
notion of angle between two vectors does not make any sense in general,
but the quotient of the lengths is still invariant - as long as the
vectors do not have zero length. The fact that the angle between two
vectors is preserved applies to null vectors in particular, which
preserves the causal structure of spacetime.

We say that a space @xmath is conformally flat if there exists a
coordinate frame @xmath in which @xmath for some function @xmath . In
case of a pseudo-Riemannian metric, it is deemed conformally flat if the
metric tensor is a diagonal matrix with entries being @xmath .

In the metric approach, geometric quantities describing curvature of
spacetime are function of metric tensor and its derivatives. Hence, if
we perform a conformal change of the metric, all quantities dependent on
it will change accordingly. We limit our interest to the Riemann and
Ricci tensors, and scalar curvature. Formulae describing such change can
be found in any textbooks on differential geometry, but for the sake of
completeness we can write them below (also, in the next chapter we will
introduce conformal frame in so-called Palatini formalism, and it will
be possible to compare outcomes of calculations carried out in both
approaches):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the dimension of the manifold. Christoffel symbols,
defined to be @xmath transform as follows:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Riemann tensor, defined as @xmath , changes in the following way [ 29 ]
:

  -- -- -- -------
           (2.4)
  -- -- -- -------

The Ricci tensor in the new conformal frame is given by the following
formula (written using a slightly different convention [ 11 ] , [ 30 ]
):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

And, finally, the curvature scalar is [ 11 ] :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

We can introduce a tensor which remains invariant under a conformal
change. This tensor is called ’Weyl tensor’ @xmath , and is defined to
be the part of the Riemann tensor which is independent of the Ricci
tensor (since some of the Riemann tensor components can be expressed in
terms of Ricci tensor). The Weyl tensor is given by the following
formula [ 20 ] :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

The Weyl tensor is traceless:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is invariant under a conformal change:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and thence it is called a ’conformal curvature tensor’. In a conformally
flat space, the Weyl tensor vanishes. Also, it can be proven that a
scalar density given by the following formula: @xmath is an invariant
quantity under a conformal change.

If @xmath is constant, then the transformation is called a ’scale
transformation’. This simply means that we change our definition of
units of length and time. Virtually, since both meter-sticks and clocks
would be rescaled, laws of physics should remain unchanged, since there
should be no preferred standard length or time. It seems plausible that
the Universe is indeed scale invariant; however, there is no such
invariance in our world [ 17 ] . For example, if we measure particle
masses using different meter-sticks and clocks, we get different values.
This means that as soon as masses of particles are introduced, the scale
invariance is broken. On the other hand, at very high energies mass of
particles is negligible, and scale invariance provides convenient tools.
Also, scale invariance may be conceived as a global transformation, and
we now that all transformations should be local, i.e. depend on
spacetime position. Along these lines, conformal transformation can be
thought of as a localized scale transformation.

Conformal invariance can be viewed in some situations [ 17 ] as an
approximate symmetry. Massless fermions exhibit conformal invariance
only under special conditions. Theory of electromagnetic field is
completely conformally invariant. The massless, gravitational field does
not posses such invariance however, and this is a result of presence of
the Newton’s constant, having the dimension of @xmath . As it turns out,
conformal invariance should not occur in realistic theories. On the
other hand, they turn out to be a useful tool when investigating
theories with a nonminimal coupling.

### 2.2 Short review of alternative theories of gravity

Possible alternative theories of gravity may differ drastically from the
original Einstein’s gravity. The name, ’alternative theories of
gravity’, encompasses a variety of proposed modifications of GR, ranging
from a simple change in Einstein-Hilbert Lagrangian to a completely new
theories unifying quantum mechanics with gravity. Theories we will be
dealing with throughout this thesis belong to the former class: they are
nothing but a modest modification of GR by means of adding extra terms
to the Lagrangian, including a nonminimally coupled scalar field or
assuming Palatini formalism. In other words, all these theories start
from the original Einstein’s idea and then add some corrections, which
should take over the behaviour of gravity at the regimes where it fails
to explain various observed phenomena. We shall refer to those theories
as ’Extended Theories of Gravity’ (following [ 23 ] ).

#### 2.2.1 Brans-Dicke theory and its generalizations

One of the simplest way of modifying GR is adding a scalar field into
the theory. It seems very pleasing and plausible that we could alter the
Einstein’s gravity by including one of the most primitive of Nature’s
phenomena. This idea was exploited by Brans and Dicke, who in 1961
proposed a theory extending GR. They pioneered so-called scalar-tensor
theories of gravity, which currently are being investigating by many
researchers. Their model, however, was rather naive and revealed certain
shortcomings not long after it had been conceived, but should be still
regarded as a prototype of all modern scalar-tensor gravities.

Original motivation for Brans and Dicke to introduce a modified gravity
was the need for incorporating Mach’s principle into the theory of
gravity. As it was shortly discussed in the Introduction, Mach’s
principle states that local motion of particles is affected by a
large-scale distribution of matter. Ernst Mach was an Austrian physicist
and philosopher who was famous for criticizing the Newton’s idea of
absolute space. He targeted the bucket thought experiment which was
supposedly proving the existence of absolute space. In his
interpretation of the experiment, Mach argued that whether the surface
of water in the vessel is at rest or curved, it is always with respect
to the distant starts, which means that the difference between these two
states must be related to the distant mass rather than to an absolute
space [ 24 ] . A similar standpoint was held also by Einstein, who was
inspired by Mach’s thought when he was formulating his general theory of
relativity. Ironically, Einstein’s theory admits solutions which are
clearly anti-Machian, such as de Sitter universe, where the evolution of
universe is dominated by a cosmological constant and matter is entirely
negligible [ 25 ] . The failure of GR to incorporate Mach’s principle
inspired Brans and Dicke to look for an alternative theory.

Brans and Dicke’s idea was to add a scalar field whose dependence on
spacetime position would be translated into a variability of the
gravitational coupling. This would clearly violate the strong
equivalence principle saying that results of all experiments carried out
in freely falling laboratories should be independent of the spacetime
position of the experimenter. However - Brans and Dicke argue - what we
managed to establish performing very accurate experiments is the weak
equivalence principle, stating that all gravitational accelerations are
equal, regardless of the matter composition [ 13 ] . They postulated the
following action functional:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here, @xmath is the curvature scalar, @xmath and @xmath represents
generic matter fields. @xmath plays a role of the gravitational coupling
and its dimension is the same as the dimension of the Newton’s @xmath ,
i.e. @xmath . What is important to notice is that the scalar field does
not enter the matter part of the action. If the converse were true, WEP
would be violated, and this can be demonstrated with a simple reasoning
[ 17 ] : in order to obtain the geodesic trajectory for a point mass
particle in a given gravitational field, we seek extremum of the
functional:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the mass of the particle and @xmath is the proper time.
The mass can be pulled out of the integral, implying that WEP holds. If
the scalar field is coupled to matter, however, factoring out the mass
will not be possible anymore. This will result in lack of covariant
conservation of point mass particle, and this was unacceptable in view
of Dicke and Brans since high-precision experiments proved that WEP
holds [ 13 ] , [ 17 ] .

Equations of motion are obtained by varying with respect to the
dynamical variables. @xmath -variation gives us the following equation [
13 ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is a wave-like equation for @xmath sourced by kinetic part of the
Lagrangian density and the @xmath term.

Variation with respect to the metric tensor yields:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the energy-momentum tensor is defined to be: @xmath . It can be
shown that @xmath , so that all conservation laws are satisfied.

As we can see, the left hand side of the equation is the familiar
Einstein tensor, and the first modification of GR shows up on the right
hand side: in place of the gravitational coupling there is an inverse of
the scalar field. Also, the next term is the energy-momentum tensor for
the scalar field. The last term contains second derivatives of the
scalar field and it originates from integrating by parts when
calculating the variation of Ricci tensor. Equation 2.11 can now be
contracted with a metric tensor, giving us a direct relation between the
curvature, trace of energy-momentum tensor and the scalar field:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

The definition of @xmath can be now substituted in 2.10 , yielding:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is a truly remarkable result since it relates the scalar field
directly to the distribution of matter. This is a clear implementation
of Mach’s principle. Let us also note that electromagnetic field does
not contribute to the trace of energy-momentum tensor.

Brans and Dicke expected the parameter @xmath to be of order of unity,
otherwise rendering the theory unnatural. However, testing the
time-delay imposed a serious constraint on the lowest possible value of
@xmath , which happens to be:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The unexpectedly high value of @xmath means that the theory is
fine-tuned. However, fine-tuning can be avoided if we give the scalar
field a sufficiently large mass, thus limiting its range. Adding a
self-interaction potential can be a viable way of modifying the theory
and making it still appealing [ 41 ] .

Since the notion of conformal transformation has been already
introduced, we may now perform a conformal change in order to see
whether we can get rid of the nonminimal coupling. Let us consider the
following conformal transformation of the metric:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the Newton’s constant, accompanied by a redefinition of
the scalar field:

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

where @xmath . The action functional now reads as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

As we can see, the new scalar field has the dimension of @xmath . We say
that the action is now cast in so-called Einstein frame - previously it
was written in Jordan frame. An extensive discussion of both frames will
be presented in the next chapter. The Einstein frame action looks like
the standard Einstein-Hilbert action, describing the familiar gravity.
However, there are two important differences. First of all, the vacuum
solution of the field equations can never be written in the form @xmath
since on the right hand side there will be always the scalar field,
permeating the spacetime in a way that cannot be avoided [ 11 ] .
Second, the coupling between matter and scalar field now appears: @xmath
enters now the matter part of the action functional. This has a profound
consequence: the energy-momentum tensor is no longer conserved. Instead,
its divergence is directly related to the trace of itself and derivatice
of the conformal factor [ 11 ] , [ 38 ] :

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.15)
  -- -- -- --------

This implies that there is a ’fifth’ force acting on the particles,
causing them to deviate from their standard trajectories. In order to
obtain the magnitude of this force, let us carry out the following
reasoning: let us assume that the energy-momentum tensor (already in the
Einstein frame) is that of a dust fluid:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We can plug this definition of energy-momentum tensor back in 2.15 and
get an equation (irrelevant for us right now) which suggests that the
total derivative of the tangent vector along a geodesic does not equal
zero anymore, but:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Because of spacetime dependence of the right hand side of the equation,
universality of free fall is clearly violated. This is a feature of
non-metric theories, and non-metricity - which is equivalent to WEP
violation - is a property of a given conformal frame. In the initial
frame (the Jordan frame) the energy-momentum tensor was conserved, so
that the theory was metric. Here, however, in the so-called Einstein
frame, its divergence is proportional to its trace. The only thing that
remains unaffected by a conformal transformation is a geodesic for
light, since in case of radiation, @xmath [ 38 ] .

##### General scalar-tensor theories of gravity

Before we move on to generalizations of Brans-Dicke theory - to a wider
class of scalar-tensor theories of gravity - let us analyze what a
possible origin of the scalar field may be. It seems that Brans and
Dicke did not ponder upon this issue, viewing the model they proposed
just as a simple alternative to GR [ 17 ] . However, the scalar field
added to the Einstein-Hilbert Lagrangian may result from a deeper
theories, which justify the nonminimal coupling between @xmath and the
curvature. For example, one of the theories supporting the scalar-tensor
gravity is the Kaluza-Klein model and its modern extensions, where the
scalar field appears as a result of compactification of higher
dimensions [ 17 ] - to be more precise, the scalar field is (a certain
power of) the radius of an @xmath -dimensional compactified space. The
scalar field is in this case related to determinant of the @xmath
-dimensional metric, and since it enters the matter part of the action
functional as well, it irrevocably must be coupled to matter. This
somehow contradicts Brans and Dicke’s assumptions about the scalar field
not violating the WEP. Another possible explanations of origins of the
scalar field involve more reliable fundamental theories, such as string
theories and noncommutative geometries. In the latter case, the field
can be viewed as a gauge field on a discrete space and identified with
the Higgs fields [ 17 ] . A detailed discussion of these theories is far
beyond the scope of this thesis; what is important to note is that the
addition of a scalar field has a sound theoretical motivation.

Scalar-tensor theories of gravity use the concept of conformal
transformation extensively because it provides a useful tool
establishing a mathematical equivalence between two conformal frames [
21 ] . However, it has been known for a long time that two different
conformal frames often describe different physics, meaning that a
conceptual problem arises when we start to investigate a relation
between observables and frames we use to work in. Our doubts about this
ambiguity can be rephrased in the following way: is there one frame that
should be regarded physical, whereas all the other ones, despite the
(possible) mathematical equivalence do not define units we use to
measure lengths? Is it possible that the discrepancies can be attributed
to the fact that the theory has not been yet formulated in an invariant
way with respect to some general space? Answer to this question is not
an easy one, and this issue will be addressed in the next chapter. Some
authors made a significant progress on this issue [ 21 ] and introduced
quantities which remain invariant under a change of conformal frame, and
then expressed all physical observables in terms of these invariants.
This reasoning seems plausible to us and in the next chapter we will
dedicate some time to obtaining such invariants; in this section,
however, we will introduce a rough concept of an invariant quantity in
scalar-tensor theories of gravity and show that, indeed, it remains
unaffected by a conformal change.

A general scalar-tensor theory allows more unspecified functions than a
pretty restricted Brans-Dicke theory. In case of the latter, the only
free parameter we had at our disposal was the coefficient @xmath ; in
case of the former, there will be four arbitrary functions of the scalar
field entering the action functional. The postulated action for the
theory looks as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath describes the coupling between scalar field and the
curvature scalar @xmath , being a function of the metric tensor @xmath .
In order to make gravity an attractive force, we must set @xmath .
@xmath is a kinetic coupling, and @xmath is a self-interaction potential
of the scalar field, which cannot take negative values. @xmath is an
anomalous coupling between the scalar field and matter.

Varying the action functional with respect to the metric tensor, we get
the following equations of motion [ 21 ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the standard definition of the energy-momentum tensor @xmath .
Variation with respect to the scalar field gives us:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

As we can see, as in case of the Brans-Dicke theory, the scalar field is
sourced by the trace of energy-momentum tensor. The continuity equation
takes the following form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

which means that the energy-momentum tensor is conserved in those
frames, where coupling between scalar field matter is not present.

Two of the four arbitrary functions can be fixed by means of a proper
conformal change accompanied by a redefinition of the scalar field:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is generally assumed that the first and second derivatives of @xmath
exist. Moreover, the Jacobian of the transformation 2.22 is allowed to
be singular at some isolated point.

If we plug the redefined scalar field and metric tensor back in the
action functional, make use of the transformation relations and neglect
boundary terms arising while integrating by parts, we end up with the
action written in a different conformal frame, with the barred dynamical
variables. In order for the Lagrangian to retain its form, the
coefficients must transform in the following way:

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

If these relations hold, then the action functional in a new conformal
frame preserves its form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

The transformation relations suggest that the condition imposed on
@xmath and @xmath are satisfied in any conformal frame. In particular,
if the potential vanishes in one conformal frame, then it is equal to
zero in all related conformal frames.

If we investigate the way coefficients transform, we will notice that it
is possible to write out such coefficients or combinations thereof which
gain only a multiplier and remain otherwise unchanged. Following [ 21 ]
, we can write:

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

By picking proper combinations of these quantities we can build
invariants, which preserve their form under a conformal change (they are
still expressed as functions of the same coefficients):

1.  @xmath

2.  @xmath

3.  @xmath

Alongside the invariants defined above, we may introduce an invariant
metric, remaining unchanged under a conformal transformation:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(invariance of this metric follows from transformation properties of
both @xmath and the metric tensor @xmath ).

Having introduced the invariants, we may now write the action functional
in terms of them. We can also assume that the relation defining
invariant @xmath is invertible, so that we can express the scalar field
as a function of it. This will give us an obvious advantage of
frame-independence of resulting field equations; also, all observables
will be expressed in terms of the invariants.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

As we can see, we ended up in an Einstein-like frame, where the scalar
field is not coupled to the curvature, but enters the matter part of the
action, hence violating the WEP. Correspondence with the action 2.14 is
apparent. Performing variation with respect to the invariant @xmath and
the invariant metric, we obtain field equation written in a
frame-independent form:

-   @xmath : @xmath

-   @xmath : @xmath

As we expected, the scalar field is now sourced by matter fields
(expressed by the trace of energy-momentum tensor). As we know from our
previous considerations, inasmuch as the scalar field is coupled to
matter, continuity equations do not hold anymore. In order to avoid it,
giving up on simplicity of the Einstein-like frame, we could have
defined another invariant metric: @xmath and express the action
functional in a Jordan-like frame. Both possibilities will be discussed
at length in the next chapter.

#### 2.2.2 @xmath theories of gravity

Adding a scalar field to the original Einstein-Hilbert Lagrangian was,
as it turned out, a procedure that was theoretically well-motivated.
However, it is not the only possible way to alter the original theory of
gravity. Because GR originates from a very specific choice of the
Lagrangian - one could dub that choice ’the simplest’ - a natural
question arises whether the gravity is uniquely described by Einstein’s
model. Not long after general relativity had been introduced, people
started thinking about altering the theory, usually just for the sake of
understanding it better. In 1923 Eddington himself endeavoured to modify
GR by adding higher order invariants [ 26 ] . The initial attempts to
alter GR were poorly justified, since it seemed pointless from the
methodological point of view to complicate the theory without any
serious reason. However, a trigger to modify it was yet to come; in the
Introduction some of the theoretical and experimental motivations for
modifying GR were discussed. At a certain moment it became clear that
Einstein’s theory was not compatible with quantum theory, and also new
evidence showed up suggesting that large-scale phenomena are not
well-described by GR (we could mention also the inflation problem). For
example, higher order theories of gravity appear when one attempts to
perform quantization on a curved spacetime and tackle the
renormalization problem [ 11 ] , [ 23 ] . These issues fueled the
scientists’ interest in alternative theories of gravity, which now is a
diverse and still developing field. The wide array of possible theories
of gravity results from the fact that one can modify it in various ways.
In this section, we will analyze one particular way of changing the
Einstein’s theory: we can straightforwardly replace the curvature scalar
in the Einstein-Hilber Lagrangian with a function thereof. It means that
now the action functional takes the following form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath . Surprisingly, such a simple replacement can account for
many observed phenomena, since the function @xmath , viewed as a series
expansion, contains terms which are of a phenomenological interest. It
must be noted at this point that @xmath theories do not purport to be
fundamental theories of gravity. Their real value is that they can be
used to explain certain processes in a way alternative to GR, thus
providing us with some insight into how the Einstein’s theory works.
This means that @xmath theories are toy-theories one uses in order to
question a particular theory and inquire about its limitations. @xmath
theories are analyzed mostly in two distinct approaches: in purely
metric, where the only dynamical variable entering the Lagrangian is
metric tensor, and in Palatini approach, where linear connection is
thought of as being independent of metric tensor. The latter approach
will be analyzed later in this chapter. Here, we focus our attention on
metric @xmath theories.

Having the action 2.25 , we can perform variation with respect to the
metric tensor. The derivation process is not essential here and will be
dealt with in the next chapter, so we just give the result of the
calculations:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

(where @xmath ). This gives us a set of fourth order field equations in
the metric derivatives. A subtlety related to boundary terms was skipped
in the process of deriving these equations. This is a problem stemming
from the fact that fixing the metric tensor variations on the boundary
does not mean that the related term will vanish, and is similar to that
of GR, where the boundary term is offset by the Gibbons-Hawking-York
surface term [ 26 ] , which is a total divergence added to the
Lagrangian. Unfortunately, no such term can be found in case of @xmath
theories, and the boundary term must be removed in a different way.
Usually, apart from fixing variations of the metric tensor on the
boundary, one can fix some other terms. There is no unique prescription,
however, for doing that, and choosing different degrees of freedom
affects the Hamiltonian formulation of the theory. On the level of
obtaining field equations this choice is luckily devoid of any meaning.
For a more detailed discussion, see [ 45 ] .

If we now perform contraction of 2.26 with the metric tensor, we get
so-called master equation:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

This equation relates the curvature scalar and the trace o
energy-momentum tensor in a way which is highly nontrivial. In case of
GR, we had a direct, algebraic relation between these two quantities.
Here, the relation is differential, and due t this fact @xmath theories
admit a wider variety of solutions compared to GR. For example, setting
@xmath does not necessarily imply that @xmath . On the other hand, GR
field equations with cosmological constant for vacuum can be easily
reproduced. One simply sets @xmath (maximally symmetric solution [ 26 ]
), and gets the following master equation:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let us assume that there is a value of @xmath which solves this
equation: if @xmath , then @xmath (and hence, @xmath ). We now come back
to the field equations for vacuum:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is equivalent to:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This is maximally symmetric de Sitter spacetime, or GR with cosmological
constant added.

Another important aspect of the @xmath theories in metric approach is
that the energy-momentum tensor is conserved [ 27 ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

It can be shown that @xmath theories of gravity are equivalent to
scalar-tensor theories by means of a Legendre transformation. More on
this topic can be found in the fourth chapter of this thesis. This is an
important equivalence since it allows us to investigate @xmath theories
using tools developed for analyzing scalar-tensor theories of gravity.

### 2.3 Palatini formalism

As it was mentioned in the Introduction, one of the mathematical
motivations for modifying GR was a discernment between metric and affine
structures of spacetime. In practical terms, viewing these two
structures as independent of each other means that we no longer consider
the linear connection @xmath on the spacetime to be a Levi-Civita
connection of the metric tensor @xmath . It simply means that quantities
which previously were functions of the metric tensor, such as the
Riemann tensor, depend now solely on a metric-independent connection.
This possibility was first analysed by Einstein himself, and the idea
dates back to 1925 [ 23 ] , but due to a historical misunderstanding, it
was dubbed a ’Palatini approach’, named after an Italian physicists
Attilio Palatini. Einstein also applied this formalism to GR, but in
case of the Einstein-Hilbert Lagrangian both approaches result in the
very same equations of motion because the independent connection turns
out to be a Levi-Civita connection of @xmath . Therefore, due to the
simplicity of E-H Lagrangian there is no particular reason to impose
Palatini variation. The situation changes dramatically in case of the
Extended Theories of Gravity, where the E-H Lagrangian is replaced with
a more complicated function or a scalar field is added [ 26 ] , [ 11 ] .
Metric approach and Palatini approach are no longer compatible and,
besides giving different equations, they also describe different physics
and give contradictory predictions.

Physical understanding of the decoupling metric from linear connection
is the following: the metric of a Lorentzian signature sets up the
geometric structure of spacetime and allows one to measure distances,
volumes and time, as well as it makes establishing causal structure on
the spacetime possible. The (torsionless) connection, on the other hand,
defines free-fall (and hence, parallel transport). Thus, the Principle
of Equivalence and the Principle of Causality become now independent. In
this way, the Palatini approach ’enriches the geometric structure of
spacetime and generalizes the metric approach’ ¹ ¹ 1 S. Capozziello, V.
Faraoni, Beyond Einstein Gravity: A Survey of Gravitational Theories for
Cosmology and Astrophysics , Springer (2011) page 68 .

Let us now focus on a concrete application of the Palatini formalism to
gravity theories - to @xmath theories, to be more specific. The action
functional we postulate is exactly the same as in 2.25 , but with a
subtle change: now the curvature scalar is regarded as a function of
both the metric tensor and the connection: @xmath , so that:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

As we can see, the matter part still depends only on the metric tensor
(and on some generic matter fields); the novelty is the gravity part.
The fact that matter couples only to @xmath means that either we are
restricting ourselves only to considering some special fields or
parallel transport is defined by the Levi-Civita connection of the
metric @xmath [ 26 ] . These two facts render the theory metric since it
satisfies conditions imposed on a metric theory of gravity. In
particular, it means that the energy-momentum tensor is conserved if we
calculate the covariant derivative using the Levi-Civita connection (and
it is not conserved if we choose to calculate the divergence using the
independent connection) [ 27 ] .

If we perform variation of the action 2.29 with respect to both
dynamical variables, we obtain the following field equations:

1.  @xmath : @xmath

2.  @xmath : @xmath

The first equation resembles somehow the Einstein field equations. The
second one carries information about a relation between the metric
tensor and the connection. This might seem to be a circular reasoning
since in the argument of the derivative we have a function of the
curvature scalar, which is yet to be determined. However, we can
contract the first equation with the metric tensor @xmath and get the
master equation relating algebraically the curvature scalar and matter
fields represented by the trace of the energy-momentum tensor:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(What is worth mentioning now is that if we choose @xmath then @xmath
and the left hand side of the above equation vanishes identically,
meaning that also @xmath must be equal to zero. Then, only conformally
invariant matter can be described by such theory [ 26 ] ). Having this
relation, we can in principle solve it and look for roots giving us a
direct relation between @xmath and @xmath : @xmath and @xmath , and the
second field equation can be written as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us now introduce a second metric on the spacetime defined to be
@xmath . This metric is obviously conformally related to the metric
@xmath . We can also show that:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

And hence, the second field equations reads now as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

By a well-known theorem [ 20 ] , the connection used to defined the
covariant derivative must be a Levi-Civita connection of the new metric
@xmath (this will be also proved in the next chapter, step by step, for
a scalar field coupled to the metric tensor):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Also, @xmath . It means that we can eliminate the independent connection
from the equations and treat it as a auxiliary field. Moreover, making
use of the conformal transformation relation, we can now unravel the
dependence of the curvature scalar @xmath on the curvature scalar @xmath
calculated using the metric tensor @xmath only [ 26 ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

In a similar manner we can give an explicit relation between the Ricci
tensor defined with respect to the independent connection and the Ricci
tensor being a function of the metric tensor (actually, it would have
been more appropriate to give this relation first, since the one shown
above is its mere result; we do not write this lengthy formula here
since it is only an intermediate step). Having this, we can basically
plug these relation back in the first field equation and successfully
reduce the number of field equations to one equation (albeit a very
complex one):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

The theory turned out to be equivalent to GR with a modified source
including derivatives of @xmath , which did not occur in GR. This of
course has some serious implications. For example, the vacuum for this
theory is the same as in case of GR with the cosmological constant added
[ 31 ] .

An important remark must be made here. Palatini formalism in case of
@xmath theories implies a bimetric structure of the theory. Such metric
are conformally related to each other and one of them appears in matter
part of the action functional (as the matter is assumed to be decoupled
from the independent connection), and the other one builds geometric
structures such as Riemann tensor. According to some authors [ 34 ] , [
35 ] , roles played by these two metrics can be clearly divided: the
metric building the geometric objects (being hence
Levi-Civita-compatible with the independent connection, which is a
flagship of the Palatini formalism) is the one conformally related the
metric coupled the matter, used to measure distances. In fact, their
physical meaning should be exactly opposite (at least in so-called
Einstein frame). As we saw in the section dedicated to the Brans-Dicke
theory, after a conformal change matter is coupled to the scalar field,
thus violating WEP; the same happens in case of Palatini @xmath , where
a vicarious role of the scalar field is being played by @xmath , since
@xmath , and the action can be written in the following form:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Particles follow geodesics defined by the metric @xmath , and an alleged
deviation from their standard trajectories are observed only if we
insist on treating the metric @xmath as the metric defining parallel
transport. Hence, it seems more accurate to reverse interpretation of
both metric tensors: the initial one is responsible for motion of the
particles (as it was shown in the section dedicated to BD theories), and
the new one is used to measure distances [ 27 ] .

Surprisingly, despite the fact that @xmath theory in Palatini approach
might seem particularly appealing, it is in conflict with the Standard
Model [ 26 ] . Additionally, @xmath theories in Palatini formalism
exhibit a singular behavior when analysing the stellar structure, giving
rise to infinite tidal forces on the surface. This basically means that
the theory is at best incomplete [ 32 ] . This stems from the fact that
the equation 2.33 can be up to the third order in matter derivatives,
whereas in case of GR only the first derivatives are present in the
trace @xmath . Metric tensor is an integral over all matter sources and
any possible discontinuities of the latter (and their derivatives) will
not translate to singularities/discontinuities of the metric ² ² 2 Of
course, there is an ongoing debate regarding viability of Palatini
@xmath theories. Some authors address the issue of infinite tidal forces
on the surface resulting from the fact that the conformal factor of the
’original’ metric @xmath is continuous but not @xmath at the surface
claiming that this discontinuity can be removed when one works with the
conformal metric, @xmath [ 33 ] . Despite these very serious
shortcomings, one should keep in mind that the theory is thought of as a
toy theory, and its main objective is to understand general theory
better.

## Chapter 3 Scalar-tensor theories of gravity in Palatini approach

### 3.1 Conformal transformations in Palatini formalism

If we follow the process of deriving conformal transformation formulae
for the Riemann tensor, it becomes obvious that the underlying
assumption we make is that the connection used to build up the tensor is
the Levi-Civita connection, e.g. it is related to the metric tensor by a
well-known formula: @xmath . In order for a connection @xmath to be
related to the metric tensor by the formula given above, the following
conditions must be fulfilled: @xmath and @xmath . We can, however, relax
the imposed constraints and start considering the affine connection as a
quantity entirely independent of the metric tensor. In this case,
transformation relations will change since the covariant derivative of
the metric tensor will not vanish in general. Hence, we postulate that
the metric tensor and the affine connection transform under a conformal
change independently of one another:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

All quantities depend on a spacetime position; however, the dependence
of the functions @xmath is indirect, they depend on the position through
a scalar field. The coefficient @xmath is introduced in order to gain
the possibility of ’switching off’ the last term. This may turn out very
handy if we want to investigate the behaviour of the Ricci scalar under
a change of conformal frame. It is important to note that when @xmath ,
the formula is a so-called geodesic mapping, meaning that it preserves
geodesics [ 18 ] , [ 36 ] . More on the topic of geodesic maps can be
found in Appendix A. ¹ ¹ 1 Another topic which remains beyond the scope
of this work is implementation of Ehlers-Pirani-Schild (EPS) framework
for gravity, in which metric @xmath and connection @xmath are treated as
two independent objects, and where equations of motion enforce a
compatibility condition relating these two objects: @xmath (or, to be
put differently, @xmath for some covector @xmath ). This result is
obtained from a couple of very basic postulates, based on the way
particles and light rays move in spacetime; see [ 37 ] , [ 38 ] , [ 39 ]
. The outcome of the postulates is a Lorentzian metric - or, to be more
precise, a whole family of Lorentzian metric related by a pointwise
conformal transformation. Since the upshot of the procedure is not a
unique metric, but a family of conformally related metrics, one cannot
observe a representative of this gauge. Physical observables should not
depend upon a representative, but they should depend on the conformal
structure as a whole. EPS formalism is of some interest since @xmath
theories of gravity in Palatini formalism are a case of integrable
Extended Theories of Gravity, where ETG framework is implemented.
The conformal transformation is accompanied by a reparametrization of
the scalar field:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

If the calculations are performend in @xmath dimensions, the formulae
relating Riemann tensors of two different conformal frames are the
following:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The formula for the (symmetrized) Ricci curvature tensor reads as
follows:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

And, finally, contracting the previous formula with the metric tensor,
we get an expression for the Ricci scalar:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now, since the function @xmath does not depend on spacetime position
explicitly, the derivative of this quantity can be cast in the following
form:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If we plug this into the expression for the Ricci scalar and assume
@xmath , @xmath , we get the full transformation formula:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . As we can see, up to a certain point the formula exactly
matches calculations performed in the purely metric approach. However,
the last term containing derivatives of the metric tensor is a novelty.
The tensor @xmath indicates whether the theory is metric; if it
vanishes, then the connection is Levi-Civita with respect to the metric
tensor. If the converse is true, connection and metric tensor are two
independent variables.

### 3.2 Action functional and equations of motion

We postulate the following action functional:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

This action contains five arbitrary functions: @xmath depending on the
scalar field @xmath . The function @xmath describes coupling between the
scalar field and the scalar curvature, @xmath is the kinetic coupling,
@xmath is a self-interacting potential of the scalar field, @xmath is a
coupling of the scalar field to the matter part of the action. The
coefficient @xmath does not have a clear interpretation yet; it
multiplies the term linear in spacetime derivatives of the scalar field.
As it will be shown alter on, if the coefficient @xmath vanishes, then
it is always possible to find a metric @xmath conformally related to the
metric @xmath such that the connection is Levi-Civita with respect to
that metric. Also, the vector @xmath is defined to be: @xmath ; this
definition stems from the transformation properties of the curvature
scalar. It must be added in order to keep the form of action functional
unchanged under a conformal change.

Variation of the action with respect to the metric tensor yields the
first set of field equations:

  -- -- -- -------
           (3.9)
  -- -- -- -------

Variation with respect to the affine connection gives us the following
equations:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

These equations are somehow easier to analyse than the previous ones. As
we can see, if the coefficient @xmath vanishes, we end up with a
somewhat simplified and, presumably, more familiar equations:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

If we set now @xmath , we get:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

This means that the second term in 3.11 does not give any contribution
(since @xmath , which can be easily verified), so we are left with:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If we now define a new metric, conformally related to the metric @xmath
:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

from which it follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we see that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Also, since the covariant derivative of the Kronecker symbol vanishes,
we can write:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which means that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Splitting the product in 3.12 using the Leibniz rule, we write now

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the formula for derivative of metric determinant has been used. It
follows now that:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can contract this equation with @xmath and get:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Having obtained this important result, let us consider the following
identity:

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.16)
  -- -- -- --------

by the virtue of 3.12 and 3.15 . It means that:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

If we express the last covariant derivative explicitly and manipulate
the indices, we can write:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Adding the third equation to the second and subtracting the first one,
we get the desired result:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

or, written in another way:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

which means that the connection is Levi-Civita with respect to the new
metric and, hence, also geometric quantities describing curvature of
spacetime, such as Riemann tensor, become functions of this metric.
The last equation of motion results from varying the action with respect
to the scalar field:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

### 3.3 Transformation relations

Following the logic of the previous chapter, we want now to apply Weyl
transformation to metric tensor, given by the formula 3.1 , as well as
to reparametrize the scalar field according to 3.3 and change the affine
connection using 3.2 . If we do so, form of the action 3.8 should be
preserved; what will substantially change are the five functions of the
scalar field: @xmath . After we switch the conformal frame, we will end
up with a set of new functions @xmath depending on a new scalar field
@xmath ; moreover, the functional form of these function will not remain
unchanged in general.
To put it differently, we are looking now for transformations of the
five functions induced by the transformations 3.1 , 3.2 , 3.3 leaving
the action functional invariant (up to boundary terms):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the postulated form of the action functional, we can write
explicitly:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

The formula above holds if the ’old’ functions are related to the ’new’
ones by the followings transformation equations:

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

This was calculated using the fact that the vector @xmath , as long as
@xmath , transforms in a nontrivial way:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath

Following the reasoning carried out in [ 21 ] , analyzing the structure
of the relations shown above we can deduce certain properties of the
coefficients. First, if @xmath is positive in any conformal frame (this
coefficient cannot be equal to zero and, in order to make gravity an
attractive force, it must be positive), then it is greater than zero in
any frame related by means of a conformal transformation. The same
property holds for the potential term @xmath ; however, if it vanishes
in one frame, then it is equal to zero in any other frame.

By a proper choice of three function @xmath we are able to fix three of
the five arbitrary functions @xmath ; we shall call this ’fixing a
conformal frame’. After we have fixed three functions, we still have
freedom to specify the remaining two functions. By doing so, we choose a
specific theory. For example, the three functions @xmath can be chosen
in such a way that three coefficients @xmath vanish, thus simplifying
the calculations. Results obtained in a given frame can be always
’translated’ to another frame if the two frames can be related by a
conformal transformation accompanied by a reparametrization of the
scalar field.

#### 3.3.1 Einstein and Jordan frames

In literature, two of all conformal frames are particularly widespread:
Einstein and Jordan frames. Action in these two frames can be related by
a conformal transformation with the general action 3.8 , so that they
retain its properties [ 21 ] . So far, however, all scalar-tensor
theories of gravity have been analysed either in purely metric approach,
or in Palatini approach but they were emerging from a different class of
Extended Theories of Gravity, namely, from @xmath theories. This
resulted in omitting the coefficient @xmath in all considerations, which
now had to be added for self-consistence of the general theory. As a
result, coefficients specifying a particular frame did not include this
additional function of the scalar field. Since the role played by the
coefficient @xmath has not been yet understood, it is left arbitrary
when we speak of ’fixing the frame’; it can be, however, set equal to
zero if a proper choice of the function @xmath is made.

A distinction between these two frames in terms of measurements made in
each of them was neatly explained by E. E. Flanagan (E. E. Flanagan
2004). His example of how choice of definition of the units we use to
measure distances and time affects choice of a particular conformal
frame gives us a taste of physical meaning of the discernment between
both frames, and the example is worth quoting it here:

Suppose we define units of length and time by taking the speed of light
to be unity and by taking the unit of time to be determined by some
atomic transition frequency (as in the current SI definition of the
second). Measurements of the geometry of spacetime in these units yield
the Jordan-frame metric. However, we can instead define a system of
units as follows. Suppose that we have a nonspinning black hole. We can
in principle take this to be a “standard” black hole (like the original
platinum-iridium standard meter), and create other nonspinning black
holes of the same size. Using these black holes we can operationally
define a unit of time to be the inverse of the frequency of their
fundamental quasinormal mode of vibration. If we define the speed of
light to be unity, and measure the geometry of spacetime in these units,
the result is the Einstein-frame metric. ² ² 2 E. E. Flanagan, The
conformal frame freedom in theories of gravitation ,
Class.Quant.Grav.21:3817 (2004), page 4.

In the Einstein frame , the gravitational part of the action functional
contains only Einstein gravity [ 40 ] , but scalar field is present in
the matter part of the Lagrangian, displaying an anomalous coupling. The
scalar field, in other words, becomes a form of matter and is always
present. Canonically, one fixes @xmath and @xmath , while keeping the
remaining three coefficients arbitrary functions of the new scalar field
@xmath . Without loss of generality, we may also consider the case when
@xmath as belonging to the Einstein frame. If this is the case, then, as
it has been already shown, another metric, building the geometrical
objects such as curvature scalar and being conformally related to the
one used to measure distances can be introduced. Particles follow now
geodesics determined by the ’new’ metric, so it seems that there exists
an additional ’fifth force’ acting on particles, causing them to deviate
from the trajectories determined by the ’old’ metric. As a result, in
the Einstein frame, the Principle of Equivalence can be violated [ 40 ]
.

In the Jordan frame , the gravitational field is described by metric,
connection and scalar field. Usually one assumes @xmath and @xmath ,
with the three functions @xmath left arbitrary functions of @xmath ,
which is now assumed to be a new scalar field. In the Jordan frame, the
scalar field is nonminimally coupled to the curvature but, unlike in the
case of Einstein frame, it is absent from the matter part of the action.
If the coefficient @xmath , then the metric used for measurement is also
used to build geometrical objects. Freely falling particles move along
geodesic of the corresponding geometry [ 21 ] . Also, the Principle of
Equivalence is not violated in the Jordan frame.

It is probably an uncontroversial and widely accepted statement that the
Einstein and Jordan frames are mathematically equivalent, but they are
very different under a physical point of view. This discernment raises
an important question of which conformal frame is the physical one,
meaning that it is self-consistent and it is possible to predict values
of certain observables (which can be measured) working in such frame.
According to [ 40 ] and other authors, the Jordan frame is unphysical
because it leads to negative definite, or indefinite kinetic energy for
the scalar field; on the contrary, the energy density is positive
definite in the Einstein frame ³ ³ 3 V. Faraoni, E. Gunzig, P. Nardone,
Conformal transformations in classical gravitational theories and in
cosmology , Fund.Cosmic Phys.20:121 (1999), page 15. . As we can read in
another paper by Faraoni (Faraoni, Gunzig 1999):

The Jordan frame formulation of a scalar–tensor theory is not viable
because the energy density of the gravitational scalar field present in
the theory is not bounded from below (violation of the weak energy
condition). The system therefore is unstable and decays toward a lower
and lower energy state ad infinitum ⁴ ⁴ 4 V. Faraoni, E. Gunzig,
Einstein frame or Jordan frame ? ,Int. J. Theor. Phys. 38, 217, page 3.

Cho (Cho 2003) puts it even more dramatically:

When the quantum correction takes place ordinary matter must couple to
the Brans–Dicke scalar field through the Jordan metric. So the quantum
fluctuation (in particular, the mixing between the Jordan metric and the
Brans–Dicke scalar field) inevitably induces a direct coupling of the
Brans–Dicke scalar field to ordinary matter. This direct coupling,
however, is precisely what Brans and Dicke have tried to avoid to ensure
the weak equivalence principle ⁵ ⁵ 5 Y. M. Cho, Quantum violation of the
equivalence principle in Brans - Dicke theory , Class. Quantum Grav. 14
2963 (1997), page 3.

On the other hand, the Einstein frame is free of this problem, but
exhibits - as it was said before - violation of the Principle of
Equivalence. However, there are two possible objections to the arguments
given above: first, as it is pointed out by Faraoni, the Einstein frame
is physical for scalar-tensor theories of gravity only when the matter
part is not considered; second, the discussion concerns only the purely
metric approach, not metric-affine. What remains a fact is that the two
frames, Einstein and Jordan, despite their mathematical equivalence,
give different observational predictions.

To make the discussion of the equivalence between Einstein and Jordan
frames complete, we should also include arguments supporting the
converse assertion: that in fact different frames are not only
mathematically, but also physically equivalent. This position is taken
by Flanagan, who clearly states that:

efforts to determine the “correct” choice of conformal frame are
misguided, at least in the realm of classical physics. They are
analogous to attempting to determine the “correct” choice of radial
coordinate in the Schwarzschild spacetime. In that context, there is of
course no correct radial coordinate, since all physical observables are
coordinate invariants. In a similar way, all observable quantities in
scalar-tensor theories are conformal-frame invariants ⁶ ⁶ 6 E. E.
Flanagan, The conformal frame freedom in theories of gravitation ,
Class.Quant.Grav.21:3817 (2004), page 4.

Indeed, an idea that all physical observables should be expressed in a
frame-invariant way sounds very appealing, and this is what was
originally intended by P. Kuusk and L. Jarv (P. Kuusk, L. Jarv et al.
2014). In [ 21 ] it is shown that observables like post-Newtonian
parameters are expressed in terms of invariant quantities (see section
’Invariants’ of this paper), which do not depend on a choice of
conformal frame.

### 3.4 Group structure of the coefficients @xmath

Having obtained the transformation formulae given above, we must check
whether the coefficients transform in a correct way when we make a
composition of two conformal transformations. If in some conformal frame
- let us call it @xmath - we make use of the following variables: @xmath
, we are able to change the frame using three arbitrary functions @xmath
, obtaining new independent variables in a frame @xmath related to the
’old’ ones via:

1.  @xmath

2.  @xmath

3.  @xmath

Using new set of functions @xmath we can perform the transformation once
again and arrive at a frame @xmath with variables @xmath . The question
now is: if the frame @xmath is to be related to the initial frame @xmath
by a single transformation making use of three functions @xmath , then
what is the correspondence between them and the functions @xmath and
@xmath ? If we investigate the way independent variables transform when
we change the conformal frame, it will turn out that these functions
should be related to each other in the following way:

1.  @xmath

2.  @xmath

3.  @xmath

The coefficients @xmath should transform accordingly, preserving the
structure of formulae relating two conformal frames. Making use of the
symbols defined above (the following has to be stressed here: symbols
relating frames @xmath to @xmath are valid only in this part of the
work, elsewhere they might have a different meaning), after some
extremely tedious calculations, we can write:

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

### 3.5 Invariants

Due to the way coefficients @xmath transform, it is possible to
construct - analogously to the procedure carried out in [ 21 ] - several
quantities which remain invariant under a transformation of metric and
connection, together with a reparametrization of scalar field. Such
quantities are invariant in a sense that they preserve their form and
are expressed by the same formula in every conformal frame. Also, their
value at a given spacetime point stays the same as we move from one
frame to another. Furthermore, since the conformal transformation is in
principle independent of coordinate transformation, spacetime
derivatives of invariant quantities are invariants themselves.

The invariants relevant to the following parts of this work are listed
below:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us now discuss the meaning of these invariants. Invariant @xmath
measures the coupling between scalar field and matter. It is easy to see
that if this invariant is constant, then the field is minimally coupled
[ 21 ] . Invariant @xmath generalizes notion of the self-interacting
potential @xmath . If it is equal to zero, then it must be vanishing in
all frames related by a conformal transformation. Invariant @xmath
resembles a function measuring some kind of invariant distance in the
space of scalar field; accordingly, the function @xmath must play a role
of a metric on this space, and clearly, since the space is
one-dimensional, @xmath is its determinant, transforming like a scalar
density: @xmath . As we can see, constant values of @xmath are possible
only when @xmath and @xmath , which means that the scalar field is not
dynamical [ 44 ] .

We can of course introduce further invariants by making a simple
observation that an arbitrary function of invariant(s) is also
invariant. From the transformation properties of derivatives of
invariants with respect to scalar field:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

it follows that a quotient @xmath is invariant too.

It is important to assume that it is possible to express scalar field as
a function of any of the invariants. In the Einstein frame, it will be
useful to express the scalar field in terms of @xmath , whereas in the
Jordan frame, where usually the curvature scalar is multiplied by a
scalar field, expressing @xmath in terms of @xmath is preferable.
Needless to say, finding an inverse of any of the relations defining
invariants may be very problematic, and we have to assume that we can
express @xmath as a Taylor expansion:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For example, in case of invariant @xmath , we have:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath contains an arbitrary constant, it can be chosen in such a
way that @xmath , so that the expression for @xmath reads as follows [
21 ] :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

An intuitive meaning of the invariants is that they label theories which
are mathematically equivalent. Indeed, if we switch the conformal frame,
values of the invariants will stay constant, meaning that we can use
them to label corresponding theories, remaining on the same orbit
defined by the formulae 3.1 , 3.2 , 3.3 . If we take values of the
invariants evaluated in two different conformal frames (or even for two
different fixed theories) and it turns out they are different, then such
frames cannot be related by a confromal change accompanied by a
redefinition of the scalar field.

Moreover, it is also possible to construct an invariant metric and an
invariant connection. In case of the metric there is no unique way of
doing so, but in this paper only two possibilities will be considered:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

or

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

As for the affine connection, a single recipe for making it invariant
has been found:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

Having introduced either of the invariant metrics, we can now measure
distances in a frame-independent way. It means that any two observers
belonging to two different conformal frames will end up with the same
values of a given observable. For example, the distance between our
planet and the Sun will be exactly the same if we use one of the
invariant metrics to measure it. However, if observers of two different
frames insist on using a normalized definition of a unit of length (for
example, determined with respect to the speed of light set equal to one
and atomic clocks), the outcomes will be different [ 43 ] . The same
holds for a definition of parallel transport. Since we have obtained an
invariant connection, determining geodesics in a unique way will become
possible (again, under the assumption that all observers use the
invariant connection).

#### 3.5.1 Action in terms of the invariant metric @xmath

Having introduced the invariants, we may now attempt to write down the
action functional 3.8 fully in terms of them. This approach will give us
an obvious advantage, since no matter which frame we are working in, all
equations will be of the same form; the action functional will be
unaffected by change of the conformal frame and hence, the resulting
equations will be written in terms of the invariants which are expressed
by the same relations between the coefficients @xmath .
If we substitute the metric @xmath and the connection @xmath into the
action 3.8 , and consider the scalar field @xmath a function of the
invariant @xmath inverting the relation 3.26 , we get:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

As we can see, this action depends now on three new dynamical variables.
Also, the action functional is now cast in an Einstein-like conformal
frame. The scalar field is fully decoupled from the curvature, but it
enters the matter part of the action, meaning that it still permeates
the spacetime and acts as an additional source of gravitational
interaction. To see this more clearly, let us perform variation with
respect to the variables @xmath :

1.  @xmath : @xmath

2.  @xmath : @xmath

3.  @xmath : @xmath

Let us now carefully analyse the obtained equations. If we consider the
second equation, we immediately recognize the discussed relation between
connection and metric tensor: if a connection is symmetric and the
covariant derivative of the metric multiplied by its determinant
vanishes, then the connection is necessarily Levi-Civita with respect to
the metric. This shows an amazing result: after writing the action
functionals in terms of invariants, initially independent invariant
connection becomes Levi-Civita with respect to the invariant metric
@xmath . Consequently, the curvature scalar also depends on the metric.
Apart from the presence of scalar field in the matter part of the action
functional, this suggests that the Einstein-like frame is supposedly the
simplest.

Let us switch our attention to the first equation. We want to see
whether the conservation of energy-momentum tensor is satisfied. In
order to so, we need to calculate covariant derivative of the whole
formula and contract one of the (upper) indices with the index of the
covariant derivative:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

Divergence of the Einstein tensor vanishes by the virtue of a well-known
theorem. Also, because of the fact that connection is Levi-Civita,
covariant derivative of the metric tensor equals zero. Furthermore, the
second term can be greatly simplified:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

So that 3.31 boils down to:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the third equation of motion, we can express @xmath as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Plugging this in 3.33 , we get:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

So that, clearly, the energy-momentum tensor is not conserved unless
@xmath . However, we can construct another quantity which is conserved;
we simply need to add to the energy-momentum tensor @xmath yet another
energy-momentum tensor, this time defined for the scalar field as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

Taking the divergence of this tensor, we get:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

which was calculated using the equation of motion obtained for the
scalar field. If we now form a new tensor:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

then, by the virtue of 3.34 and 3.36 , we have:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the (new) energy-momentum tensor is conserved.

#### 3.5.2 Action in terms of the invariant metric @xmath

Alternatively, we can express the action functional in terms of the
invariant metric @xmath , and the invariant linear connection @xmath .
We do not yet specify an invariant whose function the scalar field
@xmath should be. This will give us an action functional cast in a
Jordan-like frame:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

As we can see, this action functional does not contain the coefficient
@xmath as well. Also, the scalar field is not coupled to the matter
fields, but there is a nonminimial coupling between the scalar field and
the curvature scalar being present. These properties justify calling the
frame ’Jordan-like’. In a general Jordan frame, however, the scalar
curvature is coupled to the scalar field, which means that we should
consider @xmath to be a function of the invariant @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Substituting this result to the action functional, we get (we focus now
only on the kinetic term):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

since @xmath . The action functional takes the following form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now, the invariant @xmath plays a role of a dynamical scalar field -
analogously to the invariant @xmath in the previous chapter. Here,
however, choosing the invariant used previously would not prove useful,
since as we will see in the following parts of this paper, in some
cases, for a special choice of the conformal frame, the invariant @xmath
vanishes, hence rendering it impossible to be used as a function of the
scalar field @xmath .

For simplicity, we introduced another invariant, @xmath , defined in the
following way:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

denoting a modified potential.

Let us now obtain equations of motion for the theory. Variation with
respect to all three dynamical variables yields the following formulae:

1.  @xmath : @xmath

2.  @xmath : @xmath

3.  @xmath : @xmath

From now on, let us denote @xmath by simply @xmath .

These equations need to be carefully analysed. The first one resembles
the standard Einstein Field Equations; however, on the right hand side
of the equation we have the energy-momentum tensor multiplied by an
inverse of the invariant @xmath , which clearly plays the role of an
effective Newton constant, depending now on the spacetime position.
Second equation tells us that the invariant connection used to build the
curvature scalar and defining covariant derivative is Levi-Civita with
respect to a new metric, @xmath . The third equation gives us a relation
between the curvature constant and the scalar field. As we can see,
unlike in the case of the Einstein-like frame analysed in the previous
subsection, the scalar field is not sourced now by the trace of
energy-momentum tensor.

The second equation tells us that the curvature scalar is in fact
defined in terms of the metric @xmath , which is conformally related to
the invariant metric @xmath ; hence, we can perform a conformal
transformation and write the action in terms of quantities being fully
dependent on the invariant metric. In order to achieve this, we can make
use of the standard formula relating curvature scalars of two conformal
frames; here, however, the transformation is defined by the function
@xmath , and using the terminology introduced at the beginning of this
chapter, it corresponds to the function @xmath . Also, we need to
identify @xmath . It must be stressed that right now we do not change
the conformal frame; we merely seek a relation between @xmath and @xmath
. Furthermore, the curvature scalar used in 3.40 is a hybrid of both: we
still use the tensor @xmath to contract indices, but the Ricci tensor is
built fully from the tensor @xmath . That is why it will be convenient
to write:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which makes using the formula 3.6 possible, reading now as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

Plugging this back in the action functional 3.40 , we get:

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.42)
  -- -- -- --------

Clearly, after the conformal transformation of the curvature scalar the
action functional depends only on two independent variables: the
invariant metric and the invariant quantity @xmath . Let us focus our
attention on the term containing second derivative of the invariant
@xmath . This term can be viewed as a divergence of a vector density,
since:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This means that the formula for the action functional reduces to:

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.43)
  -- -- -- --------

For simplicity, let us introduce another invariant @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We can now perform variation of the action and obtain field equations.
Varying with respect to the metric tensor is now more complicated than
in case of Palatini formulation, mostly because we encounter a problem
with boundary conditions imposed on the variation of metric. Discussion
of all subtleties related to this topic is beyond the scope of this
paper and can be found in [ 45 ] . Without paying much attention to
boundary conditions, neglecting terms containing divergence of a vector
density, we may now find field equations having the formula for
variation of the curvature tensor:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

We may now transform the term @xmath according to:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Having introduced the above formulae, we may now arrive at a set of
field equations obtained by varying with respect to the metric tensor:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

Equation governing evolution of the scalar field reads as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the Jordan-like frame, the energy-momentum tensor should be
conserved. Taking the divergence of the equation 3.45 , we have:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us now focus our attention on the term @xmath . We may express in
terms of Ricci tensor components (keeping in mind that, for a
torsionless connection, we have an identity: @xmath , for some vector
field @xmath ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

This term and @xmath coming from @xmath clearly cancel out. The second
term in 3.47 can be simplified as well:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The third term reduces to:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Putting the results altogether and pulling out @xmath of the
parenthesis, we get:

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.49)
  -- -- -- --------

by the virtue of 3.46 . Hence, the energy-momentum tensor is conserved.

### 3.6 Conclusions

In this chapter we have introduced certain mathematical tools which will
prove useful in the next part of this paper. At the beginning, we
postulated an action functional preserving its form under a conformal
change. An immediate consequence of our definition of functions relating
dynamical variables of two conformal frames were transformation formulae
expressing five arbitrary coefficients evaluated in the ’new’ conformal
frame in terms of coefficients coming from the ’old’ frame. These
relations allowed us to write out three quantities which remain
invariant under conformal change, thus being good candidates for
replacing frame-dependent coefficients @xmath in a particular
formulation of the theory. Moreover, two invariant metrics and one
invariant linear connection were introduced (together with a definition
of the scalar field in terms of the invariants) which allowed us to come
up with an invariant way of measuring distances, volumes and time, and
defining parallel transport that all observers related by a conformal
transformation will agree upon. Within the formalism of invariants two
distinct action functionals were presented; what was interesting, the
coefficient @xmath disappeared from the action in either case. Another
important feature is that both the invariant metric @xmath and the
invariant metric @xmath result in the same action functionals and,
consequently, the same equations of motion as in case of purely metric
formulation of the scalar-tensor theories of gravity. This should not
come as a surprise since we mentioned in the second chapter that in fact
Palatini theory of gravity is a metric theory. If the independent
connection entered also the matter part of action, then predictions
given by these two approaches would be drastically different. However,
we may still wonder why a theory with highly complicated Lagrangian
turns out to be a metric theory. The answer is that we simply decided to
bring the theory into the metric form by a particular choice of the
functions @xmath ; as it was proven at the beginning of this chapter,
sufficient condition for a connection in one frame to be Levi-Civita
connection of some metric tensor is vanishing of @xmath . If this
coefficient equals zero, then existence of a metric tensor having the
property mentioned is guaranteed. Moreover, such metric tensor will be
necessarily conformally related to the ’old’ metric tensor, which simply
means that we can treat quantities entering the action functional as
functions of the original metric from the very beginning.

However, there is one caveat in stating that both approaches give the
same result if we choose a particular set of variables. Equations of
motion in each frame are written in terms of invariants, and a special
role is played by the invariant @xmath reducing to the scalar field
itself in the case of Einstein frame in the metric approach. This
invariant in case of the Palatini approach is a different function of
the coefficients and thus, of the scalar field. In the metric case, it
is defined as:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

whereas in the Palatini approach it is given by:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For example, if @xmath and @xmath , then the latter vanishes, but the
former is a well-defined function of the scalar field. Conversely, if
@xmath and @xmath are constant, but @xmath vanishes, the metric
invariant equals zero identically in all conformal frames, but the
Palatini invariant is a function of the scalar field. It is also worth
noting that @xmath is not an invariant when considered in the Palatini
formalism; this, of course, can be viewed as a consequence of decoupling
metric transformation properties from those of connection: @xmath in
general. If we find a frame in which @xmath , then the theory reduces
effectively to the metric one, but with the invariants being different
functions of the scalar field. As we will see later on, this discrepancy
will turn out very important when analysing @xmath theories.

## Chapter 4 Applications: @xmath theories of gravity and Friedmann
equations

So far, we have been developing a theory for scalar-tensor gravity in
the Palatini approach. We have set up a background for qualitative and
quantitative analysis of particular theories possibly modelling various
phenomena, which so far have been investigated with use of general
relativity, @xmath theories or scalar-tensor theories of gravity. In
this chapter we will look at a couple of possible applications of the
machinery developed earlier in this paper with a particular emphasis on
correspondence between @xmath and scalar-tensor theories (both in metric
and in Palatini approach), showing that effectively the former can be
analysed by means of the latter, and calculating the Friedmann
equations. Naturally, theories discussed here do not purport to be
fundamental theories but there exist chances it will explain certain
gravitational effects more consistently (e.g. inflation).

### 4.1 Equivalence between @xmath and scalar-tensor theories of gravity

Remarkably, it is possible to show in a simple way that @xmath and
scalar-tensor theories are equivalent to each other - at least in
certain cases. However, there is no such equivalence between two
different formulation of the same theory; dynamics obtained in Palatini
formalism differs from the metric approach. Let us first focus on the
latter case.

#### 4.1.1 Metric approach

Although the main objective of this paper is to analyse scalar-tensor
theories in Palatini approach, we need to dwell on the metric case as
well in order to work out what the differences between these two
formulations are and how our understanding of them should be altered.
Let us start with the action for @xmath theories:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

We need to introduce now an auxiliary field @xmath in a way that is not
modifying the dynamics [ 11 ] , [ 22 ] , [ 26 ] . Let us try out the
following action:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

It can be seen that adding the new field @xmath did not change the
dynamics in any way. If variation with respect to the new field is
performed, we get (assuming @xmath ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which obviously means that @xmath , and having plugged it back in 4.2 ,
the action 4.1 is restored. Now, let us make the next step and assume
that a scalar field might be identified with the derivative of the
function @xmath in the following way: @xmath . Also, this relation must
be invertible, so that the auxiliary field @xmath can be thought of as a
function of @xmath : @xmath . Then, our action function reads in the
following way:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath denotes the potential of self-interaction and is defined as
@xmath . This allowed us to cast @xmath theory in a form effectively
equivalent to the Brans-Dicke theory with the parameter @xmath . Let us
call this particular case metric @xmath in Jordan frame (this name is,
of course, far from being entirely adequate and somehow devoid of
imaginativeness, but it denotes accurately the class of theories in a
given frame and a given approach). We can treat this action functional a
bit more rigorously and write out four coefficients @xmath dependent on
the scalar field introduced in 2.17 :

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

Equations of motion are easy to write; one has to make use of 2.10 ,
2.11 and add the potential term to the equations; this gives us:

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

We can contract the first equation with the metric tensor and obtain:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Making use of the second equation, w can also write:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

As we can see, equation 2.13 has been reproduced with @xmath and the
potential added.

This class of theories can be successfully labelled by the invariants
introduced in the second chapter (since we are dealing now with the
metric theory). It will be enough to write out three thereof, as the
other ones can be constructed from them:

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

Let us notice that the last relation is clearly invertible, so that we
can express the scalar field in a frame-independent way (we need to
choose the plus sign):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We can now perform a conformal change and express the action 4.3 in
terms of the invariant metric @xmath and the scalar field defined above,
being a function of the invariant @xmath ; this yields:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

which looks exactly like 2.24 . Here, however, equivalence with the
Brans-Dicke theory is less obvious, as the original theory was written
in the Jordan frame, and the action functional shown above is cast in
the Einstein frame. If we want to reproduce the exact result of 2.14 ,
then we need to carry out yet another, trivial conformal transformation
(rescaling) and scalar field redefinition:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and plug this in 4.5 (let us also note that multiplying by a number does
not affect invariance of both the metric and the scalar field -
represented here by the invariant @xmath ):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

We will call this particular form metric @xmath in Einstein frame .
Equations of motion are easy to write:

-   @xmath : @xmath

-   @xmath : @xmath

Due of nonminimal coupling between matter and the scalar field, the
energy-momentum tensor @xmath is not conserved. This result is not very
surprising, as we simply reproduced the action functional of the second
chapter starting from different assumptions. What is interesting to
notice is that the action 2.14 has been written in an invariant form
without any knowledge of invariants introduced later .

#### 4.1.2 Palatini approach

Let us now see what happens if we apply Palatini variation to @xmath
theories in scalar-tensor form. We expect to reproduce results of the
previous chapter and obtain a well-known result, that Palatini and
metric approaches are not compatible and hence, there is no conformal
transformation connecting these two formalisms. We proceed by writing
the same action as in 4.1 , but this time we regard the curvature scalar
as a function of both the metric and the independent connection: @xmath
. In a similar manner we can introduce an auxiliary field and end up in
Palatini @xmath in Jordan frame :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is defined as in the previous section. Let us notice that
in the Palatini approach we do not let the connection enter the matter
part of the action; otherwise, we would be calling such theory
’metric-affine’. Also, despite it apparent similarity to 4.3 , unlike
that action functional this one is not equivalent to BD theory with
@xmath because the connection @xmath is not a Levi-Civita connection of
the metric @xmath . Original BD theory was of course formulated in
metric approach, but it will be shown that an initial Palatini
formulation can be brought to a BD-like form with @xmath . Let us first,
analogously to what we did in the previous subsection, write out five
coefficients @xmath introduced for scalar-tensor theories of gravity in
Palatini approach:

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

We can also list the invariant quantities built from these coefficients:

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

The invariant metrics and connections are thence:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Let us notice that variables used coincide with the invariant quantities
if we want to work in the Jordan frame. For this reason, we shall keep
up analysing the theory in this frame. In order to obtain equations of
motion, all we have to do is to come back to equations 3.9 , 3.10 and
3.20 and plug in functions of the scalar field given above. But, since
this case was analysed in section dedicated to investigation of action
functional expressed in terms of @xmath , we can write:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

(where @xmath ). We have already varied this action; we remember that
the invariant connection was a function of the scalar field and the
invariant metric @xmath , and hence could be viewed as an auxiliary
field and eliminated from the action, yielding a different one:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

As we can see, this action corresponds to BD theory with @xmath ; this
clearly shows that Palatini variation alters the physics described by
the theory, as in case of the purely metric approach we got a BD-theory
with @xmath . These two theories are different, which could be also seen
by comparing values of the invariant. Invariants @xmath and @xmath
should correspond to one another, but in case of the metric approach
value of the invariant is different from zero, whereas in case of
Palatini approach this invariant vanishes. Thus, the theories are not
commensurable, as it was said in the previous chapter.

Without any further discussion, we can plug all relevant quantities in
3.45 and 3.46 , and obtain equations of motion:

1.  @xmath

2.  @xmath

Let us now contract the first equation with the metric tensor @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

This formula can be added to the second equation of motion, yield the
following, interesting result:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

This equation is an analogue of 4.4 (or 2.13 with the potential added)
with @xmath . There is, however, a small, yet very important difference
between these two results: in case of the metric approach, relation
between the scalar field and matter is dynamical, as there is the
d’Alembert operator acting on the scalar field. Here, the relation is
purely algebraic, and this happens only for one special value of @xmath
. In the vacuum, when @xmath , a solution of the above equation is
@xmath - the Einstein theory with cosmological constant added [ 26 ] .
It must be noted that such theory was not originally considered by Brans
and Dicke, as they did not include the potential term in the action. If
the potential @xmath were absent from the action functional, the theory
would be ill-posed since it would lead to a nonsensical equation @xmath
, satisfied identically only by radiation. However, in case of @xmath
theories the potential cannot vanish, for it would contradict the
underlying assumption @xmath (because the potential is given by @xmath ,
which can be satisfied only by @xmath ) [ 26 ] .

For completeness, let us also express the action functional in terms of
the invariant metric @xmath . This will allow us to make use of formulae
introduced in the section dedicated to treatment of the theory in the
Einstein-like frame. For this reason, we shall refer to the following
formulation as Palatini @xmath in the Einstein frame . We will, however,
encounter here a problem: the dynamical independent variable being a
’replacement’ of the scalar field was the invariant @xmath , but in this
case it is identically equal to zero. However, the main reason for
introducing such invariant was our need for writing the action
functional in an invariant form. Here, due to the absence of two of the
coefficients, we can make use of a ’vicarious’ invariant @xmath , which
seems to be a natural choice since @xmath . This does not alter the
dynamics, it only means that the potential becomes a function of the
’new’ variable @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us now compute the equations of motion:

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

The second equation tells us that the invariant connection is a
Levi-Civita connection of @xmath . The last equation suggests that in
case of @xmath , the only possible solution is @xmath , which
substituted in the first equation yields again the Einstein vacuum field
equations with cosmological constant @xmath . Also, taking the
divergence of the first equation and combining it with the one
describing the scalar field, we get:

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.14)
  -- -- -- --------

However, following the prescription given in the section (3.5.1) , we
can add the energy-momentum tensor defined for the scalar field @xmath ;
they altogether make up a quantity which remains conserved: @xmath .

### 4.2 Friedmann equations

In this chapter we will apply our results to the problem of determining
cosmic evolution of the Universe. In the standard, Einsteinian approach
one calculates field equation and makes the following assumptions: the
Earth is not located in a preferred position in the Universe or, to push
this assertion even further, all places in the Universe are equivalent -
this is so-called cosmological principle , extending the idea put forth
by Copernicus that in fact our planet does not occupy a central position
in the solar system. It must be remembered that the cosmological
principle is more of an assumption rather that an observational fact.
There exist cosmological models that do not take the principle as their
tenet [ 46 ] . However, if we assume that the cosmological principle is
correct, then it has a deep geometrical meaning for our theory:
spacetime must be isotropic around every point [ 25 ] , which makes it
homogeneous [ 46 ] . This translates into a form of the metric
describing such spacetime:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath measure angles in spherical coordinates, @xmath is the
scale factor, @xmath is the spatial curvature and @xmath is related to
the standard radius @xmath by @xmath . It was first obtained in the
1920s and 1930s by Alexander Friedmann, Georges Lemaître, Howard P.
Robertson and Arthur Geoffrey Walker [ 25 ] . The Einstein Field
Equations are necessary to give us a relation between the scale factor,
’measuring’ the size of the Universe, and cosmic time. Solution of these
equation is called ’Friedman equations’; it was discovered by
aforementioned Alexander Friedman in 1922 [ 47 ] . In order to solve
EFE, one needs to calculate first all geometric objects depending on the
metric which enter the equations of motion. Because we will make use of
them later on, it seems reasonable to list them below [ 20 ] (switching
however to the classical variable @xmath ).

Connection:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Ricci tensor:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

Curvature scalar:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

If we assume that matter filling the Universe can be modelled by perfect
fluid, then its energy-momentum tensor has the following form [ 25 ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is 4-velocity between the fluid and an observer, @xmath is
the energy density of a given component of matter (not to be mistaken
for the radial component), and @xmath denotes pressure. They can be
related by so-called equation of state, giving us a direct dependence of
@xmath on @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Having matter on the right hand side of EFE, we can write the Friedmann
equations (without cosmological constant):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

which, in fact, is a result of the first Friedmann equation and the
conservation of energy-momentum tensor:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

These standard results allow us to determine evolution of the entire
Universe and so far, enriched with the cosmological constant, cold dark
matter and inflationary scenario, have been very successful in
explaining its dynamics, structure formation and particle abundances [
11 ] . However, as it was mentioned in the Introduction, certain aspects
of the theory seem somehow ad hoc , such as the inflation. In the
standard GR there is no scalar field that could cause the expansion of
early Universe to accelerate rapidly; it has to be inserted in the
equations by hand. Thus, we may wonder whether considering some
alternative theory (viewed more as a toy model) could possibly lead to a
simpler and more homogeneous description of phenomena observed in the
Universe. In this chapter we will take the first step toward this aim:
we will compute Friedmann equations for a very simple case of an empty
universe, endowed with a zero spatial curvature. We will carry out all
calculations using both invariant metrics.

#### 4.2.1 Friedmann equations in the Einstein-like frame

The Einstein-like frame is characterized by the following set of
variables:

-   metric: @xmath

-   connection: @xmath

-   scalar field: @xmath

Field equation were given in (3.5.1.) . We need to compute now the
invariant Ricci tensor and scalar curvature for the invariant metric
@xmath ; the easiest way will be to use conformal transformation
formulae since we know the Ricci tensor and curvature scalar expressed
in terms of the metric @xmath . Because both quantities depend on two
different metrics, they can be related by formulae given in the first
chapter with a proper identification of the conformal factor @xmath , so
that:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

The coefficient @xmath depends on the spacetime position indirectly,
through the scalar field. Because of the homogeneity assumption, the
field cannot depend on spatial position, it can only a function of the
cosmic time: @xmath . Hence, the formula given above should simplify
greatly since the only nonvanishing derivative will be the one with
respect to time, @xmath . In order to avoid using Christoffel symbols,
we can utilize the well-known formula for the Laplace-Beltrami operator
@xmath , where @xmath . This allows us to cast the seemingly complicated
formula in a more clear form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Taking into account that @xmath , we can write out all components of the
Ricci tensor:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.27)
  -- -- -- --------

Formula describing the curvature tensor reads as follows:

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.28)
  -- -- -- --------

Hence, the @xmath component of field equations for the metric tensor in
Palatini approach is the following:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now, let us denote @xmath . We can now perform a coordinate
transformation and write the cosmic time as a function of a new,
invariant time @xmath : @xmath . This transformation can be accompanied
by a redefinition of the scale factor: @xmath , which introduces a new,
invariant Hubble parameter, related to the ’old’ one via:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hubble parameter defined in this way is invariant under a conformal
change @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and redefinition of the cosmic time
@xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

This redefinition of both the scale factor and the cosmic time is
equivalent to writing the invariant metric in another form, preserving
structure of the FRWL metric:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Coming back to the equation 4.29 , we can write it in an invariant form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us now compute field equations for spatial components @xmath (all
tensors are diagonal, so that there are no components different from the
mentioned):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

Plugging in formulae obtained so far, after some calculations we end up
with the following result:

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.33)
  -- -- -- --------

Now, we replace time derivative with derivative with respect to the
invariant cosmic time according to @xmath , and simultaneously redefine
the scale factor: @xmath . After very tedious calculations, we arrive at
the following equation:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

The last formula results from the equation governing evolution of the
scalar field. It is given by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . Short calculation shows that:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

Again, we plug in invariant quantities and the solution is:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

Our results match closely those derived in [ 21 ] (apart from
differences in numerical factors). From this point, it is easy to obtain
inflationary behaviour of the Universe. We need to introduce the
energy-momentum tensor for the scalar field according to the
prescription given in (3.5.1.) :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We can now define energy density of the field:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

together with its pressure:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

For simplicity, we denoted differentiation with respect to the time
@xmath by a dot; this should not be mistaken for differentiating with
respect to the cosmic time @xmath .

In order for the theory to exhibit inflationary behaviour, the potential
@xmath must necessarily dominate over the kinetic term @xmath , so that
the equation of state is simply @xmath [ 48 ] . Also, the so-called
slow-roll condition enforces vanishing of the second time derivative of
the field @xmath , and the equations 4.31 , 4.37 now take the form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

The number of e-folds, measuring the amount of inflation, is given by
the following formula:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the value of the scalar field at the end of inflation.
This quantity is clearly frame-independent.

Of course, what we presented here was merely a translational task of
casting the usual Friedmann equations in a frame-independent form,
preparing a set-up for analysis of realistic phenomena, such as
inflation. We must also make now an important remark: origins of the
scalar field present in the theory are still unknown, while @xmath
theories introduce scalar fields in a natural way, through a Legendre
transformation. However, in the Einstein frame (we are still working in
the Palatini approach) the scalar field has no dynamics, so that it
cannot account for inflationary behaviour. On the other had, in the
metric Einstein frame the scalar field preserves its dynamics. Even if
the matter is present in the theory, Palatini theory in Einstein frame
is not a viable model for explaining inflation; this is obviously a
consequence of the field equations, which suggest that the connection is
in fact Levi-Civita of the metric, and the theory reduces to GR with
scalar field coupled to matter. A starting point different from Palatini
@xmath in Einstein frame may of course result in a correct dynamic of
the scalar field.

#### 4.2.2 Friedmann equations in the Jordan-like frame

This theory is fully metric and hence can be characterized by only two
variables. Before we performed the conformal transformation metric was
assumed to be the FRWL metric; after the transformation it gets
multiplied by a conformal factor. Similarly, the scalar field was
replaced with its invariant counterpart. We end up with following
variables:

-   metric: @xmath

-   scalar field: @xmath

In the Jordan-like frame equations of motion (without matter sources)
take the following form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

The first thing to do is to obtain explicit forms of the Ricci tensor
and the curvature scalar, i.e. express them in terms of the scale factor
@xmath and, possibly, the scalar field and the coefficient @xmath .
Analogously to what we did in the previous subsection, we will be aiming
at writing the Friedmann equations in a fully invariant way. This can be
achieved by using the formula 4.24 and identifying @xmath . We need to
keep in mind that, due to the homogeneity assumption, the only
nonvanishing derivative is the time derivative. Components of the Ricci
tensor read as follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.46)
  -- -- -- --------

where the prime denotes differentiating with respect to the scalar field
@xmath . The curvature scalar can be easily computed; it turns out to
be:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

Analogously to the steps taken in the previous subsection, we can change
coordinates and redefine the scale factor, so that the metric tensor
preserves its form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

These new variables make up an invariant Hubble parameter @xmath
(invariant in a sense precisely corresponding to the one discussed in
the case of Einstein-like frame), defined to be:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

Expressed in these new variables, the Einstein tensor takes on the
following simplified form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

We aim now at writing the equations 4.43 , 4.44 fully in terms of scalar
field functions and the invariant Hubble parameter and invariant cosmic
time. As a result we get three equation whereof one is redundant, but
nevertheless written below for the sake of completeness:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.54)
  -- -- -- --------

Let us now introduce energy-momentum tensor for the scalar field and,
consequently, notions of its energy density and pressure:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using energy density and pressure, we can write Friedmann equations 4.52
, 4.54 in a more familiar form:

1.  @xmath

2.  @xmath

The second equation resembles the one resulting from taking divergence
of the energy-momentum tensor defined for the scalar field. It this
case, failure of the divergence to vanish can be viewed as a consequence
of nonminimal coupling between the scalar field and curvature. The right
hand side is a function of both the scalar field and redefined scale
factor, and in fact it is precisely the curvature scalar multiplied by
the time derivative of scalar field, playing the role of a mass term.
This fact renders the theory difficult to analyse, and in case of
inflationary behaviour simple conditions for the slow-roll, mentioned in
the previous subsection, do not suffice. However, obtaining and
investigating inflation is not impossible when the nonminimal coupling
is present (at least in the metric case), as it was shown in [ 49 ] and
[ 50 ] . The latter paper is more interesting from our point of view
inasmuch as it tackles the problem using the language of invariants. In
the paper by Kuusk et al. , the exponential expansion is achieved by
demanding an invariant quantity @xmath be much less than unity, @xmath .
This requirement is accompanied by another one for realizing the
slow-roll, but it is of purely technical nature and will not be
discussed here. We can conclude our treatment of the Friedmann equations
in Palatini approach with the following remark: due to the coupling
between scalar field and curvature scalar, equations of motion are much
more complicated and several further conditions need to be imposed;
however, the procedure of obtaining inflationary behaviour is still
perfectly feasible [ 50 ] .

### 4.3 Conclusions

In this chapter the formalism we developed has been applied to @xmath
theories and Friedmann cosmology. At the beginning we analysed @xmath
theories of gravity in the metric and Palatini approaches using the
language of invariants, reproducing in a self-consistent way the
well-known fact that they are not commensurable. Metric theory is
equivalent to Brans-Dicke theory with potential and @xmath , and this
identification can be held only in the Jordan frame, as in any other one
nonexistent in the BD theory anomalous coupling of scalar field to
matter shows up. On the other hand, Palatini approach yields yet another
version of the BD theory, characterized by @xmath in the Jordan frame.
This very particular value of the free parameter renders the relation
between scalar field and matter purely algebraic, whereas in the metric
case the relation is dynamical. Thence, these two theories have
different predictive power and describe different phenomena. We may ask
a question whether any of these two theories is in agreement with the
measurements. As we know, current Solar system experiments and
cosmological data (binary pulsars [ 51 ] ) prefer BD theories with very
large values of @xmath , greater than 40000, making the theory
fine-tuned since the natural choice would be @xmath . The fine-tuning
can be abolished by assuming that the scalar field is massive and has a
short range [ 11 ] . This argument is sound as in case of @xmath
theories the self-interaction potential never vanishes (that is, if we
assume @xmath ), so that the theory cannot be ruled out based on the
data obtained so far.

In the second part of the chapter Friedmann equations for an empty
universe of vanishing spatial curvature were derived. Except for
numerical factors, equations governing evolution of the scale factor of
the Universe are exactly the same as in case of the metric approach [ 50
] . An important difference is that invariants entering the equations do
not have the same meaning in both formalisms. Despite the fact that
formulae have the same form, quantities entering them may differ in
various ways. The most obvious example is the case of Palatini @xmath
theory in Einstein frame, where there is no dynamics of the scalar field
due to vanishing of the invariant @xmath . A field without dynamics
cannot cause inflationary behaviour and the following conclusion is that
Palatini @xmath in Einstein frame cannot account for exponential rate of
expansion in the early Universe, at least not in the traditional
scenario, where the driving force is a scalar field. However, if we go
to the Jordan frame, obtaining inflation becomes possible under some
special assumptions. Due to the nonminimal coupling between curvature
and scalar field, Friedmann equations are rather complicated.

What advantage do we have of working with invariants on cosmology?
Having them, we can express certain quantities in a frame-independent
way, analogous to the covariant equations and invariant quantities used
in GR. Also, it is reasonable to assume that all observables should be
identical functions of invariants in each frame. For example, let us
investigate connection between the Einstein- and Jordan-like frames. We
can write:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so that:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

describes the particle horizon at a given moment of the cosmic time and,
clearly, is a frame-independent invariant quantity. The same does not
hold for the Hubble parameter:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that we must decide which frame to choose in order to describe
expansion of the universe using the Hubble parameter. Canonical choice
is the Jordan frame equivalent to the Jordan-like invariant frame when a
proper choice of transformation has been made (namely, @xmath and @xmath
).

## Chapter 5 Summary and outlook

Modern cosmology is a field of physics which contains probably the
biggest number of mysteries and unsolved problems, which should not come
as a surprise, as the theory deals with something that is unique by its
very nature - the Universe. Cosmos as such can be hardly investigated in
our terrestrial laboratories, so that we are forced to deduce its
properties from the outcomes of our experiments and knowledge of laws of
physics holding in the nearest vicinity. And still, formulated by
Einstein one hundred years ago theory of gravity, general relativity,
manages to account for most of the gravitational phenomena. The theory
has been triumphant to an extend beyond reasonable expectations, working
on a scale of the Solar system and, most likely, on the scale of entire
Universe. However, the theory has its drawbacks leading to many
problems, stimulating us to look for possible explanations or for a more
fundamental theory. To name a few which are far from being sorted out:
problem of nature of inflation and explaining provenance of the inflaton
field, tiny value of cosmological constant, dark matter and dark energy.
The last two are particularly worrying, as we know very little about
roughly 90% of the whole Universe. Apart from phenomenological aspects
of GR, it has some problems on a theoretical level too. We still
struggle to reconcile GR with quantum theory, treating the former not as
a fundamental theory of gravity, but rather as an effective theory.
These facts might be viewed as suggestions that the Einstein theory
needs to be modified in order to encompass still unexplained phenomena
and possibly establish a connection with more fundamental theories, such
as string theory. Scalar-tensor theories are one of such attempts,
decoupling metric structure of spacetime from its affine structure are
another one, and the present thesis originated as a merge of these two
ideas. Let us now sum up everything that has been discussed in the
paper.

In the chapter on preliminaries important concepts used throughout the
thesis were introduced. We started off with a notion of a conformal
transformation, which was a tool used later on. Then, a couple of
modified theories of gravity were introduced. In fact, there is a
plethora of possible extensions and modifications of GR, and from the
zoo of alternatives to Einstein gravity, @xmath and scalar-tensor were
chosen as the most straightforward, under certain circumstances being
equivalent to one another. The prototype of all scalar-tensor theories
was the Brans-Dicke theory introducing a scalar field nonminimally
coupled to curvature. At that moment we made use of conformal
transformation for the first time, exploiting the fact that it
establishes a mathematical equivalence of solutions in different frames,
thus enabling us to choose a frame where it is easier to solve equations
of motion. Also, the very notion of a conformal frame was encountered
there: we distinguished Einstein and Jordan frame. The former is
characterized by an anomalous coupling between scalar field and the
matter part of action, violating the weak equivalence principle. The
latter features the scalar field coupled to the curvature scalar. The
issue of which of these two frames should be deemed physical was
discussed in the next chapter. We concluded the introductory chapter
with introducing the Palatini formalism. We no longer consider
connection to be a function of metric tensor. Instead, we think of them
as two independent objects. We saw that in case of @xmath theories
Palatini approach led to a conclusion that the independent connection
was an auxiliary field and could be eliminated from the field equations,
yielding an alternated energy-momentum tensor. However, the Palatini
approach features certain shortcomings that were presented at the end of
the chapter. Still, this approach was dominant in the present paper, as
there are not many authors writing about scalar-tensor theories in
Palatini approach, and the field remains still unknown.

In the third chapter formulae describing conformal transformations in
the Palatini formalism were introduced. The novelty was that the
connection transformed according to a new function of the scalar field
@xmath , independent of the function @xmath changing the metric. The
main difference in formulae describing geometric quantities in related
frames stemmed from the fact that he covariant derivative of the metric
tensor does not vanish anymore, since the connection is not Levi-Civita
of the metric. Then, an action functional preserving its form under a
conformal transformation of both the metric and the connection was
presented, and transformation relations between coefficients of two
related frames were sought. The action functional was found by looking
for a form of the Lagrangian that does not get any new terms when
changing the frame, and the new coefficients become functions of the old
ones. The novelty here was the function @xmath multiplying the term
linear in velocities. It was shown that vanishing of the coefficient
means that it is possible to find a frame in which the connection is
Levi-Civita with respect to some conformally transformed metric tensor.
Also, equations of motion were derived, but in the most general case,
when none of the coefficients have been fixed by a choice of the
functions @xmath . In general, fixing all three functions give us a
particular frame and translates to fixing three out of five arbitrary
coefficients @xmath . Next, a group-like structure of the coefficients
was presented; composing two subsequent transformations is equivalent to
one with appropriately defined functions @xmath and @xmath . Structure
of the transformation relations allowed us to write out several
quantities that remained invariant under a conformal change in a sense
that their numerical value at a given spacetime point was the same in
all frames, as well as their functional form was preserved - they depend
on the same functions in each frame. However, due to the presence of the
coefficient @xmath some of the invariants do not have the same meaning
as in case of the metric approach. This will translate into a changed
dynamics of the scalar field in case of the @xmath theories later on. We
concluded the chapter by writing the action functional in terms of
invariants. The Einstein-like invariant frame resembles the canonical
Einstein frame, which can be obtain by putting @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath ; in this instance the invariant metric and the metric used would
coincide, @xmath . Analogously, for the invariant Jordan-like frame a
further specification of three of the functions: @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath , leads to identification of the metric with the invariant one,
@xmath .

In the following chapter we focused on applications of formalism of
invariants in Palatini scalar-tensor theories. First, we investigated a
family of alternative theories of gravity, @xmath theories, and showed
their equivalence with scalar-tensor theories - or, to be more precise,
with the Brans-Dicke theory with self-interacting potential added. We
reproduced the well-known result that in the Jordan frame the metric
version corresponds to the BD theory with @xmath , whereas in the
Palatini approach it corresponds to @xmath . This shows that both
theories are fundamentally different, and their phenomenological
predictions will diverge. Palatini formalism leads to a further
diversification of potential theories of gravity. Conformal
transformation relates frames that are mathematically equivalent, but
not physically. Applying the Palatini approach results in another
difference in the dynamics. This was clear when we considered @xmath
theories in four different versions. The second part of the chapter was
dedicated to investigation of Friedmann equations in a simple case of an
empty Universe of zero spatial curvature. Our objective was to check
whether the model could reproduce a viable inflationary behaviour. In
order to achieve this goal, we introduced invariant Hubble parameters
for both invariant frames, and wrote down the Friedmann equations. In
case of the Einstein-like frame, the inflation could be reproduced
easily. It turned out that the Palatini @xmath theory in Einstein frame
cannot account for a correct dynamics of the scalar field, as it does
not contain a kinetic term. In case of the Jordan-like frame, equations
of motion were complicated as a result of nonminimally coupled scalar
field. However, unlike the Einstein frame, the Jordan frame is a correct
set-up for the Palatini @xmath theories to investigate inflation. We did
not dwell on the issue as it would go beyond the scope of the present
thesis.

The thesis was merely a step toward formulating a comprehensive theory
of scalar-tensor gravity. It must be challenged by the data obtained
from various experiments, but one of the reasons alternative theories of
gravity are being invented is not to replace the ’good old’ general
relativity, but rather to investigate its limitations and provide us
with a fresh point of view on the Einstein theory. The outlook for the
future work of the theory presented so far is to take up the topic at
which the thesis ended and study the inflation in the Jordan-like frame,
where the nonminimall coupling is present. A confrontation with the
experiment must take place by computing the post-Newtonian parameters
for the theory. Also, it will be interesting to calculate rotation
curves of galaxies, dynamics of an expanding universe or investigating
the process of structure formation.

## Appendix A Geodesic mapping

Let us assume that we have two symmetric linear connections on a
manifold @xmath : @xmath and @xmath . The question is now: under what
circumstances do these two connections have exactly the same geodesics?
Equality of geodesics in this context means that for every geodesic
curve @xmath (defined according to @xmath ) parametrized by an affine
parameter @xmath there exists a geodesic curve @xmath for the connection
@xmath parametrized by @xmath . The image of both curves is the same
trajectory. The condition for it to occur is the following:

###### Theorem A.0.1.

(Herman, Weyl, 1921). Two symmetric connections defined on a manifold
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath , share the same set of geodesics if and only
if there exists a 1-form field @xmath on @xmath such that:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

We will now attempt to show both necessity and sufficiency ¹ ¹ 1 The
proof is given according to [ 20 ] .

-    Necessity . We take an arbitrary geodesic line of @xmath with a
    tangent vector @xmath . satisfying the equation @xmath . Because it
    is assumed to be a geodesic line also for @xmath with a tangent
    vector:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where @xmath is a function defined on the geodesic line. Vector
    @xmath is parallel transported:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    We can now substitute @xmath and divide it by @xmath . Since

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    we get:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    The derivative @xmath is simply @xmath , so that:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Because both connections are symmetric, @xmath . We now multiply the
    above equation by @xmath and make it antisymmetric in the free
    indices @xmath :

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Tensor @xmath is symmetric, so that only combinations @xmath totally
    symmetric in their lower indices will give a non-zero contribution:
    @xmath . This equality must hold at every point of every geodesics,
    which means that it must be also satisfied for the vector @xmath
    pointing in an arbitrary direction. It is possible only if all
    coefficients in this third-order polynomial are equal to zero.
    Writing them explicitly:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    We can contract two indices: @xmath and @xmath , which gives us
    @xmath . We define

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and we get:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    which proves the necessity.

-    Sufficiency . Let @xmath for any 1-form @xmath . We take now an
    arbitrary geodesic line of @xmath with a tangent vector @xmath ; we
    shall show that this geodesic line is also geodesic of @xmath . We
    have to prove that there exists a function @xmath such that vector
    @xmath is parallel transported along the geodesic of @xmath . From
    the definition we have: @xmath . We define a vector:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    It is equal to:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Because @xmath , we end up with @xmath . Along every geodesics we
    have @xmath and @xmath , so that the scalar @xmath is uniquely
    determined function of @xmath for a given 1-form @xmath . We
    postulate now @xmath and @xmath . Under this assumption @xmath , and
    @xmath is parallel transported along @xmath , which completes the
    proof.

∎
