The main objective of this thesis is to discuss scalar-tensor theories
in the Palatini approach. Both scalar-tensor theories and Palatini
formalism are means of alternating classical theory of gravity, general
relativity, in order to account for phenomena being seemingly
unexplainable on the ground of the Einstein theory or to serve as toy
models used to test limitations of the theory in question. In the
literature both Palatini approach and scalar-tensor theories have been
widely discussed, but there are very few - if none - authors writing
about a merge of these two ideas. The present paper is a result of an
insufficient attention given to the topic of scalar-tensor theories in
Palatini formalism.

In the course of the thesis action functional for scalar-tensor theories
of gravity will be introduced. This action functional differs
significantly from the action defined in case of scalar-tensor theories
in metric approach. We aim at analysing the theory using the language of
invariants, allowing us to write down all equations in a
frame-independent manner. We discover that invariants defined for the
metric case not always have their counterparts in Palatini formalism.
Also, two frames most frequently used in the literature are discussed:
Einstein and Jordan frames. Possible applications of the theory
developed in the first part of the thesis are presented. We show the
equivalence between @xmath and scalar-tensor theories of gravity, and
exploit this fact by analysing the former using methods developed for
scalar-tensor theories. We conclude the thesis with calculating the
Friedmann equations for an empty universe of vanishing spatial curvature
and preparing set-up for analysing inflationary behaviour.

Głównym celem niniejszej pracy jest dyskusja skalarno-tensorowych teorii
grawitacji w ujęciu Palatiniego. Zarówno teorie skalarno-tensorowe, jak
i podejście Palatiniego są środkami modyfikacji klasycznej teorii
grawitacji, jaką jest ogólna teoria względności, w celu wyjaśnienia
zjawisk prawdopodobnie niewyjaśnialnych na gruncie teorii Einsteina lub
w celu posłużenia jako toy models , których używa się do badania
ograniczeń kwestionowanej teorii. W literaturze podejście Palatiniego i
teorie skalarno-tensorowe są szeroko dyskutowane, ale istnieje bardzo
niewielu - lub wręcz nie ma wcale - autorów łączących oba pomysły.
Niniejsza praca powstała jako skutek niedostatecznej uwagi poświęconej
zagadnieniu teorii skalarno-tensorowych w podjeściu Palatiniego.

W toku pracy wprowadzony będzie funkcjonał działania dla teorii
skalarno-tensorowych. Działanie to znacznie różni się od działania dla
teorii w podejściu metrycznym. Naszym celem jest analiza teorii używając
języka niezmienników, pozwalającego na zapisanie równań w sposób
niezależny od konforemnego układu odniesienia. Odkrywamy, że
niezmienniki zdefiniowane dla przypadku metrycznego nie zawsze mają
swoje odpowiedniki w podejściu Palatiniego. Dwa układy konforemne sa
analizowane: Einsteina i Jordana. Możliwe zastosowania rozwiniętego
formalizmu są prezentowane w dalszej części pracy. Pokazujemy
równoważność pomiędzy teoriami @xmath a grawitacją skalarno-tensorową, i
używamy tego faktu aby analizować te pierwsze za pomocą metod
rozwiniętych dla tych drugich. Rozdział zamknięty jest dyskusją równań
Friedmanna dla pustego wszechświata o znikającej krzywiźnie
przestrzennej oraz przygotowaniem zaplecza matematycznego do analizy
zachowania inflacyjnego.

Keywords:
scalar-tensor gravity, @xmath theories of gravity, conformal
transformation, Jordan frame, Einstein frame, Palatini formalism,
conformal invariants, extended theories of gravity, general theory of
relativity, cosmology, Friedmann equations

teorie skalarno-tensorowe, teorie @xmath , transformacja konforemna,
układ Jordana, układ Einsteina, formalizm Palatiniego, niezmienniki
konforemne, rozszerzone teorie grawitacji, ogólna teoria wzgledności,
kosmologia, równania Friedmanna

University of Wrocław

Department of Physics and Astronomy

Theoretical Physics

Aleksander Kozak

268274

Scalar-tensor gravity in the Palatini approach

Master thesis under the supervision of

prof. dr hab. Andrzej Borowiec

Wrocław

2017
