In this thesis, we considered quantum systems coupled to several baths.
We supposed that the system state is governed by the quantum master
equation (QME). We investigated the quantum pump and the excess entropy
production. When the set of control parameters @xmath is modulated
between times @xmath and @xmath , the average change of a
time-independent observable @xmath of the baths is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here, the summation symbol for @xmath is omitted, @xmath is @xmath at
time @xmath , @xmath is the trajectory in the control parameter space,
@xmath is the instantaneous steady current of @xmath and @xmath is
called the Berry-Sinitsyn-Nemenman (BSN) vector. @xmath is a
non-adiabatic term and order of @xmath where @xmath is the modulation
frequency of the control parameters and @xmath is the coupling strength
between the system and the baths. If @xmath is sufficiently small, this
pumping is called the quantum adiabatic pump. Similarly, the average
entropy production @xmath under quasistatic ( @xmath ) modulation is
given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here, @xmath is the instantaneous steady entropy production rate and
@xmath is called the BSN vector for entropy production. The second term
of the right hand side (RHS) of the above equation is called the excess
entropy production, @xmath .

First, we investigated the quantum pump using the full counting
statistics with quantum master equation (FCS-QME) approach. We studied
the non-adiabatic effect and showed that the general solution of the QME
@xmath is decomposed as @xmath . Here, @xmath is the instantaneous
steady state of the QME, @xmath and @xmath are calculable and order
@xmath . @xmath exponentially damps (like @xmath ) as a function of
time. We showed that the generalized mater equation (GME) approach
provides @xmath in the Born approximation. Here, @xmath corresponds to
the set of the diagonal components of @xmath in the matrix
representation by the energy eigenstates, @xmath corresponds to @xmath
and the term @xmath originates from non-Markovian effects. We showed
that the FCS-QME method provides @xmath -th order pump current from
@xmath . We showed that the quantum pump dose not occur in all orders of
the pumping frequency when the system control parameters and the
thermodynamic parameters (the temperatures and the chemical potentials
of the baths) are fixed under the zero-bias condition.

Next, we studied the quantum adiabatic pump of the quantum dot (QD)
system weakly coupled to two leads ( @xmath and @xmath ) using the
FCS-QME. We confirmed the consistency between the FCS-QME approach and
the GME approach for a QD of one quantum level with finite Coulomb
interaction. We showed that the pumped charge and spin coming from the
instantaneous steady current are not negligible when the thermodynamic
parameters are not fixed to zero bias. To observe the spin effects, we
considered collinear magnetic fields, which affect the spins through the
Zeeman effect, with different amplitudes applying to the QDs ( @xmath )
and the leads ( @xmath and @xmath ). We focused on the dynamic
parameters ( @xmath , @xmath and the coupling strength between QDs and
leads, @xmath ) as control parameters. In one level QD with the Coulomb
interaction @xmath , we studied @xmath pump and @xmath pump for the
noninteracting limit ( @xmath ) and the strong interaction limit (
@xmath ) at zero-bias. The difference depending on @xmath appeared
through @xmath which is the average number of the electrons with spin
@xmath in the QD. For @xmath pump, the energy dependences of the
line-width functions are essential. Moreover, we studied the @xmath pump
for finite @xmath at zero-bias. The effect of @xmath appeared through
@xmath . When half-filling condition satisfies, the charge pump does not
occur.

We studied quantum diabatic pump for spinless one level QD coupled to
two leads. We calculated @xmath , @xmath and particle current up to 6th
order and pumped particle numbers.

In the latter part of the thesis, we investigated the excess entropy
production. In weakly nonequilibrium regime, we analyzed the BSN vector
for the entropy production and showed

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here, @xmath denotes the trace of the system, and @xmath is a measure of
degree of nonequilibrium. @xmath is the instantaneous steady state
obtained from the QME with reversing the sign of the Lamb shift term. In
general, the potential @xmath such that @xmath dose not exist. This is
the most important result of this thesis. The origins of the
non-existence of the potential @xmath are a quantum effect (the Lamb
shift term) and the breaking of the time-reversal symmetry. The
non-existence of the potential means that the excess entropy essentially
depends on the path of the modulation. In contrast, if the system
Hamiltonian is non-degenerate or the Lamb shift term is negligible, we
obtain @xmath . Here, @xmath is the von Neumann entropy, and @xmath
describes the amplitude of the change of the control parameters. For
systems with time-reversal symmetry, there exists a potential @xmath ,
which is the symmetrized von Neumann entropy. Additionally, we pointed
out that the expression of the entropy production obtained in the
classical Markov jump process is different from our result and showed
that these are approximately equivalent only in the weakly
nonequilibrium regime.
