##### Contents

-    1 Introduction
-    2 Anomalies
    -    2.1 The Abelian anomaly
    -    2.2 Anomalous transport: The Chiral Magnetic Effect
-    3 The AdS/CFT correspondence
    -    3.1 The large @xmath limit and different versions of AdS/CFT
    -    3.2 Scalar fields in AdS
    -    3.3 Massless vector fields in AdS
    -    3.4 Correlation functions in AdS/CFT
    -    3.5 Holographic renormalization
    -    3.6 Black holes in holography
-    4 Time dependent CME in holography and anomaly induced Landau
    resonances
    -    4.1 Holographic Setup
    -    4.2 Stationary solutions
    -    4.3 Non-equilibrium solutions
    -    4.4 Gaussian and hyperbolic tangent quenches
    -    4.5 Universality in fast quenches
    -    4.6 Quasi-normal mode formalism
    -    4.7 Resonances
    -    4.8 Quasi-normal modes with backreaction
    -    4.9 Landau resonances
-    5 Conclusions
-    A Equations of motions of the gauge fields
-    B Holographic renormalisation
-    C One-point-functions
-    D Numerical methods
-    E Convergence and numerical accuracy
    -    E.1 Time evolution
    -    E.2 Quasi-normal modes with backreaction

## 1 Introduction

Dealing with strongly coupled field theories is a challenging topic even
nowadays. Quantum field theories are best understood in their
pertubative regime, since an expansion in the coupling constant @xmath
leads to significant simplifications in the calculation and makes them
at least possible, respectively. However, in general strongly coupled
systems are not accessible in the context of pertubation theory, since
an expansion in terms of the coupling constant does not fulfil the
requirement @xmath and the corresponding power series expansion is not
convergent at all. In order to tackle questions in strongly coupled
field theories, we have to go beyond the pertubative regime.
The standard approaches to calculations in the non-pertubative regime
are the (functional) renomalisation group, lattice field theories and
the AdS/CFT correspondence. The acronym AdS/CFT is an abbreviation for A
nti- d e S itter/ C onformal F ield T heory, where the former refers to
a spacetime and the latter to a certain type of field theory.
Originally, the AdS/CFT correspondence was developed in context of
string theory. Within string theory, the connection between gauge
theories and gravitational theories is no surprise. Field theoretical
degrees of freedom are captured by open strings ending on hypersurfaces
embedded in a higher dimensional spacetime, whereas the gravitational
degrees of freedom are described by closed strings. Maldacena [ 2 ]
pointed out that in certain situations the theories of closed and open
strings have the same degrees of freedoms and are therefore dynamically
equivalent. This shows the deep connection between gauge and
gravitational theories, which is also present in the AdS/CFT
correspondence.
In Q uantum F ield T heory (QFT) we know three types of symmetry
breaking, namely explicit, spontaneous or anomalous. The former occurs
by adding terms to the Lagrangian, which break the symmetry. We refer to
the symmetry breaking as spontaneously, if the symmetry is respected at
the level of the action, but not by the state itself. Thus, the theory
is symmetric, but the vacuum state breaks the symmetry. Anomalous
symmetry breaking “happens” during the quantisation procedure; namely,
the full renormalised theory is not invariant under a certain symmetry
of the classical theory. If we consider a process, which is based on
external symmetries, anomalies will capture the core properties, which
would be otherwise highly suppressed. For example, the scattering
amplitude of the decay @xmath is completely determined by the so called
triangle anomaly. Thus, anomalies are not only visible on microscopic
scales but can also have a macroscopic manifestation, influencing
transport phenomena.
In the recent years, macroscopic phenomena induced by anomalous effects
gained a lot of interest. One of the macroscopic phenomena, which has
its origin in the presence of anomalies in the underlying theory, is the
C hiral M agnetic E ffect (CME) [ 3 , 4 ] (see [ 5 ] for a review). The
CME requires the presence of an external magnetic field and may lead to
three experimental results: the appearance of an electromagnetic current
in direction of the magnetic field, a massless propagating mode, the so
called chiral magnetic wave [ 6 ] , and in presence of parallel
electromagnetic field one observes an enhancement of the electric
conductivity, known as negative magnetoresistence [ 7 ] . The
requirement of massless fermions is a crucial restriction on possible
experimental playgrounds. Nevertheless, there emerged two main systems,
namely the Q uark- G luon P lasma (QGP) and Weyl/Dirac semimetals. The
QGP is a macroscopic system, consisting of deconfined quarks and gluons.
Although the QGP is an extreme state of matter, we have experimental
access to such systems. Despite the high temperatures, the quark gluon
plasma is strongly coupled [ 8 , 9 ] . Within H eavy- I on C ollisions
(HIC) a QGP is produced for @xmath s. Moreover, during the collision
very strong magnetic fields emerge for a short time. Due to the high
temperatures in the QGP, we can neglect the quark masses. The second
experimental playground, related to the CME, are Weyl/Dirac semimetals.
Although it is not clear yet, whether Weyl/Dirac semimetals are strongly
coupled or not, one of the abovementioned CME-ingredients, namely the
negative magnetoresistence, was already measured in several kind of
Weyl/Dirac semimetals [ 10 , 11 , 12 , 13 ] .
A complete understanding of the out-of-equilibrium properties [ 14 , 15
] requires real time studies of the system under consideration. However,
it is very challenging to perform real-time calculations within lattice
field theories. Nevertheless, the AdS/CFT correspondence provides a well
suited tool, to study real-time dynamics in strongly coupled field
theories. The CME in presence of time dependent electromagnetic fields
has already been studied at weak coupling in [ 16 , 17 ] and via
holography during thermalization in [ 18 ] . Throughout our studies, we
especially have Weyl/Dirac semimetals in mind, since in these “chiral”
condensed matter systems the CME vanishes in equilibrium [ 19 ] .
Therefore, we can “push” the system in an out-of-equilibrium state and
monitor the out-of-equilibrium response. We can generate a current in
these materials by introducing a chiral imbalance, realised by switching
on a finite axial potential; this can be done by a time dependent axial
charge in presence of parallel electric and magnetic fields

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Therefore, the local change rate in chirality depends on the product of
the electric and magnetic field. Allowing for a time dependent axial
charge density results in the non-conservation of axial charge. In order
to obtain a non-trivial evolution of the axial charge density, either
the electric field or the magnetic field (or both) has to be time
dependent. Throughout this thesis, we choose a static magnetic field and
a time dependent electric field. In particular, we are interested in
fast quenches of the electric field for the following reason.
Recently, it was experimentally possible to gain insights into strongly
coupled systems, subjected to a certain kind of quantum quenches. To
model these systems theoretically, we have to consider a time dependent
parameter in the Hamiltonian, for example the coupling constant, and
perform real-time computations. This was already done for a certain
class of holographic models, revealing an interesting feature; the
authors of [ 20 ] found an universal behaviour in the early time
response for fast enough quenches. We are interested whether our
holographic model shows this universal behaviour too and how the anomaly
affects it.
The thesis is structured as follows. In chapter 2 , we present a short
review of anomalies with focus on the triangle anomaly and its
application in external fields. The third chapter reviews the essential
ingredients of holography. Chapter 4 is mainly based on the work [ 1 ]
of the author in collaboration with Martin Ammon, Amadeo Jiménez-Alba,
Rodrigo P. Macedo, and Luis Melgar. In section 4.1 we discuss the
holographic model and in particular our ansatz for the gauge fields. In
order to characterise the non-equilibrium dynamics, we first have to
understand the stationary solutions, outlined in section 4.2 . The
stationary solutions are used as reference in order to characterise the
non-equilibrium response. In section 4.3 , we derive the time-dependent
equation and build the numerical set-up. To get an intuition of the
quench induced dynamics, we briefly discuss in section 4.4 the
qualitative differences for different magnetic fields, anomaly
parameter, and abruptnesses of the quench. In section 4.5 , we
investigate the early time response in regards to universal features.
The late time response of the system is captured by the quasi-normal
modes of the system. In section 4.6 , we explain the necessary
ingredients to compute QNMs in our set-up. The last part is dedicated to
characterise the resonances, we observed in the current. In chapter 5 ,
we interpret our results and give an outlook for further investigations.

## 2 Anomalies

In classical field theory Noether’s theorem states that symmetries of
the classical action lead to conserved currents. For example, Poincaré
invariance leads to conservation of the stress-energy tensor, @xmath ,
whereas global internal symmetries lead to conserved currents, @xmath .
At the quantum level, the conservation of the currents results in
relations between correlation functions containing the corresponding
currents, the so called Ward identities. However, symmetries derived at
the classical level are not necessarily present at the quantum level;
anomalies are the failure of a classical symmetry to survive the
quantisation procedure. They can appear because there is no regulator
preserving all symmetries and removing the infinities at the same time.
In the path integral formalism anomalies appear, because the path
integral measure is, due to the regularisation, not invariant under
certain symmetry transformations. Anomalies are important and can in
fact be seen experimentally, for example in the decay of a neutral pion
to two photons. However, anomalies constrain the dynamics and provide
consistency conditions for theories; for example, “gauge symmetries” are
not allowed to be anomalous, since it would result in a break down of
unitarity.
In order to discuss symmetries on the quantum level, we first review
symmetries of the classical theory which are relevant for the discussion
about anomalies. It is therefore customary, to understand the
left-/right-handed basis and the corresponding connection to the
axial/vector formulation [ 21 ] .
We consider a prototype Lagrangian of left- and right-handed fermions,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

The Lagrangian is invariant under local @xmath and @xmath
transformations and preservs therefore an @xmath symmetry. The
corresponding symmetry transformations are depicted in table 1 .

The corresponding left- and right-handed symmetry currents can be
computed by

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

We can define a notion of chirality by considering the eigenvalue
equation @xmath for @xmath . The eigenvalue @xmath of @xmath ¹ ¹ 1 We
define @xmath by @xmath . with respect to @xmath denotes the chirality.
The left-handed @xmath and right-handed @xmath components can be united
to a single spinor @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we defined the projection operator

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Similar to the spinors, the left- and right-handed gauge field can be
combined, resulting in an axial and vector gauge field

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

We can rewrite the Lagrangian ( 2.1 ) in terms of two external gauge
fields, namely the axial gauge field, @xmath , and the vector gauge
field, @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the vector/axial basis the @xmath symmetry translates into an @xmath
symmetry, depicted in table 2 . The corresponding symmetry currents can
be computed by

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.7)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

### 2.1 The Abelian anomaly

The existence of anomalies was noticed when Sutherland [ 22 ] and
Veltman [ 23 ] worked out a theorem, which forbade the decay of a
neutral pion into two photons. However, this theorem was in
contradiction to the experimental results; A dler, B ell, and J ackiw
(ABJ) [ 24 , 25 ] resolved the contradiction by taking anomaly effects
into account. In this way they were able to calculate the decay rate in
agreement with the one found experimentally. Concretely, they considered
the triangle Feynman diagram of the decay, consisting of two vector and
one axial current and revealed how to cure the UV divergence correctly.
They found that not both symmetry currents, the axial and the vector
current, can be conserved at the same time and therefore one of the Ward
identities has to be violated.
In the physical meaningful case, where the vector symmetry is gauged and
the axial not, the Ward identity, corresponding to the vector current
holds, whereas the axial current is anomalous; namely (in the massless
case),

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the anomalous contributions is denoted by (with @xmath being the
Levi-Civita symbol),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

The anomalous contribution to eq. 2.9 , @xmath , is referred to as the
famous ABJ anomaly. As we will see throughout this chapter, eq. ( 2.9 )
is not the only possibility to express the divergences of the current.
In this section, we derive the result motivated in eq. ( 2.9 ).
Therefore, we consider the QED-Lagrangian [ 21 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can construct a vector current @xmath , an axial current @xmath , and
a pseudo-scalar @xmath , obeying the corresponding conservation laws

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

The classical conservation laws imply, at the quantum level, relations
among Green’s functions, the so called Ward identities. They are given
by the derivative of the vacuum expectation value of the time ordered
product of a current @xmath and generic operators @xmath , namely

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
                          (2.13)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

If the Ward identities are violated, the renormalisability of the
quantum field theory will be lost. In our case, we are interested in the
three point functions, consisting of the above mentioned currents and
pseudo-scalar, respectively,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.14)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

which correspond to the triangle graphs. For convenience regarding the
further discussion, we transform the amplitudes @xmath and @xmath to
momentum space, for example

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Afterwards, we can re-express the quantities using the classical
conservation laws eq. ( 2.12 ) and integrating by parts, which leads us
to

  -- -------- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath         (2.17)
     @xmath   @xmath         (2.18)
  -- -------- -------- -- -- --------

However, the Feynman graphs shown in figure 1 imply that the WIs do not
hold. If the VWI is fulfilled, the AWI will be anomalous and vice versa.
But what is going wrong in our derivation? The answer is, we were not
allowed to integrate by parts, because the Green’s functions are
divergent and have to be regulated. The regularisation yields via a
“surface“ term, arising in the integration by parts, to the anomalous
contribution. In order to derive this contribution, we regulate the
triangle graphs of the vector-vector-axial currents and
vector-vector-pseudoscalar currents, depicted in figure 1 . Using
Feynman rules, we can read of the amplitudes using the abbreviation
@xmath

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.19)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where we set @xmath due to momentum conservation. Contracting the first
identity with @xmath and using @xmath results in

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.22)
              @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Note that the AWI holds when the rest terms @xmath vanish. This happens
when we shift the momenta in the first term of the rest terms by @xmath
and by @xmath , respectively. However, the integrals are linear
divergent ² ² 2 The quadratic divergence vanishes since @xmath . and
hence we are not allowed to do a shift. Nevertheless, we have to
evaluate the integrals; to do this we switch to spherical momentum
coordinates and introduce an radial momentum cut-off @xmath . After
evaluating the integral, we take the limit @xmath . For linear divergent
integrals we can use the following useful formula

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the radius of a @xmath sphere. Making use of this
formula and
tr @xmath , we obtain, in the symmetric momentum limit,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Regularising, as outlined above, leads to an ambiguity of the amplitude
@xmath , since we chose the momentum route arbitrarily. A shift of the
internal momentum integration @xmath with @xmath , alters the value of
the integral. Since we are interested in a cut-off independent result we
have to calculate the difference of the amplitudes with and without the
shift, namely

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

which we obtain by using the same tools as for eq. ( 2.25 ). The final
amplitude is given by @xmath resulting, after contraction with @xmath ,
in

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

Analogously, we can derive the result for the VWI given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

The important insight is, we cannot find an @xmath so that both, the AWI
( 2.27 ) and the VWI ( 2.28 ), hold at the same time! We can choose
@xmath in a way, where the VWI holds and the AWI is anomalous, or the
AWI holds and the VWI is anomalous, or both are anomalous. The VWI is
satisfied in the case @xmath , which we have to impose in order to gauge
the vector symmetry; then the AWI is anomalous, reproducing the result
of the previous section. The choice of the coefficient @xmath is, on the
level of actions, done by finite counter-terms, the so called Bardeen
counter-terms. After the calculation one question remains: we obtained
the result via an one-loop pertubation calculation; do radiative
corrections of higher order pertubation theory alter the result? The
answer is no; the Adler-Bardeen theorem [ 26 ] states that the anomaly
expression is exact on the operator level and therefore the numerical
coefficient of the anomalous term is not touched by higher order
corrections.
An important concept, when dealing with anomalies, is the framework of
consistent and covariant currents. The former are obtained by variation
of the local vacuum functional with respect to the corresponding gauge
fields. We refer to these currents, for example the axial current eq. (
2.9 ), as consistent currents since they fulfil the Wess-Zumino
consistency condition. However, the consistent currents transform not
covariant under the anomalous symmetry. When we are interested in a
covariant formulation, we have to add Bardeen-Zumino terms [ 27 ] to the
currents and obtain the covariant form, which are in the case of the
model with two gauge fields, as presented in eq. ( 2.6 ), connected by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath . In the covariant formulation, all terms,
depending directly on gauge fields, are absent and the currents contain
only gauge invariant quantities as the field strength.

### 2.2 Anomalous transport: The Chiral Magnetic Effect

Ever since their discovery, anomalies play a crucial role in the
development of QFT. Recently, the interest focused on the macroscopic
manifestation of quantum anomalies in systems with chiral fermions. One
of the effects relating anomalies to transport properties is the C hiral
M agnetic E ffect (CME). The CME describes the generation of an electric
current parallel to a magnetic field induced by a chirality imbalance.
In this section, we consider a system possessing chiral fermions,
following [ 5 , 3 , 29 ] . To get an intuitive understanding, we first
discuss the effect in the weak coupling limit where the quasi-particle
picture is appropriated.
We consider a Lagrangian, as presented in eq. ( 2.6 ), with two external
background fields providing an electric and a magnetic field. The
triangle graphs, with two external gauge fields, namely a composite
current and a charged fermion loop, are depicted in figure 1 . The
contributions of the fermions to the triangle diagram depend on their
chirality. Changing the chirality leads to a contribution with opposite
sign. Therefore, the vector current is given by @xmath (see eq. ( 2.7 )
and ( 2.8 )) and the electric charge is conserved; on the other side,
the axial current is given by @xmath . The additional @xmath matrix
cancels the change of the sign due to @xmath and the divergence of the
current gets an anomalous contribution

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the fermion charge. Nevertheless, the contributions to
the divergence of the vector current do not cancel when the number of
left and right handed particles is not equal, namely in the case of a
chirality imbalance (which can be captured by an axial chemical
potential @xmath ). Due to eq. ( 2.30 ) the axial anomaly may generate
an electric current in presence of a magnetic field.
In order to illustrate the CME, which is depicted in figure 2 , let us
consider a Dirac sea of massless fermions. In absence of external
fields, chirality is conserved and we have two disconnected Fermi
surfaces, consisting of left- and right-handed fermions. The chirality
of the fermions can be changed by adiabatically switching on external
fields, in particular an electric field parallel to a magnetic field.
Then, the equilibrium state between the Fermi surfaces is violated and
left-handed anti-particles will transform into right-handed particles
and vice versa, depending on the sign of @xmath , as we will see in the
following section.
Thus, the first important ingredient for the CME is a magnetic field ³ ³
3 In general, magnetic fields are crucial for the understanding of
topological effects in condensed matter systems, for example the Quantum
Hall Effect. The CME can be interpreted as a 3+1 dimensional version of
the Quantum Hall Effect. . Due to the magnetic field there is a
preferred direction for the spins of the fermions. The magnetic field
adjusts the spins of positive (negative) fermions in direction (opposite
direction) of the magnetic field. In presence of an electric field,
positive fermions feel the force @xmath and move in direction of @xmath
. After a time @xmath , positive fermions have Fermi-momentum @xmath ,
whereas negative fermions decrease their Fermi momentum to @xmath . The
right-handed fermions moving in the direction of the electric field
create an electric current, which is usually compensated by the
left-handed fermions moving in the other direction. The density of
states of positive fermions in @xmath -direction is given by @xmath ,
whereas the fermions in the transverse directions populate Landau levels
@xmath , leading to a total change rate of

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

The local change rate in chirality, @xmath , is then given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

in agreement with eq. ( 2.30 ). Note that this local change rate is
purely an effect of the electromagnetic axial anomaly.
The transformation of a left-handed fermion into a right-handed fermion
requires, in the Dirac sea picture, the transfer of a particle from the
left-handed Fermi surface to the right-handed Fermi surface, involving
an energy cost of @xmath and @xmath , respectively. Hence, the energy,
required per unit time, is given by the energy cost times the chirality
change. This energy stems from the power of the current or in other
words

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

and in the limit @xmath , respectively,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is known as the density of the CME current ⁴ ⁴ 4 There is a dual
version, the Chiral Seperation Effect, which gives rise to an axial
current @xmath . .

## 3 The AdS/CFT correspondence

In 1994, Leonard Susskind gave a string theory interpretation of ’t
Hooft’s work, stating, we can store the information of a three
dimensional world on an two dimensional surface, as realised in a
holographic image, implying quantum gravitational theories could be
described by a lower dimensional quantum field theory [ 30 , 31 ] .
This idea is based on the observations of Hawking [ 32 ] and Bekenstein
[ 33 ] according to which the entropy of black holes scales with the
area of the black hole horizon and not with its volume. Let us assume we
take some region of space and put some information in it; then the
maximum number of bits we could throw into this region should
intuitively be proportional to the volume of the region. However, let us
shrink the region down to a size where it collapses to a black hole
(while keeping the information in it fixed); then its information
content can also be described by the area of the black hole horizon,
which is a surface rather than a volume. We conclude that the maximum
amount of information that can be stored in a volume is proportional to
its area.
The AdS/CFT correspondence is a realisation of the holographic
principle; in 1997, Juan Maldacena [ 2 ] conjectured the dynamical
equivalence between four-dimensional @xmath Super-Yang-Mills (SYM)
theory and type IIB superstring theory compactified on AdS @xmath (see
also [ 34 , 35 ] and [ 36 , 37 , 38 ] for textbooks). As depicted in
figure 3 , the SYM is located on the conformal boundary surrounding the
higher-dimensional AdS space. The acronym AdS refers to A nti- d e S
itter spacetime which is the maximal symmetric solution of the Einstein
equations with negative cosmological constant.
Furthermore, in a particular regime the AdS/CFT correspondence is a so
called
strong/weak duality relating a strongly coupled theory to a weakly
coupled theory, which is much easier manageable. Throughout this thesis,
we relate a strongly coupled CFT to a weakly coupled gravitational
theory. At the conformal boundary there is a one to one map, the
holographic dictionary, which contains the information of how to
translate the gravity quantities into field theory quantities. Although
still a conjecture, overwhelming evidence in favor of holographic
dualities was collected over the last two decades.

### 3.1 The large @xmath limit and different versions of AdS/CFT

In the previous chapter, we outlined the dynamical equivalence between
certain CFTs and gravitational theories. On the field theory side, we
have two free parameters, the Yang-Mills coupling constant @xmath and
the parameter @xmath of the gauge group @xmath [ 36 ] ; on the
gravitational theory side the free parameters are the string coupling
constant @xmath and the ratio AdS curvature @xmath divided by the string
length @xmath In the context of AdS/CFT, the parameters are mapped onto
each other in the following way

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we introduced the ’t Hooft coupling @xmath . Since it is very
difficult to do explicit calculations in the strongest form of the
correspondence, it is necessary to simplify the theories by
approximations. The central approximation done in the context of AdS/CFT
is the large @xmath limit. String theory is currently best understood in
its pertubative regime; in order to perform a pertubative expansion in
the string coupling, we have to restrict the coupling constant to small
values, i.e. @xmath . However, the string coupling is also connected to
the Yang-Mills coupling via the AdS/CFT correspondence, requiring @xmath
. Keeping the ration of AdS curvature @xmath over the string length
@xmath , and therefore the ’t Hooft coupling @xmath , fixed requires
@xmath ; hence we have to consider a particular limit of AdS/CFT which
is referred to as the strong form of the AdS/CFT correspondence.
Within this thesis, we are interested in strongly coupled field
theories; therefore we chose to work in the limit @xmath , which is
referred to as the weak form of AdS/CFT. On the gravity side, this limit
translates (keeping the AdS curvature @xmath fixed) to @xmath , reducing
classical string theory to classical supergravity.
Throughout this thesis, we will use an bottom-up approach. In this case,
we do not have to deal with the ten-dimensional supergravity fields and
compactify them with a Kaluza-Klein reduction on the @xmath ; we already
start with an effective toy model, where the gravitational fields are
defined in AdS @xmath . In the so called bottom-up approach, we write
down a toy model Lagrangian for the gravitational theory with minimal
ingredients, which captures the core properties of the dual field theory
model under consideration. After solving the corresponding equations of
motion in the context of relativity, we extract the observables, we are
interested in, from the asymptotic behaviour of the gravity fields.

### 3.2 Scalar fields in AdS

For pedagogical reasons we choose the following procedure: we first
consider the example of a scalar field to outline the main purpose and
give then a brief generalisation to vector fields. The action of a
massive free scalar field @xmath in a @xmath -dimensional curved
spacetime, with coordinates @xmath (where @xmath ), reads [ 36 , 39 , 40
]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The corresponding equations of motion are obtained by a variational
principle and given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the coordinates @xmath are denoted by @xmath with @xmath . After a
Wick rotation of the time coordinate, the metric of Euclidean AdS in the
Poincaré patch is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is well known that eq. ( 3.3 ) evaluated for the metric in eq. ( 3.4
) has a regular singular point at @xmath . In this case Frobenius’
theorem states that the differential equation has two independent, well
defined (power series) solutions in the neighbourhood of this point with
leading power @xmath and @xmath in @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the subscripts will be explained later ⁵ ⁵ 5 In the case of @xmath
there are logarithmic contributions to the power series. For simplicity,
we chose @xmath and @xmath such that @xmath for now. . By solving eq. (
3.3 ) close to @xmath , the coefficients @xmath and @xmath remain
undetermined. However, all higher order coefficients @xmath and @xmath
are completely determined in terms of @xmath , @xmath and their
derivatives. To determine the exponents of the solution in eq. ( 3.5 ),
we make the ansatz @xmath and solve eq. ( 3.3 ) to leading order in
@xmath using @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath               
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where derivatives with respect to @xmath are contained in @xmath . To
fulfil eq. ( 3.6 ) to leading order in @xmath , the coefficient of
@xmath has to vanish, resulting in a quadratic equation in @xmath with
solutions

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Evaluating the action ( 3.2 ) for the solution @xmath , gives a finite
result; hence, we refer to @xmath as normalisable solution. The
undetermined coefficients @xmath and @xmath of eq. ( 3.5 ) are related
via the AdS/CFT correspondence to quantities on the field theory side.
In the so called standard quantisation, @xmath corresponds to the v
acuum expectation value of the dual gauge invariant operator @xmath ,
with dimension @xmath ⁶ ⁶ 6 An interesting feature reveals for masses in
the range @xmath . In this case both solutions are normalisable and can
be used to quantise the theory resulting in two different CFTs
corresponding to the same classical AdS action. . The second solution
@xmath functions as a s ource term on the dual field theory side. Adding
source terms to the action @xmath results in the generating functional
@xmath for connected Green’s functions

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

To understand the importance of the previous statement better, we look
at the behaviour of the scalar field under diffeomorphisms. Since the
scalar field is a Lorentz scalar, it has to be invariant under
diffeomorphisms

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath . Using the asymptotic expansion ( 3.5 ) and the
invariance under diffeomorphisms ( 3.9 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

results in

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Furthermore, the action iteself has to be invariant under
diffeomorphisms; plugging the scaling behaviour of the scalar field (
3.11 ) in eq. ( 3.8 ) yields to

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.12)
              @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

This requires for the scaling behaviour of the dual field theoretical
operator @xmath , since @xmath was chosen arbitrarily,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence, we conclude that @xmath has the conformal dimension @xmath .
Comparing the representations of the field theory operators with the
representations of the dual gravitational operators results, in the case
of a massive scalar field with @xmath , in the important statement

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

On the right hand side we have only quantities of the field theory side,
namely the scaling dimension under dilatations @xmath , whereas on the
left hand side only quantities of the gravitational theory are present,
namely the mass @xmath of the scalar field and the curvature radius of
AdS @xmath . Obviously, the conformal dimension of the field theory
operator is linked to the mass of the scalar field in the gravitational
theory. Since the conformal dimension has to be a real quantity, the
mass in eq. ( 3.7 ) is subjected to the so called Breitenlohner-Freedman
bound

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

For negative @xmath the corresponding dual operator is relevant (with
conformal dimension @xmath ), for vanishing masses marginal ( @xmath )
and for positive @xmath irrelevant ( @xmath ).

### 3.3 Massless vector fields in AdS

Since the model under consideration throughout this thesis contains
massless gauge fields coupled by a Chern-Simons term in the bulk, we
briefly adapt the procedure, explained for the scalar field, to massless
gauge fields. The action of a massless U(1) gauge field @xmath with a
Maxwell-Chern-Simons term is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Levi-Civita tensor. The equations of motion follow
directly from a variational principle and read (see appendix A for
further details)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

With the metric, defined in eq. ( 3.4 ), we find to leading order in
@xmath , with @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since the gauge field is an one-form, we have to consider the behaviour
of @xmath under diffeomorphisms ⁷ ⁷ 7 We work in the axial gauge where
@xmath .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

and therefore

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Again, we can interpret the non-normalisable mode @xmath as source term
for the dual field theory operator @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since the action has to be invariant under diffeomorphisms

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

we conclude for the scaling dimension of @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

implying that @xmath has conformal dimension @xmath .

### 3.4 Correlation functions in AdS/CFT

In chapter 3.2 , we established an one to one map between the mass of
the scalar field and the conformal dimension of the dual operator.
Furthermore, we noticed that the non-normalisable mode @xmath can be
interpreted as source term for the dual operator @xmath . This indicates
a duality between the generating functionals of both theories [ 36 , 41
, 42 , 39 ] .
In Euclidean signature, we can formulate the partition function @xmath
of the action @xmath , given by eq. ( 3.8 ), as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

In its strongest form, the AdS/CFT correspondence states the equality of
the partition function of the CFT and the partition function of the
gravitational theory

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

The partition function of string theory @xmath is difficult to
calculate; however, in the large @xmath limit, we can perform a saddle
point approximation of @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

The action of the supergravitational fields @xmath in AdS @xmath is
given by @xmath containing in general massive scalar fields as described
in eq. ( 3.2 ). Using the equality of the partition functions in ( 3.26
) and the saddle point approximation established in eq. ( 3.2 ), we get
the connection between the supergravity action @xmath and the generating
functional on the CFT side @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we already assumed that @xmath is the conformal dimension of the
operator @xmath and @xmath the corresponding source. Eq. ( 3.28 ) is a
non trivial statement since it claims the equality of a CFT generating
functional (in the large @xmath limit) and a generating functional of a
gravitational theory; this statement is precisely the weak form of the
AdS/CFT correspondence. As usual, the correlation functions can be
computed by differentiating the generating functional with respect to
the sources @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the corresponding sources of the operators @xmath .

### 3.5 Holographic renormalization

With eq. ( 3.29 ), we have a formula at hand which tells us how to
compute correlation functions. However, the supergravity action is
divergent, for example because of the infinite volume of AdS leading to
infrared divergences. From the quantum field theory point of view, this
is a well known phenomenon; in QFT, the computation of correlation
functions gives rise to contact terms resulting from ultraviolet
divergences. These divergences are renormalisation scheme dependent and
for this reason unphysical.
The AdS/CFT correspondence relates the infrared divergences of the
supergravity action to the ultraviolet divergences of the dual field
theory. In order to compute physical reasonable results, we have to
remove the divergences. This is done by the so called holographic
renormalization.
In this thesis, we will give a sketchy introduction to the Hamiltonian
approach to holographic renormalization [ 43 , 44 ] ⁸ ⁸ 8 For the
standard approach to holographic renormalization see [ 45 , 46 , 47 , 48
] . ; a more detailed calculation of the counter-terms can be found in
appendix B . Within this approach, the radial coordinate of AdS plays
the role of the time coordinate in the ADM formalism (R. A rnowitt, S. D
eser and C.W. M isner, [ 49 ] ) for gravity. We assume that the reader
is familiar with the standard approach to the holographic
renormalization and the ADM formalism for gravity.
Consider a toy model with a massive free scalar field @xmath and a gauge
field @xmath in a curved spacetime, whose action reads (in Euclidean
signature)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

coupled to gravity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath .
We are interested in hypersurfaces of constant values of the radial
coordinate @xmath . On this hypersurfaces @xmath , we can formulate the
action in terms of the induced metric and the extrinsic curvature. Such
a hypersurface can be viewed as a radial cut-off at @xmath ; therefore,
the regulated manifold is bounded by @xmath . On this hypersurface, the
induced quantities are the induced metric @xmath and @xmath , the trace
of the extrinsic curvature of the hypersurface.
The hypersurface @xmath works as boundary condition for the action;
hence, the momenta on the regulating surface can be computed by
variation of the on-shell action with respect to boundary values of the
induced fields given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

Furthermore, we fix the lapse and shift freedom so that the bulk metric
has the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

and choose the axial gauge, where @xmath . From now on, we consider the
hypersurface which is a radial distance @xmath apart from the boundary
and suppress the index of @xmath . In this section, the radial
derivative will be denoted by a dot.
We can rewrite the regulated on-shell action, using Einstein equations
and the Gauss-Codazzi identities, and introducing a new variable @xmath
,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

provided @xmath satisfies the equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the trace of the energy-momentum tensor.
The leading terms of the asymptotic expansion read

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath denote the non-normalisable modes, derived in
the previous section. Hence, the radial derivatives of this expansions
are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

The canonical momenta are functionals of the induced fields on the
hypersurface @xmath and read in the case of our toy model

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since the momenta are functionals of the induced fields, we can
re-express the radial derivative by the functional differential operator

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

We identify the radial derivative asymptotically with the dilatation
operator @xmath ⁹ ⁹ 9 On the field theory side it is worth mentioning
the following: usually one parametrises a spacetime by Cartesian
coordinates @xmath ; however, in Euclidean signature time and space are
treated at the same footing. Note, that we can map a complex plane by a
conformal transformation to a cylinder (r, @xmath ). On the cylinder the
states live on spatial slices of constant @xmath and evolve by the
Hamiltonian @xmath . After the mapping to the plane the Hamiltonian
becomes the dilatation operator and states live on circles with constant
radius evolving by the dilatation operator. by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can now re-express the asymptotic expansions in eigenfunctions of the
dilatation operator

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.41)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.42)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.43)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.44)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The terms with subscript @xmath , where @xmath , transform according to
their scaling dimension under the dilatation operator, as well as the
terms proportional to the logarithms, for example

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

Identifying the dilatation operator with the radial derivative
determines the transformation law of the missing terms, namely

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath for @xmath and @xmath for @xmath .
In a similar fashion, we can write down the covariant expansion of the
radial derivative

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are covariant functional operators of successively higher
dilatation weight. Note that the on-shell action is of first order
whereas the e.o.m. of the fields are of second order in the radial
derivative. The order lowers by one when we write the equations in terms
of the canonical momenta.
In order to proceed, we have to determine the explicit expansions of the
momenta and the radial derivative in terms of eigenfunctions of the
dilatation operator. The crucial part is that both expansions have to be
done with respect to the dilatation weight order by order at the same
time. After determining the expansions, we can solve the equation for
the on-shell action order by order. Hence, the counter-term is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

With this at hand, the renormalised action is defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the renormalised correlation functions by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

### 3.6 Black holes in holography

One important ingredient in the discussion of AdS/CFT is still missing:
black holes; black holes are thermodynamical objects to whom we can
associate a certain temperature, the Hawking temperature. Via
holography, we can identify the temperature of the black hole with the
temperature of the dual field theory. Since black holes have a certain
temperature they provide a scale; hence, they break the conformal
invariance in the dual field theory. From the classical point of view,
we can view black holes, loosely speaking, as a one way door. Everything
that crosses the black hole horizon, will be lost; hence, we do not have
to take those things into account which are hidden behind the black-hole
horizon. In this way, the horizon functions as IR cut-off since we only
have to integrate over the spacetime region outside the horizon. On the
QFT side, we note the following: in a QFT at finite temperature, we
impose a certain periodicity on the imaginary time @xmath , where the
temperature @xmath functions as cut-off for long times, which
correspond, via holography, to low energies.
In non-horizon penetrating coordinates, the analytic extension (to
Euclidean AdS spacetime) of a black hole is conformally equivalent to a
cone. If we want to avoid conical singularities, we have to impose a
certain periodicity. This periodicity is identified with the periodicity
resulting from the Euclidean time formalism in QFT, leading to the above
mentioned result that the temperature of the black hole is equal the
temperature of the dual field theory. We see that in context of AdS/CFT
the “thermal circle“ is implemented in a natural way in the generating
functionals, namely via the presence of a black hole in the
gravitational theory.
We conjectured that a black hole induces a particular temperature in the
dual CFT. But how effects a small pertubation on top of the black hole
horizon the dual field theory? The answer to this question can be found
in the discussion of Q uasi- N ormal- M odes (QNMs) [ 50 , 51 , 52 , 53
, 54 ] . If we perturb a black hole, the surrounding geometry will
“ring“ and settle down back in equilibrium. The relaxation time, as well
as the frequencies of the ringing, are independent of the pertubation
and totally determined by the properties of the black hole. This
phenomenon is well known from closed systems where the frequencies are
referred to as normal modes. However, in presence of a classical black
hole, the system is not closed since the black hole may absorb the
pertubations and the modes will decay.
QNMs are the solutions to the linearised equations of gauge field
pertubations and pertubations of the gravitational background, subjected
to certain boundary conditions. On the boundary the solutions have to
fulfil a Dirichlet condition; at the horizon they are subjected to an
ingoing wave boundary condition. By virtue of the restriction to ingoing
waves, the condition at the future horizon is determined since classical
black holes do not emit radiation. Furthermore, omitting the solution
with outgoing waves yields to a non hermitian boundary value problem;
hence, the corresponding eigenfrequencies are complex. In QFT, small
deviations from thermal equilibrium are captured by dispersion relations
related to damped frequencies. Dispersion relations are formally the
singularities of retarded Green’s functions in the complex frequency
plane. Via the AdS/CFT correspondence, the quasi normal frequencies of
electromagnetic and gravitational pertubations in an asymptotic locally
AdS (AlAdS) spacetime are related to the poles of real time Green’s
functions within current or energy-momentum of the dual CFT at finite
temperature. This implies that the QNMs, corresponding to
electromagnetic and gravitational pertubations, are related to conserved
symmetry currents (or anomalous currents) on the CFT side. We conclude
that the AdS/CFT correspondence implies the following identifications:

AlAdS spacetime with event horizon @xmath thermal states in the dual CFT

..

Small pertubation of the black hole or black brane background @xmath
small deviations from the equilibrium in the CFT with definite
relaxation time.

This implies that we can obtain information about time-scales in the
thermalization process of strongly coupled systems at finite temperature
via the QNM spectrum of the dual gravitational theory.

## 4 Time dependent CME in holography and anomaly induced Landau
resonances

Throughout the following chapters, we want to investigate the CME in
holography. Especially, we focus on time dependencies and the effect of
dynamical charge generation. Concretely, we consider an @xmath model
which was previously studied in the literature within the context of
anomalous transport [ 55 , 56 , 57 ] . This is in contrast to the usual
approach where the net charge is introduced by an axial chemical
potential [ 14 , 55 ] . The @xmath model allows us to model the CME in
massless QED.

### 4.1 Holographic Setup

We consider the 5-dimensional matter Lagrangian

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

consisting of two gauge fields @xmath ( @xmath coupled by a Chern-Simons
(CS) term in the bulk. In the first part of this thesis, we restrict
ourselves to the probe approximation and consider a Schwarzschild-AdS
@xmath blackhole in infalling Eddington-Finkelstein coordinates as fixed
background metric

  -- -- -- -------
           (4.2)
  -- -- -- -------

where we fixed the diffeomorphisms by setting the black-hole horizon to
@xmath =1; furthermore, we set the AdS radius to @xmath . In infalling
Eddington-Finkelstein coordinates, we find that the equations of motion
are first order in time. In this coordinates, the surfaces of constant
time penetrate, from a geometrical point of view, the black-hole
horizon. Therefore, the ingoing condition is trivially realised by
geometry, i. e. we do not have to impose regularity of gauge fields at
@xmath .
The equations of motion for the gauge fields are obtained by a
variational principle (see appendix A for further details)

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

In order to motivate the specific ansatz for the Lagrangian in ( 4.1 ),
we compute the divergence of the dual current operators (for details see
appendix C ). The holographic Ward identities read

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath denotes the epsilon symbol in the boundary theory ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10
A comparison to the QCD expression, given in eq. ( 4.6 ), yields to
@xmath for the anomaly parameter. . Recall that the abelian part of the
QCD singlet anomaly for the toy model Lagrangian considered in eq. ( 4.1
) is given by [ 21 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

To mimic this feature, we chose the prefactor of the term @xmath in eq.
( 4.1 ) equal to 3. This leads to a relative factor of 3 between the
terms @xmath and @xmath in equation ( 4.5 ). The finite Bardeen
counter-terms ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 The finite counter-term is necessary since
otherwise we would implicitly assume that the regularisation scheme
treats left- and right handed particles on the same footing [ 58 ] .
have been chosen so that the VWI is fulfilled and the AWI (in eq. ( 4.5
)) is anomalous; with this choice, we can identify the vector current
with the electromagnetic current. Therefore, we refer to @xmath as the
axial gauge field and @xmath as the vector gauge field, providing the
external fields required for the CME.
The dynamics of the axial charge is captured by @xmath , where the dot
denotes the time derivative @xmath . As outlined in chapter 2.2 , at
least one of the electricmagnetic fields has to betime dependent in
order to dynamically generate axial charge. Concretely, we consider a
time dependent electric field parallel to a constant magnetic field
(both homogenous and pointing in @xmath -direction). This is covered by
the ansatz

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

with boundary condition

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

and regularity of @xmath at the horizon. The equations of motion
resulting from this ansatz for the gauge fields and the metric read
(with @xmath )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.9)
     @xmath      (4.10)
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we introduced @xmath for simplicity. The differential eqs. ( 4.9
), ( 4.10 ) have a regular singular point at @xmath ; thus, the solution
to the equations has to behave at this point like

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.12)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

We will see that the normalisable mode of @xmath is proportional to the
covariant vector current and the non-normalisable mode of @xmath to the
axial charge density @xmath . Integrating eq. ( 4.11 ) in time

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

and substituting the resulting expression into eq. ( 4.9 ) yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

This restricts the constant @xmath to be at most linear in @xmath ,
namely @xmath . With this at hand, we can replace @xmath in eq. ( 4.10 )
and end up with a single hyperbolic PDE for @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since we are interested in one point functions, we have to specify the
counter-terms in order to compute the dual correlators (see appendix C )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

The computation of the one point function (see eq. ( C.11 )) reveals
that the logarithmic term in eq. ( 4.12 ) contributes to the correlator.
In order to avoid this contribution, we have to add a finite (gauge
invariant) counter-term to the action. This is manifest in the last term
of eq. ( 4.17 ). In this regularisation scheme, the one-point function,
corresponding to the consistent current, is given by (see appendix C )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Imposing a vanishing @xmath at the horizon results in a vanishing
consistent current in the time independent limit [ 56 , 55 ] ; hence, it
is customary to use the covariant current. The covariant current is
connected to the consistent current via eq. ( 2.29 ) and @xmath as
mentioned in footnote 10 . In our case we obtain, using the ansatz eq. (
4.7 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Apart from that, regularity of the axial gauge field in
Eddington-Finkelstein coordinates does not require a vanishing @xmath at
the horizon. We can fix the gauge freedom by setting the
non-normalisable mode of @xmath to zero. Therefore, the consistent and
covariant current are indistinguishable and we can omit the subscript.
Furthermore, we drop the subscript @xmath since we integrate out the
axial gauge field and the computations contain only the @xmath component
of the vector gauge field. The current can be obtained by extracting the
coefficient of the non-normalisable mode of the vector gauge field
@xmath at the conformal boundary

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

### 4.2 Stationary solutions

In order to study the time dependent response of the system, we have to
construct initial data; we start with an equilibrium solution, obtained
from the time independent version of eq. ( 4.16 ). Since we want to
excite the system out of equilibrium, we switch on a time dependent
electric field; this is done, as usual in holography, via a boundary
condition. As outlined in chapter 3 , the boundary value of the gauge
fields are source terms in the dual field theory; hence, the boundary
value of the vector gauge field induces an external source in the dual
field theory, namely the electric field. In order to study the
non-equilibrium response of the system, we have to integrate in time
direction; the time independent form of eq. ( 4.16 ) reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can transform eq. ( 4.21 ) to the Legendre differential equation by
introducing a new radial variable @xmath and shifting the field @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

The solutions of eq. ( 4.22 ), which are regular at @xmath , are given
in terms of the Legendre functions @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

As mentioned beforehand, the constant @xmath is just a shift of the
field @xmath and we gauge fix it to zero. To interpret the second
constant @xmath we integrate eq. ( 4.14 ) using eq. ( 4.23 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

this implies that the constant determines the absolute value of the
chemical potential. The asymptotic expansion of the stationary solution
( 4.23 ) reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we identified

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath being the Euler gamma functions. Note that in the stationary
case the time derivatives of the source in eq. ( 4.12 ) vanish.
Therefore, the coefficient of the term quadratic in @xmath is the
required expression for the current in the stationary case, given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

The last term is valid since @xmath times the factor containing the
gamma functions asymptotes, for large @xmath , 4. The value of the
current depends on the integration constant @xmath (via @xmath ). A
vanishing @xmath at the beginning requires therefore a vanishing @xmath
and yields to a trivial solution for @xmath .

### 4.3 Non-equilibrium solutions

In the following, we want to study the non-equilibrium response of the
system which requires that we integrate eq. ( 4.16 ) in time. For
numerical convenience we rescale the function @xmath , using the
asymptotic expansions. This leads to explicit @xmath dependent terms in
the differential equation. In section 4.2 we explained that the
stationary solutions, we are interested in, are independent of @xmath .
To get rid of @xmath at the initial time we choose @xmath in such a way
that the function and all its derivatives vanish in the beginning of the
simulation. Concretely, we introduce an auxiliary field @xmath defined
by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

Rewriting eq. ( 4.16 ) in terms of the auxiliary field @xmath leads to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we defined

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.31)
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

On a time slice of constant @xmath the differential equation ( 4.29 ) is
a second order ODE with respect to the radial coordinate requiring two
integration constants. The first integration constant is fixed using the
leading term of the asymptotic behaviour @xmath . The second integration
constant is incorporated by setting the shift @xmath in eq. ( 4.31 ) to
zero. Therefore, the boundary conditions enter the initial configuration
in the following way (inverting the boundary expansion and solving for
the auxiliary field)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

A brief review of the numerical methods can be found in appendix D and
the convergency tests in appendix E .

### 4.4 Gaussian and hyperbolic tangent quenches

In the previous section, we explained the framework within which we can
study the non-equilibrium behaviour of the model under consideration. We
excite the system in a non-equilibrium state via an abruptly switched on
electric field; with the electric field, we are able to “pump” energy in
the system. The more the electric field tends to a delta function like
shape, the more the system gets out of equilibrium. In the first part of
this thesis, we are interested in the dependence of the response on the
abruptness of the quench. Therefore, we will focus on two types of
quenches, namely the Gaussian and the hyperbolic tangent quench

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the inverse width of the source and @xmath fixes the
center. The parameter @xmath can be viewed as abruptness of the quench,
implying a “fast quench” refers to @xmath . There is one big difference
between the two kind of quenches; recall that the electric field is
given by the time derivative of the source. A Gaussian type source
results in an electric field with a positive and negative pulse of same
area; this means that we do not induce net axial charge in the system
after the quench. In contrast, the derivative of the hyperbolic tangent
source is a single pulse resulting in a final net axial charge. This is
obvious because the total axial charge of the system behaves as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

As a first step, we want to focus on the initial “response” of the
system. In order to get an intuition how the system reacts in response
to the quenches, we considered different values of the product @xmath
and different abruptnesses @xmath . The response of the system subjected
to the Gaussian quench is depicted in figure 4 . In reaction to a “slow”
quench (green) the current follows the corresponding adiabatic response,
given by eq. ( 4.27 ), whereas the response to a “fast” quench behaves
different compared to the adiabatic response. In order to discuss
dimensionless quantities, we introduce the rescaled magnetic field
@xmath . In the r.h.s. of figure 4 , we present the response to the same
Gaussian source for different values of @xmath . Note that we normalised
the adiabatic response associated to a particular value of @xmath so
that the adiabatic response is equal for all different values of @xmath
. Obviously, the lower the value of @xmath , the more differs the
response of the system compared to the adiabatic response.
In addition, we did a similar study for the hyperbolic tangent quench.
The corresponding results are depicted in figure 5 . Whereas the
response to the “slow” quench follows the adiabatic response, the “fast”
quench induces a damped oscillation of the current. We notice again that
for the smallest value of @xmath the response of system to the quench
deviates the most from the equilibrium response. In all cases, the
current is non zero after the quench, since the quench introduces net
axial charge to the system.

### 4.5 Universality in fast quenches

Inspired by recent work about quantum quenches in strongly coupled field
theories within holography [ 59 , 20 , 60 ] , we are especially
interested in whether our system shows an universal regime in response
to fast quenches. With regard to our model, our main focus is the
dependence on the anomaly, namely whether the response to fast quenches
is independent of the Chern-Simons coupling @xmath . In order to
characterise the initial response of the system, we found it useful to
define the quantity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the first minimum and the first maximum,
respectively, of the current. We consider now the dependence of the
quantity @xmath on different values of the anomaly parameter @xmath and
quench abruptness @xmath .
On the left hand side of figure 6 the universal behaviour is apparent;
in the case of fast enough quenches the difference is independent of the
value of @xmath and fits perfectly to a straight line (magenta) in the
double logarithmic presentation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

with a fitting error of @xmath .

The bigger the value of @xmath , the abrupter the quench has to be in
order to get to the universal regime. Furthermore, we can define a
critical abruptness @xmath of the quench, as the abruptness where @xmath
has its global maximum, i.e. @xmath . To determine the critical
abruptness we use splines for the data. The critical @xmath are depicted
by black dots; we see that they fit in the logarithmic representation to
a straight line (red). The dependence of @xmath on the value of @xmath
is shown in the r.h.s. of figure 6 . We find a linear dependence of the
critical abruptness on @xmath ; concretely, we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

with a fitting error of @xmath . After considering the Gaussian quench,
we did an analogous study with the hyperbolic tangent, depicted in
figure 7 . The discussion of the results is more qualitatively than for
the Gaussian quench, since the first minimum of the hyperbolic tangent
quench can be altered by the oscillation of the current; this causes
inaccuracies but the behaviour stays qualitatively the same. In the case
of fast enough quenches, we found again that @xmath is independent of
the value of @xmath , concretely

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

with a fitting error of @xmath .
The dependence of the critical abruptness is again linear dependent on
@xmath but we observe an obvious variance of the points.

In order to compare the results to [ 20 ] , we did a similar analysis
defining an “excitation time” @xmath by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the first @xmath , fulfilling eq. ( 4.39 ), and @xmath
is given by the adiabatic response eq. ( 4.27 ). In other words: the
excitation time is the first time where the current deviates 1% from the
adiabatic response. The results are shown in figure 8 . As the authors
of [ 20 ] we found an universal behaviour for fast enough quenches. The
straight lines in the l.h.s. of figure 8 were hard to distinguish by
eye. As shown in the inset, the differences between the lines get’s
smaller for bigger values of @xmath , which is already clear from the
picture on the r.h.s. of figure 8 . Hence, we notice that the smaller
the value of @xmath , the faster the system gets out of equilibrium.
Further on, we did the same analysis for the hyperbolic tangent quench
which we present in figure 9 . Again, in the case of fast enough
quenches we can observe an universal behaviour, independent of @xmath .
As figure 4 already indicates, we notice that the value of @xmath plays
an important role in the slow quench regime. The smaller @xmath , the
more different the system behaves compared to the adiabatic response.
This is mirrored in the excitation times which are in the slow quench
regime much smaller for smaller values of @xmath . The current reaches
in this regime, dependent on the value of @xmath , not for all quenches
the 1% deviation. The bigger the value of @xmath , the bigger values of
@xmath are necessary in order to push the system out of equilibrium.

### 4.6 Quasi-normal mode formalism

In section 3.6 , we presented a qualitative intuition about QNMs. In
order to compute the QNM frequencies in our system, we briefly review an
appropriate framework [ 61 , 62 ] . We rewrite eq. ( 4.29 ) in the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

for given initial data @xmath . Applying a Laplace transformation ¹² ¹²
12 The parameter @xmath of the Laplace transformation is related to the
Fourier parameter by @xmath .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

and taking into account that for a generic function @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that in our case the last term has to be approximately zero, as
mentioned in the previous section. In order to obtain the QNM, we have
to solve the homogeneous version of eq. ( 4.43 ). We can formulate the
problem as Generalised Eigenvalue problem (GEVP), where the complex
eigenvalues @xmath correspond to the QNMs and the regular solutions
@xmath are the corresponding eigenvectors

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

In our model, the problem is linear in @xmath due to our choice of
ingoing Eddington-Finkelstein coordinates. In Poincaré coordinates the
problem would be in general quadratic in @xmath . In our set-up the
operators read

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.46)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.47)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Within this framework, we are able to compute the QNM frequencies
required in the next section.

### 4.7 Resonances

We now focus on the late time behaviour of the current; concretely, we
are looking at the current of a fixed Gaussian source for several values
of the magnetic field. Increasing the value of @xmath results in a lower
decay rate of the late time oscillations, as shown in figure 10 . The
relaxation time gets very small compared to all other scales of the
system for @xmath . The late time behaviour is, as we will show in this
section, dominated by the QNMs of the system. A small decay rate
corresponds, in the QNM picture, to a small imaginary part. Therefore,
the decreasing damping rate indicates the existence of a QNM approaching
the real axis for increasing @xmath .

To determine, whether the oscillations in the current correspond to the
QNMs, we consider a damped oscillation, consisting of the two lowest
QNMs @xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thereby, the damping factor @xmath is given by the imaginary part of the
QNM and the oscillation frequency @xmath by the real part. Since higher
QNMs are damped very fast, we found it sufficient to fit to the first
two QNMs. The result is depicted in the r.h.s. of figure 11 . The
parameters of the fit, which matches perfectly the obtained current, are
shown in table 3 . Obviously, the lowest QNM dominates the oscillation
in the current.

Furthermore, we demonstrate, that the damping, presented in figure 10 ,
corresponds exactly to the imaginary part of the lowest QNM. Therefore,
we consider the following fit model

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

which we fit to the envelope of the oscillatory current. The results are
depicted in table 4 and the r.h.s. of figure 10 , respectively. The
damping parameter matches perfectly the imaginary part of the QNM.
Therefore, we conclude, that the damping of the oscillation is
determined by the lowest QNM.

As a first step, we try to excite the resonances of the system directly.
To do so we consider an oscillatory source, given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the factors differing from the sin term are chosen for numerical
convenience. We investigate the response of the system for frequencies
@xmath approaching the resonance frequency @xmath of the system. In
order to determine the resonance frequency of the system, we have to
make again use of the QNMs.
In figure 12 we tuned the frequency of the source from @xmath to @xmath
, in order to determine, whether the system shows a resonant behaviour
or not. To obtain a resonant behaviour the frequency has to be very
close to the resonance frequency, namely up to 99.9%. This is obvious,
considering the r.h.s. of figure 12 . All frequencies of the source,
which are too far away from the resonance frequency induce a
periodically oscillating current.
On the right hand side of figure 13 , we investigated the dependence of
the current for different @xmath and a resonant source. The current
grows in the case @xmath unbounded while for smaller @xmath the current
oscillates with a constant amplitude. The reason why we can not observe
resonances for @xmath will be clear in section 4.9 . Finally, we
considered higher QNMs as frequencies for the source with results being
qualitatively the same as for the lowest QNM.

### 4.8 Quasi-normal modes with backreaction

We now will investigate whether the resonances, observed in the previous
section, are really a footprint of the anomaly. Therefore, we have to
vary @xmath and @xmath independent from each other. Due to this demand
and since we are interested in strong magnetic fields, we have to go
beyond the probe approximation and take backreaction into account. The
magnetic field, pointing in @xmath -direction, induces a spatial
anisotropy and therefore breaks the spatial rotational invariance.
Therefore, the metric function multiplied by @xmath has to be distinct
from the ones multiplying @xmath and @xmath . This is manifest in the
metric ansatz [ 63 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

The action for the model under consideration reads

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.52)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The Chern-Simons term does not contribute to the energy-momentum tensor
since the energy-momentum tensor is given by the variation of the matter
action with respect to the metric. Hence, the energy-momentum tensor is
the usual one obtained in electrodynamics

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the trace

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

The trace of Einstein equations reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

Solving this equation for @xmath and plug it into the Einstein equations
yields to the equations of motion for the background, in the so called
trace reduced form,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

The equations of motion of the gauge fields (which will be trivially
fulfilled for the chosen background) are given by eq. ( 4.3 ) and eq. (
4.4 ). Due to the diffeomorphism freedom, we can choose our coordinate
system in a way that the black-hole horizon is located at @xmath . The
metric function @xmath can be viewed as a blackening factor and has to
vanish for this reason at the horizon, i.e. @xmath . For numerical
convenience we will rescale the metric functions by use of the
asymptotic expansions. The general ansatz is restricted to
asymptotically AdS, requiring

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

Furthermore, we want to fix the remaining diffeomorphisms, namely the
shift freedom, by imposing @xmath . With this restrictions the
asymptotic expansions are given by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.58)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.59)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.60)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

We can now introduce the rescaled functions @xmath which will be used
for all numerical calculations. They are given by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.61)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.62)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.63)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The magnetic field @xmath and @xmath appear always as a product in the
equations; hence, we can fix @xmath without loss of generality. We want
to investigate fluctuation on top of a background containing a magnetic
field. Therefore, we consider the ansatz @xmath and @xmath for the gauge
fields. With this ansatz at hand, we can solve the e.o.m. for given
magnetic field using a spectral method.
In figure 14 we show the background functions for different values of
the magnetic field. The homogenous solution ( @xmath ) is given by the
Schwarzschild solution
@xmath .
After having solved the background, we can look at pertubations on top
of it. The Chern-Simons term contains, as already mentioned in the
derivation of the energy-momentum tensor, no term proportional to the
metric or its determinant and is fully contracted. Therefore, the metric
fluctuations will decouple from the fluctuations of the gauge fields.
Since the gauge fields are five dimensional there are 5 possible
sectors, whereby only the @xmath - and @xmath -sectors of the gauge
fields are coupled. In the @xmath regime only @xmath and @xmath are
coupled. For the former the constraint equation reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

This relation can be, analogously to the non-backreacted case, easily
integrated in time leading to the relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

We set the constant @xmath to zero, as discussed in the non-backreacted
case (see section 4.2 ). Relation ( 4.65 ) allows us to replace @xmath
in the @xmath -equation which is, after a Laplace transformation, given
by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  ----- -------- -------- -- --------
        @xmath   @xmath      (4.67)
                 @xmath      
  and                        
        @xmath   @xmath      (4.68)
  ----- -------- -------- -- --------

Eq. ( 4.66 ) will be solved in context of a GEVP. We observed that in
strong magnetic fields the QNMs, we are interested in, converge slowly
or do not converge at all. To ensure the convergence the spectral
solution is improved via a mapping of the radial coordinate @xmath .
This mapping provides more gridpoints near the boundary located at
@xmath and moves the logarithms, present in the expansions ( 4.58 )-(
4.60 ) to higher orders

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

### 4.9 Landau resonances

Since we are now able to vary the Chern-Simons coupling @xmath and the
magnetic field independent from each other, we can check whether the
resonances are an anomaly driven phenomenon or purely an effect of the
magnetic field. Furthermore, the probe approximation restricted us to
small values of the magnetic field, whereas we are interested in the
fate of the QNMs at high values of the magnetic field.
To check whether there is a qualitative difference in presence of the
anomaly, we look at the behaviour of the three lowest QNMs while
increasing @xmath with anomaly parameter switched on ( @xmath ) and
without anomaly ( @xmath ). The result is depicted in figure 15 and the
difference in the behaviour is obvious. For @xmath (and in general for
@xmath ) the QNMs approach the real axis, whilst for @xmath they tend
away from it. We observe an intermediate region @xmath , as shown in the
r.h.s. of figure 15 where the absolute value of the imaginary part
increases again once the magnetic field is large enough. We notice that
the bigger the value of @xmath , the faster the QNMs approach the real
axis. The results for higher QNMs are qualitatively similar to the
results for the lowest QNM. We conclude that in the case of vanishing
@xmath there are no resonances in the current, independent of the value
of @xmath since the QNMs do not approach the real axis. In the region
@xmath , we observe the QNMs approaching monotonically the real axis up
to very small values (Im @xmath for @xmath ). QNMs with vanishing real
part are not damped and therefore we should observe resonances in the
current. For values of @xmath the QNMs do not go down again in the
regime of @xmath allowed by our numerics. Furthermore we did not observe
a mode crossing the real axis to the upper half plane, which would have
been an indicator for instabilities.

In order to characterise the behaviour of the QNMs at strong magnetic
fields, we found it useful to look closer at the real part of the lowest
QNM in dependence of the magnetic field. Therefore, we fitted the real
part of the QNM for @xmath to a function of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

We find that in all cases the exponent in eq. ( 4.70 ) is given by
@xmath . The biggest deviation is @xmath (with an fitting error of
@xmath ) for the lowest value of @xmath . The bigger the value of @xmath
, the better the data fits to a square root. In the l.h.s of figure 16 ,
we show the real part of the lowest QNM in the case @xmath . We observe
two regimes, namely the low @xmath regime where the behaviour deviates
from a square root and the regime where it fits perfectly to a square
root. In the r.h.s., we show the square root behaviour of the real part
for several values of @xmath . The real part of QNMs is proportional to
the energy; furthermore, the split-up of the energy levels of a
relativistic particle in a magnetic field, the so called Landau levels,
is given by @xmath . Hence, the square root behaviour indicates that the
resonances in the current are the consequence of the presence of Landau
levels in our set-up.
It is obvious in figure 15 that the real part in the case @xmath has no
square root behaviour for any value of @xmath . Furthermore, we did not
observe any resonances in the current in the case @xmath . In addition,
taking the behaviour of the imaginary part into account, we can conclude
that the resonances are indeed a footprint of the anomaly. Since we
considered the behaviour of the QNMs only up to a certain value of the
magnetic field, it could be possible that the modes tend again away from
the axis. In this case, the resonances would be restricted to a certain
magnetic field regime.
We investigated the dependence of the real part of the QNMs on the
magnetic field and found a square root behaviour. But is there also an
easy connection to the value of the anomaly parameter @xmath ?

In order to answer this question, we determined the slope of the square
root @xmath , defined in eq. ( 4.70 ), for different values of @xmath .
The result is depicted in figure 17 . For @xmath we fitted the data to
@xmath with the result is @xmath , where the fitting error of the
exponent is of magnitude @xmath . We therefore conclude that the
behaviour of the real part of the QNMs for strong enough magnetic fields
follows Re @xmath .
This is an interesting result which can already be obtained in the probe
limit. In figure 16 we investigated the dependence of the lowest QNM on
@xmath . As a first observation, we notice that the absolute value of
the imaginary part decreases when increasing @xmath and the QNM is
approaching the real axis. Therefore, we should be able to see
resonances for @xmath , as indicated in the inset in the r.h.s. of
figure 18 . This is precisely what we found in figure 13 , where we
observed resonances for @xmath . The real part indeed behaves, as shown
in the r.h.s. of figure 18 , as Re @xmath .

## 5 Conclusions

In this thesis, we examined non-equilibrium dynamics in strongly coupled
field theories by means of holography. Concretely, we considered an
@xmath -model, consisting of two gauge fields in presence of an anomaly,
induced by a Chern-Simons term. The two external gauge fields provide
parallel electromagnetic fields, namely a static magnetic field and a
time-dependent electric field. In presence of a chirality imbalance, the
system generates a current, parallel to the electromagnetic fields,
which is known as the CME current. Throughout the thesis, we computed
the current in order to characterise the response of the system to
quenches of the electric field.
As a first step, we considered the system in the so called probe
approximation, neglecting the backreaction of the fields on the metric.
This limits us to small values of the energy-momentum tensor compared to
the temperature of the black hole, implying that we are restricted to
sufficiently “small” values of the magnetic field and sufficiently
“slow” quenches. Nevertheless, we made progress in including
backreaction to study the full non-linear response. Within the probe
approximation, we were able to reduce the system to a single linear
hyperbolic PDE. We integrated this PDE, by means of a fully spectral
code [ 64 ] , in time direction.
Motivated by the work of [ 20 ] , we focused on the early time response
of the system in the first part of the thesis. Concretely, we examined
the dependence of the CME current on different abruptnesses of the
quench and how the anomaly affects the results. We found that our system
shows an universal scaling behaviour in the early-time response.
Throughout the investigation, we noticed that in case of bigger values
of @xmath faster quenches are needed in order to get to the universal
regime. Furthermore, we did a similar study, as the authors of [ 20 ] .
Therefore, we defined an “excitation” time, as the first time, where the
response deviates 1% from the adiabatic response. Similar to the authors
of [ 20 ] we found an universal scaling behaviour. In addition, the
response is independent of @xmath for sufficient fast quenches. Since we
excite in some cases long living oscillations in the current, a similar
discussion for a relaxation time, defined as the last time, where the
response deviates 1% from the adiabatic response, is not useful.
Nevertheless, our results for the early response indicate, that the
relaxation time gets smaller, when increasing @xmath . This coincides
with @xmath being the coupling of the current to the electric field.
We noticed that the quench excites, for sufficiently large @xmath ,
long-living oscillations in the current ¹³ ¹³ 13 Note that the
resonances were also observed in recent lattice calculations [ 65 ] . .
We traced the frequencies of the oscillations back to the real part of
the corresponding QNMs and the damping to the imaginary part. Therefore,
we conclude that an almost undamped oscillation corresponds to a QNM
with an almost vanishing imaginary part. Furthermore, we were able to
excite the resonances directly by a source, oscillating with the real
part of the corresponding QNM.
To point out whether these “resonances” are an effect of the magnetic
field or the anomaly, we computed the fate of the QNMs for strong
magnetic fields, with and without anomaly. The magnetic field @xmath and
the anomaly parameter @xmath always appear as a product in the probe
limit. Furthermore, the probe approximation is in the case of strong
magnetic fields not valid.
In the last part of the thesis, we included backreaction into the system
and computed the corresponding QNMs. The real part of the QNMs matches
for @xmath perfectly to Re @xmath . Therefore, we traced back the
resonances as presence from Landau levels in our set-up. The absence of
the resonances in the case @xmath implies, that there are no dual
fermionic degrees of freedom charged under the symmetries we took into
account.
The next step is to characterise the behaviour of the imaginary part of
the QNMs. We observe that for @xmath the QNMs approach the imaginary
axis up to very small values. The stronger the Chern-Simons coupling,
the faster and closer the QNM approach the real axis. In conclusion, for
@xmath the lowest QNM, which determines the oscillation behaviour of the
current, has for all values of @xmath a non vanishing imaginary part and
therefore we are not able to observe resonances in the current. One
could speculate whether the value @xmath is special in regards to the
quantum critical point, present at @xmath [ 66 , 67 , 68 ] .
Furthermore, we examined the dependence of the real part on the anomaly
parameter @xmath . Concretely, we found that Re @xmath . This can be
already seen from the probe limit since @xmath appears again as a
product.
Although our discussion is motivated by Dirac/Weyl semimetals, we chose
for our work a simpler model. Nevertheless, in our opinion the simpler
model captures the core properties, we wanted to explore. However, it
would be interesting to perform an analogous study in the holographic
model, established in [ 69 ] .
Furthermore, it would be interesting to include backreaction in the
discussion of the time-dependent phenomena. In the probe limit, we
observed resonances in the current for @xmath . The QNM analysis,
including backreaction, reveals that resonances should be visible for
@xmath . Nevertheless, for the @xmath curve, the mode becomes at @xmath
massless which matches the results obtained in the probe limit.
Furthermore, our system is linear, due to the probe approximation.
Therefore, it would be interesting to know, whether the full non-linear
behaviour shows an universal behaviour too. We found that the response
is independent of @xmath for fast enough quenches. In the full system it
is possible to distinguish between magnetic and anomaly effects, and to
examine the response for fixed magnetic field and different values of
the Chern-Simons coupling.
But not only the generalisation of out set-up including backreaction is
interesting. As a first step in order to study an (possible) universal
behaviour in presence of an anomaly, it would be interesting to include
a Chern-Simons term to the system, discussed in [ 70 ] . In this paper
the authors consider a Gaussian spatial anisotropy, propagating in
radial direction. For this Gaussian one could perform a similar study
regarding the initial response, as we did. An further possible extension
would be an additional boundary source, for example a time dependent
electric field.
In our discussion of the QNMs with backreaction, we traced back the
resonances to the presence of Landau levels. But are the Landau levels
populated? Are the fundamental excitations populating the Landau levels,
of fermionic or bosonic nature? Is it possible with this knowledge to
construct microscopic Fermi surfaces in context of AdS/CFT? To answer
questions in this direction, we have to switch on a finite density.
Since it is not clear, whether Dirac/Weyl semimetals are strongly
coupled, it would be interesting to look at our studies from a weak
coupling perspective. Nevertheless, it is worth mentioning that Landau
level resonances were found experimentally in Dirac semimetals [ 71 , 72
] .

## Appendix A Equations of motions of the gauge fields

The Lagrangian ( 4.1 ) of our model reads

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.1)
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (A.2)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Therefore, we obtain with @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.3)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.4)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.5)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.6)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

leading by setting ( A.3 )=( A.4 ) and ( A.5 )=( A.6 ) directly to the
equation of motion.

## Appendix B Holographic renormalisation

In order to compute the one-point-functions, we have to renormalise the
model considered in eq. ( 4.1 ). Therefore, we follow the procedure
explained in section 3.5 . In our case the non-normalisable modes of the
induced metric and the gauge fields behave asymptotically as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

and their radial derivatives as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

implying for the radial derivative @xmath and the dilatation operator
@xmath defined in eq. ( 3.39 )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

At first, we derive the equation of motion for the gauge fields in
Gaussian coordinates

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Rewriting the first term

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.5)
              @xmath      (B.6)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where we set @xmath , since we are working in the axial gauge. The same
holds for @xmath . For the Chern-Simons part we get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

and analogous for the Chern-Simons part in the e.o.m for @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Summarising the e.o.m. read

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.9)
     @xmath      (B.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

All terms without radial derivative have a well defined unique weight,
whereas the radial derivative has to be expanded. A not well defined
weight will be denoted by @xmath . Solving eq. ( B.9 ) to first order
results in (since @xmath and @xmath are zero)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

analogous we get @xmath . The equation for the on-shell action reads

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (B.12)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where we implement the on-shellness of the Lagrangian using the
asymptotic expansions. Since @xmath we conclude @xmath . To first
non-trivial order we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

The next non-vanishing order is given by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.14)
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.15)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Therefore, the counter-term in the @xmath -patch reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

## Appendix C One-point-functions

We consider the Lagrangian (where latin letters run in this section from
0-4)

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

We now expand the terms in the Lagrangian to first order. We obtain for
the first term

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
                          (C.2)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The first part of the third term leads to (using @xmath )

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (C.3)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The second part gives rise to

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (C.4)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Therefore, we can write the Lagrangian, expanded to first order as

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (C.5)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

We now put the Lagrangian on-shell and obtain, using the EOMs and the
fact that the Christoffel symbols are symmetric while the Levi Civita
tensor is antisymmetric

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (C.6)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Integrating the full divergence gives rise to boundary terms

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (C.7)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the outward pointing unit vector which reads

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Due to the normalisation @xmath , we obtain

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

The determinant of the induced metric on the @xmath plane is given by
@xmath and @xmath and therefore @xmath . The action now reads

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.10)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

With this at hand and the ansatz @xmath , we are able to compute one
point functions

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (C.11)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

After adding the counter-terms, the one-point function reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

We now derive the Ward identities. The vector Ward identity reads

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (C.13)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

since the equation corresponds to the @xmath component of the EOMs.
Furthermore we obtain for the axial Ward identity

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (C.14)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

## Appendix D Numerical methods

Within this thesis, we solve the arising equations by means of
pseudo-spectral methods. Let @xmath be the solution to the differential
equation [ 73 , 74 , 75 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a differential operator, @xmath a known function and the
coordinate @xmath is bounded by @xmath . Let @xmath a set of globally
defined, orthogonal basis functions. We can expand the unknown solution
function @xmath in this basis @xmath . Theoretically, we can plug this
ansatz in the differential equation and solve for the coefficients. In
praxis, we have to make an approximation in order to obtain a problem,
which we can tackle numerically. The spectral approximation is to
truncate the series at a certain finite value @xmath . Furthermore, we
discretise the coordinate @xmath interval in @xmath non-equidistant
gridpoints. Since the derivatives of the basis functions are known, we
can rearrange the sum so that a derivative of the function acts only on
the expansion coefficients @xmath . Plugging the expansion in the
differential equation and evaluate the corresponding equation at the
gridpoints yields to an algebraic equation system, with unknown
coefficients. In the context of pseudo-spectral methods, we do not solve
for the coefficients, but convert the expansion into a weighted sum over
grid points and solve directly for the field values. Throughout this
thesis, we use Chebyshev polynomials as basis functions and a
Gauss-Lobatto grid in the spatial direction. Since a fully spectral code
is not the usual procedure to integrate in time, we give a brief recipe
of the method.
Fully Pseudo-spectral time evolution
To evolve a 1+1 dimensional system from an initial time @xmath to a
final time @xmath with a fully spectral code we have to introduce
spectral coordinates in time and space direction. To do so we change
coordinates to map the physical domain onto a unit square and expand the
function in terms of a truncated series of Chebyshev polynomials. To
solve our concrete problem we use the following recipe [ 64 , 76 , 77 ]
.

1.  Solve the static equation to determine the initial data @xmath

2.  Decompose the time interval in appropriate time domains
    @xmath

3.  Given initial data @xmath at @xmath , introduce an auxiliary field
    @xmath

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (D.2)
      -- -------- -- -------

4.  introduce a Chebyshev-Lobatto grid in @xmath -direction ( @xmath )
    and a right-hand side Chebyshev-Radau grid (at some generic time
    interval @xmath )

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (D.3)
      -- -------- -- -------

    where @xmath and @xmath .

5.  Replace the derivatives by their discrete version: @xmath and @xmath
    and impose the discrete version of the equation of motion on every
    grid point of the unit square

6.  Solve the resulting linear system

7.  Use the numerical solution @xmath as new initial value for the next
    time domain to proceed iteratively in time until @xmath

Note that we can adjust the size of each time sub domain individually
according to the quench profile.

## Appendix E Convergence and numerical accuracy

### e.1 Time evolution

In figure 19 we depicted the auxiliary field during the time evolution
for a Gaussian quench. We chose the quench parameter so that we excite
with the quench an oscillation. The impact of quench propagates from
@xmath to @xmath . But unlike near the boundary the field near the
horizon is damped to zero. This matches exactly our expectation, since
we chose ingoing boundary condition and the field content is absorbed by
the black hole.

In figure 20 we depicted the field @xmath . The field contains the
source, which determines is asymptotic behaviour. We notice again, that
the field is damped in direction of the horizon.

Since a fully spectral code is not the usual procedure to integrate in
time direction, we show in figure the composition of the current with
respect to the time intervals. Thereby each color represents one
timestep. The dots of the same color within on time step represent the
grid in time direction. In figure 21 we present the Chebyshev
coefficients throughout the time evolution. It is apparent that near the
quench the convergence is the worst. At this point we present the
coefficients in time and the spatial direction. Furthermore, we checked
our numerics using implicit (Crank-Nicolson) and explicit (4/5th order
Runge-Kutta, 5th Adams–Bashforth) time propagators.

### e.2 Quasi-normal modes with backreaction

We now present the convergence plots for the QNMs in the backreacted
case. In figure 22 we show the convergence in the numerical worst case
background functions. Concretely, we considered a magnetic field of
magnitude @xmath . The coefficients of the background solutions drop
down to @xmath in the worst case. The supremums-norm, which is the
maximal deviation from the considered solution to a reference solution (
@xmath ) is depicted in figure 23 and reveals that for @xmath the
maximal deviation is @xmath . Furthermore, we investigated the
convergence for the pertubations. In figure 24 , we show the convergence
in the numerical worst case for the lowest QNM. The QNMs vary for @xmath
80 less than machine precision. The differential equation for the
pertubations is in the case @xmath gridpoints fulfilled up to @xmath .