##### Contents

-    1 Introduction
    -    1.1 Notation and conventions
-    2 Anti-de Sitter Spacetime
    -    2.1 Global AdS
    -    2.2 Poincaré patch of AdS
    -    2.3 Schwarzschild black holes
    -    2.4 Asymptotically AdS black holes
-    3 Entanglement and Entropy
    -    3.1 The density matrix
    -    3.2 Entanglement entropy
    -    3.3 Entanglement in CFTs
-    4 A Brief Introduction to Gauge/Gravity Duality
    -    4.1 @xmath Super Yang-Mills theory and type IIB string theory
        on @xmath
    -    4.2 Gauge/gravity duality: The weak form
    -    4.3 @xmath and @xmath
-    5 The Ryu-Takayanagi Formula
    -    5.1 Relation to holography
    -    5.2 Uses of the Ryu-Takayanagi formula
    -    5.3 Evidence for the Ryu-Takayanagi formula
-    6 Linearized Gravity in AdS Background
    -    6.1 Perturbing spacetime
    -    6.2 Perturbing the Poincaré patch
-    7 Entanglement and Spacetime
    -    7.1 Entanglement and the eternal black hole
    -    7.2 Beyond the eternal black hole
-    8 Linearized Gravity from Entanglement
    -    8.1 Entropy and the modular hamiltonian
    -    8.2 Holographic interpretation of @xmath
    -    8.3 Holographic interpretation of @xmath
    -    8.4 Combining the holographic results
    -    8.5 The form @xmath
-    9 Beyond Linearized Gravity
    -    9.1 @xmath corrections to the Ryu-Takayanagi formula
    -    9.2 A holographic interpretation of @xmath and @xmath
    -    9.3 Linearized gravity coupled to matter
-    10 Conclusion

## Chapter 1 Introduction

Ever since its discovery by Maldacena in 1998, the AdS/CFT
correspondence has intrigued researchers in quantum gravity. The
correspondence entails a duality between theories with and without
gravity, and recently, Mark van Raamsdonk and collaborators [ 1 , 2 , 3
, 4 ] have proposed that entanglement here plays a crucial role. The
suggestion relies on a single entry from the AdS/CFT dictionary; the
Ryu-Takayanagi formula [ 5 ] and its covariant generalization [ 6 ] .
This formula relates entanglement entropy on the CFT side to areas of
extremal co-dimension two surfaces on the AdS side, thereby relating an
intrinsically quantum mechanical phenomena on the CFT side to the
geometry of the bulk in the spacetime dual. This result, van Raamsdonk
conjectures, proves an intimate relation between entanglement on the CFT
side with spacetime itself on the AdS side. He argues “that the
intrinsically quantum phenomenon of entanglement appears to be crucial
for the emergence of classical spacetime geometry” [ 1 , pp. 4–5] .

A qualitative justification for this claim employs the example of a
thermofield double state and its dual description as a maximally
extended AdS-Schwarzschild black hole (the eternal black hole). In this
case, the spacetime connectivity between the two exterior regions of the
eternal black hole changes when the amount of entanglement between the
two double states is changed. While this result may be established
employing a holographic interpretation of the well known
Bekenstein-Hawking formula, it may be generalized using the
Ryu-Takayanagi formula to all quantum states with a classical spacetime
dual. Thus, for such pairs this qualitative argument indicates that
there is an intimate relation between entanglement in a CFT state and
spacetime in the dual spacetime. The details of this qualitative
argument will be the topic of chapter 7 of this thesis.

Chapter 8 will be dedicated to more rigorous and quantitative support
for a relation between entanglement on the CFT side and gravity on the
AdS side. More precisely, it will be demonstrated how the first law of
entanglement entropy on the CFT side is equivalent to imposing the
linearized Einstein equations without matter on the AdS side.

The linearized Einstein equations without matter are the @xmath limit of
the Einstein equations, where @xmath is Newton’s constant. Going to the
first subleading order in the @xmath expansion, bulk matter fields will
have to be taken into account. Since these, when promoted to quantum
fields, give rise to entanglement in the bulk, a correction to the
Ryu-Takayanagi formula is required [ 7 ] . Chapter 9 will explore this
correction and argue that the same entanglement constraint on the CFT
side with this correction is equivalent to linearized Einstein equations
including a source term.

Thus in summary, it is reviewed in this thesis how the Ryu-Takayanagi
formula alone entails that the linearized Einstein equations both with
and without matter are satisfied in a spacetime if the first law of
entanglement entropy is satisfied in a dual CFT state. Before proceeding
to this, however, chapters two through six will introduce relevant
aspects of anti-de Sitter spacetime (chapter 2 ), entanglement and
entanglement entropy (chapter 3 ), the AdS/CFT correspondence (chapter 4
), the Ryu-Takayanagi formula (chapter 5 ), and linearized gravity
(chapter 6 ).

### 1.1 Notation and conventions

Throughout this thesis, we will work in units where Planck’s constant,
@xmath , Boltzmann’s constant, @xmath , and the speed of light, @xmath
to unity – @xmath – we will, however, keep the dependence on Newton’s
constant, @xmath , explicit since this will be instructive for later
purposes. Adopting Einstein notation, we will assume an implicit sum
over repeated indices. When ambiguities may occur, we will indicate the
number of dimensions in which constants are defined by raised numbers in
parenthesis. For instance, the notation @xmath signifies that this is
Newton’s constant in 26-dimensional spacetime. Greek lower case indices
starting with @xmath – @xmath – will be used for Minkowski spacetime
coordinates, latin lower case indices starting from @xmath – @xmath –
will be used for Minkowski space coordinates. Latin lower case indices
starting from @xmath – @xmath – will be used for Poincaré coordinates of
AdS spacetime and occasionally for coordinate independent relations. To
avoid confusing in the numerical ordering of the Poincaré coordinates,
we will use @xmath for the time component of tensors (for instance
@xmath ) and @xmath for the AdS scaling coordinates component of tensors
(for instance @xmath ). Thus, raised and lowered @xmath and @xmath are
not indices but tensor components. Most often, we will consider @xmath
-dimensional AdS spacetime. Here @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . We will
use @xmath to denote the dimensionality of a spacetime. Thus, we will
often find that @xmath . Finally, we will use capital indices starting
with @xmath – @xmath – for target space coordinates and greek lower case
indices starting with @xmath – @xmath – for world sheet coordinates.

Throughout, @xmath will denote the background metric, and a metric
induced by @xmath on a surface (including the world sheet metric) will
be denoted by @xmath . Unless stated otherwise, metrics will have
Lorentzian signature and we adopt the sign convention @xmath .

## Chapter 2 Anti-de Sitter Spacetime

Throughout this thesis, we will be interested in so-called anti-de
Sitter (AdS) spacetime: It is one of the cornerstones in gauge/gravity
duality, it will serve as the background in which we will consider
linearized gravity, and one of the central examples will deal with
asymptotically AdS black holes. Consequently, we will subsequently spend
some time introducing AdS spacetime and briefly asymptotically AdS black
holes. To connect with the subsequent chapters, we introduce AdS in
@xmath dimensions. The material in this section is based on chapter 2 of
[ 8 ] and chapter 5 of [ 9 ] .

### 2.1 Global AdS

According to the theory of general relativity, spacetimes must satisfy
the Einstein equations

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath is the energy momentum tensor and @xmath is the
Einstein tensor \nomenclature @xmath The number of spatial dimensions.
\nomenclature @xmath Newton’s constant. \nomenclature @xmath The
energy-momentum tensor. \nomenclature @xmath The Einstein tensor.
\nomenclature @xmath The metric tensor of the spacetime.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath is the cosmological constant, @xmath is the Ricci tensor and
@xmath is the Ricci scalar defined in terms of the Riemann tensor as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Minkowski spacetime is arguably the most well known solution to the
vacuum Einstein equations without cosmological constant, i.e. Einstein
equations for which @xmath and @xmath . The causal structure of this and
other spacetimes can be depicted in a Penrose diagram, where the
possibly infinite spacetime is brought into finite size nice by choosing
an appropriate conformal factor. Null curves are always @xmath with
vertical such that timelike directions are those directions bounded by
the null curves. The Penrose diagram of Minkowski spacetime is depicted
in figure 2.1 .

A characteristic feature of Minkowski spacetime is that it is a
maximally symmetric spacetime in the sense that is has the maximal
number of spacetime symmetries as given by Killing vector fields, @xmath
, that satisfy the equation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath is the covariant derivative, which is given in terms of the
partial derivative, @xmath , and the Christoffel connection, @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath may be expressed in terms of the metric as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

\nomenclature

@xmath The covariant derivative. One finds that the maximal number of
symmetries and therefore Killing vector fields is @xmath where @xmath is
the number of spacetime dimensions of the manifold ( @xmath ).
\nomenclature @xmath The number of spacetime dimension of a manifold.
Thus, any manifold with this many symmetries/Killing vector fields is
maximally symmetric. In a maximally symmetric spacetime, the curvature
must be the same everywhere; something that is trivially obeyed by
Minkowski spacetime.

That curvature is the same everywhere entails that the Riemann tensor
may be expressed in terms of the Ricci scalar, @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

For Minkowski spacetime, where @xmath everywhere, this entails that the
Riemann tensor vanishes everywhere. However, the relation indicates that
we may consider two other maximally symmetric solutions to the Einstein
equations in vacuum: One where @xmath and one where @xmath . The latter
type of spacetimes – the maximally symmetric spacetimes with @xmath –
will be our primary interest in the following. Such spacetimes are known
as anti-de Sitter spacetimes and solve the Einstein equations with
negative cosmological constant as may be seen from

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

from which it follows @xmath . Thus, @xmath .

For convenience, we will consider anti-de Sitter spacetimes in (d+1)
dimensions. This may be embedded in a (d+2) dimensional Minkowski
spacetime, @xmath , with the metric

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

and given by the hypersurface subject to the restriction

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

This hypersurface may also be parametrized by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath parametrizes a @xmath -dimensional
sphere, @xmath , such that it satisfies @xmath . These coordinates are
known as global coordinates of @xmath . In these global coordinates, the
metric takes the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the standard metric on @xmath . The vector field @xmath
is a Killing vector field on the entire manifold and @xmath may
therefore serve as a global time coordinate. It is worth noting that
@xmath and therefore time is periodic in @xmath . Usually, we will mean
by global anti-de Sitter spacetime, the universal covering of anti-de
Sitter spacetime in global coordinates, where @xmath is unwrapped such
that @xmath .

For purposes below, we will be interested in the conformal boundary of
anti-de Sitter spacetime. This is more easily studied if we replace
@xmath by @xmath such that @xmath which entails @xmath . In these
coordinates, the metric takes the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since we are interested in a conformal boundary, the overall scaling
factor @xmath may be ignored and we see that for @xmath , we obtain
@xmath , where @xmath denotes the conformal boundary of (the universal
covering of) global anti-de Sitter spacetime.

Figure 2.2 depicts the Penrose diagram for the universal covering of
global anti-de Sitter spacetime; still suppressing the @xmath part of
the metric. To include this, regard the Penrose diagram in figure 2.2 as
a radial slice of a hypercylinder whose angular part is given by @xmath
. Thus, @xmath is the center of the cylinder and @xmath is the boundary.
Contrary to Minkowski spacetime, there is no spatial infinity since a
light signal may travel to boundary, @xmath , and back again in finite
time. To see this, consider the metric ( 2.13 ) for a light ray (null
curve) for which @xmath . Disregarding the factor @xmath and the scaled
sphere @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

from which we see that light may travel to the boundary in finite time.

### 2.2 Poincaré patch of AdS

Another parametrization of ( 2.10 ) that will be used repeatedly below
is given in terms of the coordinates @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . The
parametrization then reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

These are only local coordinates since the restriction @xmath entails
that we only cover half of @xmath . This is the so-called Poincaré patch
and the coordinates therefore are known as Poincaré coordinates. The
metric of this Poincaré patch of @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

In subsequent chapters, we will most often take it to be implicit that
@xmath is the Poincaré patch of @xmath .

We will also be interested in the conformal boundary of the Poincaré
patch of @xmath . This can be shown to be d-dimensional Minkowski
spacetime i.e. @xmath , which obtains for @xmath . This is more readily
seen, if we replace @xmath by defining @xmath such that the metric
becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here the conformal boundary is found at @xmath and ignoring the
pre-factor we exactly get d-dimensional Minkowski spacetime. ¹ ¹ 1 More
precisely stated, the metric @xmath has the boundary @xmath at @xmath
and @xmath is conformally equivalent to @xmath . Thus, for any slice of
the Poincaré patch with @xmath , the metric is that of Minkowski
spacetime. The coordinate @xmath takes the form of a warpfactor.

For this reason, the Penrose diagram for the Poincaré path of @xmath is
the same as that for @xmath -dimensional Minkowski spacetime (figure 2.1
). This may seem odd. Minkowski spacetime is after all very different
from anti-de Sitter spacetime. The reason that the Poincaré patch can
have the same Penrose diagram as Minkowski spacetime is that the
Poincaré patch – as the name indicates – only covers a patch of AdS.
This patch, it turns out, has the same causal structure as Minkowski
spacetime in agreement with the claim the the Poincaré patch is
conformally equivalent to Minkowski spacetime.

### 2.3 Schwarzschild black holes

Another interesting class of solutions to the Einstein equations are
black hole solutions that feature event horizons. The so-called
maximally extended asymptotically AdS-Schwarzschild black hole in global
coordinates will be of particular interest since it will play a crucial
role in developing the qualitative argument in favour of a relation
between entanglement and spacetime.

However, we will begin with the well known Schwarzschild black hole.
This is a spherically symmetric solution to the Einstein equations for
@xmath . The metric may be expressed as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the usual metric for @xmath , @xmath is a radial
coordinate and @xmath . The constant, @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

such that in 4 dimensions @xmath from which we obtain the well known
expression for the Schwarzschild black hole in 4 dimensions

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.20)
  -- -- -- --------

Since our primary interest is in the causal structure of black holes and
this is the same in any number of dimensions, we will for convenience
work in 4 dimensions in the following. Also, we will suppress the last
part of the metric @xmath , since this part of the metric merely
contributes with a @xmath -dimensional sphere in all points in the
conformal diagram of the spacetime and may be reinserted thus.

The metric of interest – the @xmath subspace – therefore takes the form

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.21)
  -- -- -- --------

Two points stand out. One is @xmath , which is a curvature singularity
and the other is @xmath , which turns out to be a coordinate
singularity. In general dimensions, the curvature singularity is still
situated at @xmath and the coordinate singularity (the black hole
horizon) is situated at @xmath .

To investigate the causal structure, we want to consider the behaviour
of light-cones and one finds that the slope of these – defined as @xmath
– are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

since the light-cone is spanned by the radial null curves @xmath . For
@xmath , we see that @xmath ; the light-cone closes up as we approach
the event horizon. This, however, is merely a feature of these
particular coordinates. A better choice of coordinates will resolve this
and allow us to study the causal structure as we pass the event horizon.
The problem that the light-cone closes up may be resolved, if we can
find a coordinate, @xmath , such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

This coordinate, known as the tortoise coordinate, must satisfy

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

and integrating on both sides, one obtains

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

We see that the event horizon at @xmath is located, in the tortoise
coordinate, at @xmath . This also entails that @xmath is only defined
for @xmath . In the tortoise coordinates, the metric takes the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

In these coordinates, the metric is no longer singular at @xmath ,
however, it is at the price that the event horizon is pushed to @xmath .
This may be resolved by replacing the time coordinate with either one of
the light-cone tortoise coordinates:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the infalling radial null geodesics have @xmath and outgoing
radial null geodesics have @xmath . The causal structure of infalling
objects may then be investigated with the coordinates @xmath , where the
metric takes the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

The radial null curves, @xmath , satisfies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

from which we see that the outgoing radial null curve simply tilts over
as the object approaches and passes @xmath such that all future directed
paths for @xmath goes in the direction of decreasing @xmath ; there is
no way out of the black hole once in.

However, we could also choose to consider the radial null curves in the
coordinates @xmath , where the metric takes the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this case, the radial null curves satisfies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we again see that the light-cone tilts when @xmath is approached
and passed. In these coordinates, however, the situation is reversed.
The horizon may be passed by following past directed curves such that
for @xmath all such paths go in the direction of decreasing @xmath .
This is a white hole; once you are out, there is no way back in.

In order to find coordinates that includes the inside of both the black
and the white hole, one could propose to use @xmath . This gives the
metric

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is related to @xmath and @xmath by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

We see that the horizon at @xmath has once again been pushed to infinity
and is found at either @xmath or @xmath . To bring the horizon to a
finite value in @xmath and @xmath , we define

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

and see that the horizon is now found at either @xmath or @xmath and
that @xmath , @xmath . Since @xmath and @xmath are null coordinates so
are @xmath and @xmath . To express the metric in terms of one timelike
coordinate and the rest spacetime, we introduce the coordinates known as
Kruskal-Szekeres coordinates,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

such that @xmath and @xmath . The metric becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the horizon in these coordinates is found at @xmath for @xmath and
at @xmath for @xmath . We can approach and pass the horizon following
null curves given by @xmath . Thus, these coordinates include both the
inside and the outside of the white and black holes. The coordinates,
however, may be analytically extended even further. In these
coordinates, we can extend the range of @xmath from @xmath to @xmath .
The region where @xmath mirrors the region @xmath and therefore includes
a second region exterior to the black and white holes. As it turns out,
no choice of coordinates can extend this spacetime further and we
therefore denote the metric ( 2.36 ) with coordinate range @xmath and
@xmath as the maximally extended Schwarzscild black hole.

The causal structure of the maximally extended Schwarzschild black hole
may be depicted in a Penrose diagram (see figure 2.3 ) where we use
@xmath and @xmath to bring the coordinates into finite range. Still, we
have suppressed the @xmath -dimensional sphere, i.e. we consider the
@xmath subspace. The full spacetime may be obtained merely by including
a @xmath -dimensional sphere scaling as @xmath in each point in the
diagram. As seen on figure 2.3 , the Penrose diagram for the maximally
extended Schwarzschild black hole shares with Minkowski space the same
future null infinity, @xmath , past null infinity, @xmath , and
spacelike infinity, @xmath , which verifies that the maximally extended
Schwarzschild black hole is indeed asymptotically Minkowski. One
subtlety about the diagram is that future timelike infinity, @xmath ,
and past timelike infinity, @xmath , are distinct from the singularity
at @xmath despite the appearance to the contrary. There are many
timelike paths that do not end on the singularity, but go to other
values of @xmath . From the diagram we see that no future directed
timelike path goes from one of the exterior region to the other; these
two regions are causally disconnected.

### 2.4 Asymptotically AdS black holes

As mentioned in the beginning of this chapter, what we are really
interested in is the maximally extended AdS-Schwarzscild black hole.
This is similar to the maximally extended Schwarzscild black hole
developed above but differs in that it is asymptotically AdS rather than
asymptotically flat. This entails that the function @xmath in ( 2.18 )
takes the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

Compared to the maximally extended Schwarzschild black hole, the causal
structure therefore remains the same with the exception that the
spacetime is asymptotically AdS. The Penrose diagram for the maximally
extended AdS-Schwarzscild black hole is therefore similar to figure 2.3
with the exception that the future null infinity, the past null infinity
and the spacelike infinity must be identical to that of the universal
covering of global AdS spacetime. The Penrose diagram is seen in figure
2.4 . Compared to figure 2.3 , the asymptotic boundaries of regions I
and III are now the universal covering of global AdS spacetime. Due to
the nature of this asymptotic boundary, light signals may reach and
return from the boundary in finite time as shown above. This has
peculiar consequences for the maximally extended AdS-Schwarzscild black
hole where @xmath . If @xmath , we may neglect the term @xmath , and the
maximally extended AdS-Schwarzscild black hole will have properties
similar to that of the asymptotically flat maximally extended
Schwarzscild black hole. Particularly, both will evaporate due to the
emission of Hawking radiation. For @xmath , however, the maximally
extended AdS-Schwarzscild black hole may be in an equilibrium with its
Hawking radiation since the radiation can reach the asymptotic AdS
boundary and return in finite time. Thus, if emission and reabsorption
rates are equal then the maximally extended AdS-Schwarzscild black hole
will not evaporate. For this reason, we denote such black holes as
eternal black holes.

For the eternal black hole we find – as we did for the maximally
extended Schwarzschild black hole – two causally disconnected regions, I
and III. No signal can travel from one to the other. Still, we will
describe the eternal black hole as a connected spacetime since a signal
from the region I can intersect a signal from region III. The signals,
however, can only intersect inside the black hole thereby precluding any
causal connection between the two exterior regions I and III. The
picture emerging is that of a wormhole so long as it is remembered that
the wormhole is simply a two sided black hole, i.e. a black hole with
two distinct exterior regions. That we may conceive of the eternal black
hole as a wormhole is further signified by the depiction in figure 2.4 b
of @xmath and a constant positive @xmath slice of the spacetime.

These depiction more explicitly demonstrates features of the eternal
black hole; most explicitly the scaling of the sphere @xmath with @xmath
. Also, these depictions will prove useful in a qualitative assessment
of the behavior of the spacetime when the area of the black hole horizon
is decreased.

## Chapter 3 Entanglement and Entropy

Entanglement is an inherently quantum mechanical phenomena. To see the
peculiarity of this phenomena let us consider two discernible particles,
1 and 2, and two positions, A and B. Both particles behave in such a way
that when measured it is found at site A half of the times and at site B
the other half of the times. However, the two particles are never found
at the same site simultaneously. Thus, when we measure and find particle
1 at site A, then a similar measurement at site B will find particle 2
there. Similarly, if particle 2 is found at site A, we can be sure to
find particle 1 at site B.

We may initially attempt to ascribe a probability wave to each particle
to account for the behaviour. Each particle is described by a wave with
two sharp peaks at A and B and with an amplitude of @xmath at each site,
i.e. they are ascribed a probability of @xmath for being at site A and
@xmath for being at site B. However, describing the particles with an
individual probability wave cannot account for their behaviour never to
be found at the same site. Generally, there is no way to describe the
behaviour with a function only ranging over the sites A and B (usually
this will be a three dimensional position space). This will inevitably
leave out some information about the relation between the two particles.
This is the information about their entanglement.

To account for their entanglement, i.e. for the effect that the
particles are never found at the same site, we must instead describe the
particles as living in configuration space. In configuration space there
are four possible configurations; not sites since the states are no
longer in position space. These may be denoted @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath where the first letter denotes the position of the first
particle and the second letter denotes the position of the second
particle. Associating probability to each of these configurations, it
follows from the example that only @xmath and @xmath have a non-zero
probability to be occupied. More precise, the probability is @xmath for
each. The lesson to learn is that it is necessary to describe the
observed correlation of these particles in configuration space. It is
not possible to describe it in position space as we are used to from
classical physics.

For convenience we will subsequently use correlation between the spin
state of two particles rather than a correlation between positions. We
will assume that the particles are fermions and therefore have spin-
@xmath . Thus, each particle is either found to have spin up, @xmath ,
or spin down, @xmath . Calling the system composed of first particle,
@xmath , and the system composed of the second particle, @xmath , their
state-spaces is spanned by the states @xmath and @xmath , respectively.
The full system, therefore, is spanned by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now, the state of the full system, @xmath , is such that if one particle
is found to have spin up, then the other particle will be found to have
spin down and vice versa. Again, we cannot account for this correlation
if we describe each particle individually. While we can get the
statistics right by assigning probability @xmath to each state for each
particle, this does not account for the correlation. We cannot describe
the full state as a product of @xmath and @xmath states.

The two systems (the two particles) are correlated, and @xmath therefore
becomes:

  -- -- -- -------
           (3.2)
  -- -- -- -------

this is what is known as a Bell pair. This is the maximally entangled
state consisting of two qubits.

### 3.1 The density matrix

The example demonstrates that two entangled particles cannot be
described as two separable subsystems, but must be regarded as one
whole. To introduce this notion of entanglement more formally, we will
consider a quantum state in some Hilbert space, @xmath that can be
decomposed into at least two spatially separated subsystems. ¹ ¹ 1
@xmath is a pure state of @xmath This implies that @xmath can be
expressed as the tensor product of the Hilbert spaces of each subsystem.
Decomposing @xmath into two subsystems, we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are the Hilbert spaces of the two subsystems
(denoted @xmath and @xmath respectively).

Given this decomposition of the Hilbert space, we may write a quantum
state – a vector @xmath – in terms of basis states in the subsystem
Hilbert spaces, @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath .

Generally this is not a product state, i.e. a product of two pure
states. Decomposing a system into two or more subsystems, it is
generally not the case that we may express the full quantum state as a
direct product of the states of the subsystems

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

even though the Hamiltonian of either subsystem – due to locality – is
independent of each other. When this equality does not hold, we will say
that systems @xmath and @xmath are entangled.

This formal exposition sits well with the above account of the Bell
pair. Here it was claimed that the spin of the particles were entangled,
when we could not describe the state of the full system in terms of the
states of two particles as spanned by @xmath . Particularly, the outcome
of measurements could not be accounted for by such a product state.

Generally, if @xmath is not a product state of @xmath and @xmath , it
follows that a pure state, @xmath , cannot give the same outcome as
@xmath for a measurement on subsystem @xmath . However, the outcome of
such measurements can be reproduced by some ensemble of orthogonal
states in @xmath , where each of these states, @xmath , are associated
with a (classical) probability, @xmath , of finding the system in that
state when making the measurement on @xmath .

Thus, the expectation value for the measurement on state @xmath agrees
with the ensemble average of that measurement on this ensemble.
Expressing this in terms of an operator, @xmath , acting on subsystem
@xmath , this implies:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

To prove that there is such a class, @xmath , of orthogonal states,
consider the expectation value of @xmath when the full state is @xmath

  -- -- -- -------
           (3.7)
  -- -- -- -------

where the last line is obtained by defining the operator

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

and by the definition of the trace

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

As seen, the operator @xmath also only acts on subsystem @xmath and it
is known as the reduced density matrix. It may be obtained from the
density matrix of the full system, @xmath , by tracing out the degrees
of freedom outside of the subsystem. In the case where the full system
is divided into two subsystems @xmath and @xmath this is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is equal to ( 3.8 ) above.

The density matrix is an hermitian operator, i.e. @xmath , and therefore
it has real eigenvalues. Furthermore, the eigenvalues of the density
matrix, @xmath , can be shown to be non-negative. Thus

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

The eigenvalues, @xmath , are also sometimes known as the entanglement
spectrum of the density matrix for a state @xmath .

Using the associated eigenvectors we can express the reduced density
matrix as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the eigenvectors of @xmath .

Inserting this into the expression for the expectation value of the
operator @xmath , we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have used that the trace is the same in any orthonormal basis.
This proves the claim that for the full system in a state @xmath there
is an ensemble of orthogonal states in @xmath , @xmath that reproduces
the expectation value of an operator, @xmath , that only acts on
subsystem @xmath .

From the last line of ( 3.7 ), we notice that the reduced density matrix
for subsystem @xmath , @xmath , contains all information about the
state, @xmath , in subsystem @xmath . Concerning our current interest –
entanglement – it is interesting to see how @xmath includes information
about the entanglement between subsystem @xmath and the full system.
Particularly, we find that if @xmath only has one non-zero eigenvalue
then the subsystem @xmath is in a pure state and thereby not entangled
with the rest of the system.

To see this, let us assume that only the eigenvalue @xmath of @xmath is
non-zero. We then have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

This implies that there is a single state of the Hilbert space for the
subsystem – in this case @xmath – that includes all the information of
full state in that subsystem; there is no classical uncertainty about
the state of the subsystem. If the full system consists of two
subsystems @xmath and @xmath and @xmath is a pure state – in this case
@xmath – then it follows that @xmath is a pure state. Assuming that this
pure state of @xmath is @xmath , we can thereby express the full state,
@xmath , as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is recognized as a product state, and the two subsystems is
therefore not entangled. In summary, if the reduced density matrix for
some subsystem has only one non-zero eigenvalue, then the subsystem is
not entangled with the rest of the full system. The reduced density
matrix contains the information about the entanglement between the
subsystem and the rest of the full system.

### 3.2 Entanglement entropy

These properties makes it natural to use the reduced density matrix to
quantify the entanglement between a subsystem and the rest of the
system. For this purpose, we will define the entanglement entropy,
@xmath , as the the von Neumann entropy associated with a density matrix
@xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

A number of properties makes the von Neumann entropy a good choice when
quantifying entanglement. First, we observe that @xmath which sits well
with the fact that the notion of “anti-entanglement” is
incomprehensible. To see that @xmath , remember that @xmath must be
diagonalized in the basis of its eigenvectors with diagonal elements
equal to its eigenvalues, @xmath . Since @xmath , it follows that @xmath
. Therefore, @xmath which implies that @xmath .

Another nice property is that the von Neumann entropy vanishes for a
pure state. Thus, if there is no entanglement between a subsystem under
consideration and the full system, then the entanglement entropy of that
system is zero. This follows, since it holds for the density matrix of a
pure state that @xmath . Thus

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

The definiti

The von Neumann entropy also nicely reproduces the usual entropy
formulas of well known ensembles. Taking the example of the
microcanonical ensemble given by the combination of states and
probabilities

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath is the number of energy eigenstates in this
interval. The entropy for the microcanonical ensemble is given as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the last equality is obtained by the identity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

which implies thinking of the total entropy as getting a contribution,
@xmath , from each state, @xmath , in the ensemble.

Now using the equality @xmath and that @xmath , we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the last line follows since since @xmath are the eigenvalues of
@xmath such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

such that that taking the trace equals a sum over @xmath .

This is exactly the von Neumann entropy. However, it is worth noticing
at this point that contrary to thermodynamic entropy which only is
defined for equilibrium states, entanglement entropy is defined for any
state and we can therefore also consider dynamical changes in
entanglement entropy. Something that will become relevant later on.

The von Neumann entropy also quantifies entanglement in agreement with
our immediate expectations. To see this, consider the previous example
of a bell pair system, but now with variable entanglement

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the spin state of subsystem @xmath and @xmath due to
normalisation.

To compute the entanglement entropy, i.e. the von Neumann entropy, for
one of the subsystem @xmath , one first has to find the reduced density
matrix

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Having found the reduced density matrix, we can find an expression for
the entanglement entropy

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the last line in obtained from the constraint @xmath .

As seen from figure 3.1 the entanglement entropy is maximal for @xmath .
The entanglement entropy vanishes for @xmath and @xmath which
corresponds to pure states of the subsystem @xmath . This is exactly
what is expected for a Bell pair state.

In general we find that if @xmath then @xmath is a pure state. If @xmath
then @xmath is in a mixed state; the degrees of freedom in @xmath are
entangled with the degrees of freedom in in the rest of the full system.

### 3.3 Entanglement in CFTs

Going to quantum field theories, some subtleties arise. A quantum field
theory is defined on a @xmath -dimensional Lorentzian spacetime, @xmath
, thus to define a state of the system one must first choose a Cauchy
(spacelike) slice, @xmath , of the spacetime that defines a moment of
simultaneity. ² ² 2 The notation @xmath and @xmath is chosen for comply
with later notation. With respect to @xmath we may define the Hilbert
space of states @xmath . For any state of the system, @xmath , we have
@xmath .

We may conceive of @xmath as a tensor product of the Hilbert spaces
associated with each point and therefore as comprising of all the local
degrees freedom in the quantum field theory. This construction is
perhaps better understood as the continuum limit of a lattice system on
@xmath with some lattice spacing @xmath . The degrees of freedom are
located at the lattice sites and associated with the Hilbert space
@xmath , where @xmath is some numbering of the lattice sites. The full
Hilbert space is then given as a tensor product of the Hilbert space at
each lattice site

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

The continuum limit is then obtained by sending @xmath and we can
conceive of @xmath as constructed in this way.

We want to interrogate about the entanglement entropy of some subregion
@xmath , i.e. about some quantitative measure of the entanglement
between @xmath and its compliment @xmath . Here, the compliment of
@xmath is defined to satisfy @xmath . The entangling surface separating
@xmath and @xmath , we denote @xmath . Since a CFT is a local quantum
field theory, there are specific degrees of freedom associated with
specific spatial regions; again the analogy to a continuum limit of a
lattice system is helpful. We can therefore regard the full quantum
system as composed of two subsystems, @xmath and @xmath , associated
with two spatially separated regions @xmath and @xmath . As a
consequence we can decompose the Hilbert space of states of the full
system as we did in the section above. ³ ³ 3 Some complications are
involved in making such a decomposition in a gauge invariant way, but
these will not be considered here.

Having made this construction, one may obtain an expression for the
density matrix operator @xmath . To evaluate the entanglement entropy
one also needs to obtain an expression for the operator @xmath .
However, taking the logarithm of a continuum operator – such as @xmath
in the context of a quantum field theory – proves to be technically
complicated. In fact, it proves to be more tractable to evaluate the
Rényi entropy

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

and then take the limit

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Rényi entropy may be evaluated using the so-called replica trick. It
is beyond the scope of the current project to go into details of this
procedure. The procedure is reviewed in [ 10 ] , where it is also
employed to obtain the entanglement entropy for 2-dimensional conformal
field theories. These prove to be a special case, since they possess a
Virasoro algebra with central charge @xmath . This simplifies the
evaluation of entanglement entropy using the replica trick. Indeed, the
evaluation of entanglement entropy proves to be impossible in all but
the simplest higher dimensional cases.

In 2-dimensional conformal field theories, any spatial slice takes the
form of a line. Define @xmath to be the interval @xmath centred around
the origin on. As shown in [ 10 ] , the entanglement entropy for such a
single interval is found to diverge, however, this is as expected since
we, in a continuum CFT, will have unregulated short distance
entanglement over the entangling surface @xmath . To regulate this, we
introduce the cutoff @xmath . With this cutoff, the entanglement entropy
of a single interval centred around the origin is found to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

The simple expression for the entanglement entropy is a consequence of
the Virasoro algebra, which is not realized in higher dimensional CFTs.
In chapter 5 , we will compare this result to an expression for the
entanglement entropy of a single interval in a 2-dimensional conformal
field theories as obtained by bulk-calculation, i.e. to an expression
for @xmath obtained via the AdS side of the AdS/CFT correspondence. It
is this correspondence – also known as the gauge/gravity duality – that
we now turn to.

## Chapter 4 A Brief Introduction to Gauge/Gravity Duality

Ever since its conception two decades ago [ 11 ] , the gauge/gravity
duality has intrigued researchers in many branches of physics. The
conjecture is a that certain local field theories on a fixed spacetime
background – i.e. without gravity – are dynamically equivalent to
certain theories that include a gravitational interaction; they describe
the same physics.

The most well known example of this duality is the one between conformal
field theories ¹ ¹ 1 Conformal field theories are quantum field theories
that are conformally invariant i.e. invariant under dillations, @xmath
where @xmath is a constant , and special conformal transformation,
@xmath . in @xmath dimensions ( @xmath ) and anti-de Sitter spacetimes
in @xmath dimensions ( @xmath ), where the @xmath is defined on a fixed
spacetime that is identical to the @xmath -dimensional asymptotic
boundary of @xmath . For this reason, the gauge/gravity duality is also
known as the AdS/CFT correspondence.

Initially, the duality may seem unlikely since one would generally
expect the number of degrees of freedom in @xmath dimensions to be
larger than the number of degrees of freedom in @xmath dimensions. Thus,
if the duality obtains, it suggests that the degrees of freedom in
theories of gravity behave differently from those in local quantum field
theories.

The first piece of evidence suggesting this to be the case is the
holographic principle known from black hole thermodynamics. From
statitical mechanics we know that entropy can be regarded as a measure
for the degrees of freedom of a system. As shown in [ 12 ] , for general
relativity to be consistent with the laws of thermodynamics, the entropy
of a black hole has to scale with the area of its event horizon, @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Indeed, this can be shown to be the upper bound of the entropy in @xmath
dimensional Einstein gravity (the Bekenstein Bound) for a spatial volume
bounded by the spatial surface with area @xmath . Thus, in general
relativity the entropy @xmath for the d-dimensional spatial slice @xmath
of the manifold @xmath scales as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the @xmath dimensional boundary of @xmath . Thus,
gravity realises the holographic principle that the degrees of freedom
in a volume scales with the surface area of that volume.

For a @xmath -dimensional local quantum field theory, the entropy of the
@xmath dimensional spatial slice of a system scales with the volume of
that spatial slice. Following the duality, a CFT state with the
spacetime dual @xmath is defined on a spacetime identical to the
asymptotic boundary of @xmath , @xmath . Thus, the entropy, @xmath
scales as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a spacelike co-dimension two surface. This is in
agreement with the result obtained for a gravitational theory under the
assumption of the holographic principle. This, of course, is no proof of
the conjectured duality between @xmath and @xmath , however, it suggests
that it is not absurd that a local quantum field theory in @xmath
dimensions can have the same number of degrees of freedom as a
gravitational theory in @xmath dimensions.

### 4.1 @xmath Super Yang-Mills theory and type IIB string theory on
@xmath

Originally, the gauge/gravity duality was conceived by comparing an open
string and a closed string perspective of a stack of @xmath D3-branes [
11 ] . This lead to the conjecture that @xmath Super Yang-Mills theory
(SYM) in four dimensional Minkowski spacetime is dual to type IIB string
theory on the poincaré patch of the spacetime @xmath . ² ² 2 For global
AdS, the CFT dual is defined on @xmath . @xmath SYM is a conformally
invariant quantum field theory with gauge group @xmath and is
characterised by the two free parameters @xmath – the rank of the gauge
group – and Yang-Mills coupling constant, @xmath . This is referred to
as the ‘CFT side’ of the duality. The string theory on @xmath is
referred to as the ‘AdS side’ and is characterised by the string length
@xmath , the string coupling constant @xmath , and the curvature radius
of @xmath , @xmath , which is also the curvature radius of @xmath . As a
free parameter, the latter two only occur as the ratio @xmath and are
related – according to the AdS/CFT correspondence – to the free
parameters on the CFT side in the following way

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is known as the ’t Hooft coupling. The string coupling,
@xmath , and the Yang-Mills coupling, @xmath , are related by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Thus stated, the conjectured duality is one between a four and a ten
dimensional theory. The holographic principle asserts that the number of
degrees of freedom in a @xmath dimensional gravity theory may be the
same as the number of degrees of freedom in a @xmath dimensional gauge
theory. This, however, still leaves five dimensions unaccounted for in
the duality between four dimensional @xmath SYM and type IIB string
theory on @xmath . To explain how the number of degrees of freedom can
match serves as a crude consistency check of the duality.

The details of the duality is such that the @xmath is defined on a
spacetime identical to the asymptotic boundary of the dual spacetime; in
this case the flat asymptotic boundary of the Poincaré patch of @xmath .
Therefore, the five dimensional version of the AdS side can be obtained
by a Kaluza-Klein [ 13 ] reduction of the string theory on @xmath . More
precisely, @xmath can be expanded in a complete set of spherical
harmonics such that any field on @xmath can be reduced to a tower of
massive fields on @xmath , where the masses are due to the origin of
these fields in the expansion in spherical harmonics of @xmath . If the
holographic principle holds for this reduced theory in five dimensions,
then it is consistent with it having the same number of degrees of
freedom as a four dimensional gauge theory like @xmath Super Yang-Mills
theory.

Again, this is no proof of the duality. Indeed, it turns out to be very
hard to prove the duality for generic @xmath and @xmath (and thereby
generic @xmath and @xmath ). A proof would require a full
non-perturbative definition of quantized type IIB string theory on
curved backgrounds, which we currently lack. This restricts most
explicit calculations on the AdS side to the regime where string
perturbation theory can be employed; the regime where @xmath . If @xmath
is kept fixed, this reduces the AdS side to classical string theory in
the sense that only tree level are taken into account, while the higher
string genus expansions are disregarded. On the CFT side, this is
equivalent to the limit where @xmath while @xmath is kept fixed. Thus,
@xmath . This is the well known ’t Hooft limit, where only planar
diagrams in the gauge theory contribute to leading order in @xmath .
Generally, for fixed @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Thus, an expansion in @xmath on the CFT side is equivalent to the string
theory genus expansion in @xmath .

If @xmath , the AdS side further simplifies. In this limit, the string
length, @xmath , is much smaller than the curvature radius, @xmath and
therefore the strings may be approximated by point particles in the form
of type IIB supergravity. This supergravity is defined on a weakly
curved @xmath (since @xmath ) and is dual to @xmath SYM in its strong
coupling limit, i.e. @xmath . This limit is referred to as the weak form
of the duality as opposed to the strong form, where @xmath and therefore
@xmath are kept fixed.

Even though a proof of the duality is not currently possible, a number
of non-trivial tests and checks have been carried out. These have their
outset in either the weak or the strong form of the duality and
evaluates the same quantities on both sides; hitherto with perfect
agreement. For instance, the symmetries of @xmath SYM form the
supergroup @xmath and so does the type IIB string theory on @xmath .
Also, scattering amplitudes which are protected by supersymmetry as one
goes from weak to strong coupling can be compared between the two sides
and shown to be equal.

Assuming the weak form of the duality, tests are complicated by it being
a weak/strong duality. This entails that one of the sides must be
evaluated at strong coupling, which cannot be done at full generality on
either side. However, observables independent of the coupling may still
be compared and can be shown to be equal. Particularly, the classical
fields of type IIB supergravity on @xmath maps to a subset of the
operators in @xmath SYM. ³ ³ 3 See [ 14 ] for a complete summary of the
field content of @xmath supergravity in 10 dimensions.

Generally, there should be a one-to-one map between operators on the CFT
side and fields on the AdS side which entails that the duality may be
formulated as a correspondence between the generating functional for
@xmath SYM and partition function of type IIB string theory. The
generating functional for correlation functions of gauge theory
operators, @xmath , is obtained by perturbing the Lagrangian, @xmath ,
by a source field, @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

The generating functional in Euclidean signature on the CFT side, @xmath
, thereby takes the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is some normalization. Assume that @xmath is the boundary
value of the fluctuating bulk field @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the dimension of @xmath . ⁴ ⁴ 4 Observe that @xmath .
Generally, @xmath is divergent. One then finds that

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.10)
  -- -- -- --------

where @xmath is the classical string theory partition function in
Euclidean signature that takes the path integral over all field
configurations for @xmath which takes the value @xmath at the asymptotic
boundary of AdS.

One complication is that @xmath is not explicitly known. Therefore, it
is often necessary to consider only the limit where the string length is
much smaller than the curvature radius, i.e. the weak form introduced
above as opposed to the strong form in ( 4.10 ). In this limit, the
leading contribution to @xmath comes from the field @xmath that solves
the supergravity equations of motion subject to the condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

One thereby obtains the relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the (renormalized) supergravity action.

If the source field of an operator in the CFT is known, then the
relation ( 4.10 ) tells how operators (and their correlators) on the CFT
side relate to fields (and field correlators) on the AdS side.

### 4.2 Gauge/gravity duality: The weak form

As the subsequent chapters will deal with the weak form of the
gauge/gravity duality, we will develop that in more detail here. To
obtain the weak form, two limits were taken on the AdS side: @xmath and
@xmath . On the CFT side, this corresponded to the limit @xmath and
large @xmath , where @xmath is the rank of the gauge group of the theory
and @xmath is the t’Hooft coupling. These limits were taken to avoid
having quantum gravity and stringy corrections on the AdS side. This
allows the approximation of the AdS side with the Einstein Hilbert
action in AdS spacetime

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the cosmological constant in AdS spacetime and @xmath
are matter terms. With this approximation, the gauge/gravity duality can
serve to relate general relativity in @xmath dimensions to a @xmath
-dimensional conformal field theory. To motivate the approximation of
the AdS side by general relativity, we will first argue how supergravity
obtains as an approximation on the AdS side and then show how the
Einstein Hilbert action is a special case of supergravity action.

Supergravity is an effective low-energy limit of superstring theory
where only tree level interactions are included. Since energy – in units
@xmath – scales like inverse length, this is the limit where the energy
is much smaller than the inverse of characteristic length scale of the
theory, which in the case of string theory is the string length, @xmath
. Thus, the low energy limit is equivalent to the limit where @xmath .
In supergravity, therefore, strings are approximated by point particles;
stringy correction are ignored. This entails that only the massless
closed string particles are included in the mode content of
supergravity. To see this, remember that the mass spectrum of the
particles in the closed string theory in Minkowski background is given
by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath and @xmath are the annihilation and creation
operators, respectively, of the closed string mode expansion. Thus, for
Minkowski background, the massless modes – for which @xmath – are
independent of the string length, @xmath , whereas the massive modes
scale as @xmath . When @xmath the massive modes decouple such that only
the massless modes contribute. Consequently, the low energy limit, and
therefore supergravity on Minkowski background, only contains the
massless modes of the closed superstring. The argument generalizes to
closed string theory of @xmath background (for more details, see [ 15 ]
).

Among the field content of the closed string is a graviton, which we
with some foresight will denote @xmath , ⁵ ⁵ 5 The @xmath representation
of @xmath and a dilaton, @xmath . ⁶ ⁶ 6 The @xmath representation of
@xmath . Here, @xmath is the embedding function from the string world
sheet to the target space. The graviton of course is interesting since
it perturbs the background spacetime in which the string moves, and
should therefore relate to the gravitational dynamics. However, also the
fluctuations of the dilaton, it turns out, contribute to the metric
perturbation as seen from the point of view of general relativity. To
indicate how this obtains as well as how to derive the supergravity
action, it is instructive to consider the graviton and dilaton parts of
the string action. For convenience, we will work with the action for the
closed bosonic string, ⁷ ⁷ 7 More presicely, the bosonic string action
that only includes the dilaton and the graviton may be regarded as the
low energy limit of the bosonic string (including only the massless
fields) where the last massless field, the Kalb-Ramond field @xmath , is
assumed to be zero. however, the procedure generalizes to the full
closed superstring action.

We will take @xmath to be worldsheet indexes and @xmath to be target
space indexes, where @xmath is the dimension of the target space. We
will further assume that the metric induced on the worldsheet by the
background metric is @xmath , i.e. the background is not necessarily
flat. ⁸ ⁸ 8 Since spacetime curvature in string theory originates from
the closed string graviton, a curved background should be conceived off
as consisting by a large enough number of closed strings such that
spacetime curves even in the classical limit. The world sheet can be
parametrized by the timelike coordinate @xmath and spacelike coordinate
@xmath . Since we will work in Euclidean signature, it is convenient to
define the coordinate @xmath such that @xmath is the Wick rotation of
the worldsheet time parameter. As usual, @xmath is the parameter for
string extension; for the closed string @xmath . The Euclidean, bosonic
string action on the world sheet for the graviton and dilaton then takes
the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the 2-dimensional Ricci scalar on the world sheet.

The dilaton field may be decomposed into a constant part, @xmath (the
vacuum expectation value of the dilation field) and fluctuations, @xmath
, around @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

We then find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath such that @xmath is identical to the Euler characteristic
of the world sheet. As a consequence, it only depends on the topology of
the world sheet

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the genus of the world sheet. One finds that @xmath for
a sphere ( @xmath ), @xmath for a torus ( @xmath ) and that @xmath is
negative for higher genus, @xmath , surfaces. Separating the constant
and fluctuating parts of the dilaton field, the action thereby takes the
form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the last term only depends on the world sheet topology.

The Euclidean generating functional associated with @xmath takes the
form as a path integral over world sheet metrics, @xmath , of manifolds,
@xmath , and embedding functions, @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath only depends on the topology, one may rewrite the
generating functional as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath ; the constant part of the dilaton field serves as the
string coupling constant. For @xmath , the first term in the sum
dominates. In this limit, therefore, one only has to consider the path
integral over world sheets that are topological spheres. This gives rise
to the tree level diagrams known as Witten diagrams. In subsequent
chapters, we will suppose this approximation to be valid. ⁹ ⁹ 9 In fact
the effective coupling is @xmath which means that it must be small for
all @xmath in order for perturbation theory to be valid.

It proves to be convenient initially to keep @xmath and only later
decompose it in @xmath and @xmath . An effective Lagrangian obtained
from perturbation theory in @xmath will take the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where terms @xmath are denoted as tree level, and higher order terms are
string loop corrections. ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 These should not be confused with loop
corrections due to an expansion in the string length, @xmath .

For general backgrounds, an observable calculated using @xmath will
diverge even at tree level. To regulate this divergence, we must
introduce a cut-off, @xmath , and the background fields will generally
depend on this cut-off. To keep track of this dependence we introduce
the functionals

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

An obvious problem with the background fields being dependent on the
cut-off is that this threatens to break conformal invariance. Just like
gauge invariance is a defining symmetry of Yang-Mills theory as a
quantum theory, so is conformal invariance in string theory.

A good indicator as to whether conformal invariance is broken is to look
at the expectation value of the trace of the energy momentum tensor,
@xmath , that must vanish. At each order of the expansion in @xmath ,
the trace may be expressed in terms of the beta-functions. Not going
into the details, one finds for the regulated action at tree level ¹¹ ¹¹
11 For higher order string loop corrections see [ 16 ] .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

For this trace to vanish, we see that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

i.e. neither of the background fields can depend on the regulator,
@xmath . This proves to impose strict constraints on these background
fields.

Even if string loop corrections are disregarded, @xmath is a non-linear
two-dimensional quantum field theory action, it can generally only be
studied in perturbation theory. The true dimensionless coupling for the
action is @xmath , where @xmath is the characteristic length of the
background field @xmath ; for instance the AdS curvature radius in
@xmath background. As seen, only the dimensionfull coupling, @xmath ,
occurs explicitly in the action, while @xmath is hidden in @xmath . We
may therefore expand @xmath in powers of @xmath just remembering that
perturbation theory is only valid for @xmath and not just @xmath .

Using this expansion, one finds

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we note that we are now considering the @xmath -dimensional Ricci
scalar and tensor. For @xmath the terms @xmath and for @xmath the string
loop order corrections vanish. Imposing the constraint @xmath ( 4.27 ),
one finds in this limit (for @xmath ) the following constraints in the
background fields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

Notably, for constant @xmath this reduces to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus as desired, in the limit @xmath (corresponding to the low energy
limit) which we consider here one obtains the Einstein equations without
matter ( 4.28 ), when all other fields vanish (expect the dilaton field
that can be a non-zero constant).

While the beta functions was obtained as the renormalization group flow
for the regulated world sheet action, they can also be regarded as
equations of motion for the background fields that the string propagates
through. We may therefore change the perspective and search instead for
a target space (and therefore 26-dimensional) action that has ( 4.27 )
as its equations of motion. Without going into the details, this action
is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is some constant. As expected from according to ( 4.22 ),
we see an overall factor @xmath which is consistent with the fact that
we only included leading order in @xmath in the beta-functions, i.e. no
string loop corrections.

@xmath is the low-energy effective action for the target space in the
presence of a closed bosonic string. It is the low-energy action since (
4.27 ) is valid only for in the limit @xmath where higher order
corrections vanishes. Loop corrections to this tree level action will be
additional terms @xmath .

Comparing @xmath to the Einstein Hilbert action there are some
similarities, but also two important differences. First is the presence
of the factor @xmath and second is the positive sign of the kinetic term
@xmath . These, however, can be accommodated by combining the metric
field, @xmath with the fluctuating part of the dilaton field, @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

Associating this new metric with Ricci scalar, @xmath and taking @xmath
we can then rewrite the metric as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

This gives the same form as the Einstein Hilbert action in the presence
of a field with kinetic term @xmath . Expressing the action like this is
known as the Einstein perspective as opposed to the string perspective
in @xmath . The constant factor can then be determined by comparison to
the Einstein Hilbert action

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is Newton’s constant in 26 dimensions. Identifying, as
above, @xmath , one obtains

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . Interestingly, @xmath , which is the parameter of the
genus expansion of the generating functional for the closed string,
@xmath . Defining the reduced Planck length in 26 dimensions @xmath and
observing from dimensional analysis that @xmath , we find, for the weak
coupling regime, that @xmath . This support the previous assertion that
the regime @xmath is the regime of classical gravity, if we assume that
effects from quantum gravity only become significant when the length
scale of the system approaches the Planck length.

Starting instead from the 10 dimensional type IIB string action, we can
analogously obtain 10 dimensional type IIB supergravity as the low
energy effective action if all string loop corrections are ignored.
Since it is tree level in string loop corrections it involves an overall
factor @xmath and includes the same terms derived above – the Ricci
scalar and a kinetic term for the dilaton – as well as additional fields
due to the additional field content of the type IIB superstring action;
among them a self dual four form field. None of these, however, lead to
terms in the action identifiable as a cosmological constant. Remarkably,
the equations of motion for 10 dimensional supergravity still permits
solutions where the non-compact spacetime is an anti-de Sitter; a
spacetime with constant negative cosmological constant. This obtains, if
the metric is @xmath and the field strength for the four form field
adequately relates to the AdS curvature radius. Also, the dilaton field
has to be constant, while the dynamics of the remaining supergravity
fields decouple.

As asserted above, a Kaluza-Klein reduction of @xmath leads to a tower
of massive modes in the 5 dimensional compactified theory on @xmath .
Thus, AdS spacetime can appear as a solution for higher dimensional
supergravity after a Kaluza-Klein reduction of a compact internal space
even if the higher dimensional supergravity contains no cosmological
constant. A Kaluza-Klein reduction may therefore reduce this higher
dimensional supergravity theory to a lower dimensional gravity theory
with a cosmological constant. Indeed, supergravity on @xmath may be
compactified by a Kaluza-Klein reduction of @xmath to some gauged, 5
dimensional supergravity theory [ 13 ] . ¹² ¹² 12 In gauged
supergravity, the gravitinos couple to a gauge field with the
consequence that the transformation law for the gravitinos includes a
constant term. For the action to remain invariant under this
transformation, a constant term – the cosmological constant – must be
added to the action. Such gauged supergravity theories does contain a
cosmological constant and has @xmath spacetime as its (supersymmetric)
vacuum [ 17 ] .

The implications of this for the AdS/CFT correspondence is that in the
low energy limit we may approximate the AdS side by the @xmath
-dimensional Einstein Hilbert action – and therefore the Einstein
equations – with cosmological constant @xmath , though we should note
that this disregards contributions from the field strength of the four
form field that, as argued above, does not decouple. Supposing the
validity of this approximation, we can then finally provide holographic
picture that will be the outset of the remainder of the thesis.

### 4.3 @xmath and @xmath

The overall assumption is that Einstein gravity on @xmath is dual to
some large @xmath , large @xmath CFT in d dimensions, where @xmath .

We will consider a one parameter family of CFT states, @xmath where
@xmath represents the CFT vacuum. We assume that @xmath lives in a
@xmath -dimensional Minkowski spacetime, @xmath , such that @xmath is
dual to the @xmath -dimensional, Poincaré patch of pure Anti-de Sitter
spacetime with metric

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a length scale that controls the negative curvature of
bulk spacetime. The spacetime has a Minkowski boundary for @xmath which
is in accordance with the general result of the AdS/CFT correspondence
that the quantum state @xmath with a spacetime dual @xmath is defined on
the boundary of the dual spacetime, @xmath . Often, we will be
interested in arbitrary Cauchy surfaces @xmath .

Generally, the spacetime dual of excited states @xmath can be
represented by the metric

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a parameter that controls the perturbation, i.e. how
much the spacetime deviates from pure AdS. As seen, pure AdS corresponds
to a spacetime where @xmath . Thus, @xmath for @xmath whereas @xmath
when @xmath .

For small enough @xmath , one finds that @xmath and we may therefore
express the metric as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is known as the Fefferman-Graham coordinates. The metric can be
used when the gravitational excitations are near the asymptotic
boundary, @xmath . On the CFT side, this corresponds to the small
excitations, i.e. to states @xmath with sufficiently small @xmath .
These states are small perturbations of the CFT vacuum and the spacetime
dual, @xmath , can be represented as perturbations of pure AdS spacetime
and will take the form of asymptotically AdS spacetimes described by (
4.36 ).

Higher excited states will on the other hand be dual to AdS spacetimes
with very different geometry that may even have different topology. For
such spacetimes, we cannot asumme that @xmath which entails that the
Einstein Hilbert action is no longer a valid description of the AdS
side, but needs corrections of order @xmath and higher. This, therefore,
takes us beyond the regime of classical (super)gravity. Intuitively,
this follows since one has to take into account the effects of the
massive string modes in high energy states.

An example of an excited CFT state with a non-trivial dual classical
spacetime is the thermal state of a CFT on @xmath -dimensional Minkowski
spacetime that is dual to the planar Schwarzschild-AdS black hole in
@xmath dimensions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . CFT states dual to black hole spacetimes will play an
important role in chapter 7 , however, our interest will be in the
eternal black hole in @xmath introduced in section 2.4 . The eternal
black hole is conjectured to be dual to a thermal double state of two
CFTs defined on @xmath [ 18 ] . ¹³ ¹³ 13 A number of authors have
recently questioned this conjectured duality (see [ 19 , 20 , 21 ] ).
Thus, in the assessment of the conclusions drawn from this duality, it
is therefore worth keeping in mind that the duality remains disputed.
The general claims about the relation between entanglement and spacetime
is not directly disproved if this duality turns out to be false, the
intuitive appeal of the qualitative argument will be somewhat damaged.

The two identical regions I and III of the eternal black hole (see
figure 2.4 ) have asymptotic boundaries – denoted @xmath and @xmath in
figure 2.4 – with spacetime @xmath . ¹⁴ ¹⁴ 14 This follows since the
eternal black hole spacetime is asymptotically pure global AdS. These
are also causally disconnected. In accord with the general result of the
AdS/CFT correspondence, the CFT dual to the eternal black hole is
defined on a spacetime identical to this asymptotic boundary of the AdS
spacetime, @xmath . ¹⁵ ¹⁵ 15 Note that for the eternal black hole this
is not a contiguous spacetime, but instead a spacetime that consists of
two disjoint copies of the same spacetime. Thus, the full quantum system
is comprised of two identical quantum subsystems, @xmath and @xmath ,
that covers the local degrees of freedom of the CFTs living on the
spacetimes identical to @xmath and @xmath respectively. Locality of the
CFT requires that @xmath and @xmath cannot interact, i.e. their
Hamiltonians must be uncoupled. However, they can still be correlated
via entanglement.

More precisely, the two subsystems @xmath and @xmath can be associated
with two identical Hilbert spaces of states, @xmath and @xmath , that
may be spanned by an orthogonal basis consisting of (again identical)
energy eigenstates @xmath and @xmath . The thermofield double state,
@xmath , that is the CFT state dual to the eternal black hole can then
be expressed as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the inverse temperature of one of the subsystems ¹⁶ ¹⁶
16 Since they are identical, the inverse temperature is the same in both
subsystems. and @xmath . Notably, the expression of the thermofield
double state, ( 4.38 ), in terms of energy eigenstates explicitly
unveils the local degrees of freedom of the two subsystems, @xmath and
@xmath , to be entangled through the weighted sum over states @xmath .
This will be of interest later.

## Chapter 5 The Ryu-Takayanagi Formula

So far, we have only provided very superficial remarks about the
quantitative relation between @xmath -dimensional CFT and the @xmath
-dimensional AdS spacetime. The reason for this is that the subsequent
study solely relies on a single entry from the AdS/CFT dictionary; the
Ryu-Takayanagi formula [ 5 ] and its covariant generalization [ 6 ] .
This formula relates entanglement entropy on the CFT side to areas of
extremal co-dimension two surfaces on the AdS side, thereby relating an
intrinsically quantum mechanical phenomena on the CFT side to the
geometry of the bulk in the spacetime dual. Using this relation alone,
it can be shown that if the first law of entanglement entropy is
satisfied in a CFT, then Einstein equations to linear order are
satisfied in the spacetime dual.

### 5.1 Relation to holography

Above, we already mentioned the remarkable result from black hole
thermodynamics due to Bekenstein and Hawking that relates the entropy of
a black hole to its horizon area

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

This gave rise to the holographic principle, which we used as a
consistency check for the gauge/gravity duality. This entails a
particular way of conceiving of the Bekenstein Hawking formula as a
relation between some entropy of a CFT subsystem and the area of the
black hole horizon; that is the area of a particular co-dimension two
surface in the spacetime dual to that CFT. Thus, rather than being a
statement about black hole thermodynamics, this holographic
interpretation of the Bekenstein Hawking formula regards it as a piece
of the AdS/CFT dictionary. As a consequence, it is natural to speculate
whether the Bekenstein Hawking formula signifies a more general relation
between entropies of CFT subsystems and co-dimension two surfaces in the
bulk of the spacetime dual of that CFT.

As it turns out, such a generalization does indeed exist. For spacetimes
described by Einstein gravity with a dual CFT state, Ryu and Takayanagi
conjectured that the entanglement entropy (defined as in ( 3.16 )) of
some spatial region on the CFT side is proportional to the area of the
co-dimension two surface in the bulk of the spacetime dual that
minimizes the area functional under certain conditions.

To put this more precisely, let us again consider quantum state, @xmath
, with the dual spacetime, @xmath . In accordance with the gauge/gravity
duality, @xmath is defined in the asymptotic boundary of @xmath , @xmath
. Let @xmath be a Cauchy surface of @xmath and let @xmath be a subregion
of the Cauchy slice such that @xmath , where @xmath is the compliment of
@xmath . The entanglement entropy, @xmath , of the quantum system living
on @xmath is the entropy associated with entanglement between the
quantum systems @xmath and @xmath over entangling surface that coincides
with the boundary of @xmath , @xmath , i.e. the von Neumann entropy of
the reduced density matrix

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the degrees of freedom in @xmath are traced out of the full
density matrix. Ryu and Takayangi’s conjecture is that @xmath is
proportional to the area of the co-dimension two surface, @xmath , whose
boundary is @xmath and which extremizes the area functional

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the metric of @xmath induced on the surface @xmath . If
more surfaces extremizes ( 5.3 ), then the further requirement is
imposed that @xmath must be the surface of least area that is homologous
to @xmath . Thus, @xmath must be the surface smoothly retractable to
@xmath that minimizes the area functional. The Ryu-Takayanagi formula
can then be expressed as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is worth noting that the area of @xmath generally will be divergent.
This is due to the infinite proper distance from any point in AdS
spacetime to the boundary. This, however, is not a problem. As remarked
in section 3.3 , short distance entanglement over the entangling surface
in continuum quantum field theories renders the entanglement entropy for
any quantum subsystem divergent. A regulation of this short distance
entanglement on the CFT side exactly corresponds to introducing a
boundary cutoff, @xmath , such that @xmath . This cutoff then serves to
regulate the area as given by ( 5.3 ).

Comparing the Ryu-Takayanagi formula with the Bekenstein-Hawking
formula, the similarity is striking. This is as expected if the
Ryu-Takayanagi formula is a generalization of the Bekenstein-Hawking
formula in its holographic interpretation. Thus, to establish the
Bekenstein-Hawking formula as a special case can serve as a first test
of the Ryu-Takayanagi formula. If the entropy, @xmath , in the
Bekenstein Hawking formula is interpreted as an entanglement entropy,
@xmath , over some entangling surface, @xmath , then the black hole
horizon must be interpreted as a co-dimension two surface, @xmath , that
minimizes the area functional which has @xmath and which is homologous
to @xmath . The problem, therefore, consists in checking whether black
hole horizons in general are extremal co-dimension two surfaces that are
homologous to a region on the asymptotic boundary of the black hole
spacetime.

For spacetimes with black holes situated in the bulk, the black hole
horizon cannot coincide with a surface that ends on the boundary, since
@xmath . Thus, if such bulk black hole horizons are to be identified
with the extremal surfaces from the Ryu-Takayanagi formula, it must be
for the special case where @xmath . This is the limit where @xmath
covers the full spacetime boundary, i.e. @xmath . Given these
conditions, it is tempting to suppose that @xmath is the empty set as
well, however, since a black hole spacetime is not simply connected – it
contains a singularity – the empty set is not homologous with @xmath .
Instead, @xmath must be a surface that enclose the singularity.
Considering all such surfaces, the one with minimal area is the black
hole horizon. Obviously, this immediately entails that the dual quantum
state to a bulk black hole must be a thermal state. If @xmath is such
that its compliment, @xmath , is empty, then the quantum state on @xmath
must be thermal in order for it to have non-zero entropy and thereby for
it to have a black hole spacetime dual with non-zero horizon area. Thus,
the Bekenstein-Hawking formula in its holographic interpretation may be
viewed be a special case of the Ryu-Takayanagi formula.

Claiming this, however, it is necessary to make a qualifying remark
about the type of entropy involved. If the full system is in a thermal
state, it has an entropy and is therefore not a pure state. But knowing
only this, the entropy cannot be designated as entanglement entropy; one
simply does not know the origin of the entropy. For this reason, the
type of entropy was left unqualified above. However for the eternal
black hole, the thermal properties explicitly originate from
entanglement effects and the entropy, therefore, is entanglement
entropy. As stated in section 4.3 , the eternal black hole is dual to a
thermofield double state

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

This is a pure state, i.e. the von Neumann entropy of the state @xmath
is zero, but expressed as an entangled state of two subsystems. Tracing
out the degrees of freedom of one of the subsystems, the other subsystem
is in a thermal state. Knowing the full state, we can identify the
thermal entropy of one of the subsystems with the entanglement entropy
between the two subsystems. Either subsystem simply is in a thermal
state, and consequently the extremal bulk co-dimension two surface whose
area is proportional to this entanglement entropy must be identical with
the black hole horizon following the argument above. Thus, when we
consider the entropy of one of the subsystems in the eternal black hole
and notes its origin, then this entropy can be identified as
entanglement entropy. Therefore, the Bekenstein-Hawking formula applies
to the eternal black hole as a special case of the Ryu-Takayangi
formula.

### 5.2 Uses of the Ryu-Takayanagi formula

As a practical tool, the Ryu-Takayanagi formula allows us to evaluate
entanglement entropies in strongly coupled field theories by evaluating
the area of @xmath in the weakly coupled dual gravity theory. However,
we could also work the other way around. Knowing the entanglement
entropy, we can determine the area of the co-dimension two surface,
@xmath . In itself, this area is not of much interest. It would be
interesting, if one could reconstruct the entire dual spacetime from the
entanglement entropy of the field theory. Knowing a single area of a
co-dimension two surface in the bulk of this spacetime will not get us
very far; many spacetimes will be compatible with this particular area.
However, subdividing the Cauchy surface, @xmath , into different
subsystems will give other entanglement entropies that can be related to
different bulk surface areas.

In fact, the problem is highly overconstrained ensuring that a single
spacetime at most – the spacetime dual of that CFT state – is compatible
with all the areas in the bulk that corresponds to entanglement
entropies on the CFT side. Thus, according to the Ryu-Takayanagi formula
it is in principle possible to find the spacetime dual of any CFT simply
by calculating entanglement entropies. It is worth noting that the
entanglement entropies overconstrain the dual spacetime such that there,
for a general CFT, will be no spacetime that is compatible with all the
entropies. Consequently, only a smaller subset of CFTs are expected to
have dual descriptions as geometric spacetime theories.

However, finding the spacetime dual even for these CFTs faces severe
technical difficulties both due to problems associated with the
evaluation of entanglement entropies on the CFT side, and due to
problems in solving the overconstrained problem on the gravity side.
Also, the Ryu-Takayanagi formula is limitated to first order in the
bulk, and therfore correction will occur from quantum gravity if we go
deeper into the bulk.

However, setting aside these technical difficulties and considering only
first order pertubations in the bulk where the gravitational theory is
well-described by classical Einstein gravity coupled to matter (without
curvature couplings), the Ryu-Takayanagi formula suggests an intimate
relation between entanglement in @xmath dimensions – an inherently
quantum mechanical phenomena – and then the entire bulk spacetime in
@xmath dimensions in the (rare) cases where gauge/gravity duality
obtains.

It is exactly this relation that will be explored subsequently. However,
prior to this some evidence for the Ryu-Takayanagi formula will be
provided.

### 5.3 Evidence for the Ryu-Takayanagi formula

At its conception, the evidence of the Ryu-Takayanagi formula consisted
in the a number of successful tests, where the extremal surface approach
was employed to reproduce known results for entanglement entropies of
CFT states. These quantitative comparisons are not very numerous due to
the strong coupling of the CFT for @xmath . Thus, most of these
comparisons are between @xmath and @xmath .

One such example is the matching of the entanglement entropy for a
single interval in a @xmath on @xmath . As we did in section 3.3 , we
will consider an interval with length @xmath centred around the origin
on the spacelike slice, @xmath , such that @xmath and @xmath . For a
@xmath on @xmath , the spacetime dual is the Poincaré patch of pure
@xmath . Since the background is Poincaré-AdS, the metric induced on the
spatial slice, @xmath , is @xmath . Following the prescription of the
Ryu-Takayanagi formula, the entaglement entropy of @xmath is equal to
the area of a co-dimension two bulk surface, @xmath , in the @xmath
plane parametrized by coordinates @xmath and @xmath ; see the metric (
2.16 ). @xmath must be a curve that has @xmath , i.e. a curve whose
endpoints at @xmath are @xmath and @xmath . Furthermore, it must
minimize the area functional ( 5.3 ).

We will choose the parametrize @xmath in terms of the boundary
coordinate @xmath . The metric induced on @xmath – with the single
component @xmath – may then be expressed as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Since induced metric has only one component, we have @xmath . The area
functional therefore takes the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Defining @xmath , we may then find the extremum of the area functional
using the Euler-Lagrange equation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The solution is @xmath – a semi-circle around the origin in the @xmath
place – as may be verified by inserting back into the numerator of
Euler-Lagrange equation:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we have used @xmath . Thus, the co-dimension two surface, @xmath ,
must satisfy @xmath .

Inserting this into the expression for the area, we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

As expected, this integration diverges. To regulate it, we require that
@xmath for some small @xmath . The integration then yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Inserting this into the Ryu-Takayanagi we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

If we identify @xmath in accord with the @xmath dictionary, we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

The same result as obtained by direct calculation in section 3.3 .

Besides direct agreement between the entanglement entropies in cases
where the calculations are tractable on both the AdS and the CFT side,
the Ryu-Takayanagi formula has also been shown to satisfy various known
properties of entanglement entropy such as strong subadditivity. A
partial derivation of the Ryu-Takayanagi formula for general spherical
entangling surfaces was proposed in [ 22 ] and based on this a full
derivation from the AdS/CFT dictionary was developed in [ 23 ] . Both
derivations are beyond the scope of the current project. However,
elements of [ 22 ] will be explored in later chapters since a number of
aspects from this partial derivation of the Ryu-Takayanagi formula will
prove useful for other purposes.

## Chapter 6 Linearized Gravity in AdS Background

In this section we introduce linearized gravity gravity first in a
generic background and then in the specific case of an anti-de Sitter
background.

### 6.1 Perturbing spacetime

Linearized gravity is a type of approximation scheme for Einstein
gravity where the spacetime is characterized by some background metric,
@xmath , plus a weak perturbation, @xmath , that generates only small
corrections to the background field such that the full metric field,
@xmath , is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is assumed to be small compared to @xmath . Linearized
gravity is then obtained by expanding Einsteins field equations to
linear order in @xmath . Since the perturbation, @xmath , is small, we
will assume that we can use the background metric to raise and lower
indices.

For convenience, we will consider a one paramater family of metrics,
@xmath , such that for each value of @xmath , @xmath solves the Einstein
equations and @xmath . Thus, the first order correction to the
background metric – the perturbation @xmath – is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The linearized Einstein equations can then similarly be obtained as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

These equations imposes constraints on @xmath . To find them, we must
establish what change is induced to linear order on the Einstein tensor
by the linear order perturbation @xmath . For convenience, we will
introduce the notation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

and may thereby rephrase the above as the task of finding an expression
for @xmath in terms of @xmath .

The Einstein tensor with cosmological constant is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the Ricci tensor, @xmath is the Ricci scalar and @xmath
is the cosmological constant. Thus,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we have defined @xmath from which it follows that @xmath . ¹ ¹ 1
To see this, consider

@xmath (6.7)

To find an expression for @xmath , one must therefore first find an
expression for the perturbation of the Ricci tensor @xmath . The Ricci
tensor is given as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the Riemann tensor. The Riemann tensor, in turn, depends
on the metric connections:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

The linear order change in the Riemann tensor induced by the linear
order perturbation, @xmath may be expanded as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have used that the partial derivative is independent of @xmath
. The last line follows since

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here we have used that the metric connection is torsion free: @xmath .

What remains is to find perturbation of the metric connection. To find
an expression for this, consider initially the derivative with respect
to @xmath of the vanishing covariant derivative of the metric

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Reorganizing this, we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Another constraint follows, since the metric connection must be torsion
free in the first two indices. Thus,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now, using first ( 6.13 ) and then that the metric connection must be
torsion free, we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Applying this two more times, we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

The metric perturbation now occurs both on the left and on the right
hand side above. Collecting these, dividing by two and raising the last
index, we finally get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

As seen, this expression only depends on metric perturbation and
covariant derivatives taken with respect to the background metric.

Inserting this expression, the perturbation of the Ricci tensor becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the last line follows from the identity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the analogous identity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

we can substitute for the last term above and act with @xmath on all
terms

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.21)
  -- -- -- --------

where we have used @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and also @xmath .

### 6.2 Perturbing the Poincaré patch

The expression in terms of the Riemann and Ricci tensor is convenient
since we will be interested in the special case where the background is
the Poincaré patch of anti-de Sitter spacetime; a solution to Einsteins
equations with negative cosmological constant

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is a maximally symmetric spacetime and the Riemann tensor may
therefore be expressed as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the Ricci tensor takes the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the Poincaré coordinates, the metric tensor is diagonal, such that
@xmath and @xmath vanishes for @xmath . Consequently, the Riemann tensor
contracted with the metric perturbation becomes:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the Ricci tensor contracted with the metric perturbation becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

Subsequently, we will primarily be interested in @xmath . Using the
above we find

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.27)
  -- -- -- --------

where we have assumed radial gauge ( @xmath ) and used that @xmath .

What remains is to evaluate @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have defined @xmath .

We will suppose that @xmath is small such that the dual spacetimes can
be represented using the Fefferman-Graham coordinates by the metric

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we, in the last equality, have defined @xmath . This is convenient
since it permits us to write the perturbed metric on the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here we have identified @xmath where @xmath is equal to @xmath with the
additional components @xmath and @xmath . From this, we readily see that
the Fefferman-Graham coordinates presumes radial gauge for the
perturbation @xmath . ² ² 2 This gauge freedom follows since there are
@xmath coordinates. One can therefore gauge fix @xmath parameters of
@xmath : @xmath has @xmath components and @xmath is another, which gives
@xmath gauge fixed components in total. Also, we have assumed that the
background metric is the Poincaré patch of AdS:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

Inserting this into the expression for @xmath , one finds

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

Reinserting this into the expression for @xmath and again substituting
@xmath with @xmath , one finally gets

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

The equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the tt-component of the linearized Einstein equations in vacuum in
the presence of a negative cosmological constant @xmath .

As one may expect, @xmath is also the equations of motion obtained to
leading order for an expansion in @xmath of the Einstein-Hilbert action.
The first subleading correction in @xmath turns on the coupling to
matter fields with the inclusion of the source term @xmath .

## Chapter 7 Entanglement and Spacetime

An initial qualitative indication of the relation between gravity on the
AdS side and entanglement on the CFT side may be obtained by considering
the dual pair: the eternal black hole and the thermofield double state.
Here the Bekenstein-Hawking formula interpreted holographically, i.e. as
a special case of the Ryu-Takayanagi formula, can be used to monitor
what happens to the black hole horizon in the eternal black hole when
entanglement is added or removed between the double states in the
thermofield double state. Thus, it serves as a probe of the relation
between entanglement on the CFT side and some spacetime surface on the
AdS side. While this special case may be studied employing a holographic
interpretation of the Bekenstein-Hawking formula, general, holographic,
classical spacetimes may similarly be studied using the Ryu-Takayanagi
formula. Below, the special case of the thermofield double state/eternal
black hole will be examined first, and we will then subsequently
consider the generalization to arbitrary quantum states with a classical
spacetime dual.

### 7.1 Entanglement and the eternal black hole

The thermofield double state is a particular state, @xmath , in which we
can find the quantum system comprised of the subsystems @xmath and
@xmath . Interestingly, the expression of the thermofield double state,
( 4.38 ), in terms of energy eigenstates explicitly unveils how the
degrees of freedom of the two subsystems are entangled through the
weighted sum over states @xmath . More explicitly, we find that the
density matrix for one of the subsystems is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

from which it follows that

  -- -- -- -------
           (7.2)
  -- -- -- -------

where we have used @xmath . This will generally be non-zero except for
the limit where @xmath , i.e. the limit where the temperature goes to
zero. It is evident from this, how the inverse temperature @xmath
controls the entanglement entropy and therefore the amount of
entanglement between the degrees of freedom in the two subsystems.

From the reduced density matrix, @xmath , we see that in the limit
@xmath only the ground state of the subsystem, @xmath , is occupied.
This follows since all the energy eigenvalues other than the vacuum
state, @xmath , are non-zero and therefore vanish in the limit @xmath as
a consequence of the factor @xmath . Due to the symmetry of the
thermofield double state, the same holds for the subsystem, @xmath .
Thus, in the limit @xmath the full system is the product of these two
ground states

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

i.e. @xmath .

Manifestly, @xmath is a product state and does not, as expected from the
expression for @xmath , contain entanglement between the degrees of
freedom in @xmath and @xmath . In this state, therefore, the two systems
are completely uncorrelated. What is argued in [ 1 ] is that a first
indication of the relation between entanglement and spacetime may be
obtained from the differences between the spacetime dual of a product
state like @xmath and an entangled state like @xmath .

The state @xmath where there is no entanglement between @xmath and
@xmath consists of the tensor product of two identical pure states; more
specifically a product of the identical vacuum states of these
subsystems, @xmath . If we suppose that a pure state is dual to some
spacetime, then the product of two pure states is dual to the product of
two such spacetimes. Thus, the full spacetime consists of the product of
two completely uncorrelated spacetimes. It seems, therefore, reasonable
to suppose that these two spacetimes are disconnected, i.e. no light
signal travelling from one spacetime can intersect a light signal
travelling from the other. From the conjectured duality between the
thermofield double state and the eternal black hole, it follows that the
spacetime dual of the thermofield double state, where @xmath and @xmath
are entangled, is a connected spacetime, i.e. in the eternal black hole
a light signal travelling from @xmath can intersect a light signal
travelling from @xmath . The comparison between @xmath and @xmath in the
context of the thermofield double states suggests that entanglement
between @xmath and @xmath is a necessary condition for connectivity
between @xmath and @xmath in the dual eternal black hole.

This conclusion sits well with the Bekenstein-Hawking formula that
relates the entropy of a black hole, @xmath , with its horizon area,
@xmath [ 12 ] .

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The duality between the eternal black hole and the thermofield double
state entails that the black hole entropy – regardless of its origin on
the AdS side – is equal to the entanglement entropy of one of the
subsystems in the thermofield double state [ 24 ] . Employing this
relation, it is possible to monitor the horizon area as seen from either
side of the eternal black hole, when entanglement between @xmath and
@xmath is removed in the dual thermofield double state. Since the
horizon area, @xmath , and entanglement entropy, @xmath , is
proportional, it follows that when entanglement is removed between
@xmath and @xmath , then the black hole horizon area decreases. Since
the entanglement entropy is controlled by @xmath , it follows that the
black hole horizon area decreases when @xmath increases. Apparently, in
the limit where all entanglement is removed between @xmath and @xmath
(i.e. where @xmath ), the entanglement entropy goes to zero and so does
the horizon area. This limit is depicted in figure 7.1 for spatial
slices @xmath and @xmath equal to a positive constant, where @xmath is
the timelike Kruskal-Szekeres coordinate.

The depiction suggests that the spacetime pinches such that it is only
contiguous at @xmath . Thus, in the limit where @xmath in the
thermofield double state, the spacetime dual is connected by a single
point. This does not exactly reproduce the initial assumption that the
product of two pure states, such as @xmath , are dual to two completely
disconnected spacetimes. A singularity remains, whose interpretation is
uncertain. This, however, should perhaps not worry us too much. Due to
the critical minimum temperature for AdS-Schwarzschild black holes below
which they cannot exist, it is unclear whether the above account of the
limit @xmath is correct. When @xmath , the temperature of the thermal
state of @xmath and @xmath goes to zero, i.e. below the critical
temperature. We should therefore be careful when taking the limit @xmath
. Despite this complication, it is clear how removing (some)
entanglement between the two subsystems of the thermofield double state,
@xmath and @xmath , decreases the connectivity in the dual eternal black
hole spacetime. From this latter observation, van Raamsdonk – not
considering the complication related the minimum temperature –
concludes: “In this example, classical connectivity arises by entangling
the degrees of freedom in the two components ” [ 1 , 2325, emphasis in
original] . Entanglement between @xmath and @xmath is a necessary
condition for spacetime connectivity between regions A and B in the
eternal black hole.

### 7.2 Beyond the eternal black hole

While conceived in the context of the duality between the eternal black
hole and the thermofield doublestate, the relation between entanglement
and spacetime connectivity generalises to any quantum state with a
classical spacetime dual.

Suppose again that @xmath is a generic quantum state with a classical
spacetime dual @xmath with boundary @xmath and @xmath is a state in the
Hilbert space, @xmath , for a CFT defined on (a spatial slice of) @xmath
. Now, divide the boundary @xmath into two regions @xmath and @xmath ,
such that @xmath (see figure 5.1 ). Since a CFT is a local quantum field
theory, there are specific degrees of freedom associated with specific
spatial regions. We can therefore regard the full quantum system as
composed of two subsystems, @xmath and @xmath , associated with two
spatially separated regions @xmath and @xmath . As a consequence, we can
decompose the Hilbert space of states of the full system as a tensor
product of the Hilbert spaces of states of @xmath and @xmath : ¹ ¹ 1
Some complications are involved in making such a decomposition in a
gauge invariant way, but these will not be considered here.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath can therefore be expressed as a sum over products of states
@xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

This will generally not be a product state, i.e. a product of a state in
@xmath and @xmath . Thus, the local degrees of freedom in @xmath and
@xmath will generally be entangled.

Again, assume that the spacetime dual of a product state

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

is dual to two disconnected spacetimes. One then obtains the result that
entanglement between @xmath and @xmath in @xmath is a necessary
condition for the dual spacetime @xmath to be a connected spacetime. The
duality between the thermofield double state and the eternal black hole
is just a particular example of this.

We may monitor this more closely using the Ryu-Takayanagi formula:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Again, it follows that changing the entanglement between @xmath and
@xmath changes the connectivity between the two corresponding regions in
the spacetime dual.

When @xmath , the state of the full quantum system becomes a product of
two pure states such that there is no entanglement between the local
degrees of freedom in @xmath and @xmath . Thus, in this limit the
entanglement entropy, @xmath , goes to zero and so does the area of
@xmath according to the Ryu-Takayanagi formula. More explicitly stated,
in this limit the bulk metric changes such that the minimal area
dividing the two asymptotic regions @xmath and @xmath in the spacetime
goes to zero; the spacetime dual of the quantum state pinches when
@xmath . For the spatial surface @xmath , figure 7.2 depicts the limit
where all entanglement is removed between @xmath and @xmath .

Again, the limit where all entanglement is removed between the quantum
subsystems does not exactly reproduce the expectation that the tensor
product of two pure states is dual to a disconnected spacetime. The two
regions @xmath and @xmath remain connected by a single singular point
that has no clear interpretation. Nevertheless, it evident how
entanglement between @xmath and @xmath is related to the connectivity
between @xmath and @xmath in the spacetime dual. Further support for
this is found in an argument from the mutual information ² ² 2
Schematically, the mutual information, @xmath , can be defined as @xmath
where @xmath is the entanglement entropy between a region @xmath and the
rest of the system [ 1 ] . between a point in @xmath and one in @xmath
to the effect that the proper distance in the dual spacetime between any
two such points goes to infinity when the entanglement between @xmath
and @xmath goes to zero [ 25 ] . As summarised by van Raamsdonk, “the
two regions of spacetime pull apart and pinch off from each other” [ 1 ,
2327] . In other words, the conclusion from section 7.1 extends even to
spacetimes with a contiguous boundary.

If the AdS side and the CFT side in the AdS/CFT correspondence are
regarded as two different ways to encode the same information about a
physical system, then the above qualitative investigation of the
relation between spacetime and entanglement in the AdS/CFT
correspondence offers an indication of how some of this information is
encoded in the two different descriptions. The aspect of the physical
system described on the AdS side as spacetime geometry is encoded on the
CFT side as entanglement structure. It is, however, important to notice
that the argument merely demonstrates how entanglement on the CFT side
is a necessary condition for spacetime connectivity on the AdS side.
Indeed, bulk entanglement corrections to the Ryu-Takayanagi formula
entails that entanglement is not sufficient for spacetime connectivity.

## Chapter 8 Linearized Gravity from Entanglement

If the entanglement structure indeed can represent the same physics as
bulk spacetime, there must be constraints on entanglement that
corresponds to Einstein’s field equations. Finding such correspondences
would provide more quantitative justification for the claim that the
same physical phenomena can indeed be encoded either as entanglement
structure on the CFT side or as bulk spacetime.

In the following, it will be shown that if perturbations of the CFT
vacuum state satisfies a particular constraint on entanglement entropy
then the spacetime dual of the perturbed state satisfies Einstein’s
field equations expanded to linear order around pure AdS. Thus, there is
a general constraint on entanglement entropy in the CFT state that
corresponds to imposing Einstein’s field equations in the bulk of the
spacetime dual.

The constraint imposed on the CFT side is the following:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the entanglement entropy of a region in a CFT and @xmath
is some energy associated with that region.

( 8.1 ) is similar to the first law of thermodynamics and a derivation
of Einstein equations from this relation sits well with previous
attempts to derive these equations from thermodynamics [ 26 ] . However,
contrary to the first law of thermodynamics ( 8.1 ) holds for arbitrary
perturbations of the vacuum state and not only for thermal/equilibrium
states as it is the case for the first law of thermodynamics.

To derive Einstein equation from ( 8.1 ), one must establish a
translation between this relation in the holographic CFT to quantities
in the spacetime dual. For the entanglement entropy (LHS of ( 8.1 )),
this translation is obtained by the Ryu-Takayanagi formula:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The change in energy (RHS of ( 8.1 )) can be translated as an energy
associated with the asymptotic behavior of the metric. This, together
with the Ryu-Takayanagi formula allows the translation of ( 8.1 )
holding in the CFT into a relation that must hold in the spacetime dual,
which turn out to be the linearized Einstein equations in vacuum.

The material of this chapter is based on [ 3 , 4 , 27 ] . No new results
are derived here, however, a number of details are filled in which are
not explicit elsewhere in the literature.

As in section 4.3 , we will consider a one parameter family of CFT
states, @xmath and assume that @xmath lives in a @xmath -dimensional
Minkowski spacetime, @xmath , such that @xmath has as its spacetime dual
the @xmath -dimensional pure Poincarè patch of Anti-de-Sitter spacetime.
The metric of the dual spacetime therefore takes the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Again, the dual spacetime of the quantum state @xmath will be doneted
@xmath . Its boundary will be denoted @xmath and arbitrary Cauchy
surfaces on this boundary will be denoted @xmath .

Within this framework, we first want to demonstrate that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

holds for all small perturbations of the CFT vacuum state i.e. for all
@xmath with small @xmath . Here, @xmath is the entanglement entropy of
@xmath for a ball shaped region @xmath and @xmath is the variation of
this entropy compared to @xmath . @xmath is the so-called hyperbolic
energy of the region @xmath and @xmath is the variation of this energy
with respect to @xmath .

Secondly, we want to demonstrate that if ( 8.4 ) holds for a quantum
state then linearized Einstein equations hold in the spacetime dual of
this quantum state. To do this, we will provide a holographic
interpretation of @xmath and @xmath which both translate as integrations
over (parts of) @xmath in terms of the metric perturbation @xmath .
Requiring an equality to first order between the holographic expressions
of @xmath and @xmath will then be shown to be equivalent to imposing
Einstein’s equations to first order on @xmath .

In the following, it will be assumed that all states, @xmath , are small
perturbation of @xmath and that their spacetime duals, @xmath ,
consequently are small perturbations of @xmath , i.e. of the Poincarè
patch of pure AdS.

### 8.1 Entropy and the modular hamiltonian

The entanglement entropy of a spatial region in a CFT is defined via the
reduced density matrix. Again, we define for some CFT state @xmath the
reduced density matrix associated with an arbitrary spatial region
@xmath as:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the compliment of @xmath . The von Neumann entropy is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now, consider the perturbed state @xmath such that @xmath is the
entanglement entropy in the region @xmath . Varying this with respect to
@xmath , we find (to any order in @xmath )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where last line follows since the trace of density matrix must be unity.
¹ ¹ 1 It has fixed normalization and therefore @xmath . Defining the
modular Hamiltonian of the region @xmath : @xmath we get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath is independent of @xmath and therefore we can take the
derivative outside the trace

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the equality follows from the definition of the expectation value
@xmath .

Thereby, we obtain the general relation that holds for an arbitrary
region @xmath and for any perturbation:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Generally, the modular Hamiltonian, @xmath , is not a local operator.
Thus, it cannot in general be evaluated from the local fields of a
quantum field theory. However, there are certain exception where @xmath
is a local operator. One example is the special case where @xmath is a
ball shaped region with radius @xmath . ² ² 2 I.e. a particular spatial,
co-dimension two surface of @xmath . The domain of dependence for this
region is defined as usual as consisting of those points for which all
causal curves that passes through the point and also passes through
@xmath .

As shown by [ 22 ] , there is a conformal mapping of this domain of
dependence for a ball shaped region in Minkowski spacetime to a Rindler
wedge of Minkowski spacetime. This is the part of Minkowski spacetime
that is accessible for a uniformly boosted observer. Identifying @xmath
and @xmath , the Rindler wedge has the metric

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath .

Generally, it holds that the density matrix for a half space (like the
Rindler wedge) is thermal for the vacuum state of a Lorentz-invariant
quantum field theory. ³ ³ 3 Unruh radiation is a well known effect of
this. To see this, consider first the Wick rotated (Euclidean) statement
of the path integral for a quantum field theory where @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are respectively final and initial field
configurations. This may be identified as density matrix of a thermal
state @xmath under the assumption @xmath and @xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

The partition function, i.e the trace of the density matrix @xmath , can
be expressed as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is equivalent to a path integral over all periodic paths with
period @xmath which we express as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can obtain the reduced density matrix for a region @xmath by tracing
out the degrees of freedom in the compliment of @xmath , @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now, note that for some state @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the vacuum state. This follows since all energy
eigenstates other than the vacuum state are suppressed by a factor
@xmath . This entails that

  -- -- -- --------
           (8.18)
  -- -- -- --------

where we have suppressed the integral over the degrees of freedom in
@xmath . From this, we can obtain an expression for the vacuum density
matrix

  -- -- -- --------
           (8.19)
  -- -- -- --------

which follows since

  -- -- -- --------
           (8.20)
  -- -- -- --------

Consider the special case where we are interested in the density matrix
for the Rindler wedge of the Minkowski vacuum, i.e. a half-space of a
particular QFT vacuum state. First, define the region @xmath of
Minkowski spacetime by @xmath . Thus @xmath is a half-space. We then
have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is still the wick rotated time coordinate. Change the
coordinates to polar coordinates, @xmath and @xmath such that the metric
may be expressed as @xmath (where we have suppressed the remaining
direction @xmath ). We then have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Comparing to ( 8.16 ), we identify this as a density matrix over @xmath
with @xmath and Hamiltonian, @xmath , that generates evolution in the
variable @xmath , i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the coordinates, @xmath , the metric takes the form @xmath which we
recognize as the metric of the Rindler wedge in Minkowski spacetime.
@xmath , therefore, is the generator of Rindler time (the boost
generator of Minkowski spacetime) and @xmath is a thermal density matrix
of the Rindler wedge. Thus, combining the results ( 8.22 ) and ( 8.23 ),
we find that reduced vacuum density matrix for the half space @xmath is
equal to the thermal density matrix defined in terms of the boost
generator with @xmath , i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the Rindler wedge, @xmath is the time coordinate and classical time
translations are generated by the vector field

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

In Minkowski space, time translations are simply generated by the vector
field @xmath and the Hamiltonian, therefore, can be obtained from the
energy density operator for Minkowski spacetime, @xmath , by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

By the same procedure, one can obtain the Hamiltonian for the Rindler
wedge, @xmath , however, its expression as a sum of vector fields
complicates things. The complication can be avoided by noting that the
Hamiltonian must be the same for any Cauchy surface of the spacetime, we
can therefore choose @xmath such that the second term in ( 8.25 ) is
zero. Thereby, @xmath can be expressed in terms of the full Minkowski
spacetime energy density operator @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is required to ensure that we only include the right
Rindler wedge. With this, we can obtain an expression for the density
matrix for the ball shaped region using the inverse mapping from the
Rindler wedge to the domain of dependence for @xmath . Since we are
considering a CFT state, the energy eigenstates, including the vacuum
state, are invariant under this conformal mapping. Associating with this
mapping the transformation @xmath , on finds

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the last equality follows from ( 8.24 ). Now define @xmath such
that @xmath . From this it immediately follows that @xmath and we may
therefore identity @xmath as the modular Hamiltonian and observe that (
8.28 ) yields a direct expression for the modular Hamiltonian of a ball
shaped region in terms of the known Hamiltonian for the Rindler wedge,
@xmath and the transformation @xmath from the Rindler wedge to the
domain of dependence for a ball shaped region.

Using this, one finds

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where, @xmath is the energy density operator for the CFT and @xmath
serves as a squared radial coordinate centred in the center of the ball.
For further details, see [ 4 , 22 ] .

We can then obtain the sought expression for the first order variation
in @xmath away from vacuum of the expectation value of modular
Hamiltonian

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally, making an identification between the expectation value of the
modular Hamiltonian and the hyperbolic energy, @xmath , the relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

is obtained by substitution into ( 8.10 ).

### 8.2 Holographic interpretation of @xmath

To see what corresponds to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

in the spacetime dual, we must find an interpretation of @xmath and
@xmath on the AdS side.

A holographic interpretation of entanglement entropy is already provided
by the Ryu-Takayanagi formula ( 8.2 ). This involves the evaluation of
the area of a minimal co-dimension two surface in the spacetime bulk
that divides the boundary region @xmath and its compliment.

Generally, one can parametrize a co-dimension two surface as @xmath
where @xmath is an embedding function. The area functional, @xmath , for
such surfaces can then be expressed as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the determinant of the metric induced on this surface by
the embedding function @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

We will use the notation @xmath for the extremal of the area functional,
where @xmath is the embedding function which extremizes the area.

Now, consider a small perturbation of the metric @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

that will entail a small variation of the spacetime. In the original
spacetime the area, @xmath , was extremized by @xmath but with the
variation in spacetime due to the variation in @xmath another surface
with embedding function, @xmath , will extremize @xmath .

The variation in extremal surface area is then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that @xmath extremizes the functional @xmath . This entails that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

i.e. the first order variations of the unperturbed extremal surface with
respect to variation in the embedding function vanishes. ⁴ ⁴ 4 For an
extremum, the first order variation always vanishes. The second term in
( 8.36 ) can therefore be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

We then observe that @xmath is of order @xmath from which it follows

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

We therefore find that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus, to linear order in @xmath , the variation in @xmath depends on the
variation in @xmath while the embedding function, @xmath , is held
fixed.

The variation of @xmath is controlled by the variation in the induced
metric. To first order in @xmath , the variation in the induced metric
is proportional to the variation in the metric since the first order
variation of the embedding function vanishes. Thus, reintroducing the
perturbation parameter @xmath , we can express the perturbation of the
induced metric as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have suppressed the tensor notation and the dependence of
@xmath on @xmath .

The variation to first order in @xmath (i.e. to first order in @xmath )
of the square-root of the induced metric, @xmath , entering in the area
functional ( 8.33 ) may then be expressed as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have used the identity @xmath . The derivative becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the last line reintroduces the tensor notation and replaces the
trace with a sum over repeated indices. Thus we find the following
expression for the variation of the square root

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can then insert this into the area functional, and get an explicit
expression of the variation of the extremum of the area functional due
to a first order variation in the metric

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now, we want again to consider the particular example where the
perturbed metric @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

The embedding function @xmath of interest is the mapping from the
co-dimension two surface, @xmath , to the spacetime with metric @xmath ,
which extremizes the area of @xmath , whose boundery at @xmath is a ball
shaped region, @xmath , with radius @xmath and which is defined on the
constant time slice @xmath . In pure AdS, the bulk surface that
extremizes the area of @xmath for a ball shaped boundary is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the spatial Minkowski coordinates, i.e. the coordinates
on the boundary @xmath .

Parametrizing this extremal surface using these boundary coordinates,
such that @xmath , one finds the embedding function

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since we have chosen a constant time slice, we may disregard the time
coordinate and consider only the spatial coordinates, @xmath . The
unperturbed induced metric, @xmath , then takes the form

  -- -- -- --------
           (8.49)
  -- -- -- --------

where the last equality follows since @xmath and @xmath and therefore is
diagonal with Lorentzian signature and elements @xmath . Now

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

so we find that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

This can be verified using the relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the identity @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

The square root of the determinant of the induced metric, @xmath ,
becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the last equality follows from ( 8.54 ). The first order variation
of the induced metric, @xmath , is then given as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have used the assumption (radial gauge) @xmath and that the
embedding function, @xmath , is invariant under the first order
variation of the the metric.

All of this can then be combined to obtain an expression for the first
order variation around pure AdS in the area of the extremal surface with
a ball shaped boundary

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the last line assumes that the center of the ball shaped region is
@xmath . Using the Ryu-Takayanagi formula ( 5.4 ) we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus, for CFT state @xmath that has pure AdS as its spacetime dual, a
small variation in the entanglement entropy, @xmath , of a ball shaped
region @xmath is proportional to the change in area of the extremal
surface @xmath , @xmath , due to the corresponding perturbation of the
AdS metric.

### 8.3 Holographic interpretation of @xmath

From

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

we see that a holographic interpretation of the hyperbolic energy,
@xmath , merely requires an interpretation of the energy density
operator, @xmath , for the CFT.

To find this holographic interpretation, consider first an infinitesimal
ball shaped region, @xmath , on the boundary @xmath centred at @xmath .
For such a infinitesimal ball, the expectation value of the energy
density operator can be assumed to be the same throughout the ball. To
leading order, we can therefore replace the function @xmath with its
central value @xmath , where @xmath is the center. The variation in
hyperbolic energy for such an infinitesimal ball, @xmath , is given by (
8.30 ) when taking the limit @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the area of the unit ball of dimension @xmath (surface
area of the unit sphere in dimension @xmath ). From ( 8.4 ) it then
follows that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

Inserting the holographic interpretation for @xmath into ( 8.59 ) we
find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

To investigate the limit @xmath , it is convenient to define coordinates
that are constant in this limit

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

With these coordinates we find the expression

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since we consider the limit @xmath , we assume that the metric
perturbation is the same throughout the region enclosed by @xmath , i.e.
@xmath . The integrals are over symmetric intervals and therefore all
terms where @xmath will not contribute since

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

We therefore have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since there is nothing particular about the numbering of the coordinates
@xmath , the @xmath integrals above must be equal

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

One thereby finds ⁵ ⁵ 5 This is a rather remarkable result in its own
right. Assuming only the Ryu-Takayanagi formula, we have derived the
known relation [ 28 , 29 ] between the first order variation of the
expectation value of the CFT stress energy tensor and the bulk metric
perturbation @xmath .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now nothing was assumed for the point @xmath , so this holds for all
@xmath . We can therefore substitute the first order variation of energy
density, @xmath , in the CFT state with the metric perturbation at the
boundary, @xmath times some constant

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

This, thereby, provides a holographic interpretation of the hyperbolic
energy for a ball shaped region on @xmath . Below, we will define

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

### 8.4 Combining the holographic results

In the two previous section we found holographic interpretations (and
expressions) for @xmath and @xmath . The relation @xmath holds for any
CFT quantum state. It will turn out that if and only if this equality
holds for all disks in all Lorentz frames then the bulk metric satisfies
the Einstein’s field equations to linear order in @xmath .

The two holographic interpretations are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have introduced the shorthand @xmath and @xmath for the
holographic interpretation of @xmath and @xmath , respectively.
Combining these and using the relation @xmath , we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

a relation between the metric perturbation on the boundary and in the
perturbation in the bulk. This bulk constraint was first shown to be
equivalent to linearized Einstein equation in vacuum in [ 3 ] , however,
a more elegant derivation was developed in [ 4 ] inspired by the
Iyer-Wald formalism [ 30 ] . Only the details of the latter derivation
will be recounted here.

In [ 4 ] , they show that the non-local constraint ( 8.76 ) is equal to
the linearized Einstein equations in vacuum if there is a form, @xmath ,
such that (off shell)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, is the exterior derivative, @xmath are linearized Einstein
equations, @xmath is the Killing vector

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

We see that all but the time component vanishes at time, @xmath .
Further, on the extremal surface @xmath that satisfies @xmath and @xmath
also the time component, @xmath , vanishes. Thus, @xmath is a
bifurcation surface of the killing vector @xmath . Finally, @xmath is
the volume form of co-dimension one surfaces in the bulk

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the antisymmetric tensor in @xmath dimensions, for which
we define @xmath . For a surface of constant time, we have @xmath and
all component but @xmath vanishes. This follows since all terms of
@xmath either include the antisymmetric tensor with repeated indices or
wedge products that involve @xmath .

Defining the volume @xmath as the volume bounded by @xmath , where
@xmath and @xmath as above are spacelike surfaces at @xmath . From that
it follows

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

Furthermore, we require that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the boundary of AdS which entails that @xmath since
@xmath .

Assuming there is such a form, @xmath , it can then be shown that if the
non-local constraint @xmath is satisfied in the bulk, then Einstein’s
field equations to linear order are satisfied in the bulk, i.e. the
constraint implies that @xmath . First, relation @xmath implies that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.83)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the last equality follows from Stokes theorem. Next, we multiply
by @xmath , take the derivative with respect to @xmath and expand using
Leibniz’ integration rule for forms [ 31 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the interior product and @xmath is a vector orthogonal
to @xmath , such that @xmath , where @xmath is a unit vector in the
radial direction. It is an axiom of exterior derivatives that @xmath for
any differential form @xmath of a smooth function @xmath . Therefore,
the first term in the expansion vanishes. Thus, inserting the expression
( 8.78 ) for @xmath and using ( 8.81 ), we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

The first term vanishes, which can be seen by splitting the surface
integral over @xmath into an integral over @xmath and one over @xmath
(valid since @xmath ). The integral over @xmath vanishes due the
requirement @xmath . The integral over @xmath vanishes since @xmath is a
bifurcation surface of @xmath ( @xmath ). Thus, only the second term
above is non-vanishing. The derivative, restricted to the volume @xmath
for which @xmath , can be evaluated by inserting the time component of
@xmath as given in ( 8.79 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

We then finally get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is satisfied only if @xmath .

To see that this implies @xmath , observe that ( 8.87 ) is of the form
@xmath . Then take the derivative of this with respect to @xmath and use
Stokes theorem:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.88)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the area element on @xmath . Expanding this integral, we
find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.89)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the last equality follows from ( 8.82 ). Now, we identify @xmath
as the average moment of the function @xmath on @xmath and find that
this vanishes. Next, consider the derivative of @xmath with respect to
@xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.90)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the last equality follows since @xmath only contributes with a
constant factor. Again, we used Stokes theorem. We identify this as the
first moment of @xmath on @xmath in the @xmath direction for vanishing
average moment. As seen, this also vanishes.

Since the first order moment vanishes, it holds that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.91)
  -- -------- -- --------

Again, taking the derivative with respect to @xmath gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.92)
  -- -------- -- --------

This, we recognize as the second moment of @xmath on @xmath in the
@xmath direction for vanishing average moment. Also this vanishes. We
can continue this procedure and show that all moments of @xmath on
@xmath vanishes if @xmath . Thus, @xmath .

Going to our particular example @xmath with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.93)
  -- -------- -- --------

it follows that @xmath , since @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are non-zero.

The argument so far has been carried assuming that the @xmath was a
subset of a surface of constant time. Thus, we have assumed a frame of
reference with four velocity, @xmath . Going to a general frame of
reference, one finds that the condition @xmath entails

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.94)
  -- -------- -- --------

As a crude test, we see immediately that this reproduces the result
above for the four velocity @xmath . If we assume that ( 8.94 ) holds
for arbitrary four velocities @xmath then it follows that @xmath . Thus,
the linearized Einstein equations are satisfied for the boundary
coordinate directions. What remains is to show that @xmath and @xmath .
First note that @xmath and @xmath for @xmath which follows from ( 8.82
). These are analogous to initial value constraints that must be
satisfied by @xmath . Consider the general result of the initial value
formulation of general relativity that if the spatial components of the
Einstein equations are satisfied everywhere, then the initial value
constraints given on some spatial slice of the spacetime are satisfied
everywhere. This result follows from the Bianchi identity @xmath [ 32 ,
252-267] . However, this result may as well be applied to constraints at
the surface @xmath . If the remaining components, @xmath , of the
Einstein equations are satisfied in all of spacetime as well as the
constraints at the surface @xmath then these constraints are satisfied
in all of spacetime. This entails that if @xmath and @xmath and @xmath
for @xmath then @xmath and @xmath for all @xmath . Thus, if @xmath is
satisfied in the bulk and there is a form @xmath that satisfies the
stated constraints then it follows that linearized Einstein equations
are satisfied in the bulk.

### 8.5 The form @xmath

What remains is to show that there is a form @xmath for which ( 8.77 ),
( 8.95 ), ( 8.78 ), and ( 8.82 ) holds. Let us make the ansatz

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.95)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.96)
  -- -------- -- --------

This entails @xmath since the covariant derivative of the Levi-Civita
tensor vanishes. We may therefore expand the variation of @xmath with
respect to the metric as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.97)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have defined @xmath and used

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.98)
  -- -------- -- --------

Also, we have used the expression for the variation of the covariant
derivative ( 6.17 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.99)
  -- -------- -- --------

( 8.97 ) may be reinserted into the expression for @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.100)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We will consider @xmath restricted to the constant time surface @xmath ,
where all but the time component of @xmath vanishes. Thus, @xmath which
follows from the expression ( 8.79 ). This entails that @xmath and
@xmath . One must also use that @xmath and that @xmath . The latter can
be verified by requiring that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.101)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.102)
  -- -------- -- ---------

For small perturbation, the term @xmath vanishes from which it follows
that @xmath . We therefore have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.103)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath assuming radial gauge. Using these, we may evaluate @xmath
on the surface @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.104)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Again, we will consider the case where the metric is approximated by the
Fefferman-Graham metric such that @xmath . Using this expression for the
metric perturbation and that @xmath , we find the final expression for
@xmath :

  -- -- -- ---------
           (8.105)
  -- -- -- ---------

where we, in the last equality, have ensured that the indices on @xmath
is lowered such that we can use definition ( 8.96 ). Note that the index
on partial derivatives are still raised and lowered by the
Kronecker-Delta, @xmath .

With this expression we can now verify that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.106)
     @xmath      (8.107)
     @xmath      (8.108)
  -- -------- -- ---------

First, consider the integration over @xmath . Here, @xmath since @xmath
on @xmath which follows since @xmath on @xmath . Define

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.109)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and observe that the integral of the @xmath form @xmath is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.110)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Inserting this and the expression for @xmath into ( 8.110 ), we find

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.111)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the last equality follows since @xmath on @xmath and @xmath .
Inserting the expression for @xmath at @xmath gives

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.112)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Next, consider the integration over @xmath . Since @xmath is a
bifurcation surface of the killing vector @xmath , it follows that
@xmath on @xmath . Both @xmath and @xmath are non-vanishing, so we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.113)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Here we define the function @xmath as above but now restricted to the
surface @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.114)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the last equality follows since @xmath on @xmath . We also define
in addition

  -- -- -- ---------
           (8.115)
  -- -- -- ---------

Again, we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.116)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the integration now is over the surface @xmath . For the
integration over the @xmath -part, we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.117)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where we have used the chain rule to replace @xmath by @xmath and @xmath
.

For convenience, we will evaluate the integration over @xmath and @xmath
separately:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.118)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.119)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Putting these elements back together and using @xmath , we finally
obtain

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.120)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Finally, consider the external derivative, @xmath . Writing @xmath and
using that @xmath , we can express the external derivative as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.121)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where we have defined @xmath . The minus sign arises since @xmath must
be the first rather than the second index of the Levi-Civita symbol
inside @xmath , and the Levi-Civity is anti-symmetric. Using @xmath and
the expressions for @xmath and @xmath , we can evaluate the two partial
derivatives:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.122)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where we have used that @xmath . The derivative @xmath becomes

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.123)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where we have used that @xmath and @xmath .

Collecting the terms, we get

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.124)
  -- -------- -- ---------

To put the exterior derivative on the form @xmath , we have to raise the
index of @xmath and replace it by @xmath

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.125)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Inserting this, we get

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.126)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (8.127)
  -- -------- -- ---------

in agreement with the result found for the linearized Einstein equations
in AdS in section 6.2 . Thus, we see that the linearized Einstein
equations in vacuum follows from the holographic interpretation of the
first law of entanglement entropy.

## Chapter 9 Beyond Linearized Gravity

So far, we have on the AdS side considered the limit @xmath of general
relativity. In this limit, the source term appearing in the Einstein
equations, @xmath , is suppressed since it is of order @xmath . Thus, to
go beyond vacuum solutions we must include also the first subleading
order in @xmath in the expansion of the Einstein equations. The limit
@xmath is – following the identification ( 4.33 ) – equivalent to the
limit @xmath . According to the AdS/CFT dictionary, @xmath ( 4.6 ) and
therefore the first subleading order in @xmath corresponds to an
expansion on the CFT side that includes the first subleading order in
@xmath . In the previous chapter, the CFT side relation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

was derived in full generality, i.e. to any order in @xmath . This
relation therefore holds also to subleading orders in @xmath .

Our interest here will be to see what this first law of entanglement
entropy corresponds to on the AdS side, if we include the first
subleading order in @xmath . We will find that this gives rise to a
source term in linearized Einstein gravity exactly corresponding to the
source term, @xmath , in the Einstein Equations. This result was first
obtained in [ 33 ] which the present chapter is based on.

### 9.1 @xmath corrections to the Ryu-Takayanagi formula

As already indicated, once we include subleading orders in @xmath on the
CFT side, we will have to consider matter fields on the AdS side. To
first subleading order in @xmath , we can approximate the AdS side as a
semi-classical gravity, i.e. by a classical spacetime @xmath and a
quantum matter field living on that spacetime, @xmath such that the dual
of some quantum state @xmath is the pair @xmath . The approximation
remains semi-classical since we assume that the spacetime @xmath is a
classical spacetime, i.e. it cannot be a superposition of spacetimes,
which supposedly would be allowed in a full theory of quantum gravity.

Going to subleading order in @xmath or equivalently @xmath induces
corrections to the Ryu-Takayanagi formula. More precisely, it is
conjectured in [ 7 ] that subleading order corrections to the
Ryu-Takayanagi formula is due to bulk entanglement over the surface
@xmath , that is the entanglement between the degrees of freedom in the
region @xmath – the region bounded by @xmath – and the rest of the
system. The correction takes the form of the entanglement entropy of the
quantum field on @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we have signified that the CFT entanglement entropy, @xmath , is a
function of the CFT state @xmath and that he bulk entanglement entropy,
@xmath , is a function of the state of the bulk field, @xmath . Just as
we motivated the Ryu-Takayangi formula as a generalization of the
Bekenstein-Hawking formula, we can motivate this correction to the
Ryu-Takayanagi formula by continuing the analogy to the case of black
holes where corrections are also supposed to arise due to entanglement
over the black hole horizon. It is essentially this result that has been
generalized in [ 7 ] to arbitrary surfaces that minimizes the area
functional.

Subsequently, we will simply assume that this corrected Ryu-Takayanagi
formula is sound for quantum states with a semi-classical spacetime
dual. With this formula, we can – in analogy to the previous chapter –
obtain holographic interpretations of @xmath and @xmath . Again, a
holographic interpretation of @xmath is immediately provided now by the
corrected Ryu-Takayanagi formula. The variation @xmath therefore
consists of the already derived variation of the area of the surface
@xmath ( 8.59 ) and the variation of the bulk entanglement entropy over
the surface @xmath . The variation of the latter, @xmath , in principle
originates in two sources: variation of the surface @xmath and variation
of the bulk field @xmath . The former, however, vanishes to first order.
This follows since entanglement entropy – just like the area of the
minimal surface @xmath – is extremized by the embedding function @xmath
and the first order variation always vanishes for such an extremum. What
remains, therefore, is to find an expression for the variation of @xmath
due to the variation of the bulk field @xmath .

### 9.2 A holographic interpretation of @xmath and @xmath

In analogy to the entanglement entropy of a quantum subsystem on the CFT
side, the bulk entanglement entropy, @xmath , is given in terms of the
reduced density matrix, @xmath , for the region @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Depending only on the variation, @xmath , we may express the variation
of the bulk entanglement entropy in terms of the variation of the @xmath
by an argument parallel to that of ( 8.7 )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we have again used that the trace of the density matrix must be
unity. Defining the bulk modular Hamiltonian

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

we find

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the last equality follows since @xmath is independent of the
variation and from the definition of the expectation value.

Similarly to the modular Hamiltonian on the CFT side, the bulk modular
Hamiltonian cannot in general be expressed in terms of local operators.
However, for the particular case where the full spacetime is AdS
spacetime and we are interested in the modular Hamiltonian of the region
@xmath , the modular Hamiltonian can be expressed as an integral over
the bulk energy momentum tensor

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are given as in ( 8.79 ) and ( 8.96 ). The
derivation of this expression is analogous to the derivation in section
8.1 . Further details can be found in [ 33 ] . With this expression for
@xmath we find that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

For the hyperbolic energy, we found in section 8.3 the first order
holographic interpretation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

This was obtained by considering an infinitesimal ball on the boundary;
subleading corrections to @xmath should therefore be related to the
energy-momentum tensor of the bulk region associated with this
infinitesimal boundary ball. Thus, if we assume that the expectation
value of bulk energy-momentum tensor, @xmath , vanishes on the boundary,
it follows that the correction to @xmath vanishes to first subleading
order in @xmath .

### 9.3 Linearized gravity coupled to matter

In the previous chapter, we found ( 8.83 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . Including the correction to @xmath , we have the
following relation to first subleading order in @xmath in the bulk

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now, imposing as a constraint the holographic interpretation of the
first law of entanglement entropy @xmath , we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

An argument analogous to that in section ( 8.4 ) implies that this
constraint is satisfied only if @xmath , i.e. if the linearized Einstein
equations with source term @xmath are satisfied in the bulk.

This, therefore, demonstrates that imposing the constraint @xmath to
subleading order in @xmath on a quantum state with a semi-classical
asymptotically AdS spacetime dual is equivalent to imposing the Einstein
equations on that spacetime to subleading order in @xmath in the bulk,
i.e. the spacetime satisfies the equations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

The constraint, @xmath , we argued holds to any order in @xmath . This
may trigger the consideration whether it is equivalent to the Einstein
equations to all orders. In order for @xmath to occur in ( 9.13 ), it
must be the case that @xmath is present in the general spacetime
constraint equivalent the general CFT constraint @xmath . Prima facie ,
one could think that there were other operators, @xmath , in this
general spacetime constraint. The idea would be that the source term
could be of the form @xmath . As argued in [ 33 ] , a rather simple
observation renders such a construction unlikely. From this general
source term, we must obtain @xmath to subleading order in @xmath , i.e.
@xmath must vanish to this order. This would obtain if the operator
@xmath was such that it annihilated the bulk vacuum state. However, any
expansion in terms of creation and annihilation operators of a local
quantum field theory operator will include terms without annihilation
operators – in other words, only with creation operators – and
therefore, the operator @xmath cannot be a local quantum field theory
operator since @xmath . There may be more subtle ways to make this
construction, however, the argument indicates that the full
semi-classical Einstein equations,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

are the general constraints on the spacetime equivalent to CFT
constraint @xmath .

A more indirect argument to this effect is the observation that
entanglement may occur between all types of degrees of freedom. All
degrees of freedom in a subsystem contribute to the entanglement entropy
and are therefore taken into account when the entanglement entropy for
the subsystem is evaluated. In this way, entanglement is universal. As
is well known, the Einstein equations signifies that all stress energy
are sources of gravity. Regardless of the origin of the stress energy it
sources the gravitational field. As they write in [ 33 ] : “we can say
that the universality of the gravitational interaction comes directly
from the universality of entanglement ”. This, we may argue, is why the
full semi-classical Einstein equations should be equivalent to some
constraint on entanglement in the dual quantum state.

It is worth remarking that even if we can obtain the full semi-classical
Einstein equations from @xmath , there still is an important restriction
to the domain of application of this result essentially due to the fact
that the spacetime is still classical. This is explicitly seen from the
fact that the Einstein tensor (with cosmological constant) @xmath , on
the LHS of ( 9.14 ), is not a quantum operator. Thus, ( 9.14 ) as a
whole is not an operator relation; which can be regarded as the reason
why we have to take the expectation value of @xmath . A more subtle
point leading to the same conclusion is that the Ryu-Takayanagi formula
is ill-defined if the geometry under consideration is a superposition of
spacetimes. Since the whole machinery above is founded on the
Ryu-Takayanagi formula, it follows that we can at most obtain
semi-classical gravity using it as our holographic dictionary. Thus,
unless further correction are made to the Ryu-Takayanago formula, we
cannot go beyond this domain of validity.

## Chapter 10 Conclusion

As demonstrated in chapter 8 and 9 , the linearized Einstein equations
both with and without matter in a @xmath -dimensional AdS background can
be derived from the first law of entanglement entropy in a @xmath
-dimensional CFT. Furthermore, it was speculated that the full
semi-classical Einstein gravity follows from imposing to first law of
entanglement to all order in @xmath .

The result is quite remarkable. Gravity in @xmath dimensions may be
encoded in an intrinsically quantum mechanical structure – entanglement
structure – in a @xmath -dimensional CFT. The dynamics described by the
Einstein’s field equations can be reinterpreted as a first law like
dynamical constraint on entanglement. But however remarkable this may
be, the import of the result is initially less significant. The
holographic relation between gravity and entanglement does not in the
form developed here offer new insights the overarching problem of
contemporary theoretical physics: Quantum gravity. By offering the
alternative interpretation of semi-classical gravity as entanglement
structure, we are offered an alternative description of a theory that we
already know well and which arguably is less than full theory of quantum
gravity. ¹ ¹ 1 It should be noted that there are those who argue for the
possibility of semi-classical gravity on the fundamental level. See for
instance [ 34 ] for a recent discussion. For this and other reasons,
there are continued research on the holographic relation between
entanglement and gravity. It is beyond the scope of the present project
to account for this research in detail, however, we will here just
mention a few of the recent developments.

In [ 35 ] , the holographic relation between entanglement and gravity is
rigorously extended to non-linear gravity by showing that the second
order perturbation of Einstein’s field equations follows from the first
law of entanglement entropy. Again, the Ryu-Takayanagi formula is
employed as the only ingredient of the AdS/CFT dictionary. This may
prove relevant, since a holographic relation between entanglement
entropy and an emergent spacetime structure similar to the
Ryu-Takayanagi formula has recently been recovered in the context of
loop quantum gravity [ 36 ] . This may suggest an independence from the
AdS/CFT correspondence (and therefore from string theory) for a
holographic prescription like the Ryu-Takayanagi formula. Obtaining the
Ryu-Takayanagi in loop quantum gravity is driven by the relation between
loop quantum gravity and tensor networks. Interesting, recent research
has also explored the links from the relation between entanglement and
gravity studied here to (random) tensor networks [ 37 , 38 ] .

In the chapters above, the Ryu-Takayanagi formula played a crucial role
in the derivation of the holographic relation between gravity and
entanglement. In [ 39 ] it is argued that one can obtain the same result
using only the Bekenstein-Hawking formula under the assumption that the
entanglement entropy is maximized for small fixed volume balls.

A research program relevant for classical general relativity is the
conjectured relation between the Fisher information defined in terms of
relative entropy for CFT subsystems and canonical energy in a dual AdS
spacetime. It has been shown in [ 40 ] that the Fisher information is
positive definite which entails that the corresponding canonical energy
is positive definite as well. This in turn suggests a new positive
energy theorem in general relativity.

There are also work that explores other constraints on entanglement in
CFTs and how these translate holographically as constraints in the bulk.
For instance, mutual entanglement information is considered in [ 41 ]
and strong subadditivity (as well as mutual information) is considered
in [ 42 ] .

#### Acknowledgements

This project is the result of many insightful discussion with more
people than I can list here. However, I would in particular like thank
my supervisor Troels Harmark for his valuable comments on earlier drafts
of this work. Honourable mention also goes to my most frequent
discussion partners Bjarke Nielsen and Niels Linnemann who have helped
me sort out the numerous questions that arose during the genesis of this
project.