## Chapter 1 Introduction

### 1.1 Background and Research Motivation

Dengue is a vector-borne disease which is transmitted by mosquitoes.
Approximately two thirds of the world’s population is living in
dengue-endemic regions, with around 390 million individuals infected
annually [ 10 ] .

There are four serotypes of dengue: DEN1, DEN2, DEN3, and DEN4.
Individuals infected with one of the serotypes obtain life long immunity
to that serotype, but only temporary immunity to the other serotypes.
When infected with a second serotype, individuals are at greater risk of
developing severe forms of dengue such as Dengue Haemmorhagic Fever
(DHF) and Dengue Shock Syndrome (DSS). Interactions between dengue
serotypes may affect dengue transmission dynamics because of differences
in epidemiological characteristics, and disease severity [ 92 , 4 , 79 ,
87 , 74 , 27 ] between serotypes.

Fluctuations in mosquito populations due to climatic factors such as
temperature and rainfall results in seasonality in dengue transmission
dynamics. In areas and regions where dengue is not endemic, but
mosquitoes reside, dengue outbreaks are triggered by imported cases [ 46
, 54 ] . These are individuals who have acquired dengue overseas and
brought it to the non-endemic regions. After mosquitoes are exposed to
dengue, a certain period of time is required for the dengue viruses to
replicate in the mosquito’s body so that the mosquito can transmit the
disease. This period is known as the extrinsic incubation period (EIP).

A number of strategies for controlling dengue have been implemented, but
they are difficult to sustain [ 31 , 66 , 78 , 77 , 55 ] , particularly
in the developing world. For example, the use of insecticides has become
largely ineffective as mosquitoes have developed resistance to the
chemicals [ 31 , 66 , 55 ] . Therefore, new control strategies are
necessary.

One strategy that has been recently proposed is to infect mosquito
populations with the Wolbachia bacterium [ 11 , 62 , 67 , 41 , 94 , 29 ]
. There are two mechanisms by which Wolbachia can work to control dengue
transmission. First, Wolbachia impairs the ability of the dengue virus
to replicate inside the mosquito [ 11 , 67 , 41 , 94 , 29 ] ,
particularly in salivary gland [ 94 ] . Consequently, the ability of
Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes to transmit dengue viruses can be
reduced. Second, Wolbachia reduces the mosquito’s lifespan [ 111 , 94 ]
. As a result, the mosquito’s lifespan may be lower than the extrinsic
incubation period (EIP) so the transmission will not occur. However, in
order for this intervention to be successful, it is necessary for
Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes to be established and persist in the
field.

Studies utilising mathematical models have suggested that Wolbachia
-carrying mosquitoes are likely to persist in the field [ 70 , 34 , 33 ,
17 ] . This has been confirmed by field experiments [ 39 , 41 , 94 ] .
An open question that then arises is “to what extent can Wolbachia
reduce dengue transmission?”. This question forms the central focus of
this thesis.

To measure the effectiveness of Wolbachia in reducing dengue at the
population level is challenging since many factors such as seasonality,
importation of dengue and dengue serotype characteristics affect dengue
transmission dynamics. An efficient way to measure the effectiveness of
Wolbachia is by the use of a mathematical model. A mathematical model
allows us to determine the underlying causes of outbreaks and to
understand the effectiveness of the control strategies that have been
implemented. To date, few studies have used mathematical models to
understand the effect of Wolbachia in reducing dengue transmission, and
hence our models will provide new insight on the effectiveness of
Wolbachia in reducing dengue at a population level. Further, we shall
investigate the effects of seasonality, dengue importation, and dengue
serotype characteristics, which have received relatively little
attention.

We are particularly interested in quantifying the effectiveness of
Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes on the reduction of dengue incidence once
their population has been established. As a result, we shall assume that
Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes persist and are established in the
population, and shall not investigate the spread of mosquitoes carrying
Wolbachia into the population in this thesis.

Throughout this thesis, the terminology “dengue/disease introduction”
refers to dengue/ disease importation. For clarity, two things should be
noted. When studying the effects of Wolbachia in the presence of a
single dengue serotype, single and multiple dengue introductions mean
that we introduce a single dengue serotype once and multiple times,
respectively. Second, when studying the effects of Wolbachia in the
presence of two dengue serotypes, dengue cases are introduced multiple
times, with different dengue serotypes. The term, “dengue introduction
scenarios” is used to refer to the manner in which a particular dengue
serotype is introduced into the population.

### 1.2 Research Aims

The main question addressed in this thesis is “to what extent can
Wolbachia reduce dengue transmission?”. This has been approached by
formulating novel mathematical models in the absence and presence of
Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes for single and two dengue serotypes. The
specific aims of this thesis are to:

1.  [wide=0pt,labelwidth = 1.3333em, labelsep = 0.3333em, leftmargin = ]

2.  Determine the level of reduction in dengue incidence caused by the
    presence of Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes.

3.  Explore the effects of seasonality and other important parameters on
    dengue transmission dynamics and the persistence of Wolbachia
    -carrying mosquitoes.

4.  Determine the effects of dengue introduction scenarios on the
    performance of Wolbachia in reducing dengue incidence.

5.  Investigate the effects of two dengue serotypes and dengue serotype
    characteristics on the performance of Wolbachia in reducing dengue
    incidence.

### 1.3 Contributions

The novel contributions of this thesis are as follows.

1.  [wide=0pt,labelwidth = 1.3333em, labelsep = 0.3333em, leftmargin = ]

2.  Deterministic mathematical models of scenarios incorporating one and
    two dengue serotypes in the absence and presence of Wolbachia
    -carrying mosquitoes are produced, incorporating sinusoidally forced
    death rates for the mosquitoes. These models take into account
    important biological features of dengue and Wolbachia . The models
    are used to study the effectiveness of Wolbachia in reducing the
    incidence of dengue at a population level. Furthermore, these models
    serve as a baseline for further investigation of Wolbachia
    interventions. To the best of our knowledge, the two serotype dengue
    model in the presence of Wolbachia is the first population level
    model to investigate the effectiveness of Wolbachia in the presence
    of more than one dengue serotype.

3.  The important parameters of the models that drive dengue epidemics,
    are determined using sensitivity analysis through the standard
    combination of Latin Hypercube Sampling and Partial Rank Correlation
    Coefficient (LHS/PRCC) [ 13 , 56 , 103 ] , where the parameters
    relative significances are ranked. These findings will be useful to
    guide future data collections to better inform future models.

4.  The ranges of biologically realistic parameter values, which
    determine the persistence of Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes and
    dengue epidemics, are calculated. These findings confirm the
    potential Wolbachia strains that can persist in the field, and also
    the maximum benefits of Wolbachia for the different parameter
    values.

5.  The level of reduction in dengue incidence due to Wolbachia
    intervention is determined by comparing the relative difference of
    the outbreak sizes in the absence and presence of Wolbachia
    -carrying mosquitoes. We estimate the level of reduction in dengue
    incidence due to Wolbachia in scenarios where one and two dengue
    serotypes are present. In the single serotype scenario, the levels
    of dengue incidence reduction after single and multiple
    introductions of dengue are determined. In the presence of two
    dengue serotypes, the levels of dengue incidence reduction for
    serotypes with symmetric and asymmetric epidemiological
    characteristics are determined.

### 1.4 Outline of the Thesis

In the next chapter, we present a review of literature related to this
thesis, and then in the subsequent six chapters, we present the original
contributions of this thesis. These contributions are divided into two
parts corresponding to the presence of one (Chapters 3 - 5 ) and two
(Chapters 6 – 8 ) dengue serotypes in the population. The final chapter
discusses the conclusions drawn and future directions for research. A
brief overview of the contents of each chapter is given below.

Chapter 2 : Literature Review
A review of literature is presented in this chapter. Chapter 2 contains
reviews of relevant literature from two main viewpoints: biological and
mathematical reviews. The biological literature reviewed presents
background information about dengue, dengue vectors and Wolbachia . The
mathematical reviews provide background on the deterministic SIR model,
vector-borne disease modelling, seasonality, the basic reproduction
number, and introduce models specific for Wolbachia population dynamics
and models for dengue epidemiology in the absence and presence of
Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes.

Chapter 3 : Mathematical Modelling of a Single Dengue Serotype
This chapter contains the full derivation of our single serotype dengue
models in the absence and presence of Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes.
The assumptions and important features of these models are described.
The models are an extension of previously published models by Ndii et
al. [ 70 ] ^(*) ^(*) * This work was conducted during my Masters study
at the ANU and introduce a human population in which dengue is present
as well as seasonally varying death rates for adult mosquitoes. These
models are then used to study the effect of single and multiple dengue
introductions, which are presented in Chapter 4 and Chapter 5 ,
respectively. The expressions for the basic and effective reproduction
numbers for these models are also derived.

Chapter 4 : Dengue Transmission Dynamics for a Single Introduction Event
In this chapter, the performance of Wolbachia in reducing dengue
incidence after a single introduction of dengue cases is investigated.
The parameter estimation is also presented. We justify the parameter
values chosen and explore the parameter spaces of several parameters. A
global sensitivity analysis for the model is also conducted, and we
compare the reproduction numbers obtained in the absence and presence of
Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes.

Chapter 5 : Dengue Transmission Dynamics for Multiple Introductions
In this chapter, we investigate multiple introductions of dengue cases
over weekly, year-round and three month periods, and assess the
performance of Wolbachia in reducing dengue in these scenarios. We then
investigate the potential for an outbreak, and the effects of the
transmission rate and seasonality on Wolbachia performance in reducing
dengue. We also compare the effective reproduction number and our
simulations where dengue cases are introduced for one week of the year.

Chapter 6 : Mathematical Modelling of Two Dengue Serotypes
After studying the performance of Wolbachia in reducing dengue incidence
when only a single dengue serotype circulates, we turn our attention to
the performance of Wolbachia in reducing dengue in the presence of two
dengue serotypes. We begin by developing two serotype dengue models in
the absence and presence of Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes. These models
take into account antibody-dependent enhancement (ADE) and temporary
immunity. As a reminder for readers, we re-describe the parameter values
used in our investigation. The models are then used to study the effects
of the symmetric and asymmetric epidemiological characteristics of
dengue serotypes which are presented in Chapters 7 and 8 , respectively.

Chapter 7 : Two Serotypes with Symmetric Epidemiological Characteristics
In this chapter, the symmetric epidemiological characteristics of dengue
serotypes under different disease introduction scenarios are
investigated. Two disease introduction scenarios are considered. First,
individuals carrying dengue serotype 1 are introduced into the
population at weekly intervals for one year, and then individuals
carrying another dengue serotype are introduced into the population at
weekly intervals for another year. Second, individuals carrying dengue
serotype 1 are introduced into the population at weekly intervals over a
period of two years, and then individuals carrying another dengue
serotype are introduced into the population at weekly intervals over a
further two year period. We explore the effects of the
antibody-dependent enhancement and the transmission probability on
Wolbachia performance in reducing dengue incidence in these two
scenarios.

Chapter 8 : Two Serotypes with Asymmetric Epidemiological
Characteristics.
In this chapter, we study the performance of Wolbachia in reducing
dengue incidence when the epidemiological characteristics of dengue
serotypes differ. As in Chapter 7 , we explore the effects of the
antibody-dependent enhancement and the transmission probability on
Wolbachia performance in reducing dengue incidence.

Chapter 9 : Conclusions and Future Directions
In this chapter, we summarise the original results discovered in this
thesis, present our conclusions and suggest several possible future
directions for research.

## Chapter 2 Literature Review

The review of literature presented in this chapter is divided into two
parts: a review of biological literature and a review of mathematical
literature. The biological literature review introduces dengue (Section
2.1.1 ), the dengue vector (Section 2.1.2 ), and Wolbachia (Section
2.1.3 ). The mathematical literature review explains the deterministic
SIR model (Section 2.2.1 ), vector-borne disease modelling (Section
2.2.2 ), the inclusion of seasonality in compartmental models (Section
2.2.3 ), the basic reproduction number (Section 2.2.4 ), and introduces
a model for Wolbachia population dynamics (Section 2.2.5 ), a model for
dengue in the absence (Section 2.2.6 ) and presence of Wolbachia
(Section 2.2.7 ), and the Latin Hypercube Sampling (LHS) and Partial
Rank Correlation Coefficient (PRCC) methods (Section 2.2.8 ).

When material from this review is required in later chapters, we shall
reference the appropriate sections so that the interested reader can
review the details.

### 2.1 Biological Review

This section presents background information about dengue, dengue
vectors and Wolbachia .

#### 2.1.1 Dengue

Dengue is a vector borne disease that is transmitted by mosquitoes, and
has attracted public health concern worldwide. Over 40% of the world’s
population are living in dengue-endemic regions and approximately 390
million individuals are infected with dengue annually [ 10 ] .
Infections with the dengue virus can lead to dengue fever (DF), dengue
haemorrhagic fever (DHF) and dengue shock syndrome (DSS), the last two
of which are the most severe forms of dengue. The fatality rates for DHF
and DSS can be as high as 20%, although this can be reduced to less than
1% if the proper treatment is accessible [ 102 ] , which is generally in
developed countries.

The number of dengue cases is increasing worldwide [ 75 , 45 , 64 ] .
For example, in Australia, there has been an increasing trend in the
number of dengue cases over the last two decades, an increase from
around 17 in 1991 to over 1000 in 2015 [ 75 ] . In dengue endemic
countries there are also increasing numbers of dengue cases. In
Indonesia, the incidence of dengue has been increasing since 1968 [ 45 ]
. In Malaysia, the number of dengue cases increased by 14% annually from
2000–2010 [ 64 ] .

In regions or countries where dengue is not endemic, outbreaks of the
disease are triggered by imported cases. These are individuals who have
acquired dengue overseas. In Australia, local outbreaks are generally
caused by imported cases, with an estimated 1132 overseas-acquired cases
of dengue entering Australia in 2010 [ 46 ] . In Taiwan, dengue
outbreaks begin by importation of dengue. The disease then spreads until
transmission ends in winter due to the cold weather. The same pattern is
repeated every year [ 54 ] . These examples highlight the effect of
dengue importation on disease transmission dynamics.

There are four serotypes of dengue viruses: DEN1, DEN2, DEN3 and DEN4.
Individuals obtain lifelong immunity to a given dengue serotype after
infection with it, and have a short-term antibody response to the other
serotypes, which lasts for around 2–9 months [ 96 ] . If they are
subsequently infected by a different serotype, they are likely to
contract DHF or DSS. Patients with a severe form of dengue show peak
viraemia levels (levels of the virus in the blood) 100–1000 times higher
than DF patients [ 92 ] .

DHF is associated with the antibody dependent enhancement (ADE) of
dengue virus replications. The ADE mechanism is as follows. An
individual who is primarily infected by a particular serotype will
produce neutralising antibodies to that serotype, but when the same
individual is secondarily infected with other serotypes, the
pre-existing antibodies to the previous infection do not neutralise, but
rather enhance, the replication of the secondary virus [ 98 , 68 ] . ADE
may result in higher transmissibility rates of dengue from humans to
mosquitoes.

There is variability in the epidemiological characteristics of the four
dengue serotypes, and the severity of the disease varies between
serotypes [ 92 , 4 , 79 , 87 , 74 , 27 ] . Nishiura and Halstead [ 74 ]
found that DEN1 infection causes more severe symptoms than DEN4, while
Tricou et al. [ 87 ] found that infections with DEN1 result in higher
viraemia levels than infections with DEN2. Estimates of the basic
reproduction numbers from serological data showed relatively little
difference between dengue serotypes [ 27 , 79 ] .

The distribution and the dominance of dengue serotypes in a given
outbreak varies over time. In Thailand, all four dengue serotypes
circulated during the period 2000-2010, with DEN3 being dominant during
the periods 2000–2002 and 2008–2010, whereas DEN4 was most common
between 2003 and 2008 as reported by Limkittikul et al . [ 53 ] . In
Malaysia, DEN1 was dominant during 2004 and 2005, but was overtaken by
DEN2, which was dominant during 2006 and 2007. Although all four dengue
serotypes were circulating in 2014, none of them was dominant [ 64 ] .
In Taiwan, DEN2 dominated during 2002 and 2003, DEN3 dominated during
2005–2006, and DEN1 dominated in 2004 and 2007 [ 54 ] . More information
about dengue epidemics in several countries can be found in the
literature (see, for example, [ 93 , 14 , 52 , 22 ] ).

In general, the characteristics of DF infection are high fever with a
temperature of approximately @xmath , severe headache, pain behind the
eyes, muscle and joint pains, nausea, vomiting, swollen glands or rash.
These symptoms last for approximately 2–7 days. People with a severe
form of dengue exhibit all DF symptoms, together with plasma leakage,
fluid accumulation, respiratory distress, severe bleeding, or organ
impairment, symptoms which may lead to death if proper treatment is not
administered [ 102 ] .

The dynamics of dengue transmission are very seasonal due to
fluctuations in the dengue vector caused by climatic factors such as
temperature and rainfall. Furthermore, there are differences between
regions or countries in the periods when epidemics occur. For example,
in Thailand, the number of cases peaks between May and September each
year as reported by Limkittikul et al. [ 53 ] . In Taiwan, the peak is
around October and then incidence diminishes around December [ 54 ] .

There are several important aspects to be considered when studying
dengue dynamics at a population level: importation of dengue, dengue
serotype characteristics and the seasonal factors which affect the
mosquito population dynamics.

#### 2.1.2 Dengue Vectors

Two vectors that transmit dengue are Aedes albocpictus and Aedes aegypti
. The latter is considered to be the main vector. Aedes albocpictus
mostly lives in rural areas and large water containers. Aedes aegypti is
highly anthropophilic, preferring to feed on humans only, and lives in
urban and semi urban areas which are densely populated. Aedes aegypti
moves only short distances of around 300 @xmath during its lifetime [ 36
] .

Figure 2.1 shows the Aedes aegypti lifecycle, which consists of eggs,
larvae, pupae, young adult and adult Aedes aegypti . In modelling, eggs,
larvae and pupae are commonly grouped into one category because only
adult mosquitoes can transmit dengue and the dengue virus cannot
influence the aquatic stage of development. The mosquito life cycle is
highly dependent on climatic conditions such as temperature and
rainfall. Figures 2.2 – 2.3 show the plots of the aquatic death rate and
the adult mosquito death rate against temperature given by Yang et al. [
108 , 109 ] . These figures show that the aquatic death rate and the
adult mosquito death rate vary as the temperature changes. Figure 2.2
shows that the aquatic death rate is high when the temperature is less
than approximately @xmath or greater than @xmath . The adult death rate
is very high when the temperature is below @xmath (see Figure 2.3 ).

When feeding on an infected human, Aedes aegypti ingests viraemic blood.
After a period of time known as the Extrinsic Incubation Period (EIP),
the salivary glands of the mosquito become infected. During the EIP the
viruses replicate and are internally disseminated within the mosquito.
The EIP varies depending on temperature, but on average lasts for one to
two weeks [ 95 , 16 ] . Infected mosquitoes are able to transmit dengue
if they live longer than the EIP. When an infected mosquito bites a
susceptible human, the human becomes exposed, but not yet infectious,
for approximately 4–7 days and then becomes infectious for the following
3–7 days. If susceptible mosquito subsequently feeds on the infectious
human, the cycle continues.

To date, no vaccines against dengue are commercially available. Although
human behavioural changes can be helpful in reducing dengue
transmission, most interventions against dengue focus on vector control.
A number of strategies have been implemented to control vector
populations, but they are difficult to sustain [ 31 , 66 , 78 , 77 , 55
] , particularly in the developing world. Insecticides, for example,
become less effective as mosquitoes develop resistance to the chemicals
[ 31 , 66 , 55 ] . The removal of mosquito breeding sites is another
intervention that has been carried out, but this must be repeated often,
as has been found in Cairns and Singapore [ 78 , 77 ] . A promising
strategy against dengue is the Wolbachia intervention [ 11 , 62 , 67 ,
41 , 94 , 29 ] . Details about Wolbachia are presented in the following
sub-section.

#### 2.1.3 Wolbachia

This section discusses the Wolbachia bacterium, its characteristics, and
effects on mosquitoes and the dengue virus.

Wolbachia is a genus of bacteria which has infected around 66% of all
different species of insects [ 38 ] , but does not naturally infect
Aedes aegypti , the main vector transmitting dengue. Infecting Aedes
aegypti with Wolbachia has been found to reduce dengue viral load in
mosquitoes [ 11 , 67 , 41 , 94 , 29 , 110 ] . Consequently, it has been
proposed as a strategy to reduce the spread of dengue.

Wolbachia are maternally inherited intracellular bacteria that
manipulate the reproduction of a diverse range of arthropod hosts. One
form of reproductive manipulation caused by Wolbachia infection is known
as cytoplasmic incompatibility (CI) [ 86 , 97 , 41 , 94 ] . CI gives a
female Aedes aegypti mosquito a reproductive advantage, the details of
which are given below.

1.  [wide=0pt,labelwidth = 1.3333em, labelsep = 0.3333em, leftmargin = ]

2.   Wolbachia -carrying female mosquitoes produce viable offspring when
    mating with either Wolbachia -carrying or non- Wolbachia male
    mosquitoes, and immature mosquitoes mature to non Wolbachia and
    Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes.

3.  Non- Wolbachia female mosquitoes can only reproduce successfully
    with non- Wolbachia male mosquitoes, and immature mosquitoes mature
    to non- Wolbachia mosquitoes only.

4.  If non- Wolbachia female mosquitoes mate with Wolbachia -carrying
    males, they cannot produce offspring successfully, although an
    embryo is formed, further blocking reproduction [ 94 ] .

Laboratory experiments have been conducted to assess the effects of
Wolbachia on Aedes aegypti . Two Wolbachia strains were used in these
experiments: WMelPop and WMel [ 41 , 88 , 94 , 90 ] . WMelPop halves the
mosquito lifespan [ 111 , 94 ] and reduces egg viability [ 63 ] .
WMelPop has been found to reduce blood feeding success [ 89 ] .
Furthermore, a fecundity cost of up to 56% has been found in WMelPop
-carrying mosquitoes [ 61 , 94 ] . By contrast, WMel reduces the
mosquito lifespan by approximately 10% [ 94 ] , does not influence the
time development of Aedes aegypti and has no significant effect on egg
viability after oviposition [ 94 ] . Both strains of Wolbachia have the
ability to reduce the levels of dengue viruses in the salivary glands of
Aedes aegypti [ 67 , 94 ] .

If Wolbachia causes a marked reduction in the mosquito lifespan,
multiple introductions of Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes may be required
to ensure Wolbachia persistence in the wild. The elapsed time between
introductions and the number of released mosquitoes determines the
likelihood of persistence [ 34 ] . The release of more males than
females can also lead to Wolbachia persistence [ 35 , 113 ] .

Results from field experiments show that Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes
can persist [ 39 , 41 ] . These results suggest that the population of
Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes can stabilise over time, and hence,
potentially reduce dengue transmission. Furthermore, the proportion of
Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes in the field has been found to be around
90% in comparison to non- Wolbachia mosquitoes [ 41 , 39 ] . Moreover,
the maternal transmission of Wolbachia may be perfect or near to
perfect, as seen in field trials [ 39 ] . Lower rates of infection with
dengue viruses of serotypes 1–3 in mosquitoes carrying Wolbachia have
also been found.

In summary, there are several important characteristics of Wolbachia
that can affect the population dynamics of mosquitoes, namely
cytoplasmic incompatibility (CI), the mosquito death rate and the
maternal transmission. Dengue-related characteristics such as reduced
biting rates, and reduced levels of dengue virus in mosquitoes are also
key to the potential reduction in dengue transmission.

### 2.2 Mathematical Review

This section presents the mathematical theory used in this thesis. This
includes a formulation of the deterministic SIR model, an explanation of
seasonality, and discussions of vector-borne disease modelling, the
basic reproduction number, a model specific for Wolbachia and dengue
dynamics, and the latin hypercube sampling (LHS) and partial rank
correlation coefficient (PRCC) methods for multivariate analysis.

#### 2.2.1 The Deterministic SIR model

A deterministic formulation of the SIR model is presented in this
section. A deterministic model is appropriate when studying disease
transmission dynamics in large populations, as is the case throughout
this thesis. The SIR model has been used as a cornerstone for the
development of compartment-based models. The general principle of
compartment-based models is that the population is divided into
different sub-populations, according to their disease status. In the SIR
model, the population is divided into three sub-populations, namely
Susceptible (S), Infectious (I) and Removed (R).

Let us consider the simple SIR model without demography and assume
homogenous and well-mixed populations. Humans are born susceptible to
infection and move to the infectious class at a rate @xmath after
contact with infectious individuals. After a period of time @xmath ,
they recover. This SIR model is governed by the following system of
differential equations

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.1)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.2)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are positive constants. Here the parameter
@xmath represents a combination of the rate at which contact between
susceptible and infectious people is made and the probability that
contact results in the successful transmission of the disease, while the
parameter @xmath is the recovery rate.

We can determine the threshold above which an epidemic occurs by
rearranging the infected population equation (Equation 2.2 ), that is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is easy to see that the critical threshold is @xmath , where the
populations of @xmath and @xmath are in proportions. When an infectious
case is introduced to the population, an epidemic will proceed if the
susceptible population is higher than this critical threshold, otherwise
an outbreak cannot occur. The inverse of this critical threshold is
called the basic reproduction number (further explained in subsection
2.2.4 ), which is defined to be the number of new cases generated by a
typical infectious individual in an entirely susceptible population.

The classical SIR model can be extended by adding other classes,
depending on the purpose of the model and the characteristics of the
disease being studied. For example, if a disease has a latent period,
one may add a latent compartment to the system of equations. Another
possible extension would be to include demographic factors such as birth
and death rates. As additional details are incorporated into the model,
it becomes more complex, and typically the calculation of the basic
reproduction number is conducted by constructing the next generation
matrix and finding the spectral radius of that matrix as described in
Section 2.2.4 . Although some analytical expressions such as the steady
state or the critical threshold can be derived, deriving analytical
solutions in terms of S and I simultaneously is not straightforward [ 47
] . This is particularly true when models become increasingly complex as
additional important features are included. One way to find the
solutions of a deterministic model is by the use of computational tools.
Throughout this thesis, we use Matlab [ 58 ] to generate the solutions
of the models.

#### 2.2.2 Vector-borne Disease Modelling

Some diseases such as malaria, chikungunya, and dengue are transmitted
to humans via a vector and consequently their transmission dynamics are
affected by the population dynamics of the vector. At the population
level, the transmission dynamics of vector-borne diseases can be
investigated using mathematical models [ 105 , 104 , 60 , 72 ] .
Deterministic models provide one technique for modelling the
transmission dynamics of vector-borne diseases, particularly in large
populations. The simple SIR model presented in Section 2.2.1 can be
extended into such a model by including the vector population and
introducing parameters which adjust for the biological features of the
vectors and the disease. A review on vector-borne disease mathematical
models can be found in Smith et al. [ 83 ] .

When more than one vector is involved in the transmission of a disease,
the biological features of each vector such as its transmission rate,
and birth and death rates influence disease transmission. In this
thesis, we construct deterministic mathematical models including two
types of mosquitoes: mosquitoes not carrying Wolbachia and mosquitoes
carrying Wolbachia (referred throughout this thesis as “non- Wolbachia ”
and “ Wolbachia -carrying” mosquitoes, respectively), together with the
human population with dengue, and use these models to investigate the
spread of dengue. We focus on the situation where an outbreak occurs and
measure the reduction in the number of people infected due to the
introduction of Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes.

#### 2.2.3 Seasonality

The transmission of infectious diseases varies seasonally depending on
various factors. Climatic fluctuation contributes to the seasonal
dynamics of many infectious diseases because it affects pathogen
transmission rates [ 49 ] . For vector-borne diseases, climatic factors
are linked to the fluctuation of vector populations and, hence, to
vector-borne disease transmission.

In most mathematical models, the seasonal effect is captured by the use
of sinusoidal and/or square wave functions. For example, seasonal
variation in the transmission rate can be represented using a sinusoidal
function such as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the transmission rate which varies seasonally, @xmath is
the average transmission rate, and @xmath is the amplitude of seasonal
forcing of the transmission rate or “strength of seasonality” and lies
between @xmath and @xmath .

Seasonal variation can also be modelled using a square wave function
such as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where each year is divided into two different seasons: the high season
and the low season. The parameter @xmath represents the degree of
seasonality which varies between 0 and 1 (see [ 25 , 48 , 71 , 76 , 85 ]
).

#### 2.2.4 Basic Reproduction Number

The basic reproduction number is an important quantity in
epidemiological modelling which is commonly estimated when data is
available [ 30 , 19 ] . The basic reproduction number, generally denoted
by @xmath , is defined to be the number of secondary cases generated by
a typical infectious individual in an entirely susceptible population.
The expression for the basic reproduction number can be obtained by
constructing the next generation matrix (NGM) for the model [ 23 , 24 ,
91 , 37 ] and finding its dominant eigenvalue. Another method to derive
the basic reproduction number for a non-seasonal model is to use the
“survival function”. However, this method becomes increasingly difficult
when there are more infectious states and hence the use of the next
generation approach is more appropriate [ 37 ] .

Diekmann et al. [ 24 ] give a clear explanation of how to construct the
NGM, which they denote by @xmath . The decomposition of the NGM relates
to epidemiologically new infections only. For example, changes in the
population in a model with latent and infectious compartments consist of
new infections into the latent compartment and members of the population
moving from the latent to the infectious compartment. The change from
the latent to the infectious compartment is not a new infection. A
matrix whose decomposition relates to the expected offspring of
individuals in any infected state is called a next generation matrix
with large domain and denoted by @xmath . Diekmann et al. showed that
the largest eigenvalue of the next generation matrix with large domain
is equal to that of the next generation matrix, @xmath , and hence, to
the basic reproduction number, @xmath .

The steps for finding the basic reproduction number given in Diekmann et
al . [ 24 ] are the following.

1.  Let @xmath be the number of infected states, and @xmath be the
    possible infected states of individuals. We write a linearised
    infected subsystem around the disease-free steady state in the form

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (2.6)
      -- -------- -- -------

    where @xmath is the transmission matrix, which encodes the
    production of new infection, and @xmath is the transition matrix,
    which encodes the transition of infected individuals between
    compartments including those that transfer out of compartments for
    reasons such as the death of the individual.

2.  The next generation matrix with large domain can be found using the
    formula @xmath . The basic reproduction number is calculated by
    finding the spectral radius of the matrix @xmath .

#### 2.2.5 Mathematical Models for Wolbachia Population Dynamics

A number of mathematical models have been developed to provide insight
into the population dynamics of Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes [ 34 , 33
, 17 , 70 , 112 , 113 , 57 ] . Hancock et al. [ 34 ] developed a
mathematical model to explore the host population dynamics and Wolbachia
infection frequency with both single and multiple introductions
(“seeding”) of Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes. The same authors also
developed a metapopulation model to explore spatial dynamics and found
that spatial variations in density-dependent competition have an effect
on the spread of Wolbachia infection [ 33 ] . Chan and Kim [ 17 ]
developed a spatial mathematical model incorporating both slow and fast
dispersal situations for the spread of mosquitoes. They found that
temperature affects the speed of Wolbachia invasion and that the death
rate of Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes influences their persistence.
Zhang et al. [ 112 ] developed a birth-pulse model of Wolbachia spread
considering cyptoplasmic incompatibility and different density dependent
death rates. They found that it is likely that mosquitoes carrying
Wolbachia will invade the population. Zheng et al. [ 113 ] developed a
mathematical model to analyse the release of Wolbachia -carrying
mosquitoes into the population, and found that the release of minimal
numbers of mosquitoes with Wolbachia can lead to persistence of
Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes.

Ndii et al. [ 70 ] developed a mathematical model of mosquito population
dynamics in the presence of Wolbachia which incorporated the effects of
CI in the mating function and competition for resources in the aquatic
stage. They found that Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes and non- Wolbachia
mosquitoes can coexist, and showed that the steady state where Wolbachia
-carrying mosquitoes alone persist only exists when maternal
transmission is perfect, a finding which was confirmed by Chan and Kim [
17 ] . Rodriguez et al. [ 57 ] used a mathematical model to analyse the
changes in the proportion of Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes during the
host’s life cycle on the dynamics of the spread of Wolbachia , and found
that the spread of Wolbachia may be affected by these changes.

In this thesis, we extend the model of Ndii et al. [ 70 ] to include a
human population in which dengue is present. The extended model is used
to investigate the performance of Wolbachia in reducing dengue. The
model for mosquito population dynamics in the presence of Wolbachia
-carrying mosquitoes as given by Ndii et al. [ 70 ] is governed by the
following differential equations

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.7)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.8)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.9)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.10)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.11)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . Here @xmath , @xmath and @xmath denote aquatic, male and
female mosquitoes, respectively, and the subscripts @xmath and @xmath
differentiate between non- Wolbachia and Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes.
The parameters @xmath and @xmath denote the respective proportions of
non- Wolbachia and Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes that are male.

The effect of CI is represented by the following equations. Non-
Wolbachia aquatic mosquitoes are produced after non- Wolbachia male and
female mosquitoes mate. The population’s growth is limited by the
carrying capacity @xmath through the term

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

The fact that Wolbachia -carrying females reproduce after mating with
non- Wolbachia or Wolbachia -carrying males is represented by the term

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Furthermore, the effects of imperfect maternal transmission are also
included in the model. That is, not all Wolbachia aquatic mosquitoes
mature to be Wolbachia -carrying adult mosquitoes. A proportion of them
mature to be non- Wolbachia adults. This proportion is represented by
the parameter @xmath . A proportion @xmath of the Wolbachia aquatic
mosquitoes that mature to become non- Wolbachia mosquitoes become male
and the rest become female mosquitoes.

#### 2.2.6 Mathematical Models for Dengue in the Absence of Wolbachia

A number of dengue models have been developed and analysed. A review of
various deterministic dengue models can be found in Andraud et al. [ 6 ]
. Dengue models were split into two categories: vector-host and
host-to-host transmission.

To capture the effect of seasonality, a sinusoidal function is generally
used [ 60 , 5 ] . For example, McLennan-Smith and Mercer [ 60 ]
developed a mathematical model for dengue which included seasonality in
the transmission rate. The model was found to have increasingly complex
behaviour as the strength of seasonality was increased. Andraud et al. [
5 ] used a periodically-forced model to estimate parameter values using
data from Singapore. They found a good fit between the output from the
model and the data from Singapore, and showed that seasonality is an
important factor driving dengue dynamics.

Yang and Ferreira [ 107 ] developed a dengue mathematical model with
variation in some parameter values over time. The parameters were set to
different values to represent favourable and unfavourable conditions for
the development of mosquitoes. Their model divided aquatic and adult
mosquito populations into six compartments: eggs, larvae, pupae,
susceptible, exposed and infectious adults. They found that, although
dengue persists in favourable conditions, there is a gap of several
years between successive outbreaks of dengue.

Several studies have investigated the effects of introducing individuals
with dengue into the population [ 99 , 9 ] . Bannister-Tyrrell et al. [
9 ] investigated the variation of dengue activity in Australia using a
process based modelling approach in which dengue was introduced
bimonthly, monthly and weekly. They found that increasing the frequency
of introductions of dengue results in larger outbreaks. Williams et al.
[ 99 ] used an existing dengue model, which involved an entomological
component (CIMSiM) and a disease component (DENSiM), to assess the
effects of the importation rate on dengue outbreaks. They conducted
weekly introductions with the number of imported dengue cases ranging
from 1–25 individuals. They found that higher rates of importation each
week result in increased monthly dengue incidence. However, these
studies did not investigate the importation of different serotypes of
dengue, a factor which is known to affect dengue transmission dynamics
and have effects on secondary infections.

A number of mathematical models considering multiple serotypes of dengue
have been developed [ 26 , 21 , 12 , 1 , 65 , 50 , 3 , 42 , 100 ] . An
important issue that arises when investigating disease dynamics in the
presence of multiple serotypes of dengue is the effect of antibody
dependent enhancement (ADE) on dengue dynamics. Adams and Boots [ 1 ]
used a two-serotype dengue model to study dengue transmission dynamics,
and found that the enhancement of transmission does not lead to the
exclusion of either serotype when both serotypes have the same basic
reproduction number. Ferguson et al. [ 26 ] found that enhancement may
permit the coexistence of all serotypes. Woodall and Adams [ 100 ]
developed a model in which they assumed that only small fraction of
primarily infected humans became susceptible to enhanced secondary
infection. They found that antibody-dependent enhancement may not be
driving the oscillatory dynamics of dengue. Aguiar et al. [ 3 ]
developed a seasonal multiple serotype dengue model and performed a
comparison study between non-seasonal, low seasonal and high seasonal
models with a low importation rate of infected individuals. They found
complex dynamics, and a match between empirical DHF monitoring data and
model simulations. Romero et al. [ 65 ] found that the presence of ADE
heterogenity can facilitate the persistence of dengue serotypes. Kooi et
al. [ 50 ] used a mathematical model to analyse the characteristics of
two dengue serotypes for which the force of infection differs. They
concluded that models that include the assumption of identical
epidemiological characteristics are useful when the difference between
dengue serotype characteristics is not great, otherwise an exploration
of different (asymmetric) epidemiological characteristics is required.
However, most of these studies did not consider different disease
introduction strategies (or Wolbachia ).

Most multiple serotype dengue models do not take vector population
dynamics into account. Hu et al. [ 42 ] investigated the effect of
including the mosquito population and the host incubation period on the
dynamics of dengue when multiple serotypes are circulating. In this
host-only model, they found a large degree of frequency instability
which made future predictions difficult. However, this behaviour
disappears when the vector is included in the model. Their findings
emphasize the importance of including vectors of dengue in mathematical
models.

Another area of deficiency in the mathematical literature lies in the
scarcity of studies investigating Wolbachia intervention using
mathematical models which include both non- Wolbachia and Wolbachia
-carrying mosquitoes. Given that the presence of multiple serotypes of
dengue has been observed to influence dengue dynamics, a study of the
effectiveness of the Wolbachia intervention in reducing dengue in the
presence of more than one dengue serotype is also worthwhile.

#### 2.2.7 Mathematical Models for Dengue in the Presence of Wolbachia

Few mathematical models have been developed that couple a model of the
Wolbachia -carrying mosquito population with a human dengue model [ 43 ,
35 ] . Hughes et al. [ 43 ] developed a mathematical model considering
the situation where only either non- Wolbachia or Wolbachia -carrying
mosquitoes persist in the population. They found that Wolbachia can be a
powerful control for dengue when @xmath is not too large ( @xmath ).
Hancock et al. [ 35 ] explored a scenario of Wolbachia release and its
effects on vector-borne diseases, but did not specifically consider
dengue. They found that the male-biased release of Wolbachia -carrying
mosquitoes can reduce disease transmission. Ferguson et al. [ 28 ]
formulated and estimated a basic reproduction number ( @xmath ) for
dengue, and found that Wolbachia can reduce the basic reproduction
number by 66–75 %. A reduction of the basic reproduction number by 66–75
% should be sufficient to reduce dengue incidence in areas with low to
moderate transmission settings, that is, with typical @xmath [ 28 ] .
However, if @xmath , a reduction of 66-75% still results in @xmath and
hence, dengue outbreaks can still occur. Although the effective
reproduction number is still higher than unity, the presence of
Wolbachia can still reduce the number of dengue cases, though the
proportional reduction in dengue incidence is not high.

The existing studies have not investigated the effect of disease
introduction scenarios on Wolbachia performance. This is important as
the introduction of dengue into the population is irregular, and it is
uncertain which dengue serotypes will enter the population at any given
time. If the characteristics of dengue serotypes differ [ 92 , 4 , 79 ,
87 , 74 , 27 ] , undertanding the effects of these factors on Wolbachia
performance in reducing dengue incidence is important. To our knowledge,
no population level models have been developed to study the performance
of Wolbachia in reducing dengue incidence when more than one dengue
serotype circulates. In this thesis, we develop models in which two
dengue serotypes circulate and study the performance of Wolbachia in
reducing dengue incidence under these conditions.

#### 2.2.8 Latin Hypercube Sampling and Partial Rank Correlation
Coefficient

The degree of certainty in models for infectious disease dynamics is not
always known. Although some parameter values can be estimated from data,
there remains uncertainty in estimates. Other parameter values are
difficult to estimate from data. For example, data sets generally do not
provide information on the number of asymptomatic cases, or the exact
time a pathogen infects people. Therefore, it is important to conduct
sensitivity analyses of the model parameters in order to determine which
parameters have the greatest effects on the model outcomes of interest,
and to assess the likely impact of changes in parameters within
reasonable bounds.

If the inputs such as parameters or initial conditions are known with
little uncertainty, we can estimate the degree of uncertainty in the
output by finding the partial derivative of the output function with
respect to the input parameters [ 56 , 18 ] . This is known as a local
sensitivity analysis. In epidemiological models, most parameters are
very uncertain, and so a global sensitivity analysis is more
appropriate.

Latin Hypercube Sampling (LHS), in conjuction with Partial Rank
Correlation Coefficient (PRCC) multivariate analysis [ 56 , 13 ] , is
often used for global sensitivity analysis. LHS is a stratified Monte
Carlo sampling method, where the random parameter distributions are
divided into @xmath equal probability intervals [ 56 , 103 , 13 , 59 ] .
Here @xmath is the sample size. Each interval of each parameter is
sampled only once without replacement, and the entire range of each
parameter is explored [ 56 , 103 , 13 , 59 ] . Inputs and outputs are
then ranked before PRCC indices are determined.

Suppose we have @xmath parameters and @xmath samples. Then the LHS
matrix, @xmath , and the output, @xmath , are

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here the output is calculated from the solution of the mathematical
model using the input parameters given in the matrix. We can rank the
samples of each parameter (the entries in each row of the matrix @xmath
), and the entries of the output @xmath , in order of increasing size to
give matrices

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with entries @xmath and @xmath , where @xmath is the rank of parameter
@xmath in our parameter sample ordering and @xmath is the rank of output
@xmath in the ordering of our output values.

The partial rank correlation coefficient between @xmath and @xmath
@xmath is found using the formula [ 20 , 56 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the sample means, and @xmath .

The partial rank correlation coefficient is then inspected to assess the
sensitivity of the parameters. If the coefficient is close to 1 or -1,
the parameters are more sensitive, with negative values indicating an
inverse relationship between the inputs and outputs. For example, an
increase in the inputs leads to a decrease in outputs, and conversely.
As the PRCC measures the nonlinear but monotonic relationships between
inputs and outputs, then the output should be increasing monotonic
function. In our analysis, the output is the cumulative number of
infectious humans.

Significance tests can be performed to assess whether PRCC ( @xmath ) is
significantly different from zero. This is tested using the statistic [
20 , 13 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

If the PRCC value is higher than the T-test value, it is statistically
significant.

### 2.3 Summary

This chapter is summarised in two sections, covering biological and
mathematical reviews.

#### 2.3.1 Biological Aspects

1.  [wide=0pt,labelwidth = 1.3333em, labelsep = 0.3333em, leftmargin = ]

2.  The increasing number of dengue cases in many countries is an
    indication of the threat it poses.

3.  There are four dengue serotypes. Individuals infected by one of the
    seroptypes gain life long immunity to that serotype, but are more
    likely to develop a more severe form of dengue called Dengue
    Haemorhagic Fever (DHF) or Dengue Shock Syndrome (DSS) when they are
    later infected by other serotypes. A particular risk associated with
    secondary infections is higher viral loads, which can lead to higher
    transmissibility and death.

4.   Aedes albopictus and Aedes aegypti are mosquitoes that transmit
    dengue. The latter is considered to be the main vector. The death
    rate of mosquitoes is environmentally-dependent.

5.   Wolbachia gives female mosquitoes a reproductive advantage, known
    as cytoplasmic incompatibility (CI). Wolbachia reduces the lifespan
    of mosquitoes by up to 50% for the WMelPop strain and 10% for the
    WMel strain. It also reduces the reproductive rate and viral load in
    the mosquitoes.

6.  The higher death rates for mosquitoes carrying Wolbachia may result
    in Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes being unable to persist in the
    field.

7.  Little research has been conducted to investigate potential
    reductions in dengue when the Wolbachia intervention is implemented
    in the field.

8.  The times of importation of dengue into the population are
    irregular, and the dengue serotypes that enter the population are
    uncertain.

9.  Little research has considered the effects of different disease
    importation strategies on Wolbachia performance in reducing dengue.

#### 2.3.2 Mathematical Aspects

1.  [wide=0pt,labelwidth = 1.3333em, labelsep = 0.3333em, leftmargin = ]

2.  A deterministic model can be utilised to understand disease
    transmission dynamics, in particular, for large populations.

3.  The basic reproduction number @xmath is the average number of new
    cases generated by one infected individual in an entirely
    susceptible population. @xmath is used to determine whether
    epidemics can occur.

4.  Mathematical models for single and multiple serotypes of dengue have
    been developed, but only a few include a Wolbachia -carrying
    mosquito population.

5.  Seasonal effects can be captured using sinusoidal or square wave
    functions.

6.  A global sensitivity analysis is highly relevant as most parameters
    of epidemiological models are very uncertain. Latin Hypercube
    Sampling, in conjunction with the Partial Rank Correlation
    Coefficient calculation, can be used to understand the sensitivity
    of the outcome variables to the input parameters.

7.  Only a few mathematical models have been developed to study the
    effect of Wolbachia on dengue transmission dynamics.

8.  Very few mathematical models have been developed to study the
    performance of Wolbachia in reducing dengue when more than one
    dengue serotype circulates in the population.

## Part 1: A Single Dengue Serotype

In part 1 of this thesis, we investigate the performance of Wolbachia in
reducing the incidence of dengue in populations where a single dengue
serotype is circulating. The focus is on single and multiple
introductions of dengue cases into the population. This part comprises
Chapters 3 – 5 , and the results are summarised below.

### Summary

-   [wide=0pt,labelwidth = 1.3333em, labelsep = 0.3333em, leftmargin = ]

-   Single serotype dengue transmission models in the absence and
    presence of Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes are developed in Sections
    3.1 (Equations ( 3.1 )–( 3.8 )) and 3.2 (Equations ( 3.18 )–( 3.29
    )), respectively.

-   We estimated parameter values for the model against data from
    Cairns, Australia, presented in Table 4.1 , Section 4.5.1 .

-   Sensitivity analyses, conducted in Sections 4.5.1 and 4.5.2 ,
    reveals that the transmission probability, the biting rate and the
    average adult mosquito death rate are the most influential
    parameters (see Figures 4.3 and 4.4 ).

-   Using the WMel strain allows Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes to
    persist according to our steady state analysis of the model (Section
    4.2 , Figure 4.1 ).

-   We show in Section 4.5.4 that Wolbachia reduces the number of days
    at which the reproduction number is higher than unity ( @xmath ) by
    up to 78 days (Section 4.5.4 , Figure 4.6 ).

-    Wolbachia introduction reduces the lengths of the potential seasons
    in which epidemics occur by up to six weeks as shown in Section
    5.2.1 , Figure 5.2 .

-    Wolbachia is effective in reducing dengue incidence by up to 80% in
    areas or regions with low and medium seasonality and moderate
    transmission rates as shown in Sections 5.2.2 and 5.2.3 , Figures
    5.3 and 5.4 , respectively.

## Chapter 3 Mathematical Modelling of a Single Dengue Serotype***The
models are part of the manuscripts that have been published as
“Modelling the transmission dynamics of dengue in the presence of
Wolbachia”, Meksianis Z. Ndii, R. I. Hickson, David Allingham, G.N.
Mercer, in Mathematical Biosciences (2015) and submitted as “The effect
of Wolbachia on dengue outbreaks when dengue is repeatedly introduced”,
Meksianis Z. Ndii, David Allingham, R.I. Hickson, Kathryn Glass.

In this chapter, seasonal dengue models for a single serotype in the
absence and presence of Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes are developed.
The models are an extension of the model developed by Ndii et al. [ 70 ]
for mosquito populations, which was reviewed in Section 2.2.5 . The aim
of this chapter is to present a full derivation and important features
of the models. In Chapters 4 and 5 we shall use these models to
investigate the effects of Wolbachia on dengue transmission dynamics
under single and multiple introductions of dengue.

### 3.1 Model in the Absence of Wolbachia

In this section we formulate the baseline model, that is, the model in
the absence of Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes. Our model includes
populations of humans and non- Wolbachia mosquitoes.

The human and mosquito populations in this model are assumed to be
homogeneous and well-mixed, and we assume that only one dengue serotype
is circulating. The model comprises human and vector (mosquito)
populations, with births and seasonally forced deaths for the adult
mosquito population. As the ratio between male and female mosquitoes is
approximately 1.02:1 [ 7 ] , the numbers of male and female mosquitoes
are assumed to be equal. As only female mosquitoes feed on blood from
humans as part of their reproductive cycle, only female mosquitoes can
transmit dengue. Consequently, this model only considers female
mosquitoes. Vertical transmission of dengue in mosquitoes can occur
(see, for example, [ 44 , 51 ] ), however this tends to be at low levels
[ 51 ] , and there is no evidence this level changes with the
introduction of Wolbachia , and so we ignore vertical transmission. A
schematic representation of the model is given in Figure 3.1 . Here the
subscript @xmath denotes the human population and the subscript @xmath
denotes the non- Wolbachia mosquito population.

The human population is divided into four subpopulations, namely
Susceptible ( @xmath ), Exposed ( @xmath ), Infectious ( @xmath ) and
Recovered ( @xmath ). Furthermore, a constant human population size is
assumed, and hence human birth and death rates are assumed to be equal,
that is, @xmath and @xmath .

The mosquito population is divided into subpopulations of Aquatic (
@xmath ) comprised of eggs, larvae and pupae, Susceptible ( @xmath ),
Exposed ( @xmath ) and Infectious ( @xmath ) mosquitoes. The total adult
female mosquito population is @xmath . The subscript @xmath is used to
denote non- Wolbachia mosquitoes. We use this subscript here for
consistency and to differentiate from the Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes
included in the models in later sections. We group eggs, larvae and
pupae into one compartment as they are not involved in the transmission
of dengue. Without loss of generality, they can be represented by a
single death rate and maturation rate for the purpose of modelling. No
recovered class is required for mosquitoes as they remain infected for
the rest of their lives.

The model is then governed by the following system of differential
equations,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.1)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.2)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.3)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.4)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.5)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.6)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.7)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The probability of transmission from a non- Wolbachia mosquito to a
human is assumed to be the same as the reverse, hence we let @xmath .
The variation in the adult mosquito death rate is strongly influenced by
environmental factors such as temperature, humidity, and rainfall [ 109
] and in our model is sinusoidally forced,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath is the amplitude of seasonal forcing in the adult death
rate, which will be called the strength of seasonality throughout this
thesis. Further, @xmath is the average adult death rate, @xmath is time
and @xmath is the phase shift, which is used to align the cosine
function with the seasonal factors in Far North Queensland. This forcing
of the adult death rate results in appropriate seasonal fluctuations in
the adult mosquito population, in turn leading to a seasonal aquatic
population through the mating function. Hence, there is no need to force
the reproductive rate, and we keep it constant.

A human becomes exposed (but not yet infectious) after being bitten by
an infectious mosquito at rate @xmath (Equations ( 3.1 ) and ( 3.2 )),
where @xmath is the successful biting rate and @xmath is the
transmission probability from non- Wolbachia mosquitoes to humans and
the reverse. Exposed humans then become infectious at rate @xmath and
recover from dengue at rate @xmath .

The aquatic population increases as the male and female mosquitoes mate
and breed, but the population is limited by carrying capacity @xmath
through a logistic term

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since there are equal numbers of male and female mosquitoes, @xmath ,
this becomes @xmath (Equation ( 3.5 )). Members of the aquatic
population die at rate @xmath and mature into susceptible female
mosquitoes at rate @xmath , where only half of the maturing aquatics are
female. Susceptible mosquitoes progress to the exposed class after
biting infectious humans at rate @xmath . They then become infectious at
rate @xmath (Equation ( 3.8 )), where @xmath is the extrinsic incubation
period.

The populations of both humans and mosquitoes are non-dimensionalised by
letting @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
and @xmath . Since the carrying capacity, @xmath , is related to the
number of available breeding sites, which depends on the number of
humans, @xmath . Hence @xmath , where @xmath is the ratio of the
carrying capacity to the total human population. The model, after
removing the hats for the sake of simplicity, is then reduced to

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.10)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.11)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.12)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.13)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.14)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.15)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.16)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , but the mosquito population does not necessarily sum to
one due to the relationship with the carrying capacity and the
sinusoidal forcing term.

### 3.2 Model in the Presence of Wolbachia

In this section the formulation of the model in the presence of
Wolbachia is presented. This extends the model in the absence of
Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes given in Equations ( 3.1 )–( 3.8 ) by
including a Wolbachia -carrying mosquito population.

The population of Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes is divided into
subpopulations of Aquatic @xmath comprised of eggs, larvae and pupae,
Susceptible ( @xmath ), Exposed ( @xmath ) and Infectious ( @xmath )
mosquitoes, where @xmath . The subscript @xmath is used to denote
Wolbachia and to differentiate between non- Wolbachia and Wolbachia
-carrying mosquitoes. The model comprises twelve compartments in total,
four for each of the three modelled populations: two mosquito
populations and one human population. A schematic representation of the
model is given in Figure 3.2 .

The model is governed by the following system of differential equations

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.18)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.19)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.20)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.21)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.22)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.23)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.24)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.25)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.26)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.27)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.28)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

In this model, the exposure rates for humans are different from those in
the model in the absence of Wolbachia , as seen in Equations ( 3.1 ). In
this model, a susceptible human becomes exposed after being bitten by
either non- Wolbachia or Wolbachia -carrying infectious mosquitoes at
rate @xmath or @xmath , respectively (see Equations ( 3.18 ) and ( 3.19
)). Here @xmath is the biting rate for Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes
and @xmath is the transmission probability from Wolbachia -carrying
mosquitoes to humans. Note that the transmission probability from humans
to Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes is assumed to be equal to that of
humans to non- Wolbachia mosquitoes, so @xmath . By contrast, there are
differences in the transmission probabilities of dengue from mosquitoes
to humans for Wolbachia and non- Wolbachia mosquitoes (see Section 4.2
for an explanation).

The effects of cytoplasmic incompatibility and imperfect maternal
transmission on the mosquito populations are included in this model. The
effect of CI is incorporated by differences in the mating functions.
That is, the non- Wolbachia females can only reproduce when mating with
Wolbachia mosquito males, giving

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . As the ratio of male to female mosquitoes is assumed to
be 1:1, this is reduced to @xmath (see Equation ( 3.22 )). The aquatic
Wolbachia mosquitoes are produced when Wolbachia -carrying female
mosquitoes mate with either non- Wolbachia or Wolbachia males, giving
the term

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , which simplifies to @xmath (Equation ( 3.26 )). The
growth of aquatic mosquitoes is limited by carrying capacity @xmath , so
that each mating function is multiplied by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

Wolbachia -carrying aquatic mosquitoes mature to be Wolbachia -carrying
adult mosquitoes at rate @xmath . To capture the imperfect maternal
transmission of Wolbachia [ 94 , 40 ] , we assume that a proportion
@xmath of them become Wolbachia -carrying adults and a proportion (
@xmath ) become non- Wolbachia adults (see Equations ( 3.23 ) and ( 3.27
)). In a similar manner to that for non- Wolbachia mosquitoes, the death
rate of Wolbachia -carrying adult mosquitoes varies seasonally ( @xmath
. More explanation of about this relationship is given in Section 4.2 ).

The non-dimensionalised model form is a useful generalisation, with the
independence of variable scale allowing the solution to be applicable in
other settings, such as for a different population size. Therefore, as
in the model in the absence of Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes, the
populations of both human and mosquitoes are non-dimensionalised by
dividing the human subpopulations by @xmath and the mosquito
subpopulations by @xmath . The model is then reduced to

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.33)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.34)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.35)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.36)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.37)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.38)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.39)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.40)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.41)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.42)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.43)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.44)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The parameter descriptions and values can be found in Table 4.1 , Page
4.1 .

### 3.3 Basic and Effective Reproduction Number

The basic reproduction number @xmath is one of the most important
quantities in infectious disease modelling, acting as an epidemic
threshold. If @xmath , an outbreak may occur, whereas it cannot if
@xmath . We determine @xmath for our model in order to investigate the
effect of introducing Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes on the epidemic
threshold.

Following Diekmann, Heesterbeek and Roberts [ 24 ] , to construct a next
generation matrix, we need to first identify the subsystem of ODEs that
describes the production of new cases and the changes between infectious
classes or groups, which is called the infected subsystem. From the
model ( 3.18 )–( 3.29 ), the infected subsystem is

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.45)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.46)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.47)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.48)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.49)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.50)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

At the infection-free steady state, @xmath , and @xmath . For small
@xmath , the linearised infected subsystem is approximated by
Equations ( 3.45 )–( 3.50 ), with @xmath .

Let @xmath . We want to write the linearised infected subsystem in the
form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the transmission matrix, whose entries correspond to
transmission events, and @xmath is the transition matrix, whose entries
correspond to movement between the infected compartments including
deaths. The transmission matrix @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are the population of mosquitoes with and
without Wolbachia . As mosquito populations vary seasonally, both of
these are functions of time. The transition matrix @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We next find the inverse of the transition matrix @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We multiply the transmission matrix and the inverse of transition matrix
to obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The spectral radius of the matrix @xmath is the basic reproduction
number, that is,

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.51)
  -- -- -- --------

Equation ( 3.51 ) gives the basic reproduction number in the presence of
Wolbachia . In the absence of Wolbachia , after setting all Wolbachia
-related parameters to zero, Equation 3.51 is reduced to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

The disease-free equilibrium results in all humans becoming susceptible
( @xmath ). However, the equilibrium mosquito population includes both
susceptible adults ( @xmath and @xmath ) and mosquitoes in the aquatic
phase ( @xmath , @xmath ). Thus we explicitly include @xmath and @xmath
in the formula for @xmath and @xmath .

The basic reproduction number found here can be considered to be an
instantaneous basic reproduction number which depends on fluctuations in
the mosquito population, @xmath and @xmath .

Besides determining the basic reproduction number, it is also important
to determine time-dependent variations in the potential for transmission
of infectious disease. This is usually conducted by evaluating the
effective reproduction number. The effective reproduction number is the
average number of secondary cases generated by a primary case [ 73 , 106
] . The effective reproduction number is different to the basic
reproduction number in that it takes into account the depletion of
susceptible individuals and any public health intervention [ 30 ] . To
make it easier for readers to differentiate between basic and effective
reproduction numbers in this thesis we will refer to the reproduction
number as the basic reproduction number if the population is entirely
susceptible, even where there is a Wolbachia intervention.

The effective reproduction number can be obtained by multiplying the
basic reproduction number by the proportion of the population that is
susceptible populations [ 73 ] . The first term of Equation ( 3.51 ) is
the average number of secondary infectious humans produced by one
primary human case in a completely susceptible population of humans and
non- Wolbachia mosquitoes. The second term of Equation  ( 3.51 ) is the
same as the first term, but where mosquitoes carry Wolbachia . The
effective reproduction number can be obtained as the sum of the first
term multiplied by @xmath and the second term multiplied by @xmath .
That is,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.54)
  -- -- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the absence of Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes, the effective
reproduction number is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

### 3.4 Discussion

Mathematical models developed in this chapter are used to investigate
the effectiveness of a Wolbachia control strategy in reducing the number
of human dengue cases under scenarios of single and multiple
introductions of human dengue cases. In these models, we assume a
well-mixed and homogeneous population and ignore heterogeneity in the
population, although our models could be extended to include this.
Furthermore, although we assume the transmission probabilities from
humans to mosquitoes and mosquitoes to human are the same, the force of
infections of humans and mosquitoes are different due to differences in
the proportions of infectious humans and mosquitoes (Equations ( 3.1 )
and ( 3.6 ) , respectively). Vertical transmission of dengue in
mosquitoes can occur (see, for example, [ 44 , 51 ] ), however this
tends to be at low levels [ 51 ] . Furthermore, Adams and Boots [ 2 ]
found that vertical transmission is not an important factor for
determining dengue persistence. As the purpose of this thesis is to
determine the indicative reduction in the number of dengue cases due to
a Wolbachia intervention, the assumptions used in this thesis are
sufficient. Further explorations can be conducted and suggestions are
detailed in Section 9.3 .

### 3.5 Summary

-   [wide=0pt,labelwidth = 1.3333em, labelsep = 0.3333em, leftmargin = ]

-   Single serotype dengue models in the absence and presence of
    Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes are developed (Sections 3.1 and 3.2
    ).

-   We provide dimensionalised and non-dimensionalised models (Sections
    3.1 and 3.2 ).

-   The death rate of mosquitoes is sinusoidally forced (Section 3.1 ,
    Equation ( 3.9 )).

-   The basic and effective reproduction number is derived, which can be
    considered to be an instantaneous basic reproduction number (Section
    3.3 , Equations ( 3.51 )–( 3.56 )).

-   The basic and effective reproduction number depends on fluctuations
    in the mosquito population (Section 3.3 , Equations ( 3.51 )–( 3.56
    )).

## Chapter 4 Dengue Transmission Dynamics for a Single Introduction
Event ***This work is part of the manuscript that has been published as
Meksianis Z. Ndii, R. I. Hickson, David Allingham, G. N. Mercer.
Modelling the transmission dynamics of dengue in the presence of
Wolbachia. Mathematical Biosciences. 262:157–166. 2015.

The aim of this chapter is to study the effects of Wolbachia on dengue
transmission dynamics in the case where there is a single introduction
of dengue cases into the human population.

The mathematical models developed in Chapter 3 are used to investigate
the effects of Wolbachia on dengue transmission dynamics for a single
strain. We consider a single outbreak with a duration of approximately
one year, and hence omit human births and deaths from our models by
setting @xmath . We work with our non-dimensionalised models in the
absence (Equations ( 3.10 )–( 3.17 )) and presence (Equations ( 3.33 )–(
3.44 )) of Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes.

### 4.1 Data and Parameter Estimation

Cairns is the largest city in the region of Australia where Aedes
aegypti are present and local dengue transmission occurs, and is also
where the Wolbachia field trials, which began in 2011, are being
conducted [ 41 ] . In summer 2008/2009, there was a DEN3 outbreak in
Cairns [ Ritchie2013 ] and we use data from this outbreak to estimate
the parameter values of transmission probability ( @xmath ), strength of
seasonality ( @xmath ) and seasonal phase ( @xmath ) for the baseline
model, for example, in the absence of Wolbachia , represented by
Equations ( 3.10 )–( 3.17 ). The other parameter values were obtained
from the literature and are given in Table 4.1 . The Cairns data covers
the period from 2nd November 2008 to 31st May 2009 and was extracted
from Figure 2 of the paper by Ritchie et al. [ Ritchie2013 ] . As our
model is formulated as a proportion of the population, each data point
is divided by 150,000, which was the approximate population of Cairns in
2008 [ 15 ] .

We minimise the sum of the squared error between the model and data,
which is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the total proportion of human dengue cases up to the
@xmath week from the observed data, and @xmath is the total proportion
of human dengue cases up to the @xmath week from the model simulations.
The lsqnonlin built-in function in Matlab [ 58 ] is then used to
estimate the @xmath , @xmath and @xmath parameter values.

### 4.2 Wolbachia Parameters

In this section, model parameters relating to Wolbachia -carrying
mosquitoes are presented and discussed. Most of these are given in terms
of non- Wolbachia mosquitoes, following the conventions in the
literature. The relationships between Wolbachia and non- Wolbachia
parameters,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.2)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.3)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.4)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The reproductive rate of Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes is generally
lower than that for non- Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes ( @xmath ).
There is a significant difference in reproductive rates for the WMelPop
and a marginal difference for the WMel strain. This is because WMelPop
decreases the viability of eggs [ 63 ] , whereas WMel does not have a
significant effect on them [ 94 ] .

The death rate of Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes is higher than that of
non- Wolbachia mosquitoes ( @xmath ) because Wolbachia reduces the
mosquito lifespan [ 111 , 94 ] . WMel and WMelPop reduce the lifespan of
mosquitoes by up to 10% and 50%, respectively [ 111 , 94 ] .

Wolbachia also inhibits viral replication and dissemination in the
mosquitoes [ 11 , 67 , 41 , 94 , 29 ] . This results in a lower dengue
viral load in the Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes, and to reflect this,
we set the transmission probability from infectious Wolbachia -carrying
mosquitoes to humans to less than that for Wolbachia -free mosquitoes (
@xmath ). Additionally, Wolbachia causes a condition known as bendy
proboscis [ 89 ] which inhibits feeding and lowers the successful biting
rate ( @xmath ). This lower biting rate also captures the effect that,
due to the inhibition of viral replication, some Wolbachia -carrying
mosquitoes are effectively not infected with dengue, and so the overall
transmission rate from humans is lower (that is, @xmath ).

For the parameter values used in this paper, there are only two
realistic stable states, which are that only non- Wolbachia -carrying
mosquitoes persist, and that both populations persist (Figure 4.1 ). An
additional stable state does exist in which only the Wolbachia -carrying
mosquitoes persist, but this requires the perfect maternal transmission
of Wolbachia , and may not be realistic [ 94 ] . This state was also
found by Ndii et al. [ 70 ] for an autonomous system. When both
populations persist in this model, the proportion of Wolbachia -carrying
mosquitoes is around 86%, which compares well with the 90% observed in
Hoffmann et al. [ 41 , 39 ] .

### 4.3 Measurement of the Effect of Wolbachia on Dengue Outbreaks

A measure is needed to assess the impact of the Wolbachia intervention
on dengue transmission. We do this by comparing the total numbers of
human dengue cases in the absence and presence (for example,
persistence) of Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes. The relative effect is
expressed as a percentage, given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the final proportion of dengue cases, with subscripts to
denote the absence (A) and presence (P) of Wolbachia -carrying
mosquitoes.

### 4.4 Sensitivity Analysis

A global sensitivity analysis is performed using the standard
combination of Latin Hypercube Sampling (LHS) and Partial Rank
Correlation Coefficient (PRCC) multivariate analysis [ 56 , 59 , 103 ,
13 ] . LHS is a stratified Monte Carlo sampling method, in which the
random parameter distributions are divided into @xmath equal probability
intervals and samples are taken from each [ 56 , 59 , 103 , 13 ] . Here
@xmath is the sample size for each parameter. Each interval of each
parameter is sampled exactly once without replacement, so that the
entire range of each parameter is explored [ 56 , 103 , 13 ] .
Parameters are sampled from a triangular probability distribution
because we expect that the values close to the peak of the triangular
distribution pattern are those which are more likely to occur. The
minimum, maximum and expected values are given in Table 4.1 .

PRCC is an efficient method for measuring the nonlinear, but monotonic
relationship between inputs and the model outcome of interest [ 56 , 103
, 13 , 20 ] . In this paper, the inputs are the parameters as well as
the initial number of exposed humans, while the model outcome is the
cumulative proportion of infectious individuals, which is the solution
of the differential equation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The ranges of the input parameters are available in the literature and
only samples of the parameter values that result in the persistence of
mosquitoes are included in the calculation. The PRCC is computed for the
full length of 31 weeks, the period of time for which data is available
(see Richie et. al [ Ritchie2013 ] ). The most significant parameters
are those for which a small change in value leads to a significant
change in the output, that is in the cumulative number of infectious
humans.

### 4.5 Results

In this section the model simulation and sensitivity analysis results
are presented for both models. The governing systems of differential
equations are integrated using MATLAB’s inbuilt routine “ode45”, with
the parameter values given in Table 4.1 . We run the model until the
mosquito population reaches the periodic stable state, before the
infected humans are introduced into the population on the @xmath of
November. That is, the transient dynamics of the introduction of the
Wolbachia mosquitoes into the system are not considered. In Far North
Queensland, dengue is not endemic, hence dengue outbreaks occur as
dengue cases are introduced into the population. For both models, the
initial conditions for the human population are @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath .

#### 4.5.1 Parameter Estimation and Sensitivity of the Model in the
Absence of Wolbachia

In this section we consider the model in the absence of Wolbachia , that
is, Equations ( 3.10 )–( 3.17 ), as described in Chapter 3 , which
serves as a baseline model for comparison with the Wolbachia
intervention. Most of the parameters are obtained from the literature,
as per the references in Table 4.1 . The remaining three parameters,
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath , are estimated via optimisation using Matlab
’s lsqnonlin function. We constrain the optimisation by physical limits,
that is, between 0 and 1 for @xmath since it is a probability, 0 to 365
for the seasonal phase @xmath , and 0 to 1 for @xmath , so that the
death rate @xmath remains positive at all times. The ranges of parameter
values are chosen such a way that it is biologically realistic and
result in the persistence of Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes.

We fit the parameters as follows. The model is run to its periodic
stable state and then two exposed humans are introduced. The sum of
squares error is calculated using the cumulative 31-week proportional
weekly data of Ritchie et al. [ Ritchie2013 ] . The parameters are then
estimated using Matlab ’s lsqnonlin function, with a final sum of
squares error equal to @xmath . The resulting parameter values @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath are given in Table 4.1 . To assess the
goodness-of-fit, we calculated the @xmath statistic for the model
residuals using Matlab ’s chi2gof function. This returned a p-value of
0.3713, and so we failed to reject the hypothesis that the residuals are
from a normal distribution. There is some systematic bias in the
residuals around the start of the outbreak, evident in Figure 4.2 ,
where the observed outbreak rises slightly faster than the model. While
model embellishments could be added to account for this, here we
consider that the standard SEIR model of infectious disease is
sufficient for our intended purpose: comparing the outbreak dynamics in
the absence and presence of Wolbachia .

The sensitivity analysis was performed by executing 5,200 runs (to
reduce variance) to assess the model’s sensitivity to the parameters.
The parameter ranges used are given in Table 4.1 . The range of the
number of initially-exposed humans is taken to be between one and five
individuals. This is realistic as only a small number of initial cases
is needed to trigger an outbreak [ Ritchie2013 ] .

The changes in parameter sensitivity exhibited over time are common for
SEIR models due to the changes in disease dynamics over time, as seen in
Figures 4.3 and 4.4 . Figure 4.3 shows that, for most of the time
period, the most influential parameters are the transmission probability
( @xmath ), the biting rate ( @xmath ) and the average adult death rate
( @xmath ), where the latter has a negative correlation. The phase,
@xmath , influences the outbreak size by shifting the peaks and troughs
of the mosquito population in time; outbreaks tend to take off around
the peaks. Because of the sinusoidal nature of the seasonality, the
correlation between @xmath and the outbreak size changes sign over time.
The parameter @xmath determines the progression rate of humans from the
exposed to the infectious class. In the early days, when exposed
individuals are introduced, this parameter drives an increase in the
number of infectious humans. If this parameter has a high value, the
initial introduced cases will quickly move into the infectious class.

As the epidemic takes off, the cumulative number of infectious
individuals is determined more by the biting rate @xmath and the
transmission probability @xmath , and so @xmath declines in importance.
Moreover, the dynamics of the mosquito population have a larger
influence on the disease dynamics once the epidemic has taken off.

When there are many susceptible mosquitoes in the population, there will
be many infectious mosquitoes and hence many infected humans. An
increase in the number of susceptible mosquitoes is regulated by the
parameter @xmath and so this parameter has an important impact in the
later period after the epidemic has taken off. As expected, the
cumulative number of infectious individuals is most sensitive to the
number of initially-exposed humans ( @xmath ) at early times since they
are immediately added to this output. However, for the range considered,
@xmath does not change the proportion of dengue reduction due to the
introduction of Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes.

#### 4.5.2 Sensitivity Analysis of the Model in the Presence of
Wolbachia

In this section the effects of Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes on the
dengue dynamics are investigated. Variations in parameter values are
explored to quantify the persistence of Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes
and its effects on the number of human dengue cases. The initial
conditions for the two mosquito populations are @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath , which are obtained by running Matlab
simulations of the model in the absence of dengue to the periodic stable
state. Since the WMel strain of Wolbachia is used in the Cairns field
experiments [ 41 ] , we use its expected parameter values in our model.

The results of the sensitivity analysis are similar to those for the
model in the absence of Wolbachia , and are shown in Figure 4.4 . The
transmission probability ( @xmath ), the biting rate ( @xmath ) and the
average adult mosquito death rate ( @xmath ) are the most influential
parameters on the model outcome. Furthermore, at early times, the
cumulative number of infectious individuals is sensitive to @xmath and
@xmath . An exploration of the ratios of transmission probability,
@xmath , biting rate, @xmath , and death rate, @xmath , is also carried
out as they relate to the most influential parameters. We also explore
the ratio of the reproductive rates for Wolbachia and non- Wolbachia
mosquitoes, @xmath , to obtain information regarding its effect on
dengue disease dynamics and on the parameter range for which Wolbachia
-carrying mosquitoes persist.

#### 4.5.3 Parameter Exploration

Although we are using values for @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
from the literature, the provided values are generally qualitative
descriptions, or come from laboratory trials which may not be
representative of what happens in the field, and hence the correct
parameter values may differ. Therefore, in this Section, we vary these
parameters, one at a time, to determine their effects on human dengue
incidence as measured by the relative effect given in Equation ( 4.6 ).
Thus, we quantify the effect of introducing Wolbachia -carrying
mosquitoes on dengue transmission for a range of realistic parameter
values.

We consider two scenarios, and their resulting effects on dengue cases
are shown in Figure 4.5 . The first uses the expected values for WMel
for the non-varied Wolbachia parameters (indicated by the solid line in
the Figure). The second scenario uses the non- Wolbachia mosquito
values, allowing us to explore the effect of cytoplasmic incompatibility
(CI) on the dengue transmission dynamics, assuming that Wolbachia has no
other effect on mosquito physiology. This second scenario is represented
by the dashed line in the figure.

The vertical lines in Figure 4.5 (a) and (b), for @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively, denote the boundary between persistence ( @xmath ) and
non-persistence ( @xmath ) for the Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes. Both
scenarios show that as the death rate of Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes
increases, the relative effect on dengue incidence also increases up to
the point where the Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes no longer persist,
around @xmath for the solid line and @xmath for the dashed line. The
default values, with @xmath , are identified on the figure by a cross,
showing that WMel should reduce human dengue incidence by approximately
96%. Interestingly, in the second scenario, when @xmath , we see that
even if all of the Wolbachia parameters are equal to their non-
Wolbachia counterparts, human dengue incidence is still reduced by
approximately 16%. This occurs due to the combination of CI and
competition, with the total female mosquito population ( @xmath ) being
reduced.

The CI means Wolbachia -free and Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes have
different mating functions, and, in particular, that no non- Wolbachia
offspring are produced from the combination of a non- Wolbachia female
and a Wolbachia -carrying male (there is effectively a @xmath term in
Equation 3.22 ). This difference in the mating functions, combined with
the competition in the aquatic phase, results in a reduced total
mosquito population, and hence less dengue. This provides the new
insight that CI, when considered in isolation, alters the dengue
transmission dynamics.

The solid line with expected WMel values in Figure 4.5 (b) shows that
when the reproductive rate of Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes is too low
compared to non- Wolbachia mosquitoes, the Wolbachia -carrying
mosquitoes no longer persist, and hence have no effect on human dengue
incidence. This occurs at approximately @xmath for the expected
parameter values (solid line), and @xmath for @xmath (dashed line). When
Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes do persist, their effect on human dengue
incidence decreases with increasing @xmath since the total number of
mosquitoes increases, despite CI. However, this effect is negligible for
the expected parameter values (solid line), with an over 90% reduction
in dengue for all values where Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes persist.

The results given in Figure 4.5 (c) show that even if @xmath
(transmission is not directly affected by Wolbachia ), a reduction in
human dengue incidence of approximately 76% is still obtained due to the
other effects of Wolbachia on mosquito physiology. In addition, as shown
in Figure 4.5 (d), a 90% reduction in human dengue incidence is obtained
even though the biting rate of Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes is close
to that of non- Wolbachia mosquitoes ( @xmath ).

#### 4.5.4 The Basic Reproduction Number

Using the formula for the basic reproduction number in Chapter 3 , we
investigate the basic reproduction number. Figure 4.6 shows the effects
of seasonal forcing on the basic reproduction number. This can be
considered to be an instantaneous basic reproduction number. The results
show that the basic reproduction number is greater than one, meaning an
outbreak may occur, for approximately 208 out of 365 days for the model
where Wolbachia is absent, and 130 days for the model where Wolbachia is
present. That is, Wolbachia intervention reduces the number of days when
an outbreak can occur by 78 days a year in this deterministic model. If
infected humans are introduced in favourable conditions, where the basic
reproduction number is higher than unity, then outbreaks can still occur
[ Grassly2006 , Coutinho2006 ] . This means that introducing Wolbachia
-carrying mosquitoes reduces the chance that a dengue outbreak will
happen by reducing the number of days when the conditions are
favourable. The basic reproduction number is a function of the parameter
values, and is affected in the following way by key ones. If the
transmission probability increases, the basic reproduction number also
increases. When the ratio of death rate of Wolbachia -carrying to non-
Wolbachia mosquitoes (f) increases, the basic reproduction number
decreases, but then increases when f > 1:3. This is realistic because if
f > 1:3, Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes die out and non- Wolbachia
mosquitoes dominate the population, which then results in a higher
@xmath . If the vertical transmission is not ignored, the basic
reproduction number would be different. That is, some proportion of
mosquitoes mature to be exposed mosquitoes. However, the modelling
method would be the same.

### 4.6 Discussion and Conclusions

We have developed a mathematical model for dengue transmission dynamics
in the presence of a Wolbachia -carrying mosquito population in order to
quantify the effects of a Wolbachia intervention on human dengue
incidence. Our model incorporates seasonal forcing through the adult
mosquito death rate, the effect of cytoplasmic incompatibility, and
competition for resources in the aquatic stage. This model considers the
circulation of only a single dengue serotype with the mosquito
population in a periodic stable state, appropriate to the study of a
single dengue outbreak. It is assumed that half of the mosquito
population mature into female adults, that a single introduction event
occurs, and that there is no initial dengue immunity in the human
population. These effects will have an impact on dengue transmission
dynamics, with initial dengue immunity reducing the relative effect of
the Wolbachia introduction due to smaller outbreak sizes. However, the
purpose of this model was to obtain an indication of the effect of the
introduction of Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes on dengue transmission
dynamics. Extensions to the model which consider the effect of immunity
in the human population are considered in Chapters 5 , 7 , and 8 .

A model which does not incorporate seasonality can only fit the data for
Far North Queensland in one of two ways. First, nearly all humans need
to have been previously infected and now recovered ( @xmath ), which is
not realistic. Second, all mosquitoes can die out, as they would at some
time in a one year period in a model which incorporated seasonal
effects. However, unlike in a model which includes seasonal effects, the
mosquito population cannot re-emerge, so this finding is again not
realistic. Thus seasonality must be incorporated into our model if we
wish it to fit the data for Far North Queensland.

The key parameter ranges were explored in order to determine the level
of dengue incidence reduction due to Wolbachia and the persistence of
Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes. This was an important part of our work
as definite values for many parameters are not known. A global
sensitivity analysis was used to determine the most influential
parameters.

We found that inoculating mosquitoes using the Wolbachia strain WMel ,
which reduces the mosquito lifespan by at most 10%, allows Wolbachia
-carrying mosquitoes to persist. This result is compatible with the
recommendations of Walker et al. [ 94 ] and the results from field
experiments [ 41 , 39 ] . Furthermore, we obtain new insight from Figure
4.5 into the importance of cytoplasmic incompatibility as a biological
factor. CI not only gives a reproductive advantage to Wolbachia
-carrying female mosquitoes, but also influences the transmission
dynamics of dengue as it reduces the mosquito population. The release of
more Wolbachia -carrying males than females is being considered by
Hancock et al. [ 35 ] , and their analysis may be important in
considering the effect of cytoplasmic incompatibility on dengue
transmission dynamics, and the possible feminisation of the Wolbachia
-carrying mosquito population. However, our results suggest that, with
equal numbers of males and females, Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes can
persist, and hence a reduction in dengue human incidence can be obtained
through the use of this intervention.

The ratios of the transmission probability, @xmath , and of the biting
rate, @xmath , determine the level of reduction in human dengue
incidence due to the introduction of Wolbachia . By contrast, the ratios
of the death rate, @xmath , and of the reproductive rate, @xmath ,
determine the persistence of Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes. This
finding is corroborated by our sensitivity analysis. Additionally, the
biting and reproductive rates are linked, since female mosquitoes feed
on human blood during their reproductive cycle. However, we treat the
biting and reproductive rates as independent when exploring the
parameter space and note that the relative behaviour of these parameters
is as shown in Figure 4.5 . A significant reduction in human dengue
incidence due to the introduction of Wolbachia is also corroborated by
the results found for the reproduction number. Figure 4.6 shows that the
number of days where this quantity is higher than unity is reduced by
around 78 days when Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes are introduced,
indicating that the chance of a dengue outbreak occurring is reduced.
This indicates that, in our seasonal model, the time of introduction of
dengue is important. When individuals with dengue enter the population
at the appropriate time of the year, an outbreak can occur. This is
further explored in Chapter 5 .

In conclusion, a one-strain dengue mathematical model incorporating
Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes has been developed and analysed for a
single outbreak. We quantify the effect that Wolbachia will have on
human dengue cases, once the mosquito populations have reached their
periodic stable states. Wolbachia comes with a fitness cost but also a
reproductive advantage (CI) to Aedes aegypti mosquitoes, and we explore
the parameter values for which Wolbachia will persist in the mosquito
population. Our results show that for realistic WMel parameter values,
Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes can greatly reduce the transmission of
dengue. We also show that in the absence of any other effect on the
mosquito physiology by Wolbachia , cytoplasmic incompatibility alone
affects the transmission of dengue, reducing the human incidence.

The results discovered this chapter provide an indication that Wolbachia
is effective in reducing dengue transmission. This chapter focuses on a
single introduction of dengue cases. Generally, individuals with dengue
enter the population multiple times, and the elapsed time between
introductions is irregular. Therefore, understanding the effect of
Wolbachia on dengue transmission dynamics when individuals carrying
dengue enter the population multiple times is important. In the next
chapter, multiple introductions of dengue cases into the population are
investigated to assess their effects on the performance of Wolbachia in
reducing dengue transmission.

### 4.7 Summary

-   [wide=0pt,labelwidth = 1.3333em, labelsep = 0.3333em, leftmargin = ]

-   We estimated the parameter values against data for Cairns, Australia
    in Section 4.5.1 .

-    Wolbachia is expected to reduce dengue transmission by over 90%
    (Section 4.5.3 , see Figure 4.5 ).

-   Using the WMel strains that reduces the mosquito lifespan by
    approximately 10% allows the mosquitoes carrying Wolbachia to
    persist in the wild (Sections 4.2 and 4.5.3 , Figures 4.1 and 4.5
    (a).)

-   A global sensitivity analysis reveals that the transmission
    probability, the average death rate and the biting rate are the
    important parameters (Sections 4.5.1 and 4.5.2 , see Figures 4.3 and
    4.4 ).

-   The presence of Wolbachia reduces the number of days at which basic
    reproduction number is higher than one by around 78 days in a year
    (Section 4.5.4 , Figure 4.6 ).

-   In the absence of any other effect on the mosquito physiology by
    Wolbachia , cytoplasmic incompatibility (CI) alone reduces the
    dengue incidence (Section 4.5.3 , Figure 4.5 ).

## Chapter 5 Dengue Transmission Dynamics for Multiple
Introductions***This work is part of the manucript that has been
submitted for publication as Meksianis Z. Ndii, David Allingham, R.I.
Hickson, Kathryn Glass. The effect of Wolbachia on dengue outbreaks when
dengue is repeatedly introduced.

In the previous chapter, we studied the effect of Wolbachia on dengue
transmission dynamics for a single introduction of dengue cases. In this
chapter, we study the effect of Wolbachia on dengue transmission
dynamics for multiple introductions of dengue. The aim of this chapter
is to investigate the performance of Wolbachia in reducing dengue
incidence when dengue cases are introduced into the population multiple
times.

We work with our dimensionalised models from Chapter 3 in the absence
(Equations ( 3.1 )–( 3.8 )) and presence (Equations ( 3.18 )–( 3.29 ))
of Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes.

### 5.1 Introduction

The transmission dynamics of dengue are very seasonal due to
fluctuations in the mosquito population as a result of variations in
climatic conditions such as temperature and rainfall. In regions with
strongly seasonal climatic conditions, epidemics generally occur at
certain times of the year and are mostly triggered by the importation of
dengue cases. This means that the time period in which an infected
individual enters the population is an important factor in determining
whether an outbreak will occur.

Only a few research projects have considered the effects of multiple
introduction times on dengue outbreaks (see Section 2.2.6 ). Some
studies have investigated the effects of the frequency of dengue
introductions on dengue transmission dynamics [ 9 , 99 ] .
Bannister-Tyrrell et al. [ 9 ] investigated the variation in dengue
activity in Australia using a process-based modelling approach in which
dengue cases were introduced once a year, bimonthly, monthly and weekly.
Williams et al. [ 99 ] used an existing dengue model, which involved an
entomological component (CIMSiM) and a disease component (DENSiM), to
assess the effects of the importation rate on dengue outbreaks. They
assumed that between 1 and 25 dengue cases were introduced into the
population at weekly intervals. A few mathematical models have been
developed to study the effects of Wolbachia on dengue transmission
dynamics. In this chapter, we investigate the combined influence of
these two factors on dengue transmission dynamics by exploring the
performance of Wolbachia in reducing dengue incidence when dengue cases
are repeatedly introduced into the population.

Mathematical models describing dengue transmission dynamics in the
absence and presence of Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes are given in
Chapter 3 . The model incorporates seasonality through a function
controlling the adult mosquito death rate and is parameterised for
Cairns, Australia. However, this model can be generalised to simulate
dengue transmission dynamics in other places where dengue outbreaks are
triggered by the importation of dengue cases. We measure the
effectiveness of the Wolbachia intervention by comparing the incidence
of dengue in the absence and presence of Wolbachia , and use this to
compute the proportional reduction in dengue incidence. The formula for
this reduction is given in Equation ( 4.6 ) on Page 4.6 .

#### 5.1.1 Simulation Procedure

We run simulations for our model using the built-in MATLAB functions
ode45 and odextend . The initial conditions used for the simulations are
@xmath [ 15 ] , @xmath , @xmath [ 19 ] , @xmath [ 94 ] , and the
remaining populations are set to zero. In experiments conducted to
assess the spread of Wolbachia and its persistence, Wolbachia and non-
Wolbachia mosquitoes were released in the ratio 2:1 [ 94 ] , and so we
set @xmath . In the absence of Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes, @xmath .
In this analysis, the phase, @xmath , is shifted 60 days ( @xmath days)
as our start time is January.

We use the following procedure for our simulations. First, the model is
run without dengue using the initial conditions described above until
the mosquito population reaches the periodic stable state, and then
individuals with dengue are introduced. Second, we continue the
simulation using “odextend” for another week, after which dengue is
reintroduced. The reintroduction procedure is repeated until the final
introduction for the year. Step two is repeated for the same periods of
each following year until the human infected population has remained
constant for at least 75 consecutive years. As we assume a constant
human population, when individuals with dengue are introduced, the same
number of individuals are removed from the susceptible human class,
@xmath . We are particularly interested in the occurrence of outbreaks
as the aim of this chapter is to determine the reduction in dengue
outbreak size due to Wolbachia . To ensure that the disease does not
persist when the infected human population is less than one individual,
the infected population is set to zero if it falls below a threshold of
0.5, which is a deterministic proxy for stochastic fade-out.

#### 5.1.2 Introduction Scenarios

We consider weekly year-round introductions and weekly three-month
introduction periods. Plots of the time series for infected humans when
we introduce dengue every week in a year (1 @xmath scenario) and every
week in a three month period (2 @xmath and 3 @xmath scenarios) are given
in Figure 5.1 . In the second scenario, dengue cases are introduced
weekly from June to August, while in the third scenario, dengue cases
are introduced weekly from September to November. The introduction
periods are represented by rectangles at the top of Figure 5.1 . In the
second and third scenarios, the disease dies out over winter, but the
overall dynamics for each of the three scenarios are very similar due to
the level of introduction.

The true number of imported cases is very uncertain and differs across
geographic regions [ 80 ] . In Queensland, for instance, the number of
imported dengue cases was around 202 in 2010 and 118 in 2011 [ 46 ] .
The number of imported cases in Taiwan has increased over time from one
individual in 1998 to around 15 individuals in 2007 [ 82 ] . In our
model, two dengue cases are introduced each week, with a total of 104
imported cases for year-round introduction (scenario 1) and 26 imported
cases for each of the three month periods of introduction (scenarios 2
and 3).

### 5.2 Results

In this section, we assess the potential for an outbreak, the effect of
the strength of seasonality and the transmission rate, and investigate
the effective reproduction number.

#### 5.2.1 Potential for an Outbreak

Here we explore the impact of the season in which dengue is imported.
Figure 5.2 shows the outbreak size with and without Wolbachia for
different values of @xmath , the parameter representing the strength of
seasonality. In all simulations, dengue is introduced over a three month
period (Scenarios 2 and 3), with the week of the first introduction
given on the x-axis. Figure 5.2 shows that the lengths of the potential
outbreak seasons have been reduced in the presence of Wolbachia
-carrying mosquitoes for all three values of @xmath . The maximum
potential outbreak size occurs when dengue is first introduced between
June and September. Furthermore, the outbreak season contracts as the
strength of seasonality ( @xmath ) increases.

In investigating the effects of the transmission rate and the strength
of seasonality under the assumption that dengue is introduced over a
period of three months, we use the June to August (scenario 2) and
September to November (scenario 3) time periods of introduction as
outbreaks can potentially occur when dengue is introduced in these
periods. We use three-month periods of introduction as these are
equivalent to the approximate length of a climatic season such as Summer
or Winter.

#### 5.2.2 The Effect of the Strength of Seasonality

The strength of seasonality is one of the key factors to explore since
it affects vector dynamics. As the strength of seasonality ( @xmath )
increases, the outbreak size increases both in the absence and presence
of Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes (Figure 5.3 ). When we look at the
overall effects of Wolbachia on dengue, we see that the proportional
reduction in dengue decreases as the strength of seasonality increases.
Furthermore, the time of introduction also affects the impact of
Wolbachia on dengue incidence. The reduction in dengue incidence when
cases are introduced weekly throughout the year (scenario 1) is lower
than that for either of the scenarios modelling three months of
introduction, and hence Wolbachia is less effective in this scenario.
For low values of the strength of seasonality, the proportional
reduction in dengue is approximately 80% for year-round introduction
(scenario 1) and over 80% for the three month periods of introduction
(scenarios 2 and 3). In general, the Wolbachia intervention is most
effective when the amplitude of seasonality is low.

#### 5.2.3 The Effect of the Transmission Rate

The transmission probability @xmath and the biting rate @xmath are the
most influential parameters in the model [ 69 ] and so we explore the
effects of these parameters on dengue dynamics in the presence of
Wolbachia . As these two parameters have similar effects on the disease
dynamics, we combine them into one parameter, @xmath which we refer to
as the transmission rate. In Chapter 4 , the fitted value for @xmath ,
appropriate for Cairns in northern Australia, was calculated to be
0.1648 day @xmath .

Figure 5.4 shows that as @xmath increases, the proportional reduction in
dengue, @xmath , peaks and then decreases. Figure 5.4 also reveals that
the maximum proportion of dengue reduction is slightly less than 80% for
the year-round introduction (scenario 1), and around 80% for weekly
introduction during June to August (scenario 2) and September to
November (scenario 3). For Cairns, the proportional reduction in dengue
is around 50% for year-round introduction and 60% for three-month
introductions.

#### 5.2.4 The Effective Reproduction Number

Using the formula for the effective reproduction number in Chapter 3 ,
Page 3.53 for the model in dimensionalised form, we investigate the
transmission potential of dengue in the long-term. The equilibrium
susceptible populations are obtained by simulating the model with weekly
year-round introduction until the human infected population remains the
same for 75 years. The equilibrium susceptible populations are then used
to calculate the effective reproduction number. We then simulate our
model where two dengue cases are introduced once a year in a specific
week (we implement a thresholding of 0.5 to keep consistency), and
compare this with the results of the effective reproduction number.

A comparison of the effective reproduction number ( @xmath ) and with
the outbreak size shows a similar threshold (Figure 5.5 ). If we
introduce dengue cases in the week at which @xmath , an outbreak is
likely to occur (Figure 5.5 ). There is a slight difference between the
week in which @xmath and the week in which outbreak takes off. The
outbreak takes off around two weeks later in the absence of Wolbachia
and four weeks later in the presence of Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes.

### 5.3 Discussion and conclusions

We investigated the effects of Wolbachia on dengue transmission dynamics
using a mathematical model which includes the importation of humans
infected with dengue.

We found that, in the presence of Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes, the
time-window in which epidemics can occur is reduced by between two and
six weeks (see Figure 5.2 ), depending on the strength of seasonality.
This is driven by a decline in the mosquito population size, likely
caused by a reduction in the mosquito lifespan and, thus, in the
mosquito’s reproductive rate. An increase in the strength of seasonality
further reduces the time-window in which an outbreak can occur due to
the presence of a limited number of mosquitoes over winter. In this
case, the decline in the mosquito population numbers is due to a short
lifespan driven by seasonality. The model provides the insight that the
presence of Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes reduces the length of the
potential seasons in which an outbreak can occur.

We also compared the time-dependent reproduction number and the
simulation, and found the time at which an outbreak occurs qualitatively
matches. That is, an outbreak occurs when the reproduction number is
greater than one. The models agree within 2–4 weeks and this slight
discrepancy is likely due to a combination of disease importation
assumptions and thresholding rules that lead to outbreak fadeout for
some reproductions numbers close to one. As the purpose of this thesis
is to obtain general understanding of the performance of Wolbachia in
reducing dengue incidence, the general consistency in these approaches
is sufficient and reassuring.

In comparing the outbreak sizes, as the strength of seasonality is
increased, we found that outbreak sizes increase and the benefits of
Wolbachia decrease. This increase in outbreak size is caused by a larger
mosquito population since the mosquito lifespan is longer when
seasonality is at its highest. This larger mosquito population increases
the chance that a human in the population is infected. In contrast, as
the transmission rate increases, there is an intermediate level of
transmission (around 0.08 to 0.12) at which Wolbachia is most effective.
At these transmission rates, outbreaks will occur in the absence of
Wolbachia , but only either very small or no outbreaks will occur in the
presence of Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes. When the strength of
seasonality is around 0.02-0.30 and the transmission rates are around
0.08 to 0.12 day @xmath , dengue incidence can be reduced by more than
80%, depending on the time of year in which dengue cases are introduced.
In reality, infected individuals enter populations year-round, according
to a number of different factors. However, our results across scenarios
1–3 show that the effect of Wolbachia is largely independent of the time
of introduction. Overall, our results suggest that dengue incidence can
be reduced by up to 80% in populations where dengue is repeatedly
introduced.

In this chapter, multiple introductions of a single dengue strain were
explored. Although these findings provide insights into the performance
of Wolbachia in reducing dengue incidence, generally individuals with
different dengue serotypes enter the population at random times.
Moreover, since four dengue serotypes are circulating in most places [
53 , 64 ] , the effects of Wolbachia on dengue transmission dynamics
with multiple serotypes are of interest. This may influence Wolbachia
performance in reducing dengue. However, generally only one serotype
dominates a given outbreak [ 84 , 53 , 64 ] . In the following three
chapters, the performance of Wolbachia in reducing dengue when more than
one dengue serotype circulates in the population is investigated.

### 5.4 Summary

-   [wide=0pt,labelwidth = 1.3333em, labelsep = 0.3333em, leftmargin = ]

-   We conducted multiple introductions of a single dengue serotype to
    investigate the performance of Wolbachia in reducing dengue
    incidence.

-   When dengue is not endemic, timing of imported cases determines the
    likelihood of an outbreak (Sections 5.2.1 and 5.2.4 , see Figures
    5.2 and 5.5 ).

-   We found that the time window in which outbreak occurs has been
    reduced by up to six weeks in the presence of Wolbachia -carrying
    mosquitoes (Section 5.2.1 , Figure 5.2 ).

-   A reduction of 80% in dengue incidence can be obtained when the
    strength of seasonality and the transmission rates are around
    0.02–0.3 and 0.08–0.12, respectively (Sections 5.2.2 and 5.2.3 , see
    Figures 5.3 and 5.4 ).

## Part 2: Two Dengue Serotypes

In this part of the thesis, the performance of the Wolbachia
intervention when two dengue serotypes circulate is studied. In
addition, the effects of symmetric and asymmetric epidemiological
characteristics on Wolbachia performance in reducing dengue incidence
are explored. This part comprises Chapters 6 – 8 , and the results are
summarised below.

### Summary

-   [wide=0pt,labelwidth = 1.3333em, labelsep = 0.3333em, leftmargin = ]

-   Two-serotype dengue models in the absence and presence of Wolbachia
    -carrying mosquitoes are developed (Chapter 6 , Equations ( 6.3 )–(
    6.14 ) and  ( 6.24 )–( 6.39 )).

-   The procedure for simulation is the same as that in Chapter 5 ,
    except here the dengue serotype being introduced varies according to
    the scenario of dengue introductions (Section 7.2 ).

-   Different disease introduction scenarios are explored and the
    results show that varying the disease introduction scenario does not
    affect Wolbachia performance in reducing dengue incidence, with up
    to 80% reduction in human dengue cases (Chapter 7 , Sections 7.3.1
    and 7.3.2 ).

-   Although the antibody-dependent enhancement parameter affects the
    performance of Wolbachia in reducing dengue incidence, the
    transmission probability remains the key parameter regulating the
    dengue dynamics, and, hence, Wolbachia performance in reducing
    dengue incidence (Chapters 7 and 8 ).

-   When one serotype is more transmissible, that serotype will dominate
    the primary infections, and the secondary infections will be
    dominated by the less transmissible serotype. The performance of
    Wolbachia in reducing dengue infection caused by the more
    transmissible serotype subsequently declines (Section 8.2.2 ).

-   The proportional reduction in secondary infections due to the
    Wolbachia intervention is higher than that for primary infections
    (Chapters 7 and 8 ).

## Chapter 6 Mathematical Modelling of Two Dengue Serotypes dengue***The
mathematical models presented here are part of the manuscript that has
been submitted for publication as M.Z. Ndii, D. Allingham, R. I.
Hickson, K. Glass. The effect of Wolbachia on dengue dynamics in the
presence of multiple serotypes of dengue: symmetric and asymmetric
epidemiological characteristics.

In order to investigate the performance of Wolbachia in reducing dengue
incidence when more than one dengue serotype circulates, we develop
two-serotype models for dengue in the absence and presence of Wolbachia
-carrying mosquitoes. In this chapter, we present a full derivation of
these models and explain their important features. In Chapters 7 and 8
we use our models to study the effects of symmetric and asymmetric
epidemiological characteristics of the serotypes on dengue transmission
dynamics.

### 6.1 Model Formulation

In these models, human and mosquito populations are assumed to be
well-mixed and homogenous, and we include two serotypes of dengue. The
ratio between male and female mosquitoes is 1.02:1 [ 7 ] . For
simplicity, we assume that the numbers of male and female mosquitoes are
equal, that is, @xmath and @xmath . Subscripts @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
denote humans, non- Wolbachia and Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes,
respectively. Superscripts @xmath and @xmath denote serotypes @xmath or
@xmath . This chapter is organised as follows. First, we present the
formulation of the model in the absence of Wolbachia , and then the
model in the presence of Wolbachia . Finally, we remind the reader of
the relationships between and the values of several important parameters
for the models.

#### 6.1.1 Model in the Absence of Wolbachia

A two-serotype dengue model in the absence of Wolbachia -carrying
mosquitoes is formulated. This model is an extension of the single
serotype dengue model in the absence of Wolbachia -carrying mosquito
population given in Equations ( 3.1 )–( 3.8 ) on page 3.1 . The model
comprises human and non- Wolbachia mosquito populations, and the
schematic representation of the model is given in Figure 6.1 .
Superscripts @xmath and @xmath denote dengue serotypes, where @xmath and
@xmath .

The human population is divided into 14 different classes:

-   Susceptible to all serotypes, @xmath .

-   Exposed and infectious with serotype @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
    respectively.

-   Temporarily immune to all serotypes, but previously infected by
    serotype @xmath , @xmath .

-   Susceptible to serotype @xmath and previously infected by serotype
    @xmath , @xmath .

-   Exposed and infectious to serotype @xmath and previously infected by
    serotype @xmath , @xmath and @xmath respectively.

-   Recovered from all serotypes, @xmath .

The total human population is then given by the equation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

The non- Wolbachia mosquito population is divided into six compartments:

-   Mosquitoes in the aquatic stage, @xmath .

-   Susceptible, @xmath .

-   Exposed to either serotype, @xmath .

-   Infectious with either serotype, @xmath .

The mosquitoes remain infectious throughout their lifetime, hence no
recovered class for mosquitoes is required. We also assume that the
mosquitoes are never co-infected with both serotypes. The total
population of non- Wolbachia mosquitoes, @xmath , is given by the
equation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The model is governed by the following system of differential equations

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.3)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.4)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.5)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.6)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.7)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.8)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.9)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.10)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.11)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.12)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.13)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.14)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Humans are born susceptible at rate @xmath and then exposed to dengue
after being bitten by non- Wolbachia infectious mosquitoes at rate
@xmath , which is governed by the equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath is the biting rate of non- Wolbachia mosquitoes, @xmath is
the transmission probability from non- Wolbachia mosquitoes with
serotype @xmath to humans, and @xmath is the total human population,
given in Equation 6.1 . The transmission probability between humans and
non- Wolbachia mosquitoes is assumed to be the same, and is denoted by
@xmath .

Exposed individuals progress to the infectious class at rate @xmath ,
and then to the temporary immunity class at rate @xmath . After spending
@xmath time units in the temporary immunity class, they become
susceptible to the other serotype @xmath , where @xmath . They may then
become exposed to dengue after being bitten by non- Wolbachia mosquitoes
carrying dengue serotype @xmath at rate

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Following re-exposure, they become infectious at rate @xmath , and
recover from the secondary infection at rate @xmath . We assume that
dengue is not fatal, so that humans die only at the natural death rate,
@xmath . As explained in Section 2.1.1 , fatality due to the severe
forms of dengue is only 1% in developed nations and we focus on the
difference in dengue cases in the presence versus absence of Wolbachia
-carrying mosquitoes, so use this simplification.

Non- Wolbachia aquatic mosquitoes are produced when non- Wolbachia
female @xmath and male @xmath mosquitoes mate. The growth of the aquatic
mosquito population is limited by the carrying capacity @xmath , through
the inclusion of the term:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

As the ratio between males and females is around 1.02:1 [ 7 ] , we
assume that there are equal populations of male and female mosquitoes,
@xmath . Therefore, Equation 6.17 is reduced to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Non- Wolbachia aquatic mosquitoes become adult susceptible mosquitoes at
rate @xmath . The susceptible mosquitoes are infected with dengue after
biting infectious humans with either primary or secondary infections at
rate

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath is the antibody-dependent enhancement of serotype @xmath ,
which is higher than one since infectious individuals with a secondary
infection have a higher viral load, and hence, a higher transmission
rate. The exposed mosquitoes become infectious at rate @xmath . The
death rate of adult mosquitoes is sinusoidally forced according to the
equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is average death rate, @xmath is the amplitude of
seasonality and @xmath is a phase shift as also done in Section 3.1 .

#### 6.1.2 Model in the Presence of Wolbachia

In this section, a two-serotype dengue model in the presence of
Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes is formulated. The model is an extension
of the model in the absence of Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes given in
Equations ( 6.3 )–( 6.14 ) of the previous section. The flowchart for
this model is given in Figure 6.2 . The two-serotype dengue model in the
presence of Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes is governed by Equations (
6.24 )–( 6.39 ).

The model comprises human, non- Wolbachia and Wolbachia -carrying
mosquito populations. The human and non- Wolbachia mosquito compartments
are the same as in the model in the absence of Wolbachia -carrying
mosquitoes. The population of Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes is grouped
into six compartments, which are mosquitoes in the aquatic stage, @xmath
, susceptible, @xmath , exposed to either serotype @xmath , @xmath , and
infectious with either serotype @xmath , @xmath . The total population
of Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the total population of non- Wolbachia mosquitoes is given in
Equation ( 6.2 ).

Unlike in the model in the absence of Wolbachia , susceptible humans are
exposed to dengue after being bitten by either infectious non- Wolbachia
or Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes, that is, at a rate governed by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath is the transmission probability from Wolbachia -carrying
mosquitoes to humans. The parameter @xmath is the successful biting rate
of Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes, where @xmath since Wolbachia reduces
the biting rate [ 89 ] . Exposed individuals progress to infectious,
temporary immunity and secondary susceptible classes at the same rates
as in model in the absence of Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes.
Individuals who were previously infected by serotype @xmath are
re-infected by dengue serotype @xmath at rate

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . Infectious individuals then move to secondary infectious
and recovered classes at the same rates as in the model in the absence
of Wolbachia . All humans die at the natural death rate, @xmath .

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.24)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.25)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.26)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.27)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.28)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.29)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.30)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.31)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.32)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.33)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.34)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.35)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.36)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.37)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.38)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.39)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

In the presence of Wolbachia , the effects of cytoplasmic
incompatibility (CI) on mosquito reproduction are included in the model.
Non- Wolbachia mosquitoes are produced when non- Wolbachia females and
males mate, and the growth of the aquatic non- Wolbachia mosquito
population is limited by the carrying capacity, @xmath , through the
expression

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

As we assume that there are equal numbers of male and female mosquitoes,
@xmath and @xmath , this expression reduces to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes are reproduced after Wolbachia -carrying
females mate with either Wolbachia -carrying or non- Wolbachia males,
according to the expression

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

which, can be similarly reduced to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

Non- Wolbachia mosquitoes in the aquatic stage mature into susceptible
non- Wolbachia mosquitoes at rate @xmath . Wolbachia -carrying
mosquitoes in the aquatic stage mature into susceptible mosquitoes at
rate @xmath , with @xmath of them becoming Wolbachia -carrying
mosquitoes and the remaining @xmath becoming non- Wolbachia mosquitoes.
Mosquitoes in the aquatic stage die at rate @xmath . Susceptible
mosquitoes are exposed to dengue after biting infectious humans with
either primary or secondary infections at rates

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

for Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes and @xmath as given in Equation (
6.19 ) for non- Wolbachia mosquitoes. The transmission probability from
humans to Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes is assumed to be the same as
that between humans and non- Wolbachia mosquitoes, which is represented
by @xmath . The exposed mosquitoes progress to the infectious class at
rate @xmath for non- Wolbachia mosquitoes and @xmath for Wolbachia
-carrying mosquitoes.

### 6.2 Parameter Descriptions

Parameter descriptions, values and sources are given in Table 6.1 . Most
of parameters are the same as in Chapter 4 , but we remind the reader of
the relationships between and the values of several important
parameters. The transmission probabilities between humans and non-
Wolbachia mosquitoes, and from humans to Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes
are assumed to be equal and are represented by @xmath . However, the
transmission probability from Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes to humans,
@xmath , is lower than @xmath since Wolbachia reduces the level of
dengue virus in the salivary glands of the mosquito. The biting and
reproductive rates of Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes are reduced, and
hence @xmath and @xmath , respectively. Furthermore, because Wolbachia
reduces the mosquito lifespan, the death rate of the Wolbachia -carrying
mosquitoes is higher than that of non- Wolbachia mosquitoes ( @xmath ).

The period of temporary immunity is taken to be half a year or 6 months
[ 96 ] , hence @xmath day @xmath . As individuals with secondary
infections have higher viral loads, this leads to higher transmission
rates. Therefore, the antibody-dependent enhancement, @xmath , is set to
@xmath [ 42 ] .

### 6.3 Summary

-   [wide=0pt,labelwidth = 1.3333em, labelsep = 0.3333em, leftmargin = ]

-   Two-serotype dengue models in the absence and presence of Wolbachia
    -carrying mosquitoes are developed in Sections 6.1.1 and 6.1.2 ,
    Equations ( 6.3 )–( 6.14 ) and ( 6.24 )–( 6.39 ), respectively.

-   In the absence of Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes, individuals are
    infected after being bitten by infectious non- Wolbachia mosquitoes.

-   In the presence of Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes, individuals are
    infected after being bitten by infectious non- Wolbachia or
    Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes.

-   Antibody dependent enhancement (ADE) is included, where the ADE is
    represented by @xmath . Antibody dependent enhancement increases
    infectivity of individuals with secondary infections. This can lead
    to more severe forms of dengue.

-   The temporary immunity class is included in the model. Individuals
    in this class have recovered from primary infections and have a
    temporary immunity to all serotypes of dengue. They later become
    susceptible to the serotypes with which they have not previously
    been infected.

## Chapter 7 Two serotypes with symmetric epidemiological
characteristics ***The results of scenario one form part of the
manuscript that has been submitted for publication as M.Z. Ndii, D.
Allingham, R.I. Hickson, K. Glass. The effect of Wolbachia on dengue
dynamics in the presence of two serotypes of dengue: symmetric and
asymmetric epidemiological characteristics.

In Chapters 4 – 5 , we studied the effect of Wolbachia on dengue
dynamics when a single serotype of dengue was circulating. We considered
scenarios when dengue cases were introduced into the population once,
and multiple times. In this chapter and the next, we use the
mathematical models formulated in Chapter 6 to study the effect of
Wolbachia on dengue dynamics when two serotypes of dengue are
circulating, assuming first symmetric and then asymmetric
epidemiological characteristics of the serotypes. The aim of this
chapter is to investigate the effectiveness of Wolbachia in reducing
dengue transmission for two serotypes with symmetric epidemiological
characteristics under different disease introduction scenarios.

### 7.1 Introduction

Several mathematical models have been developed to investigate dengue
dynamics in the absence of Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes when more than
one dengue serotype circulates [ 26 , 21 , 12 , 1 , 65 , 50 , 3 , 42 ,
100 ] . However, these models did not consider differing disease
introduction scenarios, a factor which can influence disease
transmission dynamics. In addition, to the best of our knowledge, no
modelling studies have been conducted to investigate the effects of
Wolbachia on dengue dynamics when more than one dengue serotype
circulates under different disease introduction scenarios.

Understanding the effect of different disease introduction scenarios on
Wolbachia performance in reducing dengue incidence is of importance,
because the exposure of the population to different dengue serotypes may
alter the disease dynamics.

In this chapter, we assume that the two circulating dengue serotypes
have identical epidemiological characteristics (the symmetric case).

### 7.2 Scenarios of Dengue Introduction

Deciding on an exact strategy for the introduction of dengue serotypes
into the population is a challenging task because individuals with a
particular dengue serotype enter the population at irregular intervals [
53 ] . Furthermore, the dominant dengue serotype in any one location
varies over time. For example in Thailand, DEN3 was common during
2002–2004 and 2008–2010, whereas DEN4 was common during 2003–2008 [ 53 ]
.

Here we consider two disease introduction scenarios as illustrated in
Figures 7.1 and 7.2 . In the first scenario, individuals carrying dengue
serotype 1 are introduced weekly over a one year period, and individuals
carrying another dengue serotype are introduced weekly over an
additional one year period (Figure 7.1 ). In the second scenario,
individuals carrying dengue serotype 1 are introduced weekly for a
duration of two years, and then individuals carrying another dengue
serotype are introduced weekly over an additional two year period
(Figure 7.2 ). These patterns are then repeated for many years.
Throughout this chapter and in Chapter 8 , serotypes 1 and 2 refer to
two different dengue serotypes, but do not specifically refer to DEN1
and DEN2.

We use simulations to investigate the effect of Wolbachia when two
dengue serotypes circulate under two disease introduction scenarios. Our
simulations are conducted in the same way as that presented in Chapter 5
, Page 5.1.1 , except for differences in the dengue serotypes, depending
on the disease introduction scenario. The effects of the
antibody-dependent enhancement rate ( @xmath ) and the transmission
probability ( @xmath ) on Wolbachia performance in reducing dengue are
examined for all scenarios.

The effectiveness of the Wolbachia intervention is measured by comparing
the relative differences in the outbreak sizes in the absence and
presence of Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes, which is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath is the final number of dengue cases in the human population,
with subscripts to denote in the absence (A) and presence (P) of
Wolbachia . In order to ensure that the two disease introduction
scenarios are comparable, a four-year outbreak size is used to calculate
the proportional reduction in dengue due to Wolbachia . This gives two
outbreaks of dengue caused by each serotype in both disease introduction
scenarios as shown in Figure 7.3 .

### 7.3 Results

The performance of Wolbachia in reducing dengue is explored under two
disease introduction scenarios. The antibody-dependent enhancement (ADE)
and the transmission probabilities for the two serotypes are set to be
equal. That is, @xmath and @xmath . The parameter @xmath is the
transmission probability between humans and non- Wolbachia mosquitoes
and from humans to Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes. The transmission
probability from Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes to humans is set to
@xmath , because Wolbachia reduces the level of dengue virus in
mosquitoes [ 11 , 67 , 41 , 94 , 29 , 110 ] and hence reduces
transmission.

#### 7.3.1 First Dengue Introduction Scenario

When we explore the case where the dengue serotypes have the same ADE,
we find that as the ADE increases, the overall outbreak size and the
outbreak sizes for the primary and secondary infections in the absence
and presence of Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes increase. In addition,
the proportional reductions in the overall numbers of dengue cases, and
the reductions in the numbers of primary and secondary infections due to
the Wolbachia intervention decrease (Figure 7.4 ). The proportional
reduction in the incidence of secondary infections is higher than that
of primary infections, with the maximum reduction in secondary
infections found to be approximately 78%, compared to a reduction in
primary infections of around 45%.

When we vary the ADE and the transmission probability simultaneously, we
find that the transmission probability has the greater effect on the
performance of Wolbachia in reducing dengue incidence (see Figures 7.5 –
7.7 ). Furthermore, lower transmission probability values do not result
in outbreaks. In the presence of Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes, the
range of transmission probabilities for which epidemics do not occur is
larger than that in the absence of Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes (for
overall cases, it is around 0–0.1 in the absence of Wolbachia , compared
to 0–0.18 in the presence of Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes). This means
that the presence of Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes raises the threshold
at which epidemics occur. The maximum overall reduction in dengue
incidence due to Wolbachia is around 70-80%, which occurs when the
transmission probability lies in the range 0.14–0.22. In this range of
transmission probabilities, epidemics either do not occur or the
outbreak size is smaller when Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes are present
(Figures 7.5 ). Moreover, as the transmission probability increases, the
reduction in secondary infections due to Wolbachia is greater than that
of primary infections (Figures 7.6 and 7.7 ). This reduction in
secondary infections can reach up to 90%.

#### 7.3.2 Second Dengue Introduction Scenario of Dengue

The performance of Wolbachia in reducing dengue in the second scenario
of dengue introduction is similar to that in the first scenario. An
increase in the ADE rate leads to an increase in the outbreak size of
dengue infections in both in the absence and in the presence of
Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes (Figure 7.8 ). When the ADE is higher,
the level of reduction in dengue incidence caused by Wolbachia slightly
decreases. The reduction in the number of secondary infections is higher
than that of primary infections, with the level of overall reduction and
reduction in primary and secondary infections similar to those found for
the first scenario of disease introduction.

When the ADE and the transmission probability are varied simultaneously,
we find that the transmission probability has more impact on the
performance of Wolbachia in reducing dengue incidence than the ADE. The
presence of Wolbachia raises the threshold at which epidemics occur (see
Figures 7.9 – 7.11 ). The maximum overall reduction in dengue reaches
80% for a similar range of transmission probabilities (around 0.14-0.22)
to the one found for the first disease introduction scenario (Figure 7.9
). The effects of ADE become stronger for higher values of the
transmission probability. The proportional reduction in secondary
infections is higher than that for primary infections. The maximum
reduction in primary infections is 80%, compared to more than 90% for
secondary infections.

### 7.4 Discussion and Conclusions

In this chapter, we analysed the effect of Wolbachia on dengue dynamics
under different disease introduction scenarios, when two dengue
serotypes with symmetric epidemiological characteristics are
circulating. We found that the benefits of Wolbachia are similar
regardless of the disease introduction scenario. Since the time of
introduction of a particular dengue serotype into the population is very
uncertain, it is not easy to predict the dominant serotype before an
epidemic occurs. Predicting the dominant dengue serotype before an
epidemic takes off may be important from the public health perspective
as the presence of different serotypes may change the severity of the
epidemic [ 74 , 87 , 92 ] . However, our findings suggest that
uncertainty around dengue serotypes is not a hurdle for the
implementation of the Wolbachia intervention. Although all dengue
serotypes circulate in the population, and the times at which
individuals infected with different dengue serotypes enter the
population are irregular, Wolbachia will still reduce the number of
dengue cases. This is particularly true for secondary infections which
can result in more severe forms of dengue.

Our results for both disease introduction scenarios show that the
outbreak size increases as the transmission probability increases.
Furthermore, we found that the ADE does not have a noticeable impact on
the effectiveness of Wolbachia unless the transmission probability is
high. The maximum overall reduction in dengue cases is obtained for
transmission probabilities in the range 0.14-0.22, and a considerable
reduction in secondary infections of 70-90% is achieved. However, if the
transmission probability is high, reductions in dengue incidence of only
20-40% are likely. This implies that Wolbachia will be most effective in
reducing dengue transmission if dengue serotypes are not strongly
transmissible, a similar finding to the results of Chapter 5 for a
single serotype. As the transmission probability is one of the
parameters that regulates the basic reproduction number, our results are
consistent with the finding by Hughes and Britton [ 43 ] and Ferguson et
al [ 28 ] that Wolbachia will be effective if the basic reproduction
number is not too high. Our finding that differences in the ADE levels
between serotypes have much less impact on dengue dynamics than
differences in the transmission probability indicates that a better
understanding of serotype-specific transmission probabilities may be
needed to optimize the delivery of the Wolbachia intervention.

In order to confirm our results, two further scenarios of dengue
introductions were explored: introducing individuals carrying serotype 1
for the first six months and individuals carrying another dengue
serotype for a further six months, and introducing individuals carrying
dengue serotypes 1 and 2 at the same time. We found similar results to
those presented in this chapter.

Research has shown that the epidemiological characteristics of dengue
serotypes may be different [ 92 , 4 , 79 , 87 ] . Although our results
in this chapter, assuming symmetric epidemiological characteristics,
provide insights into the effectiveness of Wolbachia in reducing human
dengue incidence in the presence of more than one dengue serotype, an
analysis of asymmetric epidemiological characteristics is of importance
to further our understanding of Wolbachia performance in reducing human
dengue incidence. The effects of Wolbachia on dengue transmission
dynamics when the epidemiological characteristics between serotypes
differ are explored in the next chapter.

### 7.5 Summary

-   [wide=0pt,labelwidth = 1.3333em, labelsep = 0.3333em, leftmargin = ]

-   We investigate the effect of Wolbachia in reducing dengue incidence
    under different disease introduction scenarios when the
    antibody-dependent enhancement (ADE) and the transmission
    probability of serotypes are the same.

-   We found that different disease introduction scenarios do not affect
    the performance of Wolbachia in reducing dengue incidence (Sections
    7.3.1 and 7.3.2 ).

-   The level of ADE does not have a noticeable effect on dengue
    transmission dynamics (Sections 7.3.1 and 7.3.2 , see Figures 7.4 –
    7.11 ).

-   The proportional reduction in secondary infections (up to 90%) is
    higher than that in the primary infections (up to 80%; Sections
    7.3.1 and 7.3.2 , see Figures 7.4 – 7.11 ).

## Chapter 8 Two Serotypes with Asymmetric Epidemiological
Characteristics***Results and discussions in this chapter form part of
the manuscript that has been submitted for publication as M.Z. Ndii, D.
Allingham, R.I. Hickson, K. Glass. The effect of Wolbachia on dengue
dynamics in the presence of two serotypes of dengue: symmetric and
asymmetric epidemiological characteristics.

In the previous chapter, we studied the effect of Wolbachia on dengue
transmission dynamics under different disease introduction scenarios
when the epidemiological characteristics of the serotypes were assumed
to be symmetric. In this chapter, we study the effect of Wolbachia on
dengue transmission dynamics when the epidemiological characteristics of
the serotypes are asymmetric. That is, we explore the case where one
serotype is more transmissible or has a higher ADE than the other.

### 8.1 Introduction

Research has shown that the characteristics of dengue serotypes may be
different [ 92 , 4 , 79 , 87 , 74 , 27 ] . For example, the severity of
disease varies between serotypes [ 92 ] , DEN1 may result in more severe
symptoms than DEN4 [ 74 ] , and infections with DEN1 may result in
higher viraemia levels than infections with DEN2 [ 87 ] . These
differences may affect the performance of Wolbachia in reducing dengue
transmission.

Modelling studies have investigated the effects of asymmetric
epidemiological characteristics on dengue dynamics in the absence of
Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes [ 65 , 50 ] . However, little has been
done to investigate the effects of asymmetric epidemiological
characteristics of dengue serotypes on the performance of Wolbachia in
reducing dengue transmission. In this chapter, we use the mathematical
models formulated in Chapter 6 to study the effects of Wolbachia in
reducing dengue incidence when the epidemiological characteristics of
the two circulating serotypes differ, Equations ( 6.3 )–( 6.14 ) and
Equations ( 6.24 )–( 6.39 ). The characteristics of interest are the
antibody-dependent enhancement parameter, @xmath , and the transmission
probability, @xmath .

The equations from Chapter 6 describing the forces of infection for
humans, non- Wolbachia mosquitoes and Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes
are, respectively,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath is the transmission probability of serotype @xmath between
humans and non- Wolbachia mosquitoes, and from humans to Wolbachia
-carrying mosquitoes. The parameter @xmath is the ADE for serotype
@xmath , and the parameters @xmath and @xmath are the biting rates of
non- Wolbachia and Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes, respectively. The
parameter @xmath is the transmission probability from Wolbachia
-carrying mosquitoes with serotype @xmath to humans, and it is set to
@xmath . In our investigations, the ADE and the transmission probability
for serotype 2 are set to be higher than those for serotype 1 as
follows:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath            (8.4)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------

Here @xmath [ 42 ] and @xmath [ 69 ] . The parameter @xmath varies
between 0 and 1.9 ( @xmath ) and the parameter @xmath varies between 0
and 0.2387 ( @xmath ). Thus @xmath and @xmath , which are reasonable
ranges for ADE and the transmission probability [ 42 , 6 ] . Therefore,
the force of infection for humans, non- Wolbachia mosquitoes and
Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes of serotype 2 is higher than that of
serotype 1:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since, as we discovered in Chapter 7 , disease introduction scenarios do
not appear to influence the performance of Wolbachia in reducing dengue
transmission, only one disease introduction scenario is used in this
analysis. That is, each dengue serotype is introduced weekly in
alternate years. Although the strategy of dengue introductions is
different, the total outbreak sizes caused by different serotypes were
similar for both scenarios. This means that although @xmath is
different, the outbreak size caused by each dengue serotype would be
similar for different scenarios of dengue introductions. Therefore, in
this analysis, we use the scenario where each dengue serotype is
introduced weekly in alternate years.

The outbreak size over two years is used to quantify the proportional
reduction in dengue incidence due to Wolbachia as it includes the sizes
of the outbreaks caused by both serotypes. The four-year outbreak size
used in the preceding chapter is unnecessary here because we are not
comparing the performance of Wolbachia in reducing dengue under
different disease introduction scenarios. The simulation procedures used
here are the same as those used in the previous chapters (Chapters 5 and
7 ).

### 8.2 Results

In this section, the results of simulations exploring the effects of
asymmetry in the antibody-dependent enhancement (ADE) (Section 8.2.1 )
and the transmission probabilities (Section 8.2.2 ) on Wolbachia
performance in reducing dengue incidence are presented. A discussion and
conclusion appears in Section 8.3 .

#### 8.2.1 Effect of Asymmetric Antibody-Dependent Enhancement

In our simulations for this section, the ADE for serotype 2 is varied
and that of serotype 1 is fixed.

When the dengue serotypes have different ADE, an increase in the ADE for
serotype 2 leads to slight increases in the overall outbreak size and
the outbreak size due to primary and secondary infections in the absence
and presence of Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes. The proportional
reduction in dengue incidence caused by Wolbachia also decreases (Figure
8.1 ). The proportional reduction in secondary infections (73–78%) is
higher than that of primary infections (40–45%), and the overall
reduction in dengue incidence varies between 53% and 58%.

When looking at the effects of each dengue serotype on the performance
of Wolbachia in reducing dengue incidence, we see that the serotype with
the higher ADE (serotype 2) contributes more to the primary infections,
whereas the serotype with the lower ADE (serotype 1) contributes more to
the secondary infections (see Figure 8.2 ). As the ADE for serotype 2
increases, the overall outbreak size and the outbreak size for primary
infections due to serotype 2 in the absence of Wolbachia increases,
whereas the outbreak size for secondary infections due to serotype 2 in
the absence of Wolbachia decreases. The same behaviour is found in the
presence of Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes, except that the outbreak
size for secondary infections with serotype 2 slightly increases. On the
other hand, as the ADE for serotype 2 increases, the overall outbreak
size for serotype 1 in the absence of Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes
remains constant because the decrease in the number of primary
infections is offset by the slight increase in the number of secondary
infections. Similar behaviour is found in the presence of Wolbachia
-carrying mosquitoes. Moreover, as the ADE for serotype 2 increases, the
performance of Wolbachia in reducing the number of dengue cases due to
serotype 2 decreases, though the reduction in the secondary infections
(70–78%) is higher than that in the primary infections (40–45%). The
performance of Wolbachia in reducing dengue infections due to serotype 1
is similar to its performance against infections caused by serotype 2.

#### 8.2.2 Effect of Asymmetric Transmission Probabilities

If the transmission probability of serotype 2 is higher than that of
serotype 1, the overall outbreak size and the outbreak sizes for primary
and secondary infections in the absence and presence of Wolbachia
-carrying mosquitoes increases, and the proportional reduction in
overall, primary and secondary cases due to Wolbachia decreases (see
Figure 8.3 ). The overall reduction varies between 31% and 58%, and the
reduction in primary and secondary infections decreases from 45% to 13%
and 78% to 60%, respectively.

A strong effect on the Wolbachia performance in reducing dengue caused
by differences in the transmission probabilities between dengue
serotypes is observed (Figure 8.4 ). Generally, the more transmissible
serotype (serotype 2) will dominate the primary infections, while the
less transmissible serotype (serotype 1) will dominate the secondary
infections. The overall outbreak size of dengue caused by serotype 1
remains constant as the decrease in the number of primary infections is
balanced by the increase in the number of secondary infections.
Interestingly, in the presence of Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes,
although the number of primary infections due to serotype 1 decreases,
the number of secondary infections due to serotype 2 slightly increases,
but the latter is still lower than the former. Furthermore, the results
show that the reduction in secondary infections is higher than that in
primary infections (see Figure 8.4 ). Moreover, Wolbachia can still
reduce the number of dengue cases caused by the more transmissible
serotype (serotype 2).

### 8.3 Discussion and Conclusions

In this chapter, we investigated the effect of asymmetric
epidemiological characteristics on the performance of Wolbachia in
reducing dengue incidence. Although ADE influences the performance of
Wolbachia in reducing dengue incidence, the transmission probability is
still the most influential parameter. The results are consistent with
our previous findings for dengue serotypes with symmetric
epidemiological characteristics. In the simulations conducted for this
chapter, the reduction in secondary dengue infections due to Wolbachia
is higher than that for primary infections.

As the ADE of serotype 2 is varied, the overall outbreak sizes in the
absence and presence of Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes increases.
Furthermore, the reduction in primary and secondary infections due to
Wolbachia declines slightly as the ADE of serotype 2 ( @xmath )
increases. This implies that ADE does not have a large impact on the
performance of Wolbachia in reducing dengue. When looking at the effect
on individual serotypes, as the ADE of serotype 2 increases, the
outbreak sizes of serotype 2 primary infections increase and the
incidence of serotype 1 primary infections decreases. Serotype 2
contributes more to primary infections than serotype 1 as the ADE of
serotype 2 increases. Because more individual humans are primarily
infected by serotype 2, secondary infections are dominated by
serotype 1. If there are two serotypes circulating in the population and
more individuals have primary infections with one of the serotypes, then
it is likely that more individuals have secondary infections with the
other serotype.

Interestingly, we find that although the number of primary infections
due to serotype 1 decreases in the presence of Wolbachia -carrying
mosquitoes, the number of secondary infections caused by serotype 2
increases slightly. However, the number of secondary infections caused
by serotype 2 is still lower than the number of primary infections
caused by serotype 1. This may be for the following reasons. As the ADE
of serotype 2 increases, there are more individuals primarily infected
with serotype 2 than serotype 1. The higher number of primary infections
with serotype 2 affects the force of infection, resulting in a greater
likelihood of secondary infection with serotype 2 for individuals
previously infected with serotype 1. Hence, as the ADE for serotype 2
increases, the number of secondary infections caused by serotype 2
increases. This implies that there is a complex interaction between
variables regulating the force of infections. Note that similar
behaviour is also found when varying the transmission probability of
serotype 2.

A strong effect on the performance of Wolbachia in reducing dengue
transmission is found when the transmission probability of one of the
serotypes is greatly different from the transmission probability of the
other. When the transmission probability of one serotype is higher than
that of the other serotype, the number of primary infections caused by
that serotype (the serotype with higher transmission probability (
@xmath )) is increased and secondary infections are more likely to be
caused by the other serotype (the serotype with the lower transmission
probability ( @xmath )). This is biologically realistic because when
@xmath , more individuals are primarily infected with serotype 2 and
thus they are more likely to be secondarily infected with serotype 1.
Furthermore, Wolbachia will be less effective in in reducing the overall
number of dengue cases caused by the more transmissible serotype.
Although asymmetry in the transmission probabilities can lead to a
higher number of secondary infections due to the less transmissible
serotype, this incidence can be reduced by up to 78% with the
implementation of the Wolbachia intervention.

Our findings suggest that if the more transmissible serotype is
responsible for more severe illness, then reducing the incidence of
primary infections may be of concern. This is because the more
transmissible serotype will cause more primary infections. Although
secondary infections can lead to more severe forms of dengue, paying
attention to primary infections is also important given that the level
of reduction in dengue primary infections due to the Wolbachia
intervention is not as great as the reduction in secondary infections.
Furthermore, our finding that differences in antibody-dependent
enhancement rates between serotypes have a much smaller effect on dengue
dynamics than differences in the transmission probabilities indicates
that a better understanding of serotype-specific transmission
probabilities may be needed in order to develop strategies to optimize
the delivery of Wolbachia interventions.

Further investigation of the variables that regulate the force of
infections is needed to advance our understanding of Wolbachia
performance in reducing dengue incidence. A further exploration of
serotype-specific effects on the performance of Wolbachia in reducing
dengue incidence is one possible avenue for future exploration. Ferguson
et al. [ 28 ] estimated the basic reproduction numbers for the four
dengue serotypes. If the data becomes available, one could find similar
estimates for the parameters that govern the force of infection or the
basic reproduction number. Our theoretical explorations provide insights
into the performance of Wolbachia when two dengue serotypes circulate in
the population, and, in particular, when the epidemiological
characteristics between serotypes differ. The results are consistent
with our findings for a single serotype presented in part 1 of this
thesis. It may be of future interest to explore Wolbachia performance
when more than two dengue serotypes circulate.

### 8.4 Summary

-   [wide=0pt,labelwidth = 1.3333em, labelsep = 0.3333em, leftmargin = ]

-   We investigate the performance of Wolbachia in reducing dengue
    incidence when the level of antibody-dependent enhancement (ADE) and
    the transmission probability of dengue serotypes are different
    (Sections 8.2.1 and 8.2.2 ).

-   When a dengue serotype has higher ADE or transmission probability,
    that serotype will contribute more to primary infections, whereas
    the other serotype will contribute more to secondary infections
    (Sections 8.2.1 and 8.2.2 , see Figures 8.2 and 8.4 ).

-   The proportional reduction in secondary infections is higher than
    that in primary infections when one serotype is more transmissible
    that the other serotype (around 60–78% compared to around 13–45%;
    see Section 8.2.2 ) or has higher ADE than the other serotype
    (73–78% compared to 40–45%; see Section 8.2.1 ) .

## Chapter 9 Conclusions and Future Directions

The central question addressed by this thesis is “to what extent can
Wolbachia reduce dengue transmission?”. We have approached this question
by formulating novel mathematical models for populations in which one
and two dengue serotypes circulate in the absence and presence of
Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes. The details of these mathematical models
are given in Chapter 3 (single serotype dengue models) and Chapter 6
(two-serotype dengue models). As discussed in Section 1.2 , the aims of
this thesis are to

1.  [wide=0pt,labelwidth = 1.3333em, labelsep = 0.3333em, leftmargin = ]

2.  Determine the level of reduction in dengue incidence caused by the
    presence of Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes.

3.   Explore the effects of seasonality and other important parameters
    on dengue transmission dynamics and the persistence of Wolbachia
    -carrying mosquitoes.

4.  Determine the effects of dengue introduction scenarios on the
    performance of Wolbachia in reducing dengue incidence.

5.  Investigate the effects of two dengue serotypes and dengue serotype
    characteristics on the performance of Wolbachia in reducing dengue
    incidence.

Our original results, presented in Chapters 3 – 8 , fulfil the aims of
this thesis as listed above. Aim 1 is satisfied in Chapters 4 , 5 , 7
and 8 . Aim 2 is satisfied in Chapter 4 . Aim 3 is satisfied in Chapters
5 and 7 , while Aim 4 is satisfied in Chapters 7 – 8 . A summary of the
original results contained in this thesis is given below in Section 9.1
.

### 9.1 Summary of the Results

The original findings discovered in this thesis can be grouped into two
parts: results which consider the circulation of a single dengue
serotype and results which consider the circulation of two dengue
serotypes.

Part 1 of this thesis (Chapters 3 - 5 ), is concerned with the
development of novel mathematical models for dengue transmission
dynamics where it is assumed that a single dengue serotype is
circulating in the population. Separate models are developed to consider
both the absence and presence of Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes. These
models are then used to analyse the effects of Wolbachia on dengue
transmission dynamics when dengue cases are introduced once and multiple
times.

When dengue cases are introduced into the population once, and Wolbachia
-carrying mosquitoes persist, a reduction in dengue incidence of up to
90% can be obtained. Furthermore, the choice of Wolbachia strain for
inoculation of the mosquitoes has a significant effect on the ability
for Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes to persist in competition with non-
Wolbachia mosquitoes. The WMel strain, which reduces the lifespan of the
mosquito by at most 10%, allows the Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes to
persist, whereas the WMelPop strain is unlikely to allow persistence
since it reduces the mosquito lifespan by up to 50%.

Cytoplasmic incompatibility, when considered in isolation from all other
physiological effects of Wolbachia on the mosquitoes, was found to
reduce the number of human dengue cases. When exploring the key
parameters for our models, we found the range of the ratios of
reproductive and death rates for adult non- Wolbachia mosquitoes which
allowed Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes to persist. Furthermore, the
transmission probability, the biting rate and the average death rate
were found to be the most influential parameters, the latter having a
negative relationship with the cumulative number of infectious
individuals. The results for the basic reproduction number, @xmath ,
show that Wolbachia reduces the number of days for which @xmath .

When investigating multiple introductions of dengue cases into the
population, we simulated weekly introductions of dengue cases into the
population throughout the year and over three month periods. We found
that Wolbachia reduces the potential length of the season in which
epidemics are likely to occur by up to six weeks, depending on the
strength of seasonality. The largest reduction in dengue incidence found
was around 80%, which is obtained when the strength of the seasonal
forcing is low. The efficacy of Wolbachia also depends on the
transmission rate, with the bacteria most effective in reducing dengue
incidence at moderate transmission rates ranging from 0.08–0.12. This is
consistent with fitted estimates for Cairns, Australia as given in
Chapter 4 .

In part 2 of the thesis (Chapters 6 – 8 ), the performance of Wolbachia
in reducing dengue incidence when two serotypes of dengue circulate in
the population is investigated.

When considering the case where epidemiological characteristics of these
serotypes are the same (the ‘symmetric case’), we found that varying the
disease introduction scenario does not affect dengue transmission
dynamics. Although the timing of dengue introductions is irregular and
is not easy to investigate, the results for the disease introduction
scenarios that we simulated suggest that the Wolbachia intervention can
be implemented, regardless of the disease introduction scenario.
Furthermore, the antibody-dependent enhancement rate does not noticeably
affect the impact of Wolbachia on dengue incidence unless the
transmission probability is high. A considerable reduction in secondary
infections of 60-80% is achieved through the Wolbachia intervention.

When the epidemiological characteristics of the dengue serotypes differ,
there is a shift towards greater numbers of primary infections of the
serotype with the higher enhancement rate or higher transmission
probability. Where only the antibody-dependent enhancement rate differs
between serotypes, we find relatively little decline in the
effectiveness of Wolbachia . However, if one serotype is more
transmissible than the other, Wolbachia is less effective in reducing
dengue cases caused by the more transmissible serotype. Although the
number of secondary infections caused by the less transmissible serotype
is higher, a reduction of around 78% in the number of secondary
infections can be obtained by the implementation of the Wolbachia
intervention.

### 9.2 Conclusions

In this thesis we sought to answer the question: “to what extent can
Wolbachia reduce dengue transmission?”.

We found that once mosquitoes carrying the Wolbachia bacterium persist,
a reduction in dengue incidence of up to 80% can be obtained in the
presence of one or two circulating dengue serotypes. A higher reduction
in the incidence of secondary infections can be obtained regardless of
the epidemiological characteristics of the serotypes. Different disease
introduction scenarios and levels of antibody-dependent enhancement in
secondary cases do not affect the performance of Wolbachia in reducing
dengue incidence. By contrast, differences in the transmission
probabilities of the serotypes have a much greater effect. If the
transmission probability is high, Wolbachia can reduce the number of
dengue cases by only around 20%-40%. Where serotypes have different
epidemiological characteristics, the more transmissible serotype will
dominate primary infections, and the less transmissible serotype will
dominate secondary infections.

Our findings suggest that Wolbachia should reduce the number of primary
dengue cases in areas with moderate transmission levels, and cause even
greater reductions in the incidence of secondary cases. Given the higher
risk of severe outcomes in secondary cases, Wolbachia has great
potential for improving public health.

### 9.3 Future Directions

The work contained in this thesis makes a significant contribution to
the current knowledge of dengue transmission dynamics and provides
evidence of the effectiveness of the Wolbachia intervention in reducing
dengue transmission. To advance our understanding of the performance of
Wolbachia in reducing dengue incidence, several possible directions are
open for study. These may utilise our work as a baseline.

1.  [wide=0pt,labelwidth = 1.3333em, labelsep = 0.3333em, leftmargin = ]

2.  In this thesis, deterministic mathematical models are formulated,
    which are appropriate for large population sizes. A stochastic
    approach could be used to further our understanding of the impact of
    small infected population sizes on dengue dynamics in the presence
    of Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes. Alternatively, a hybrid modelling
    approach, coupling deterministic and stochastic models could be
    used. In such an approach, a stochastic model would be used when the
    infected population becomes small, and a deterministic model when
    the infected population exceeds a certain threshold value.

3.  We found that the biting rate is one of the important parameters
    that regulates the transmission dynamics of dengue. In this thesis,
    the biting rate is assumed to be fixed. To further our understanding
    of the effect of the biting rate on dengue transmission dynamics in
    the presence of Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes, it may be of
    interest to explore variations in the biting rate of mosquitoes.
    Such variations could occur as mosquitoes get older and may have an
    impact on regulating the transmission dynamics of dengue.

4.  It may be of interest to explore the effect of feminisation of the
    population of Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes on the performance of
    Wolbachia in reducing dengue transmission. The release of more males
    than females seems to have an effect on the mosquito population
    dynamics [ 35 , 113 ] , and, hence, on dengue transmission dynamics.

5.  We define an “instantaneous basic reproduction number” using a
    formula for autonomous systems and replace the equilibrium mosquito
    population with a time-varying mosquito population. It may be
    interesting to derive the basic reproduction number for the full
    seasonally-dependent model, or use the concept proposed by Bacaer [
    8 ] to investigate the epidemic threshold.

6.  A different approach such as metapopulation modelling or
    integro-differential equations may be used to investigate the
    effects of human movements on dengue transmission dynamics.

## Appendix A Appendix Basic Reproduction Number

We derive the basic reproduction number for dimensionalised models. The
infected subsystem of the single serotype dengue model in the persence
of Wolbachia -carrying mosquitoes (Equations ( 3.33 )–( 3.44 )) is given
by

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.1)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.2)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.3)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.4)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.5)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.6)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

At the infection-free steady state, @xmath , and @xmath . For small
@xmath , the linearised infected subsystem is approximated by
Equations ( A.1 )–( A.6 ), with @xmath .

Let @xmath . We want to write the linearised infected subsystem in the
form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the transmission matrix, whose entries correspond to
transmission events, and @xmath is the transition matrix, whose entries
correspond to movement between the infected compartments including
deaths.

The transmission matrix @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are the number of mosquitoes with and without
Wolbachia . As mosquito populations vary seasonally, both of these are
functions of time. The transition matrix @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We next find the inverse of the transition matrix @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We multiply the transmission matrix and the inverse of transition matrix
to obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The spectral radius of the matrix @xmath is the basic reproduction
number, that is,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Equation ( A.7 ) gives the basic reproduction number in the presence of
Wolbachia . In the absence of Wolbachia , after setting all Wolbachia
-related parameters to zero, Equation A.7 is reduced to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The basic reproduction number found here can be considered to be an
instantaneous basic reproduction number which depends on fluctuations in
the mosquito population, @xmath and @xmath .
