## 4.9 General comments on the Quantum Field Theory

Let us start our study of the correspondence between our new metrics
with their respective field theory dual. We will state some general
points that these field theories will fulfill.

In the case of the backgrounds corresponding to the compactifications
described in section 4.5.1 , our field theories are obtained by a
twisted KK-compactification on a two dimensional manifold—that can be
@xmath or @xmath . The original field theory is, as we mentioned, the
Klebanov-Witten quiver, that controls the high energy dynamics of our
system. The bosonic part of the global symmetries for this QFT in the UV
are

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.9.98)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where, as we know the @xmath is enhanced to @xmath . The theory contains
two vector multiplets @xmath , for @xmath , together with four chiral
multiplets @xmath for @xmath and @xmath with @xmath .

These fields transform as vector, spinors and scalars under @xmath —that
is @xmath are singlets, the fermions transform in the @xmath and the
vectors in the @xmath . The transformation under the ’flavor’ quantum
numbers @xmath is,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.9.99)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- ----------

The backgrounds in section 4.5.1 , are describing the strong coupling
regime of the field theory above, in the case in which we compactify the
D3-branes on @xmath twisting the theory. This means, mixing the
R-symmetry @xmath with the @xmath isometry of @xmath . This twisting is
reflected in the metric fibration between the @xmath -direction (the
Reeb vector) and the @xmath . The fibration is implemented by a vector
field @xmath in eq. ( 4.5.44 ). The twisting mixes the R-symmetry of the
QFT, represented by @xmath in the dual description, with (part of) the
Lorentz group. In purely field theoretical terms, we are modifying the
covariant derivative of different fields that under the combined action
of the spin connection and the R-symmetry (on the curved part of the
space) will read @xmath .

In performing this twisting, the fields decompose under @xmath . The
decomposition is straightforward for the bosonic fields. For the
fermions, we have that @xmath decomposes as @xmath and similarly for the
@xmath spinors.

The twisting itself is the ’mixing’ between the @xmath charges of the
spinor and its R-symmetry charge. There is an analog operation for the
vector and scalar fields. Some fields are scalars under the diagonal
group in @xmath . Some are spinors and some are vectors. Only the
scalars under the diagonal group are massless. These determine the SUSY
content of the QFT. This particular example amounts to preserving two
supercharges. There are two massless vector multiplets and two massless
matter multiplets. The rest of the fields get a mass whose set by the
inverse size of the compact manifold. In other words, the field theory
at low energies is a two dimensional CFT (as indicated by the AdS @xmath
factor), preserving @xmath SUSY and obtained by a twisted
compactification of the Klebanov-Witten CFT. The QFT is deformed in the
UV by a relevant operator of dimension two, as we can read from eq. (
4.5.52 ).

An alternative way to think about this QFT is as the one describing the
low energy excitations of a stack of @xmath D3-branes wrapping a
calibrated space @xmath inside a Calabi-Yau 4-fold.

The situation with the metrics in section 4.5.2 is more subtle. In that
case there is also a flow from the Klebanov-Witten quiver to a
two-dimensional CFT preserving (0,2) SUSY. The difference is that this
second QFT is not apparently obtained via a twisting procedure. As
emphasized by the authors of [ 66 ] , the partial breaking of SUSY is
due (from a five-dimensional supergravity perspective) to ’axion’ fields
depending on the torus directions. These axion fields are proportional
to a deformation parameter—that we called @xmath in eq. ( 4.5.66 ). The
deformation in the UV QFT is driven by an operator of dimension four
that was identified to be @xmath and a dimension six operator that
acquires a VEV, as discussed in [ 66 ] .

To understand the dual field theory to the IIA backgrounds obtained
after non-Abelian T-duality and presented in section 4.6.1 involves more
intricacy. Indeed, it is at present unclear what is the analog field
theoretical operation of non-Abelian T-duality. There are, nevertheless,
important hints. Indeed, the foundational paper of Sfetsos and Thompson
[ 191 ] , that sparked the interest of the uses of non-Abelian T-duality
in quantum field theory duals, showed that if one starts with a
background of the form AdS @xmath S @xmath , a particular solution of
the Gaiotto-Maldacena system (after lifting to M-theory) is generated [
81 ] . This is hardly surprising, as the backgrounds of
eleven-dimensional supergravity with an AdS @xmath factor and preserving
@xmath SUSY in four dimensions, have been classified. What is
interesting is that the solution generated by Sfetsos and Thompson
appears as a zoom-in on the particular class of solutions in [ 163 ] .
This was extended in [ 126 ] that computed the action of non-Abelian
T-duality on the end-point of the flow from the @xmath conformal quiver
with adjoints to the Klebanov-Witten CFT. Again, not surprisingly, the
backgrounds obtained correspond to the @xmath version of the Gaiotto
@xmath theories— these were called Sicilian field theories by Benini,
Tachikawa and Wecht in [ 21 ] , see Fig. 4.1 . It is noticeable, that
while the Sicilian theories can be obtained by a twisted
compactification of M5-branes on @xmath , the case obtained using
non-Abelian T-duality corresponds only to M5-branes compactified on
@xmath and preserving minimal SUSY in four dimensions. What we propose
in this chapter is that the twisted compactification on @xmath of a
Sicilian gauge theory can be studied by using the backgrounds we
discussed in section 4.6.1 and their M-theory counterparts. We will
elaborate more about the 2-d CFTs and their flows in the coming
sections.

In the following, we will calculate different observables of these QFT’s
by using the backgrounds as a ’definition’ of the 2d SCFT. The
backgrounds are smooth and thus the observables have trustable results.
Hence, we are defining a QFT by its observables, calculated in a
consistent way by the dual solutions. The hope is that these
calculations together with other efforts can help map the space of these
new families of CFTs. To the study of these observables we turn now.

### 4.10 Quantized charges

In this section, we will study the quantized charges on the string side.
This analysis appears in the field theory part of the chapter because
these charges will, as in the canonical case of AdS @xmath S @xmath ,
translate into the ranks of the gauge theory local symmetry groups.

The NATD produced local solutions to the 10-dim SUGRA equations of
motion. Nevertheless, it is still not known how to obtain the global
properties of these new geometries. Some quantities associated to a
particular solution, like the Page charges below, are only well-defined
when the global properties of the background are known. Since we have
only a local description of our solution, we will propose very
reasonable global results for the Page charges, mostly based on physical
intuition.

Let us start by analyzing a quantity that is proposed to be periodic in
the string theory. We follow the ideas introduced in [ 152 ] and further
elaborated in [ 160 ] . To begin with, we focus on the NATD version of
the twisted solutions; described in section 4.6.1 . Let us define the
quantity,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.10.100)
  -- -------- -- ------------

where the cycle @xmath is defined as,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.10.101)
  -- -------- -- ------------

As the topology of the NATD theory is not known, we propose that this
cycle is present in the geometry. This cycle will have a globally
defined volume form, which in a local description can be written as
@xmath . We then find,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.10.102)
  -- -------- -- ------------

Again, we emphasize that this is a proposal made in [ 152 ] and used in
[ 160 ] . Moving further than @xmath along the variable @xmath can be
’compensated’ by performing a large gauge transformation on the @xmath
-field,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.10.103)
  -- -------- -- ------------

We will make extensive use of this below.

Let us now focus on the conserved magnetic charges defined for our
backgrounds. We will start the analysis for the case of the solutions in
section 4.5.1 .

#### 4.10.1 Page charges for the twisted solutions

We will perform this study for the solutions before and after the NATD,
and we will obtain how the Page charges transform under the NATD
process. Page charges (in contrast to Maxwell charges) have proven
fundamental in understanding aspects of the dynamics of field
theories—see for example [ 20 ] .

In particular, for D3-branes we have, ( 4.A.189 ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The topology of the internal space is @xmath . We consider the following
cycles:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.10.104)
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ------------

The background fields @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are vanishing, and only
@xmath contributes. The specific components of @xmath in eq. ( 4.6.70 )
that have non vanishing pullback on these cycles are,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.10.105)
  -- -------- -- ------------

We explicitly see that it is a globally defined form, as all the
involved quantities ( @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ) are well
defined globally. The associated Page charges of D3-branes for the
background around eq. ( 4.6.70 ) are,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.10.106)
  -- -------- -- ------------

where @xmath is the total volume of the two-manifold @xmath . ¹² ¹² 12
Notice that we use Vol for volume elements (differential forms) and
@xmath for the actual volumes of the manifolds (real numbers). As usual,
the first relation quantizes the size of the space,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.10.107)
  -- -------- -- ------------

We have then defined three D3-charges. The one associated with @xmath is
the usual one appearing also in the AdS @xmath S @xmath case. The other
two can be thought as charges ’induced’ by the wrapping of the D3-branes
on the Riemann surface. The reader may wonder whether these charges are
present in the backgrounds found after NATD. We turn to this now.

We use now the Page charges expressions for IIA SUGRA ( 4.A.189 . We
label the radius of the space of the geometry in eq. ( 4.6.73 ) by
@xmath , to distinguish it from @xmath , the quantized radius before the
NATD. In order to properly define the cycles to be considered, we should
know the topology of this NATD solution. However, we have obtained only
a local expression for this solution, and we do not know the global
properties. As we explained above, we will present a proposal to define
the Page charges that would explain the transmutation of branes through
the NATD. We propose the relevant cycles to be, ¹³ ¹³ 13 Intuitively, we
can think that the branes transform under NATD as 3 consecutive
T-dualities. For example, in the first 5-cycle of eq. ( 4.10.104 ), the
NATD is performed along 3 of the coordinates, ( @xmath ), in such a way
that we end up with a 2-cycle, the first cycle in eq.( 4.10.108 ),
associated with D6-branes. In the second 5-cycle of eq.( 4.10.104 ) the
NATD only affects the @xmath -direction, so it disappears, and two more
directions are added in order to complete the 3 T-dualities, ending up
with a 6-cycle in eq.( 4.10.108 ), associated with D2-branes.

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.10.108)
  -- -------- -- ------------

The associated charges are,

  -- -- -------- -------- ------------
        @xmath            (4.10.109)
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- ------------

In the last expression, we performed the integral over the @xmath
-coordinate in the interval @xmath . These three charges are in
correspondence with the ones before the NATD in eq. ( 4.10.106 ).
Indeed, we can compute the quotients,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.10.110)
  -- -------- -- ------------

These quotients indicate a nice correspondence between charges before
and after the duality.

Using the first relation in eq. ( 4.10.109 ) we quantize the size @xmath
of the space after NATD to be @xmath .

A small puzzle is presented by the possible existence of charge for
D4-branes, as there would be no quantized number before the NATD to make
them correspond to. To solve this puzzle, we propose that there should
be a globally defined closed non-exact form that allows us to perform a
large gauge transformation for the @xmath , in such a way that all the
D4 Page charges vanish. In local coordinates, we have a gauge
transformation,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.10.111)
  -- -------- -- ------------

written in such a way that the integrand has at least one leg along a
non-compact coordinate,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.10.112)
  -- -------- -- ------------

Hence, any Page charge for D4-branes is vanishing. To be precise, the D2
charge @xmath must be computed after choosing this gauge, as it depends
on @xmath , but it turns out to be the same as calculated in eq. (
4.10.109 ).

The motion in the @xmath -coordinate, as we discussed above, can be
related to large gauge transformations of the @xmath -field. The large
transformation that ’compensates’ for motions in @xmath , namely @xmath
has the effect of changing the Page charges associated with D4-branes,
that were initially vanishing. Indeed, if we calculate for the following
four cycles,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.10.113)
  -- -------- -- ------------

the Page charge of D4-branes varies according to,

  -- -------- -------- -------- ------------
     @xmath   @xmath            (4.10.114)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- ------------

We can interpret these findings in the following way. Our QFT (after the
NATD) can be thought as living on the world-volume of a superposition of
D2- and D6-branes. Motions in the @xmath -coordinate induce charge of
D4-branes, which can be interpreted as new gauge groups appearing. This
suggest that we are working with a linear quiver, with many gauge
groups. Moving @xmath -units in @xmath generates or ’un-higgses’ new
gauge groups of rank @xmath and @xmath . Computing volumes or other
observables that involve integration on the @xmath -coordinate amounts
to working with a QFT with different gauge group, depending on the range
in @xmath we decide to integrate over. Notice that @xmath is not a
holographic coordinate. Motions in @xmath are not changing the energy in
the dual QFT. For the AdS-fixed points the theory is conformal and
movements in @xmath do not change that.

In the paper [ 160 ] , the motion in the @xmath -coordinate was argued
to be related to a form of ’duality’ (a Seiberg-type of duality was
argued to take place, in analogy with the mechanism of the
Klebanov-Strassler duality cascade, but in a CFT context). That can not
be the whole story as other observables, like for example the number of
degrees of freedom in the QFT, change according to the range of the
@xmath -integration. Hence the motion in @xmath can not be just a
duality. We are proposing here that moving in the @xmath -coordinate
amounts to changing the quiver, adding gauge groups, represented by the
increasing D4 charge.

We will now present the same analysis we have performed above, but for
the case of the background in section 4.5.2 .

#### 4.10.2 Page charges for the Donos-Gauntlett solution

Part of the analysis that follows was carefully done in the original
work of [ 66 ] and here we will extend the study for the solution after
the NATD that we presented in section 4.5.2 . We will give an outline of
the results as the general structure is similar to the one displayed by
the twisted solutions of the previous section.

We focus on the original Donos-Gauntlett background first. We denote by
@xmath , @xmath the two radii of the torus (the cycles of the torus are
then of size @xmath and @xmath respectively) and consider five different
cycles in the geometry,

  -- -- -- -------- ------------
                    (4.10.115)
           @xmath   
           @xmath   
           @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- ------------

The Page charges associated with D3-, D5- and NS5-branes are,

  -- -- -- -------- ------------
                    (4.10.116)
           @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- ------------

After the NATD, we focus on the background around eqs. ( 4.6.2 ) and (
4.6.78 ). We consider the following cycles in the geometry,

  -- -- -------- -- ------------
        @xmath      (4.10.117)
                    
  -- -- -------- -- ------------

The correspondent Page charges defined on them (the @xmath -coordinate
is taken in the @xmath interval),

  -- -- -------- -------- ------------
        @xmath            (4.10.118)
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- ------------

From the first relation we obtain, @xmath . Like in the case of the
twisted solutions, we can choose a gauge for the @xmath field

  -- -- -------- -------- ------------
        @xmath            (4.10.119)
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- ------------

such that the Page charge of D4-branes, when computed on every possible
compact 4-cycle, is vanishing. Indeed, after the gauge transformation,
we have

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.10.120)
  -- -------- -- ------------

Any integral over compact manifolds is vanishing. Like in the case of
the twisted solutions, @xmath and @xmath should be recalculated after
choosing this gauge; but their value turns out to be unchanged.

We can apply the same string theory considerations on the quantity
@xmath that now is defined as an integral over the cycle,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.10.121)
  -- -------- -- ------------

We then calculate,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.10.122)
  -- -------- -- ------------

If we move further than @xmath along the variable @xmath , we can
compensate this by performing the large gauge transformation @xmath We
now consider the correspondent variation of Page charges for D4-branes,
that can be calculated using the following cycles,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.10.123)
  -- -------- -- ------------

to be,

  -- -------- -------- -------- ------------
     @xmath   @xmath            (4.10.124)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- ------------

The variation of the Page charges of D2-branes vanishes under this large
gauge transformation. For the Donos-Gauntlett solution we observe a
structure very similar to the one discussed for the twisted solutions.
Again, here we would propose that the NATD background ’un-higgses’ gauge
groups of rank @xmath as we move in units of @xmath in the @xmath
-coordinate.

We move now to the study of another important observable of our dual 2-d
and 4-d CFTs.

### 4.11 Central charges and c-theorem

In the following sections, we will quote the results for central charges
according to eq. ( 4.2.42 ) for the conformal field theories in two and
four dimensions. Following that, we will write the result that it yields
for the flows between theories.

#### 4.11.1 Central charge at conformal points

As anticipated, we will quote here the results for eq. ( 4.2.42 ) for
the different AdS @xmath and AdS @xmath fixed points. We start with the
twisted solutions of section 4.5.1 . We will use that the volume of the
@xmath space is @xmath .

Twisted geometries

For the IR AdS @xmath fixed point, the volume of the internal compact
manifold is @xmath , and the central charge is,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.11.125)
  -- -------- -- ------------

At the UV AdS @xmath fixed point, the volume of the internal compact
manifold is @xmath , and the result for the central charge is,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.11.126)
  -- -------- -- ------------

After the NATD, we must consider the new radius of the space @xmath and
the volume of the new 5-dim compact space @xmath . The computations turn
out to be similar as the previous ones, and we obtain that the central
charges before and after NATD, for both the two and four dimensional
CFTs, are related by,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.11.127)
  -- -------- -- ------------

Let us comment on the quantity @xmath , that appears in the calculation
of the Page charges in section 4.10 —see for example, eq. ( 4.10.118 )
and also in the computation of the entanglement entropy of section 4.12
. Indeed, if we calculate, ¹⁴ ¹⁴ 14 We identify the integral with the
volume of the manifold spanned by the new coordinates. This becomes more
apparent if we use the expressions in the appendix, in different
coordinate systems.

  -- -- -------- -------- ------------
        @xmath            (4.11.128)
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- ------------

We have performed the @xmath -integral in the interval @xmath . The
logic behind this choice was spelt out in section 4.10 , see below eq. (
4.10.114 ). The proposal is that moving in units of @xmath in the @xmath
-coordinate implies ’un-higgsing’ a gauge group, hence we would have a
linear quiver gauge theory. The central charge captures this un-higgsing
procedure, increasing according to how many groups we ’create’. What is
interesting is the @xmath behavior in eq. ( 4.11.128 ). Indeed, if
@xmath were associated with the rank of a gauge group, this scaling
would be precisely the one obtained in Gaiotto-like CFTs (also valid for
the @xmath ’Sicilian’ theories of [ 21 ] ). Indeed, the NATD procedure
when applied to the AdS @xmath T @xmath background creates metric and
fluxes similar to those characterizing the Sicilian CFTs. The
backgrounds in sections 4.5 to 4.8 are dual to a compactification of the
Klebanov Witten CFT and (using the NATD background) the Sicilian CFT on
a two space @xmath . The two-dimensional IR fixed point of these flows
is described by our ’twisted AdS @xmath ’ and its NATD. The central
charge of the Sicilian CFT and its compactified version is presenting a
behavior that goes like a certain rank to a third power @xmath . This
suggest that crossing @xmath amounts to adding D4-branes and
Neveu-Schwarz five branes and @xmath is the number of branes that were
added —see eqs. ( 4.10.114 ) and ( 4.10.124 )--- or crossed ¹⁵ ¹⁵ 15
Thanks to Daniel Thompson for a discussion about this. . Had we
integrated on the interval @xmath , we would have obtained a scaling
like @xmath at leading order in @xmath .

Donos-Gauntlett geometry

We study here the central charge for the Donos-Gauntlett background in
section LABEL:sectionDG . For the AdS @xmath fixed point, the volume of
the internal compact manifold is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the central charge is,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.11.129)
  -- -------- -- ------------

For the AdS @xmath fixed point, the volume of the internal compact
manifold @xmath , and the central charge results in,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.11.130)
  -- -------- -- ------------

The quotient of central charges before and after the NATD for the
Donos-Gauntlett QFT, are given by a similar expression to that in eq. (
4.11.127 ).

We move now to study a quantity that gives an idea of the degrees of
freedom along a flow.

#### 4.11.2 Central charge for flows across dimensions

In the previous section, we calculated the central charge for two and
four dimensional CFTs dual to the AdS @xmath and AdS @xmath fixed points
of the flow. In this section, we will use the developments in [ 77 ] and
[ 135 ] , to write a c-function along the flows between these fixed
points. We will find various subtleties,

-   When considered as a low energy two-dimensional CFT, the definition
    of the c-function evaluated on the flows will not detect the
    presence of the four dimensional CFT in the far UV.

-   We attempt to generalize the formula of [ 135 ] for anisotropic
    cases (that is for field theories that undergo a spontaneous
    compactification on @xmath ). This new definition will detect both
    the two dimensional and four dimensional conformal points, but will
    not necessarily be decreasing towards the IR. This is not in
    contradiction with ’c-theorems’ that assume Lorentz invariance.

We move into discussing these different points in our particular
examples. To start, we emphasize that the formulas in ( 4.2.38 )-(
4.2.42 ), contain the same information. Indeed, the authors of [ 135 ] ,
present a ’spontaneous compactification’ of a higher dimensional
Supergravity (or String theory) to @xmath dimensions, see eq. ( 4.2.41
). Moving the reduced system to Einstein frame and observing that the
@xmath of the matter in the lower dimension satisfies certain positivity
conditions imposed in [ 77 ] , use of eq. ( 4.2.39 ) implies eq. (
4.2.42 ). Hence, we will apply eqs. ( 4.2.41 )-( 4.2.42 ) to our
different compactifications in sections 4.5 to 4.8 .

Twisted and Donos-Gauntlett solutions. For the purpose of the flows both
twisted and Donos-Gauntlett solutions present a similar qualitative
behavior. We start by considering the family of backgrounds in eq. (
4.5.44 ) as dual to field theories in @xmath dimensions. In this case
the quantities relevant for the calculation of the central charge are,

  -- -- -------- -------- ------------
        @xmath            (4.11.131)
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- ------------

We calculate the quantity

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.11.132)
  -- -------- -- ------------

Then, we obtain

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.11.133)
  -- -------- -- ------------

Using the BPS equations describing these flows in eq. ( 4.5.49 ) we can
get an expression without derivatives. Specializing for the solution
with an @xmath in section 4.5.1 , we find

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.11.134)
  -- -------- -- ------------

We can calculate this for the background we obtained in section 4.6.1 ,
by application of NATD. The result and procedure will be
straightforward, but we will pick a factor of the volume of the space
parametrized by the new coordinates, @xmath .

For the purposes of the RG-flow, the quotient of the central charges
will be the same as the quotient in eq. ( 4.11.128 ). This was indeed
observed in the past [ 126 ] , [ 160 ] and is just a consequence of the
invariance of the quantity @xmath under NATD.

Coming back to eq. ( 4.11.134 ), we find that in the far IR, represented
by @xmath , the central charge is constant. But in the far UV ( @xmath
), we obtain a result that is not characteristic of a CFT. Hence, this
suggest that the definition is only capturing the behavior of a 2-dim
QFT. In other words, the four dimensional QFT may be thought as a two
dimensional QFT, but with an infinite number of fields.

The absence of the four dimensional fixed point in our eq. ( 4.11.134 )
can be accounted if we generalize the prescription to calculate central
charges for an anisotropic 4-dim QFT. Holographically this implies
working with a background of the form, ¹⁶ ¹⁶ 16 A natural generalization
of eq. ( 4.11.135 ) is @xmath

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.11.135)
  -- -------- -- ------------

In this case we define,

  -- -- -------- -------- ------------
        @xmath            (4.11.136)
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- ------------

We can apply this generalized definition to the flow for the twisted
@xmath background of section 4.5.1 , and Donos-Gauntlett background of
section 4.5.2 (for more examples the reader is referred to appendix D of
[ 16 ] ). In this case, we consider them as dual to a field theory in
@xmath anisotropic dimensions (two of the dimensions are compactified on
a @xmath ). The quantities relevant for the calculation of the central
charge are,

  -- -------- -------- ------------
     @xmath            (4.11.137)
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- ------------

We calculate

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.11.138)
  -- -------- -- ------------

Then, we obtain

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.11.139)
  -- -------- -- ------------

Focusing on the @xmath case, if we use the solution that describe this
flow—see eq. ( 4.5.51 ) we get an analytical expression,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.11.140)
  -- -------- -- ------------

Notice that, by definition, this quantity gives the correct central
charge in the UV (a constant, characterizing the 4-d fixed point). In
the IR, the quantity turns out to be constant too, so it is capturing
the presence of a 2-d fixed point. Nevertheless, it is probably not an
appropriate candidate for a ’c-function between dimensions’ as it is not
necessarily increasing towards the UV. This is not in contradiction with
the logic of ’a-theorems’ and proofs like the ones in [ 77 ] or [ 140 ]
, as the metric does not respect Lorentz invariance. Hence, it is not
satisfying the assumptions of the theorems. For the Donos-Gauntlett case
analogous things happen. It would be very nice to try to apply the
recent ideas of [ 99 ] to this flow. Notice that this feature of a
’wrong monotonicity’ for the central charge was also observed—for
theories breaking Lorentz invariance in Higher Spin theories—see the
papers [ 102 ] .

Let us move now to study other observables defining the 2-d and 4-d
QFTs.

### 4.12 Entanglement entropy and Wilson loops

In this section, we will complement the work done above, by studying a
couple of fundamental observables in the QFTs defined by the backgrounds
in sections 4.5 to 4.8 .

Whilst at the conformal points the functional dependence of results is
determined by the symmetries, the interest will be in the coefficients
accompanying the dependence. Both observables interpolate smoothly
between the fixed points.

#### 4.12.1 Entanglement entropy

The aim of this section is to compute the entanglement entropy on a
strip, which extends along the direction @xmath , and study how this
observable transforms under NATD. The input backgrounds for our
calculations will be the Donos-Gauntlett and the @xmath flow as well as
their non-Abelian T-duals. Since the procedure is the same in all of the
cases and due to the similarity of the geometries we will present the
results in a uniform way.

This prescription states that the holographic entanglement entropy
between the strip and its complement is given by the minimal-area static
surface that hangs inside the bulk, and whose boundary coincides with
the boundary of the strip. The general form of the entanglement entropy
for the non-conformal case is,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.12.141)
  -- -------- -- ------------

For the strip, we chose the embedding functions to be @xmath and @xmath
and then using the conservation of the Hamiltonian we arrive at an
expression for @xmath that makes the area minimal under that embedding.
With that we compute,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.12.142)
  -- -------- -- ------------

where the form of the function @xmath depends on the geometry of the
background that we consider,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.12.143)
  -- -------- -- ------------

Above, @xmath is the radial position of the hanging surface tip and we
define @xmath . Also, with @xmath we denote the volume of the Riemann
surface @xmath . Notice that the form of the function @xmath is the same
before and after NATD. Moreover we consider,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.12.144)
  -- -------- -- ------------

The quantity @xmath is defined as,

  -- -- -- ------------
           (4.12.145)
  -- -- -- ------------

Before the NATD transformation @xmath comes from the 3-dimensional
submanifold that is spanned by the coordinates @xmath , while after the
NATD it comes from the submanifold that is spanned by the dual
coordinates @xmath . This implies that the entropies before and after
NATD are proportional all along the flow, for any strip length. A
discussion on possible values of the quantity @xmath can be found in the
quantized charges section 4.10 and in the discussion on central charges
in section 4.11 .

When computed by the Ryu-Takayanagi formula eq. ( 4.12.142 ) the
entanglement entropy is UV divergent. In order to solve this we compute
the regularized entanglement entropy ( @xmath ) by subtracting the
divergent part of the integrand of eq. ( 4.12.142 ). The regularized
entanglement entropy is given by,

  -- -- -- ------------
           (4.12.146)
  -- -- -- ------------

where the last integral is an indefinite integral with the result being
evaluated at @xmath and

  -- -- -- ------------
           (4.12.147)
  -- -- -- ------------

From the formulas ( 4.12.144 ), ( 4.12.145 ) and ( 4.12.146 ) it is
obvious that the regularized entanglement entropies before and after the
NATD transformation differ by the factor

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.12.148)
  -- -------- -- ------------

In the formula above we denoted by @xmath the value of the entanglement
entropy after the NATD transformation. As discussed below eq. ( 4.11.134
), the quantity @xmath is invariant under NATD, and this explains why
the ratio ( 4.12.148 ) is constant along the flow.

At this point let us normalize the regularized entanglement entropy by
defining the quantity,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.12.149)
  -- -------- -- ------------

In what follows we present the behavior of @xmath in the UV and the IR
for the geometries of interest. We express the results in terms of the
width of the strip @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.12.150)
  -- -------- -- ------------

The UV/IR behavior written in eqs ( 4.12.152 ), ( 4.12.155 ), ( 4.12.158
) and ( 4.12.160 ) below, are just consequences of the fact that in far
UV and far IR the dual QFT is conformal. The functional forms are
universal, so our main interest is the constant appearing in them, and
also as a cross-check of numerical results.

##### Behavior in the UV

Twisted geometries

In the case of the twisted @xmath geometry we find that the width of the
strip is,

  -- -- -- ------------
           (4.12.151)
  -- -- -- ------------

Here in the integration we changed the variable @xmath by @xmath . From
the calculation of the normalized entropy @xmath we observe that in the
UV this behaves like @xmath , namely

  -- -- -- ------------
           (4.12.152)
  -- -- -- ------------

where we also included subleading and next-to subleading terms.

Donos-Gauntlett geometry

Similarly in the case of the Donos-Gauntlett geometry we find that the
width of the strip in terms of @xmath (considering also a subheading
term) is,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.12.153)
  -- -------- -- ------------

where

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.12.154)
  -- -------- -- ------------

Here as well we end up with a @xmath behavior, a logarithmic subleading
contribution and a constant @xmath for the regularized entropy,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.12.155)
  -- -------- -- ------------

where @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.12.156)
  -- -------- -- ------------

##### Behavior in the IR

Twisted geometries

The calculation for the IR limit is more tricky. The origin of the
subtlety is that the integrals we have to evaluate now run all along the
flow and we do not know the analytical properties of the integrands. In
order to address this issue we split the integration into the intervals
@xmath and @xmath choosing @xmath to be in the deep IR but always
greater than @xmath .

Following this prescription in the calculation, for the width of the
strip we find,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.12.157)
  -- -------- -- ------------

If we do the same analysis when we calculate the normalized entropy we
find,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.12.158)
  -- -------- -- ------------

The logarithmic dependence of the leading term on @xmath is the expected
for a @xmath theory.

Donos-Gauntlett geometry

We close this section presenting the corresponding results for the
Donos-Gauntlett geometry. As in the case of the twisted geometries we
split the integrations in the same way. Then for the width of the strip
we find,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.12.159)
  -- -------- -- ------------

The normalized entropy displays again a logarithmic behavior in terms of
the width of the strip,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.12.160)
  -- -------- -- ------------

where the constant @xmath has the value,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.12.161)
  -- -------- -- ------------

The results for the entanglement entropy are shown in Fig. 4.2 . We will
now perform a similar analysis for Wilson loops.

#### 4.12.2 Wilson loop

In our calculations we consider an embedding of the form @xmath for the
string. Such an embedding gives rise to the following induced metric on
the string,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.12.162)
  -- -------- -- ------------

where @xmath is defined in ( 4.12.144 ). It is obvious that the above
induced metric is the same for all of the geometries that we have
discussed in this chapter so far (even for the duals). For this reason
we believe that it is not necessary to make any distinction with respect
to these geometries for the moment. Moreover, this means that the
observable is ’uncharged’ under NATD and thus it has the same functional
form when computed in the initial and dualized geometries. The interest
will be in the numerical coefficients our calculation will give.

The Nambu-Goto lagrangian density for the string takes the form,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.12.163)
  -- -------- -- ------------

where @xmath stands for the induced metric ( 4.12.162 ).

An important observable that can be computed holographically is the
potential energy of two non-dynamical sources added to the QFT. As
explained in the subsection 4.2.1 ,the conservation of the Hamiltonian
implies that,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.12.164)
  -- -------- -- ------------

where @xmath is the value of the function @xmath at the tip of the
hanging string @xmath . We can solve the last equation for @xmath and
use the result to calculate the distance between the endpoints of the
string. If we do this we can express @xmath in terms of @xmath

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.12.165)
  -- -------- -- ------------

The Nambu-Goto action now reads

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.12.166)
  -- -------- -- ------------

where @xmath . The integral in eq. ( 4.12.166 ) is divergent since we
are considering quarks of infinite mass sitting at the endpoints of the
string. We can regularize this integral by subtracting the mass of the
two quarks and dividing by @xmath as it is shown below

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.12.167)
  -- -------- -- ------------

This formula gives us the quark-antiquark energy. In order to calculate
the same observable starting with the NATD geometries one must take into
account that the AdS radius @xmath is different from that of the
original geometries. In fact both results are related in the following
way

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.12.168)
  -- -------- -- ------------

In the last expression the hats refer to the dual quantities.

At this point we will explore the UV and IR limits of the
quark-antiquark energy both for the twisted and the Donos-Gauntlett
geometries.

##### Behavior in the UV

Twisted and Donos Gauntlett geometry

First we focus on the twisted solution where the Riemann surface is the
hyperbolic space, i.e. @xmath . In section 4.5.1 we saw that in this
case the function @xmath behaves like @xmath . Taking this into account
we can compute the distance between the quarks from the formula (
4.12.165 ). The result of this is

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.12.169)
  -- -------- -- ------------

Solving this equation for @xmath we can substitute into the result
coming from the formula ( 4.12.167 ). This will give the quark-antiquark
energy in terms of @xmath which in our case is

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.12.170)
  -- -------- -- ------------

as expected for a CFT. The main point of interest in the previous
formula is in the numerical coefficient.

Similar considerations for the case of the Donos-Gauntlett geometry give
the same results as in the twisted case above. This is because the
asymptotic behavior of the function @xmath in the UV is the same in both
cases.

##### Behavior in the IR

Twisted geometry

Again in the IR region we address again the same difficulty that we
found in the computation of the entanglement entropy. We use the same
trick to overcome it, that is we split the integrations into the
intervals @xmath and @xmath where @xmath has value in the deep IR but
always greater than @xmath .

In section 4.5.1 we saw that in the case where @xmath , the IR behavior
of the function @xmath is @xmath . Applying this into the formula (
4.12.165 ) we obtain the following result,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.12.171)
  -- -------- -- ------------

As before we solve the previous result for @xmath and we substitute it
into the expression that we find from the calculation of the
quark-antiquark potential. This way we express the energy as a function
of the distance between the quarks,

  -- -- -- ------------
           (4.12.172)
  -- -- -- ------------

Donos-Gauntlett geometry

Repeating the same steps for the case of the Donos-Gauntlett geometry we
find that the distance between the quarks is,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.12.173)
  -- -------- -- ------------

Then, expressing the energy in terms of the distance @xmath we find
again a dependence proportional to @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath      (4.12.174)
  -- -------- -- ------------

Let us point out that the behavior in eqs ( 4.12.170 ), ( 4.12.172 ) and
( 4.12.174 ) are just consequences of the fact that far in the UV and
far in the IR the QFT is conformal.

The results for the quark-antiquark potential are shown in Fig. 4.3 .

### 4.13 Discussion

We started by studying backgrounds dual to two-dimensional SUSY CFTs.
The 2-d CFTs were obtained by compactification of the four-dimensional
Klebanov-Witten CFT on a torus or on a compact hyperbolic plane. The 2-d
CFT preserves (0,2) SUSY.

On those type IIB backgrounds we performed a NATD transformation, using
an @xmath -isometry of the ’internal space’ (or, equivalently, a global
symmetry of the dual CFT). As a result, we constructed new, smooth and
SUSY preserving backgrounds in type IIA and 11-dimensional supergravity
with an AdS @xmath fixed point. A further T-duality was used to
construct new, smooth and SUSY type IIB background whose IR is of the
form AdS @xmath M @xmath and all fluxes are active.

We analyzed the dual QFT by computing its observables, using the smooth
backgrounds mentioned above. By studying the Page charges, we observed
that there is a correspondence between the branes of the starting type
IIB solution and those of the type IIA solution after NATD.

The behavior of the central charge in the original CFT (the
compactification of the Klebanov-Witten theory to 2-d) is @xmath , while
after the NATD goes like @xmath . This new (cubic) dependence suggest a
relation with long linear quivers, which would imply that @xmath is
measuring the number of D4- and NS5-branes. The picture that emerges is
that of a 2-d CFT living on the intersection of D2- , D6- and
NS5-branes, with induced D4 charge every time an NS-brane is crossed.
Quantized charges support this interpretation.

Entanglement entropy and Wilson loops had the expected universal
dependence on @xmath (the quark-antiquark separation or the length of
strip separating the two regions) at the fixed points. The interest of
the expressions is on the coefficients, not determined by conformal
invariance. Interestingly, along the flow the observables smoothly
interpolate between the IR and the UV behaviors, which are fixed points
of different dimensionality. Both for the entanglement entropy and the
Wilson loops we found that the quotient of their values before and after
NATD is constant along the flow, as it is expected. It would be
interesting to connect these studies with previous calculations done for
AdS @xmath , either at the sigma model or the supergravity level. We are
presenting new backgrounds, hence new 2-d CFTs on which studies done in
the past could be interesting to revisit. It would be also interesting
to make more precise the QFT dual to these backgrounds. The key point
needed for this purpose is to understand the global properties of the
supergravity background after the NATD. Besides, it could be interesting
to check whether our solutions fall within the existent classifications
of, for example [ 84 , 17 ] . Probably, for this purpose the global
properties of the solution are needed. Another interesting point would
be to further study new observables that select (or explore) the values
of @xmath argued in this work to be special values of the @xmath
-coordinate, in the line of [ 156 ] .

## Appendix 4.A Appendix

#### 4.a.1 Supergravity

In the previous chapter we introduced in some detail the Lovelock and
LGB gravity theories; now we discuss another family of gravitational
actions that play a very distinguished role in AdS/CFT : Supergravities,
that are low energy limit of string theories.

Supersymmetry (SUSY) is a proposed symmetry that relates bosonic and
fermionic fields. It has been very explored since the early 1970’s, with
many remarkable properties both formal and phenomenological ¹⁷ ¹⁷ 17 So
far no clear experimental evidence of it is available, though. . As
mentioned in the motivation, it was applied to string theories where it
reduced the necessary number of spacetime dimensions and eliminated a
tachyon among other implications.

The SUSY applications to string theories and holography are many and
very important: microstate counting for BH entropy, strong-weak
dualities, AdS/CFT discovery, identification of the dual CFT in cases of
high SUSY, exploration of highly coupled regimes of field theories,
classifications of possible fields theories, exact solvability …; the
list goes on and on. It also generically allows to find stable analytic
solutions by solving first order equations (frequently called BPS
solutions); this has become a mainstream technique that we also have
used.

The SUSY of superstring theories is also inherited by their low energy
limits. The extension of gravitational theories with SUSY was also
studied for its own sake, and it is called Supergravity (SUGRA). The
SUSY in these cases is a gauge symmetry, namely the transformations
parameters are position dependent and new fields appear, very much like
in electromagnetism.

These SUGRA theories are particularly useful in the context of AdS/CFT.
In the top-down approach, the duality is normally used in the low energy
limit of the string theory side that is described by classical SUGRA. At
the beginning of AdS/CFT, only solutions of string theory effective
actions were used and they are often found relying on SUSY.
Surprisingly, purely bosonic solutions are almost always considered,
although they normally preserve some of the supersymmetries of the
theory they belong to.

In general, SUGRA theories can be constructed in different dimensions,
gauge symmetries and different amounts of SUSY ¹⁸ ¹⁸ 18 Meaning that
several linearly independent symmetry transformations exist. . For our
purposes we will introduce type IIA/B and 11D SUGRAs, which are the
bosonic low energy limits of type IIA/B superstrings and of M-theory
respectively. The 11D case is fairly special, because for @xmath
nontrivial consistent field theories cannot have massless particles with
spins greater than two.

#### 4.a.2 11D and type IIA, IIB SUGRAs

In this subsection the main concepts of the bosonic sectors of SUGRAs
(11d, type IIA and type IIB) used in this thesis are briefly reviewed.
Let’s start with the type eleven dimensional case.

##### 11d Sugra

The bosonic sector of 11D SUGRA is given by the vierbein @xmath and a
4-form @xmath with dynamics given by:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.175)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath is a three form verifying @xmath (at least locally).

The bosonic equations of motion of eleven-dimensional supergravity are a
generalization of the Einstein:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.176)
  -- -------- -- -----------

and Maxwell equations is:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.177)
  -- -------- -- -----------

We will call @xmath and @xmath called a background in 11D. When it
verifies equations ( 4.A.176 ) and ( 4.A.177 ) the background is a
classical bosonic solution to 11D SUGRA.

The supersymmetric character of the theory is given by a list of rules
that transform bosons and fermions and leave invariant the equations of
motion, the so called SUSY transformations. For bosonic solutions, where
the fermionic fields are set to zero, the supersymmetric variation of
bosonic fields is automatically zero, and the supersymmetric variation
of the fermionic field called gravitino is given by:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.178)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath given by the geometrical covariant derivative of the
spinor:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.179)
  -- -------- -- -----------

We say that a classical bosonic solution of eleven-dimensional
supergravity is supersymmetric if there is a nonzero spinor @xmath such
that @xmath . That spinor is called a Killing spinor. As equation ( ) is
linear, the solutions form a vector space of fields ¹⁹ ¹⁹ 19 In very
much the same way Killing vectors do. . For 11D SUGRA, the dimension of
this vector space can range from 0 to 32, and it is common to use the
parameter @xmath to refer to the supersymmetry of a given background. It
is very common to refer as SUSY solutions as @xmath BPS solutions. In
this manner 1/2 BPS solution of 11D SUGRA will have @xmath , 1/4 BPS
means @xmath , etcetera.

The BPS solutions have two key properties that make them extremely
useful. ( 4.A.178 ) is a first order equation that surprisingly implies
that the background is solution of the much more difficult to solve (
4.A.176 ),( 4.A.177 ). But, additionally, the solutions found in this
way are automatically stable. This explains why the technique has become
so popular.

These are the key notions of 11D SUGRA that appear often in the AdS/CFT
literature. Now we will review similar ones for type IIA and IIB SUGRAs,
and the relation to the former.

##### Type IIA supergravity

It is a non-chiral maximally supersymmetric supergravity in ten
dimensions. The bosonic fields are @xmath : @xmath is the metric, @xmath
is the dilaton, a real scalar, @xmath is the Kalb-Ramond 2-form, @xmath
are 1,3-forms respectively and called the potentials. Let us define
their field strengths:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.A.180)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.A.181)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.A.182)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

satisfying the following Bianchi identities:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.A.183)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.A.184)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.A.185)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

The equations of motion are obtained from the action (in string frame ²⁰
²⁰ 20 This is the form one obtains directly from the low energy limit of
string theory, hence the name. Yet, the field redefinition @xmath
eliminates the prefactor @xmath from ( 4.A.186 ). That field choice is
called the Einstein frame because of the minimal coupling of @xmath that
it produces. ):

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.186)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath , and @xmath is the string coupling constant (often taken
equal to 1). The truncation @xmath is frequently considered and referred
as massless IIA SUGRA.

The equations of motions for @xmath and @xmath are:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.A.187)
  -- -------- -- -----------

The fluxes (a.k.a. Maxwell) equations read:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.188)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- -----------

There are some key quantities @xmath and @xmath associated to the forms
@xmath and @xmath :

  -- -- -- -----------
           (4.A.189)
  -- -- -- -----------

where every @xmath is a d-cycle in the geometry. These quantities are
called Page charges and they measure the amount of D @xmath or @xmath
branes associated with the geometry, therefore providing vital
information about the field theory dual [ 20 ] . ( 4.A.189 ) are also
valid for the IIB SUGRA fields.

As explained in the 11D case, we are only interested in bosonic
solutions, and most of them will be supersymmetric. To find the latter
we introduce the IIA SUSY transformations for the fermions: dilatino
@xmath and gravitino @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.A.190)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath is the product of all gamma matrices, and @xmath .
Finally, it is possible to get massless IIA SUGRA as a consistent
truncation of the 11D SUGRA; equivalently any massless IIA solution can
be uplifted to eleven dimensions. The uplifted metric is given by: ²¹ ²¹
21 We said before that M-theory contains IIA superstring. The present
embedding of IIA supergravity into 11d is the corresponding fact for
their low energy limits.

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.191)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where by @xmath we denote the @xmath coordinate which corresponds to a
@xmath isometry in the 11D theory upon which we compactify.

The 11-dimensional geometry is supported by a 3-form potential @xmath
which gives rise to the 4-form @xmath . This 3-form potential can be
written in terms of the 10-dimensional forms and the differential of the
@xmath coordinate as,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.192)
  -- -------- -- -----------

The 3-form @xmath corresponds to the closed part of the 10-dimensional
RR form @xmath .

##### Type IIB supergravity

There exists also a chiral maximal supergravity in ten dimensions, type
IIB supergravity. It can be related with IIA using T-duality, that will
be also explained in section 4.1 .

The bosonic fields are similar to those of IIA: @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , where @xmath is a ten-dimensional metric, @xmath is the Kalb
Ramond 2-form, @xmath is the dilaton (again a real scalar), @xmath are
0,2,4-differential forms serving as potentials of the following field
strengths:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.A.193)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.A.194)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.A.195)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.A.196)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

The Bianchi identities for the RR forms are given by:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.197)
  -- -------- -- -----------

The EoM can be derived from the following action:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.198)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath . The equations of motion obtained from this action are
supplemented by a further condition, which states that the @xmath form
is self-dual:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.199)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Like in type IIA, the Page charges are given by eq. ( 4.A.189 ). The
difference in this case is that the @xmath will have odd @xmath .

The SUSY transformations for the dilatino @xmath and the gravitino
@xmath for type IIB supergravity in string frame are [ 126 ] :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.A.200)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath , are the Pauli matrices.

#### 4.a.3 SUSY analysis

##### SUSY preserved by the twisted solutions

In this part of the appendix we write explicitly the variations of the
dilatino and gravitino for the ansatz (2.1-2.4), for the 3 cases @xmath
, @xmath and @xmath . The SUSY transformations for the dilatino @xmath
and the gravitino @xmath for type IIB supergravity in string frame are
given by ( 4.A.2 ).

Let us consider the @xmath case in detail (the @xmath case is obtained
analogously). Recall that the vielbein is written in ( 4.5.48 ).

The dilatino variation vanishes identically, as the fields involved are
vanishing. The @xmath component of the gravitino reads,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.201)
  -- -------- -- -----------

First, we use the chiral projection of type IIB,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.202)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where we define @xmath . We also impose the following projections
(Kähler projections),

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.203)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Then, expression ( 4.A.201 ) simplifies to,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.204)
  -- -------- -- -----------

We now impose the usual projection for the D3-brane,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.205)
  -- -------- -- -----------

and also a further projection related to the presence of the twisting,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.206)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Then, imposing that expression ( 4.A.204 ) vanishes we obtain,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.207)
  -- -------- -- -----------

For the component @xmath of the gravitino equation, we obtain that it is
zero when we impose the projections and equation ( 4.A.207 ). For the
component @xmath we have,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.208)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Combining projections ( 4.A.203 ) and ( 4.A.206 ) we get @xmath . Then,
( 4.A.208 ) gives the condition,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.209)
  -- -------- -- -----------

For @xmath , after imposing the projections and equation ( 4.A.209 ) we
arrive at,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.210)
  -- -------- -- -----------

There are two contributions to this term, one coming from the curvature
of the @xmath (through the spin connection) and another coming from the
twisting @xmath . That is, here we explicitly see that the twisting is
introduced to compensate the presence of the curvature, in such a way
that some SUSY can be still preserved. Then, we impose,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.211)
  -- -------- -- -----------

For @xmath , the variation is,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.212)
  -- -------- -- -----------

From the condition @xmath , we obtain a differential equation for @xmath
. Solving for it we arrive at the following form for the Killing spinor,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.213)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath is spinor which is independent of the coordinate @xmath .
For @xmath the variations vanish as long as,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.214)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Finally, for @xmath the graviton variation vanishes if,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.215)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Summarizing, the variations of the dilatino and gravitino vanish if we
impose the following projections on the Killing spinor,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.216)
  -- -------- -- -----------

and the BPS equations ( 4.5.49 ), together with the condition @xmath .
For the case of the 2-torus, if we focus on the @xmath component,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.217)
  -- -------- -- -----------

we see that there is one term depending on @xmath , due to the twisting.
Contrary to the @xmath and @xmath cases, here there is no curvature term
that could cancel it. This will force @xmath , obtaining @xmath , which
does not permit an AdS @xmath solution.

Finally, after all this analysis we deduce that the Killing spinor does
not depend explicitly on the coordinates @xmath on which we perform the
NATD transformation. In fact it only has a dependence on the coordinate
@xmath .

##### SUSY preserved by the NATD solutions

In the above subsection we calculated the amount of SUSY that is
preserved by the type IIB supergravity solutions of the section 4.5.1 by
examining the dilatino and the gravitino variations. Here we compute the
portion of SUSY that is preserved by a supergravity solution after a
NATD transformation following the argument of [ 191 ] , which has been
proven in [ 133 ] . According to this, one just has to check the
vanishing of the Lie-Lorentz (or Kosmann) derivative [ 141 ] of the
Killing spinor along the Killing vector that generates the isometry of
the NATD transformation. More concretely, suppose that we want to
transform a supergravity solution by performing a NATD transformation
with respect to some isometry of the background that is generated by the
Killing vector @xmath . Then there is a simple criterion which states
that if the Lie-Lorentz derivative of the Killing spinor along @xmath
vanishes, then the transformed solution preserves the same amount of
SUSY as the original solution. In the opposite scenario one has to
impose more projection conditions on the Killing spinor in order to make
the Lie-Lorentz derivative vanish. Thus in that case the dual background
preserves less supersymmetry than the original one.

We recall that given a Killing vector @xmath the Lie-Lorentz derivative
on a spinor @xmath along @xmath maps the spinor @xmath to another spinor
and is defined as,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.218)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath . For further details about the Lie-Lorentz derivative we
urge the interested reader to consult [ 177 ] .

In this chapter we constructed type IIA supergravity solutions by
applying a NATD transformation with respect to the @xmath isometry of
the original backgrounds that corresponds to the directions @xmath . The
non-vanishing components of the associated Killing vectors are,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.219)
  -- -------- -- -----------

In what follows we will compute the Lie-Lorentz derivative along the
three Killing vectors @xmath using the geometries of the sections 4.5.1
and 4.5.2 . It turns out that in all cases the Lie-Lorentz derivative
vanishes without the requirement of imposing further projections on the
Killing spinor. This means that the new solutions that we found using
the technique of NATD preserve the same SUSY as the original solutions.

Let us now compute the Lie-Lorentz derivative along the Killing vector (
4.A.219 ) for the twisted geometries that are described by the formulas
( 4.5.44 )-( 4.5.48 ). In the previous section, which deals with the
supersymmetry of the starting solutions, we mentioned that the Killing
spinor does not depend on the isometry coordinates @xmath . This means
that the first term in ( 4.A.218 ) reduces to,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.220)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Hence for each of the three Killing vectors we find,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

For convenience we have defined the rotated @xmath -matrices,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.224)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Let us now compute the 1-forms that are dual to the Killing vectors.
What one has to do is to lower the index of the Killing vectors (
4.A.219 ) using the metric ( 4.5.44 ) which gives the following result,

  -- -- -- -------- -----------
                    (4.A.225)
           @xmath   
           @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -----------

The second term of ( 4.A.218 ) can be computed by acting with the
exterior derivative on the above 1-forms and contracting the result with
@xmath -matrices. Notice that in order to compare with ( 4.A.3 ) one has
to express the components of @xmath using the flat frame ( 4.5.48 ).
Finally for the second term of ( 4.A.218 ) we find,

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (4.A.226)
  -- -------- -- -----------

which means that the Lie-Lorentz derivative along the Killing vectors
@xmath vanishes.

In the case of the Donos-Gauntlett geometry ( 4.5.62 ) we notice that
all the necessary expressions are quite similar to those computed in the
previous subsection. This is because the only significant difference
between the line element of the twisted geometries and that of the
Donos-Gauntlett geometry is just a fiber term. As in the previous case,
the Killing spinor does not depend on the isometry coordinates @xmath .
This implies that the derivative term @xmath in eq. ( 4.A.218 ) has no
contribution to the result. Then the first term of eq. ( 4.A.218 ), for
each of the three Killing vectors, can be easily obtained from eq. (
4.A.3 ) by setting @xmath . Similarly, if we set @xmath into eq. (
4.A.225 ) we find the 1-forms @xmath for the Donos-Gauntlett case. Once
we know these 1-forms we can follow the same prescription as in the
previous subsection and compute the second term of ( 4.A.218 ) for each
Killing vector. It happens again that this term, when computed for every
Killing vector, is related to the first term by a minus sign and thus
the Lie-Lorentz derivative vanishes without imposing further projections
on the Killing spinor.

## Chapter 5 Holographic Ward identities in 1+1 QFT

The goal of the present chapter is the holographic description of Ward
Identities in 1+1 QFTs. We start with a review of the concepts of
symmetry breaking, Ward identities and Goldstone bosons in the field
theory side 5.1 . The peculiarities of 1+1 dimensional case are covered
in section 5.1.1 . In 5.2.1 , we will introduce the basics of
holographic renormalization for a scalar, while the AdS/CFT description
of symmetry breaking will be given in section 5.2.2 . Finally, we start
the presentation of the original results of the chapter, reaching the
desired holographically Ward identities in section 5.4 and discussing
them in 5.6 .

### 5.1 Symmetry breaking and Ward identities in QFT. Goldstone theorem

Symmetries play an absolutely fundamental role in High Energy Physics.
Nevertheless, this symmetries might be broken below a certain energy
scale, and therefore be absent in the experimental data. In this
situations, we say that the symmetry is broken. Concerning our
mathematical descriptions, the symmetry breaking can be explicit (in the
action, Hamiltonian or EoM), spontaneous (violated by the vacuum) or
both at the same time (concomitant). There are very important
phenomenological consequences. In High Energy Physics, a prominent
example is the Higgs mechanism ¹ ¹ 1 Indeed discovered nearly
simultaneously by Higgs, Brout and Englert, and Guralnik, Hagen and
Kibble. [ 72 , 101 , 113 , 114 , 115 ] (actually inspired by a condensed
matter related proposal [ 7 ] ). The discovery [ 1 , 52 ] of the Higgs
boson at CERN was recently awarded the Nobel Prize. The Higgs field
gives mass to the gauge bosons @xmath and @xmath without explicitly
breaking gauge symmetry. Another very important example the is chiral
symmetry breaking of QCD, which endows nucleons with mass [ 172 , 171 ]
. This work was also worthy of the Nobel prize. Another very
investigated but still unobserved case is SUSY breaking. In condensed
matter systems, the list of symmetry breaking instances is very large,
and some examples include every crystal (spatial translation is broken),
(anti)ferromagnets, superconductors and superfluids, to name a few.
Indeed, the BCS theory of superconditivity, that relies on symmetry
breaking, has also been worthy of Nobel Prize [ 13 ] . The relevance and
applicability of the concept is therefore clear. In the following we
give an introduction of the very elementary concepts from the field
theory side.

Consider an action invariant under some gauge group @xmath . In
classical Physics the Noether theorem asserts that every continuous
symmetry will be associated with a conserved current. In the quantum
setting, the analog result is given by the Ward identities, that will
play also a central role when the symmetry is broken. We begin by
briefly discussing the different kinds of symmetry breaking. The
simplest possibility is the explicit breaking, in which we add a term to
the action that is not invariant under @xmath . For concreteness and
also because is our case of interest, let us take @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.1.1)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is invariant under @xmath and for simplicity we consider
@xmath to have unity charge, therefore it breaks the symmetry. @xmath is
the explicit breaking parameter.

The second possibility is called spontaneous symmetry breaking (SSB). It
happens when the vacuum state @xmath is not invariant under all elements
of @xmath , or alternatively, it is not annihilated by all generators
@xmath of @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.1.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

For @xmath this generically implies that:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.1.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

and @xmath is called the vacuum expectation value of @xmath , VEV for
short. Despite @xmath being charged, we are going to take always real
@xmath . ² ² 2 This can always be achieved with a gauge transformation
These two quantities @xmath will appear extremely often: what we mean by
explicit breaking is @xmath and by spontaneous @xmath . Holographically,
they will be related to source and VEV of the scalar field dual to
@xmath . ³ ³ 3 This is so for standard quantization of the scaar. In
alternative quantization of the scalar, their roles are exchanged. The
third possibility is when both @xmath and receives the name of
concomitant symmetry breaking.

Now that we have introduced the first definitions of symmetry breaking,
let us explain its effect on the particle spectrum. This is indeed the
content of the Goldstone theorem from the 1960’s. [ 92 ] . It states
that when there is spontaneous symmetry breaking, massless scalar
particles will appear; they are called Goldstone bosons (GB). There are
as many GB as symmetry generators are broken. It must be emphasized that
this result holds in @xmath -dimensional QFT for @xmath . The
peculiarities of @xmath dimensional symmetry breaking are reviewed in
section 5.1.1 , as we want to describe them holographically. When the
breaking is concomitant with dominant spontaneous component, Goldstone
scalars become slightly massive and then they are referred as
pseudo-Goldstone bosons.

Let us relate the symmetry breaking and GB with the Ward identities as
promised above. The Ward identity is, by definition:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.1.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the current operator. The relations:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.1.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

follow from the Ward identity, and we will refer to them informally as
the Ward identities. @xmath is an unknown function, but the same for
both correlators. ⁴ ⁴ 4 Functions of @xmath can be understood as
operatorial relations between functions, for example in one dimension:
@xmath corresponds to @xmath , and from it we infer that @xmath .
However, these notation becomes more understandable in Fourier space,
where @xmath . The Fourier space is usually preferred for explicit
computations of correlators. We will sometimes keep the delta function
@xmath implicit. Furthermore, in two point functions the operator on the
left is evaluated in @xmath and the one on the right in @xmath , unless
stated otherwise, and often we will not write them. The main objective
of the present chapter is to holographically obtain ( 5.1.5 ) for 1+1
dimensions; the result can be found in section 5.4 , eqs. 5.4.98 .

The so called GMOR relations establish the mass of pseudo-GB in the
presence of small ESB. Although we will not use them, its (quantitative)
reproduction by a bottom-up model is a remarkable achievement of
holography presented in [ 11 ] . We will heavily rely on their methods,
and they will be reviewed in section 5.2 .

#### 5.1.1 Symmetry breaking in 1+1 QFT. Absence of SSB at finite N

The Goldstone theorem is valid only for spacetime dimension @xmath . In
@xmath (1+1 CFT), it is crucial to distinguish finite @xmath and
(strictly infinite) large @xmath behaviour. At finite @xmath , there are
no Goldstone bosons [ 55 ] . A similar situation happens in @xmath
dimensions with non-vanishing temperature [ 166 , 117 ] . These two
facts are collectively known as the Coleman-Mermin-Wagner theorem.

A simple physical intuition of the absence of SSB can be found in [ 158
] , and we quickly review it here. Consider a complex scalar field
@xmath , with cartesian components @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.1.6)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.1.7)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The action will be given by:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.1.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The last terms is introduced by hand to break the gauge symmetry and
@xmath is taken to be small. This parameter @xmath will make more clear
the limit of purely SSB, and we will take it to zero at the end.
Furthermore, the spatial length of the system is restricted with an IR
cutoff @xmath , that will also be taken to infinity at the end of the
computation. ⁵ ⁵ 5 Otherwise the results present IR divergences.

Taking into account these limits, we say that the @xmath symmetry is
spontaneously broken iff:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.1.9)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The order of limits is important, and if taken in the opposite order the
VEV will always vanish.

It is convenient to introduce the polar coordinates of the field @xmath
to focus on the phase. With that purpose we fix the value of the modulus
@xmath : ⁶ ⁶ 6 The validity of such approximation is also discussed in [
158 ] .

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.1.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

We are therefore left with a free field @xmath . The corresponding mode
expansion is well known:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.1.11)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

As the field is free, we can explicitly compute the 2pt. correlator:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.1.12)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

that diverges in the IR as @xmath , the limit of vanishing explicit
breaking. We have implicitly taken the @xmath limit. ⁷ ⁷ 7 The integral
is also UV divergent, but the Coleman theorem is essentially related to
IR behaviour ( cf. [ 158 ] ) . Therefore the fluctuations become
infinitely large in 2d for the free field. With it, we arrive at our
desired result for the VEV:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.1.13)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

Using ( 5.1.12 ), @xmath in the limit of @xmath , i.e. no explicit
breaking. As a consequence, both @xmath vanish, so do @xmath and
therefore the VEV of @xmath , @xmath , vanishes too. This is essentially
worded saying that quantum fluctuations erase the VEV in 2d. Notice that
it only happens in @xmath as in higher dimensions higher powers of
@xmath will appear in the numerator of ( 5.1.12 ) and the IR
contribution is finite. A similar phenomenon happens in 2+1 thermal
field theories. [ 166 , 117 ] .

Nevertheless, symmetry can be spontaneously broken ( [ 57 , 96 , 207 ] )
in the large @xmath limit , because of the fluctuation suppression it
produces. Actually, with non-zero temperature the situation is the same
in @xmath , as implied by the Mermin-Wagner theorem. The breaking of
symmetry is possible only for strict large @xmath . This result was
actually re-obtained holographically in [ 9 ] , using non-classical
calculations on the gravity side to include @xmath effects. We shall not
tackle such difficult computation, and instead we will find
holographically the presence of GB in eq. ( 5.5.111 ), as expected for
large @xmath .

### 5.2 Introduction to AdS/CFT of symmetry breaking

In this section we will introduce a few notions of holographic
renormalization and the AdS/CFT description symmetry breaking. Our
original work is totally based on them.

#### 5.2.1 Holographic renormalization of a scalar field (standard
quantization)

In this subsection we quickly review the formalism of holographic
renormalization using the example of a complex scalar field to compute 2
points functions of an operator in the boundary theory. After that, we
use the scalar to show an example of alternative quantization. This
simple case contains most of the key concepts that will appear in our
original work: correspondence between scalar and operator, gauge
transformations, counterterms, near boundary expansion and source choice
through alternative quantization. The general goal of holographic
renormalization is to compute n-point functions in the gauge theory
side. It is based on the precise formulation of AdS/CFT relating the
partition functions of the boundary and bulk theories. This is the
so-called Witten prescription, that we will use in the saddle point
approximation for gravity [ 208 , 97 ] :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.14)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.15)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the QFT generating functional. @xmath are the sources
(to be more clearly defined later), and @xmath is the boundary of the
asymptotically AdS space in the gravity side. ⁸ ⁸ 8 The on-shell action
can be computed using Euclidean or Lorentzian signature; we proceed with
the second. Notice that both sides of the correspondence have the same
sources @xmath . If one computes @xmath with the appropriate
renormalization, the @xmath correlators can be computed taking
functional derivatives on it:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.16)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

In similar fashion one computes correlators involving only @xmath and
the ones involving both @xmath and @xmath .

The main issue is how to compute the on-shell action to use ( 5.2.14 ).
We are going to ignore the backreaction of @xmath on the geometry ⁹ ⁹ 9
This can be done in certain situations, check [ 192 ] for more details.
. The dimension will be fixed to @xmath field theory, therefore
4-dimensional bulk. The action then is just the free scalar in AdS.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.17)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

The @xmath can be negative, but not arbitrarily. There is a minimal
physically acceptable value known as the BF bound [ 32 ] :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.2.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The mass will determine the dimension of the operator @xmath dual to
@xmath as:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.19)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.20)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

Besides, there is an upper bound given by unitarity of the dual field
theory (unitarity bound), that also further restricts the possible
values of @xmath . Taking into account both bounds, we obtain a neat
restriction on @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.2.21)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We are going to fix @xmath such that @xmath . This value is well inside
the BF and the unitarity bounds, and corresponds to the explicit
calculations in [ 11 ] . It is easy to solve the EoM of @xmath in pure
AdS, as it turns out to be Bessel equation. For values of @xmath close
to 0, the result is the well-known near boundary expansion of an scalar:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.22)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.23)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the radial coordinate we are going to use, and @xmath is
the near boundary region. Notice that linear and quadratic powers of
@xmath appear only because we chose @xmath . In general they will be
@xmath where @xmath is the mass of the scalar. @xmath are called the
modes of @xmath respectively. The next step is to evaluate the on-shell
action using the near-boundary expansion ( 5.2.22 ). As mentioned
before, it is UV divergent and needs a UV cutoff. In order to make it
finite, we need to add some counterterms @xmath that are boundary terms
in the bulk theory and gauge invariant. With it the renormalized action
is:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.24)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.25)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the pullback of the metric on the boundary. Using the
renormalized action, we can compute the variations:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.26)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

We see that it demands @xmath on the boundary to have vanishing
variation. When quantities fixed by the variational principle are
constant, all the sources should be constant too. When this happens we
will say that the sources are consistent with the variational principle.
Furthermore, it is the only requirement we will impose on the sources.
As @xmath constant in the boundary is consistent with the variational
principle, we can use them as a legitimate sources. The higher order
modes @xmath have to be written as functions of the sources @xmath . The
EoMs and normalizability in the bulk impose relations between the modes,
that we write generically as:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.27)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.28)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

We can now rewrite the action @xmath as:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.29)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

We finally compute the desired holographic correlators with functional
derivatives ( 5.2.16 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.30)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.31)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.32)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.33)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

The first follows as no linear term in @xmath appears, and the same
happens in the last one.

The only matter that remains is the precise form of @xmath . The EoM
have already been used; only remains to fix the integrations constant in
such a way they solution is normalizable in the bulk. The result is:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.34)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.35)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

where we are using the Fourier space representation of the correlators,
and @xmath . This is precisely the conformal result.

#### Alternative quantization of the scalar

Eq. ( 5.2.26 ) imposes to choose @xmath as a source. But we can make
@xmath sources if we add an appropriate boundary terms @xmath to the
action. Indeed:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.36)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.37)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

where we now must impose @xmath instead of @xmath as we did in the case
of ( 5.2.26 ). Therefore @xmath will be our new sources. @xmath is
sometimes called a Legendre term ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 In analogy with the Legendre
transform applied for example in Mechanics or Thermodynamics. The
necessity of a well defined variational principle and the addition of
the necessary terms is totally similar to the discussion of section 3.1
. . Choosing subleading expansion modes as sources is called alternative
quantization , in opposition to the standard quantization of the
previous section, that uses the leading modes as sources.

Different boundary terms can drastically change the holographic meaning
of a given gravity solution. For example, in 5.5 it changes from
representing purely explicit symmetry breaking to purely spontaneous.
Furthermore, let’s mention a relevant application introduced in [ 137 ]
. When one uses standard quantization, the lowest dual operator
dimension described by holography is @xmath . Nevertheless, the
unitarity bound of CFT is lower than @xmath and given by @xmath . It
turns out that the range of dimensions @xmath can be covered using
alternative quantization.

A similar kind of boundary terms will change the source for the vector
field in section 5.3.3 , and this will be needed to describe conserved
current holographically in 2d.

These examples contain key elements that will appear in the original
results of the chapter and that are also common to many holographic
renormalizations:

1.  Scalar-operator correspondence,

2.  Relation of scalar mass and operator dimension, allowed dimensions
    and bounds,

3.  Necessity of gauge invariant combinations of modes,

4.  Counterterms,

5.  Determination of sources.

Of course there are several aspects left out. Among the most important
are the role of backreaction (which is necessary for holographic
stress-energy tensor [ 62 ] and correlators involving @xmath ) and the
systematic determination of counterterms [ 178 ] .

#### 5.2.2 Holographic U(1) symmetry breaking and analytic Goldstone
bosons in AdS@xmath

The purpose of this section is to review how to obtain the Ward
identities ( 5.1.5 ) in @xmath via AdS/CFT. We will use the methods
presented in [ 11 ] . ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 Some early AdS/CFT work on description of
symmetries and their breaking can be found in [ 137 , 26 , 27 ] . The
first step is to introduce the holographic bottom-up action ¹² ¹² 12
Although it has been proven that it can be embedded in SUGRA for some
values of the parameters. :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.2.38)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath , @xmath . We are not going to consider the backreaction of
@xmath on the geometry. ¹³ ¹³ 13 This is justified in [ 11 ] , page 9.
This model is well known in the literature by the name of holographic
superconductor [ 103 , 104 ] . We have chosen mass @xmath , that
corresponds to @xmath . It contains the simplest necessary fields to
describe SSB: A @xmath vector field @xmath minimally coupled to a
charged scalar @xmath .

The explicit and spontaneous symmetry breaking are introduced through a
finite background @xmath [ 104 ] in the scalar, around which the field
fluctuates. We also decompose the vector in transversal and longitudinal
part:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.39)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.40)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.41)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

We make the standard gauge fixing @xmath (radial gauge). The parameters
@xmath in this background will be the same as the @xmath introduced in (
5.1.4 ) and ( 5.1.3 ). Using the EoMs for @xmath , we find the near UV
expansions: ¹⁴ ¹⁴ 14 As stressed in ( 5.2.22 ), the powers appearing in
@xmath expansion are determined by dimension and scalar mass choice
@xmath . In particular, other choices can lead to non-entire powers or
even logarithms.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.42)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.43)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.44)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

We do not consider explicitly the transverse part @xmath as its EoM are
completely decoupled and it is not the source of the desired Ward
identities. The counterterms and in general all the boundary terms that
are added to the action are required to:

1.  Cancel all divergences.

2.  Respect the symmetries of the action (for example gauge symmetry.)
    ¹⁵ ¹⁵ 15 If the renormalization can only be done with non-invariant
    terms, then the quantum theory will not preserve the symmetry. This
    is called an anomaly.

3.  Have a well defined variational principle, consistent with the
    desired sources.

In this case, we can meet those criteria with the same counterterm (
5.2.24 ) as the free scalar. To be able to compute correlators we have
to write expansion modes in terms of the sources. Notice that gauge
transformations mix @xmath at first order in fluctuations through @xmath
:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.45)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.46)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the infinitesimal gauge transformation. It is therefore
necessary to mix @xmath and @xmath to write gauge-invariant relations,
namely:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.47)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

instead of @xmath in terms only of @xmath like we did in ( 5.2.27 ).

To reproduce the Ward identities ( 5.1.5 ) in terms of one unknown
function it is not necessary to solve the EoM of the fluctuations. We
only need to solve them if we want to know the form of that unknown
function. The only remaining ingredient is the guess of the coupling
between sources and operators:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.2.48)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Using it, we holographically derive exactly the VEV and the desired Ward
identities ( 5.1.5 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.49)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.50)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.51)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

Once the function @xmath is known analytically, which is possible in
this model with the @xmath choice, one can study @xmath and search for
the Goldstone boson as the IR poles of it. For example, taking the
results for @xmath [ 11 ] (purely spontaneous breaking):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2.52)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

signals the GB. The case of interest in 1+1 will follow the procedure of
this section, except for one crucial difference: the constant term
@xmath will no longer be the dominant term in the expansion of @xmath ,
eq. ( 5.2.42 ). For @xmath to become source, we need especial boundary
terms as explained in section 5.3.3 .

### 5.3 Holographic renormalization of scalar and U(1) gauge field in
AdS@xmath

From now on until the end of the chapter we present our original
results. We will consider a fixed AdS @xmath background with a vector
field and a complex scalar. This is the minimal bulk field content to
describe a symmetry current and an operator charged under it. Later,
holographic renormalization is performed in order to find the correct
Ward identities describing symmetry breaking. This has a subtlety
related to the fact that a vector in a three-dimensional bulk can have
different boundary conditions [ 164 ] . We will see that coupling it to
a charged scalar with a non-trivial profile singles out one boundary
condition, the one that correctly corresponds to a conserved current in
the boundary theory. Besides reproducing the Ward identities, including
the situation where also explicit breaking is present, an analytically
Goldstone boson is found in a specific toy example. Finally the
implications and context of the result are discussed.

#### 5.3.1 Preamble: a free vector alone in AdS@xmath

The procedure of holographic renormalization exhibits many subtleties
for a vector in 2+1 bulk dimensions. Most of them are related to the
fact that a vector in AdS @xmath has properties analogous to a scalar at
the Breitenlohner-Freedman (BF) bound [ 32 ] . We then start the study
of the peculiarities of holographic renormalization in two dimensions
with a preliminary discussion of a free gauge field in AdS @xmath ,
before coupling it to matter and analyzing the physics of symmetry
breaking.

As a precedent, the case of a vector in AdS @xmath was discussed briefly
in [ 164 ] along with higher dimensions. It was stated that only a
particular boundary condition led to normalizable fluctuations. It was
also noted there that it can be useful to dualize the bulk vector into a
bulk massless scalar. This approach was also followed in [ 74 ] , where
different boundary conditions were selected, in the dual frame.

Here, we will stick to a vector in bulk AdS @xmath and discuss how one
has to perform renormalization when imposing the boundary condition of [
164 ] . In the next sections we will show that a different boundary
condition is needed for consistency with the derivation of the Ward
identities.

We take the following bulk action for a free Abelian gauge field: ¹⁶ ¹⁶
16 Being in three dimensions, one could include a Chern-Simons term for
the vector (see for instance [ 8 ] for a careful discussion in a similar
perspective). Since our aim is to stay as close as possible to the
higher dimensional cases, where such a term is not present, we will take
here the minimalistic approach and set it to zero. This choice is of
course protected by parity.

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.53)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the usual electromagnetic field strength, and @xmath is
the AdS @xmath metric in the Poincaré patch,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We choose the radial gauge @xmath , and we divide the remainder into
transversal and longitudinal components,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.54)
  -- -------- -- ----------

so that the action becomes

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.55)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The action ( 5.3.53 ) leads to the following equations of motion:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.56)
     @xmath      (5.3.57)
     @xmath      (5.3.58)
  -- -------- -- ----------

From the last two equations we derive the asymptotic behaviors of the
fields,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.59)
  -- -------- -- ----------

while from the first one we can drop the term in the action ( 5.3.55 )
involving the longitudinal component. Note that the presence of the
logarithmic terms entails that the constant terms can suffer from an
ambiguity. We will deal later on with this issue.

Then we can integrate by parts and use the equation of motion for @xmath
to express the action as a boundary term:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.60)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which needs to be renormalized because of the logarithmic divergence.

If we want to write a counterterm that removes this divergence and is
gauge invariant, we may build it out of the field strength, but we soon
realize that we then have to make it non local. This turns out to be
equivalent to a mass term, which is absolutely local, but gauge
invariant only on-shell, by equation ( 5.3.56 ). Indeed, ¹⁷ ¹⁷ 17 A
counterterm with a @xmath prefactor is typically needed for scalars at
the BF bound, see e.g. [ 27 ] .

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath               (5.3.61)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the induced metric on the two-dimensional boundary, and
the identity in the second line holds indeed thanks to the constraint (
5.3.56 ).

With such counterterm the renormalized action, @xmath , reads

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.62)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The variational principle gives

  -- -- -- ----------
           (5.3.63)
  -- -- -- ----------

so that, taking into account the last line of ( 5.3.1 ), we have

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.64)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The source for the operator dual to @xmath would thus be @xmath , in
agreement with [ 164 ] . Note that as the source is transverse, the dual
operator enjoys a gauge symmetry and thus cannot be a conserved current,
it would be a pure gauge field.

We stress that the counterterm we have to introduce in two boundary
dimensions, which has the form of a mass term, does not have an
equivalent in any higher dimensions. This might be reminiscent of the
Schwinger model (see e.g. [ 95 ] for a modern exposition), where the
photon mass is also generated by exactly the same non-local term. Note
however that here we are dealing with a non-local counterterm, due to a
non-local UV divergent term, while in two-dimensional QED the
loop-generated mass of the photon is finite.

In [ 164 ] it is noted that the above boundary conditions for the vector
are equivalent to the usual boundary conditions one would impose on the
massless scalar that is equivalent to (the transverse part of) the
vector by bulk duality:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.65)
  -- -------- -- ----------

It is straightforward to see that the usual, local counterterm that one
writes for @xmath corresponds to the non-local one found above.

Profiting from this dual formulation, the authors of [ 74 ] have argued
that in order to describe a conserved current in the boundary theory,
one should impose mixed boundary conditions on @xmath , which are
interpolating between the ordinary and the alternative quantizations [
137 ] (see also [ 168 ] ). ¹⁸ ¹⁸ 18 We should note that when considering
the holographic correspondence between string theory on AdS @xmath and
boundary CFT @xmath as in [ 90 ] , there is a natural prescription to
describe CFT currents, which are actually enhanced to Kac-Moody
generators. The techniques are however different from the ones employed
here, in particular there is no renormalization. Below, we are going to
see that coupling the vector to a scalar leaves us with the only choice
of the alternative quantization for the vector. We consider now a
holographic model for spontaneous symmetry breaking in a 1+1 dimensional
boundary field theory. We thus consider the following action, of an
Abelian gauge field coupled to a complex scalar in AdS @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.66)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where

  -- -- -------- --
        @xmath   
        @xmath   
  -- -- -------- --

From the equations of motion of a free scalar in AdS @xmath , one can
infer the following scaling dimensions for the dual boundary
operator/source:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.67)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We then fluctuate the complex scalar around a fixed background,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.68)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We take @xmath and @xmath to be real for definiteness. When the scalar
is in the ordinary quantization, the sub-leading piece (proportional to
@xmath ) triggers a VEV for the real part of the dual boundary operator,
and so leads to spontaneous symmetry breaking of the global @xmath . The
leading piece (proportional to @xmath ) corresponds to explicit breaking
of the symmetry, and we keep it different from zero for the moment, in
order to use it as a sort of regulator. It will indeed turn out that we
will need it in some intermediary steps.

Moreover, we fix the radial gauge @xmath and we conveniently split the
gauge field into transverse and longitudinal components as in ( 5.3.54
). We then derive from the variation of the action the following
linearized equations of motion for the fluctuated fields:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.69)
     @xmath      (5.3.70)
     @xmath      (5.3.71)
     @xmath      (5.3.72)
     @xmath      (5.3.73)
  -- -------- -- ----------

As we have seen in the previous section, in three dimensions the vector
field is at the BF bound, and indeed we have the following asymptotic
expansions near the boundary:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.74)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The asymptotic expansion of the two scalar components depends on the
value of the bulk mass. Let us set ourselves in the window between the
BF bound ( @xmath ) and the “massless bound” ( @xmath ), and exclude the
two extremal values, which would need to be treated separately since
they entail logarithms. For all other values in this window, the scalar
asymptotic expansions are logarithm-free. We thus have the following
expansions,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.75)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We can now, integrating by parts and using the equations of motion,
reduce the action to a boundary term, which reads

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.3.76)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

By using the asymptotic expansions we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.3.77)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

We see that the divergent pieces of the scalar sector can be removed by
the usual counterterm (in which we subtract the background value)

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.3.78)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

leaving only the logarithmic divergences of the vector sector:

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.3.79)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

We would like to remove also these divergences and then express the
renormalized action in terms of the sources only. To do so, we need to
identify which are the sources. Normally the source is associated with
the leading term in the small @xmath expansion of the field, unless one
performs alternative quantization. For the gauge vector field, in any
higher dimension the leading piece corresponds to a constant term. In
our case instead, due to the fact that the vector is at the BF bound and
to the consequent presence of the logarithmic term, the leading term is
no longer the constant one. Then we would be naively led to choose the
logarithmic term as the source, as we indeed did in the previous
section. For the transverse part this does not pose any particular
problem, but for the longitudinal part, which in the present case does
not disappear from the boundary action, it is more problematic.

Note that the longitudinal part of the vector shifts under gauge
transformations, which in the radial gauge @xmath are constant in @xmath
. It is then the constant term in @xmath that shifts, in any boundary
dimensions, including two. Thus in our case it is @xmath defined by (
5.3.74 ) that shifts under gauge transformations. In other words, it is
the constant part of @xmath that has gauge transformations, and so
should be the source of a boundary conserved current. Then it seems
reasonable to try to alternatively quantize the vector, and move the
source from the coefficient of the logarithm to the @xmath -constant,
gauge-dependent term.

#### 5.3.2 Ordinary quantization for the vector

In first place, however, let us renormalize the vector in ordinary
quantization, i.e. keeping the source to be @xmath . The point of this
subsection is to show that this approach does however lead to a flawed
physical picture, and that a different choice has to be made.

We then compute first the variation of the regularized action ( 5.3.66
), namely

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.3.80)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

It is crucial here not to use the constraint ( 5.3.69 ), which in
components yields

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.81)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This equation is relating the coefficient of the logarithm to the source
and VEV of the fluctuating scalar @xmath . The equations of motion can
be used to express VEV’s in term of sources, but since we do not know
yet whether @xmath will be a source or not, we have to remain off-shell
to check the variational principle.

We then vary the counterterm for the scalar divergences,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath               (5.3.82)
                          @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -- -------- ----------

so that we get

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.3.83)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

Thus the scalar sources appear to be well-defined in the ordinary
quantization, but of course we still have to renormalize the vector
sector. A mass-like counterterm as the one of the previous section (
5.3.1 ) will not help in renormalizing the longitudinal component. We
propose the following gauge invariant, local counterterm:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

whose variation is

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.3.85)
                          
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

We notice that such counterterm (and its variation as well) is singular
in the limit @xmath , and so in the purely spontaneous case it would not
do the job. Keeping instead @xmath , we obtain

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.86)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We see that in this way the variational principle is well defined (even
if still singular in @xmath ), and in particular @xmath should be
considered as the source. Then we had better interpret the constraint (
5.3.81 ) as an expression for @xmath in terms of the sources. In this
point of view the renormalized action is

  -- -- -- ----------
           (5.3.87)
  -- -- -- ----------

Again we see that all the terms involving the source of the imaginary
part of the dual scalar operator explode for @xmath . No theory of
spontaneous breaking can be extracted out of this, which is consistent
with the fact that the VEV of the longitudinal component of the vector
is gauge-dependent in this quantization. Moreover, in the purely
spontaneous case the constraint coming from eq. ( 5.3.69 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.88)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which strengthens the idea that @xmath cannot be the source of the
conserved current. Indeed, @xmath is the source for the imaginary part
of the scalar, and so @xmath cannot be another source, ¹⁹ ¹⁹ 19 A
similar situation happens in cascading solutions, as for instance in [
25 ] . and therefore we confirm that we are forced to do the alternative
quantization on the vector.

Let us then show how to alternatively quantize the vector field and put
the source back to the gauge-dependent, @xmath -constant term @xmath ,
as in any higher dimensions.

#### 5.3.3 Alternative quantization for the vector

We should then try to renormalize in a different way, such that we move
the source to the constant term. This is achieved by considering an
additional counterterm, of the Legendre transform kind, such as the
following one:

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (5.3.89)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

Indeed its variation is

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and, taking the expression ( 5.3.83 ), and the variation of the ordinary
counterterm ( 5.3.2 ), the combination

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
                 (5.3.91)
  -- -------- -- ----------

yields the desired switch of the sources. Furthermore, the corresponding
renormalized action reads

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.3.92)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where we have used the constraint ( 5.3.81 ) to remove @xmath , which is
not a source anymore. Notice that both ( 5.3.3 ) and ( 5.3.92 ) are
finite in the @xmath limit.

This renormalized action is completely identical to those of higher
space-time dimensions and gives the suitable Ward identities for a
pseudo-Goldstone boson (see for instance [ 11 ] for the
three-dimensional case). However, both counterterms we have used ( 5.3.2
) and ( 5.3.89 ) are singular for @xmath (even if the final result is
not), so our action cannot be renormalized in this way if we set @xmath
from the beginning.

We realize however that there is another gauge invariant and local
counterterm that yields the same action as @xmath in one step, namely

  -- -------- -------- -- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath         (5.3.93)
  -- -------- -------- -- -- ----------

This counterterm, subtracted to ( 5.3.79 ), trivially gives the
renormalized action ( 5.3.92 ). The counterterm is then equivalent to
the combination @xmath , and is not singular when @xmath .

Note that this could be interpreted to mean that the limits @xmath (high
UV) and @xmath (purely spontaneous breaking) do not commute at large
@xmath . In order to make explicit this non-commutativity of the two
limits, we can write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We see immediately that if we take first the limit @xmath we get the
desired counterterm @xmath , which is independent of @xmath and so the
subsequent @xmath limit is ineffective; whereas if we take first the
limit @xmath , we have no singularities thanks to @xmath , but we have
surviving divergences in @xmath when we take the @xmath limit
afterwards, namely:

  -- -- -- ----------
           (5.3.94)
  -- -- -- ----------

One could be tempted to interpret this as a signal of the impossibility
of taking @xmath and @xmath at the same time, i.e. no spontaneous
symmetry breaking. However the counterterm ( 5.3.93 ) is perfectly
well-behaved on its own, and it can actually be written also for the
vector alone, whereas this is not the case for the two intermediate
steps (( 5.3.2 ), ( 5.3.89 )), which are actually even more singular
when all the scalar background is taken to zero. We cannot thus exclude
the counterterm ( 5.3.93 ), and with it we have to allow for spontaneous
symmetry breaking in two dimensions, confirming the expected holographic
evasion of the Coleman theorem.

The counterterm ( 5.3.93 ) has an explicit @xmath factor, leading to the
possibility to add also a finite counterterm with a similar structure
and an arbitrary prefactor. This is indeed what was analyzed in [ 74 ]
in the dual frame, with the interpretation of the introduction of a
double-trace current-current deformation and the consequence of a
non-trivial RG flow. Here we note that such a finite counterterm would
spoil the identification of @xmath and @xmath as sources, shifting them
by an arbitrary amount linear in @xmath and @xmath respectively. In the
following, we take the point of view that the ambiguity in the @xmath
has been fixed, and we have taken @xmath and @xmath to be our sources.
It is indeed this prescription that allows us to find the expected Ward
identities.

One last comment about alternative quantization for the vector field is
that, if one holds @xmath fixed and lets @xmath loose, then according to
[ 164 ] the fluctuations are not normalizable. This seems the price to
pay to describe in the boundary theory a proper conserved current, whose
existence we have no reason to exclude for a two-dimensional CFT. In
addition, let us say that while for scalars bulk non-normalizability is
usually connected to boundary operators with dimension below the
unitarity bound, in the present case we do not see what problematic
scenario this non-normalizability would correspond to in the dual
theory; on the contrary, we have shown that everything works as smoothly
as in higher dimensions precisely when we choose the alternative
quantization for the vector field.

### 5.4 Ward identities of symmetry breaking in AdS@xmath/Cft@xmath

Once we have obtained the renormalized action ( 5.3.92 ), then showing
that the Ward identities are realized is systematic. It actually follows
from the same arguments as in [ 11 ] . First we rewrite the action as

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Then we remark that the equations of motions and gauge invariance
dictate the relations between VEVs and sources to take the following
form:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.4.95)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the @xmath ’s are typically non-local functions, obtained by
solving the EOM with appropriate IR boundary conditions (i.e. in the
deep bulk).

Replacing in the action yields the generating functional for one- and
two-point functions, depending explicitly on sources only:

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.4.96)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

Using the usual dictionary, for instance

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.4.97)
  -- -------- -- ----------

we get for the correlators most relevant to the Ward identities

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.4.98)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is a function enforced by fluctuations EoM and IR decaying
boundary conditions, as defined in eq. ( 5.4.95 ); @xmath is a constant
given by @xmath . This is our main result, and we can summarize the
whole chapter as:

1.  @xmath must be used as source of a boundary conserved current.

2.  One needs a boundary term like ( 5.3.93 ) such that: 1) divergences
    of the action are countered, 2) @xmath appears as a source in the
    variational principle (( 5.3.3 )) of the renormalized action.

3.  After the previous two steps, the expected Ward identities are
    recovered in ( 5.4.98 ).

As in [ 11 ] , we can obtain directly the Goldstone boson pole in the
purely spontaneous case from ( 5.4.96 ) and ( 5.4.97 ). In momentum
space, relativistic invariance and the Ward identity force the mixed
correlator to be

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.4.99)
  -- -------- -- ----------

displaying the expected massless pole. Furthermore when turning on
@xmath , one can argue that @xmath has to have a pole with a mass square
proportional to @xmath . Hence also @xmath has a massless pole in the
@xmath limit. We will not repeat these steps here because they are
clearly independent of the dimension of space-time. The Coleman theorem
kicks in only after one considers (perturbative) quantum corrections due
to the massless particle. Clearly holography does not capture such
quantum corrections, which we then assume to be suppressed by the large
@xmath limit.

In the following section, in order to cover all possibilities (namely,
all scalar operator dimensions between @xmath and @xmath ), we will
briefly perform alternative quantization also in the scalar sector.
Moreover, this will allow us to work out an analytic expression for
@xmath for a specific value of the dimension of the dual boundary
operator.

### 5.5 Alternative quantization of the scalar. Analytic Goldstone boson

Here, as we did for the vector field, the goal is to move the sources to
the subleading terms for the scalar as well. That is, we are interested
in considering @xmath as the sources.

In order to change the boundary conditions we should consider a Legendre
transformation of the scalar counterterm ( 5.3.78 ), that is

  -- -------- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.5.100)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- -----------

Then the following combination is free from scalar divergences,

  -- -------- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (5.5.101)
  -- -------- -------- -- -----------

and @xmath and @xmath have opposite meanings with respect to ( 5.3.79 ).
We can verify by the variational principle that indeed the sources and
VEV’s are switched. If we take the expression ( 5.3.80 ) and subtract
the variation of the present counterterm, we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (5.5.102)
  -- -------- -------- -- -----------

as desired.

Then we use the counterterm ( 5.3.93 ) to remove the vector divergences
as well, and we get the renormalized action where both the vector and
the scalar are in the alternative quantization:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (5.5.103)
  -- -------- -- -----------

We remark that, since now the purely spontaneous breaking occurs for
@xmath , the two counterterms ( 5.3.2 ), ( 5.3.89 ) are now well behaved
for the purely spontaneous case, whereas they are singular for the
purely explicit one. Since we do not expect any obstruction for explicit
symmetry breaking specific to two dimensions, this confirms that the
counterterm ( 5.3.93 ) is the correct one, while it is the ordinary
quantization for the vector which is problematic.

If we now express the VEV’s in terms of the gauge-invariant sources in
the following way:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (5.5.104)
  -- -------- -- -----------

(where the @xmath ’s are just the reciprocals of the @xmath ’s), we can
rewrite the renormalized action uniquely in terms of the sources,

  -- -------- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.5.105)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- -----------

From this renormalized action we can retrieve Ward identities that are
completely equivalent to those in ( 5.4.98 ), with inverted roles for
@xmath and @xmath (and @xmath going into @xmath ).

To conclude the discussion, we would like to provide an explicit
expression for the two-point correlator of @xmath , where the massless
Goldstone pole should be found. For @xmath , that in alternative
quantization corresponds to purely spontaneous breaking, and @xmath ,
corresponding to the dimension of the boundary operator equal to @xmath
, the equation of motion ( 5.3.71 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (5.5.106)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath . This equation can be analytically solved, and, if we
impose boundary conditions such that the solution is not exploding in
the deep bulk, we obtain the following well-behaved function

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (5.5.107)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath is the Tricomi’s hypergeometric function.

From the constraint ( 5.3.69 ) we get

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (5.5.108)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath is the constant term in the small @xmath expansion.
Similarly, from the equation of motion ( 5.3.71 ) we can express the
gauge invariant combination involving @xmath in the following way:

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (5.5.109)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Then we can derive the final expression for the correlator:

  -- -------- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.5.110)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath is the Euler-Mascheroni constant, and @xmath is the
di-gamma function. Using the expansion @xmath for large @xmath , one
verifies that both the linear term @xmath and the logarithmic term
@xmath in the numerator of the equation above cancel in the @xmath
limit. In this way, the low energy behavior of this correlator exhibits
the expected Goldstone massless pole, namely

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (5.5.111)
  -- -------- -- -----------

We have thus confirmed the presence of the Goldstone boson, in addition
to the constraints imposed by the Ward identities.

### 5.6 Discussion

We have verified from the holographic point of view that in the strict
large @xmath limit spontaneous symmetry breaking can occur in two
dimensions [ 207 ] . Indeed, considering the minimal AdS @xmath /CFT
@xmath setup in which symmetry breaking can be produced, we have
retrieved the canonical Ward identities ( 5.4.98 ) as they appear in
higher dimensions [ 11 ] . Nevertheless, the way to get this result
involves subtleties and peculiarities which are specific to two
dimensions. The most crucial one is that we have to renormalize the
gauge field in the alternative quantization, if we want it to properly
source a conserved current and then recover the correct Ward identities
for the breaking of a global symmetry on the boundary.

We can consider quantum corrections to the result that we have obtained,
taking inspiration from [ 9 ] , and compute a bulk tadpole correction to
the scalar profile. It would presumably reproduce the infrared
divergence which is responsible for preventing the vacuum expectation
value, mirroring a similar field theory computation. Such a quantum
effect, by the holographic correspondence, is equivalent to a @xmath
correction in the boundary theory.

On the other hand, we can think of the question directly in field
theory, considering the canonical example of a complex scalar field with
a Mexican-hat potential, as in [ 158 ] . In @xmath dimensions, the large
quantum fluctuations of the phase would prevent the selection of a
specific ground state around the circle at the minimum of the potential.
However, if we add an arbitrarily small (but finite) explicit breaking,
this would select a particular ground state, and act as a regulator for
the infra-red divergence, making such vacuum stable under quantum
fluctuations. Hence, for explicit breaking parametrically smaller than
the spontaneous one, we expect (even at finite @xmath ) a mode that is
hierarchically lighter than the rest of the spectrum, and whose mass is
linear in the explicit breaking parameter, in accordance with the
renowned Gell-Mann–Oakes–Renner relation [ 87 ] . So, if there are no
Goldstone bosons in two dimensions, there definitely should be
pseudo-Goldstone bosons in two dimensions, and we have just provided a
holographic description of the latter.

## Chapter 6 Summary and conclusions

In the present thesis we have the long term motivation of testing and
extending the domain of applicability of the AdS/CFT correspondence.
This goal has been made concrete in three different problems, which we
summarize alongside with the main results in the following pages.

Quantum Theory describes our most essential principles of the very small
scales, roughly ranging from molecular and condensed matter to
elementary particles. Its success in explaining and predicting physical
phenomena is simply extraordinary. The other great revolution of early
XX century was the General theory of Relativity, that explains gravity
but has profound conceptual implications for the rest of Physics. One
can naively apply on it the principles of Quantum Mechanics seeking a
Quantum description of Gravity but the resulting theory is not
renormalizable. Indeed, finding a consistent Quantum Theory of gravity,
and experimentally testing it, is one of the most relevant problems of
current Fundamental Physics.

The most developed candidate to reach that goal is string theory. After
more than 20 years of extensive work on it, the AdS/CFT correspondence
(a.k.a. holography, holographic duality and gauge/gravity
correspondence) was discovered by Maldacena in 1997. In its most
frequent use, it states the equivalence of QFT at large @xmath and
strong coupling with classical gravity theories in AdS. This means that
it is possible to compute strongly coupled QFT quantities (typically
very hard) using weakly coupled classical gravity. It is in the context
of the correspondence where this thesis’ research was done.

### 6.1 AdS to dS phase transition in higher curvature gravity

We have examined the role of higher curvature gravity corrections on
thermal phase transitions between AdS and dS geometries. Apart from the
natural gravitational interest, this research may be eventually helpful
to clarify the holographic correspondence in the case of asymptotically
dS geometries.

Higher curvature corrections to gravity are studied for a variety of
reasons: as string theory (or any other high energy gravity theory) low
energy effective actions, to test their cosmological effects, from a
purely classical gravitation point of view, to explore their holographic
meaning, etcetera. Among those theories, Lovelock family have some
special properties. We have focused on the simplest non-GR case of the
Lovelock family, known as Lanczos-Gauss-Bonnet gravity. The potential
holographic relevance of the problem is that we have a dynamical process
in which the initial state is asymptotically AdS while after some time a
dS cosmological horizon is formed.

Despite our emphasis in higher curvature theories, gravitational phase
transitions can also happen in GR; for example, the well known
Hawking-Page transition [ 106 ] . Furthermore, it is certainly possible
for a phase transition in GR to change spacetime asymptotics. A simple
way is the transition between the different non-degenerated minima of a
scalar potential. [ 56 ] . Normally, these transitions end in AdS
vacuum, while in our case it ends in a dS one.

What is specific of higher curvature corrections is that the transitions
can happen between asymptotics of different curvature radius even in the
absence of matter [ 43 ] . This process is mediated by bubble
nucleation. The interior of such bubbles contains a solution with the
geometry of the final vacuum (dS in our case) and it is matched to an
exterior solution with the initial asymptotics (AdS in our example) with
appropriate junction conditions. When the thermalon -euclidean section
of the static bubble- has lower free energy than the initial solution,
bubble nucleation is triggered. The new configuration is dynamically
unstable, thereby it will either collapse or expand. The last
possibility will give rise to the desired change in the asymptotics. Let
us remark that the metric is continuous at the junction but the
derivatives are not; despite it such solution must be considered as a
legitimate competing saddle in the euclidean path integral approximation
to free energy [ 43 ] .

Our main result is a phase transition from thermal AdS to the formation
of dS cosmological horizon in Lanczos-Gauss-Bonnet gravity. The
transition happens through the proliferation of bubbles hosting dS black
holes in their interior. No matter fields are required to match both
sides of the bubble due to the Lanczos-Gauss-Bonnet term. For other
higher curvature corrections we generically expect a similar phenomenon.
The transition becomes disfavored from a maximum value of the higher
curvature coupling @xmath , although thermal fluctuations could trigger
them given enough time. In previous studies of AdS to AdS transitions
was favored beyond a critical temperature for all @xmath .

It is important to remind the limitations of our analysis. The main one
is the Boulware-Deser instability of the initial AdS vacuum, meaning
that the graviton field presents ghosts around that vacuum. Nevertheless
it is easy to find higher order Lovelock theories having two different
stable Boulware-Deser vacua, although there are many additional
technical complications to compute the bubble free energy. Such analysis
was carried out in fourth order Lovelock by the authors of [ 43 ] , and
the transition between two AdS healthy vacua was shown to take place. We
also conjecture that the same kind of thermalon mediated phase
transitions are generic in higher curvature theories, not exclusively in
Lanczos-Gauss-Bonnet or Lovelock.

There are other limitations deserving some comments. In [ 44 ] , the
quadratic theories of gravity have been found to display causality
violation, rendering them inconsistent at least in this respect.
Notably, it was found in [ 59 ] that for certain string-brane scattering
the massless modes approximation is inconsistent. However, if the full
stringy structure (in particular the Regge behaviour) is taken into
account the causality violating effects found in [ 44 ] are avoided.
Nevertheless, the Lanczos-Gauss-Bonnet theories still remain acceptable
models for many purposes, for example the study of hydrodynamics.
Another point of concern, related to the previous one and that is
actually present in part of our work, is that for small @xmath the
curvature of one of the vacua goes as @xmath , and from a stringy point
of view, curvature corrections of order higher than quadratic should be
necessary.

The main open question concerning the transitions is clearly their
potential holographic meaning, which remains unknown to us. A first step
may be to analyze the observables of the static bubble configuration,
for example the Wilson loop at large enough distances so that the string
penetrates the bubble or even the horizon. A second stage would be the
computation of similar observables during the expansion of the bubble,
along the lines of, for example, [ 146 ] . Finally, one may try to study
the dS geometry in which the transition ends, following the research
line of dS/CFT correspondence started by Strominger in 2001 [ 193 ] .

### 6.2 Deformation of KW CFT and new AdS@xmath backgrounds via
non-Abelian T-duality

We found new solutions of Supergravity using non-Abelian T-duality, a
generating technique based on string theory. Such new solutions
represent supersymmetric RG flows from four to two dimensions, and we
investigate the effects of the Non-Abelian T-duality on the holographic
observables. The problem also presents a (super)gravitational
motivation, as the generated solutions can fall outside known
classifications, as it happens in [ 154 ] . Apart from being interesting
in themselves, the new field theories may help to understand the effect
of non-Abelian duality on the string theory sigma model, its
supergravity approximation and the interplay with holographic
correspondence.

There are deformations of Klebanov-Witten (KW) background AdS @xmath T
@xmath flowing to an AdS @xmath factor in the IR. We generated new
examples applying non-Abelian T-duality on them. After it, we compared
the holographic observables of the generated solutions with those of the
previously known deformations. The new dual field theories seem to be
related to long linear quiver gauge theories. This paragraph summarizes
the whole research.

To be more detailed, we have considered two kinds of geometries on which
NATD is applied. The first is given by the duals of some 4d QFT placed
on a manifold @xmath ; in particular an @xmath SUSY flow with @xmath and
non-SUSY fixed points with @xmath ; we called them ’twisted solutions’.
The second kind is the deformation of KW found by Donos and Gauntlett in
[ 66 ] , that we refer to as the Donos-Gauntlett (DG) solution. This
last background was chosen as seed of the generating technique
essentially for three reasons: it is a deformation of KW flowing to AdS
@xmath , it is supersymmetric and can be related by two Abelian
T-dualities to AdS @xmath S @xmath S @xmath S @xmath . This last
background is the near horizon limit of D1-D5 brane intersection and
some discussion of its possible field theory dual can be found in [ 198
] .

The solutions generated that are T-dual to a flow are also RG flows from
AdS @xmath to an AdS @xmath factor. They are new type IIA SUGRA
backgrounds and preserve SUSY and regularity. By construction very
non-trivial fields and coordinate dependence appear. On one of the new
geometries, we have also performed Abelian T-duality after the
non-Abelian one. Furthermore we have lifted the IIA solutions to 11D
SUGRA. The main limitation of the NATD procedure is that the generating
technique does not give a prescription on the coordinate ranges for the
new background, and therefore its global properties are not determined a
priori. Nevertheless, recent progress on the subject has given a
non-trivial interpretation of the unknown ranges based on the
holographic field theory [ 156 ] .

Concerning the observables dual to the new geometries, we have analyzed
Page charges, c-function, entanglement entropy (EE) on a strip and a
rectangular Wilson loop (WL) energy before and after applying NATD. The
main results have been:

1.  The new background’s dual field theories seems closely related to an
    infinitely long linear quiver gauge theory. The relation between
    central charge and Page charges is @xmath , instead of the standard
    quadratic in @xmath . Such dependence suggests a relation with long
    linear quivers, which would imply that @xmath is measuring the
    number of D4- and NS5-branes. The picture that emerges is that of a
    2-d CFT living on the intersection of D2- , D6- and NS5-branes, with
    induced D4 charge every time an NS-brane is crossed.

2.  Quark-antiquark Wilson loop energy as a function of distance is
    trivially invariant. c-function and EE in terms of the energy scale
    and strip width, respectively, are non-trivially invariant all along
    the RG flow up to a constant factor which depends on the range of
    dual coordinates.

The relation to long linear quiver gauge theories was quickly sharpened
in [ 159 ] and the effect of NATD on the dual field theory significantly
clarified in [ 156 , 153 , 155 ] . The change of the dual field theory
caused by the duality at the level of SUGRA does not mean automatically
that NATD is not a duality of the full (perturbative) string theory,
although it points to it, as explained in [ 128 ] . Its authors proposed
as a motivation of their work to elucidate whether NATD is a string
duality or not by the examination of its effects on the meson spectrum.
They conjecture that the difference before and after NATD they found may
be caused either by the presence of a boundary in the sigma-model field
theory or due to finite @xmath or finite ’t Hooft coupling effects.
Finally, they propose to directly study the string theory on the
non-Abelian T-dual, specifically taking the pp-wave limit and using the
formalism initiated in [ 22 ] .

### 6.3 Holographic Ward identities in 1+1 QFT

We have studied the extension of the holographic renormalization
procedure to reproduce the field theoretic Ward identities of
spontaneous symmetry breaking in a 1+1 holographic superconductor. The
result could be of interest for applications to one-dimensional
condensed matter systems. Another motivation is to know if the bottom up
model we use behaves in physically sensible manner for this low
dimension. A final goal is to explore what is specific of three
dimensional bulk theory and what are its implications for the QFT side.

Spontaneous symmetry breaking (SSB) is important in High Energy Physics
as well as in Condensed Matter. A key result about it is the Goldstone
theorem: there is a massless boson (called Goldstone boson) for every
given generator whose symmetry is spontaneously broken. The properties
of symmetry breaking are reflected on the Ward identities: the one point
function signals SSB and the two point spectrum encodes the Goldstone
bosons. The powerful result of Goldstone does not apply to 1+1 QFT: at
finite @xmath SSB and Goldstone bosons are not possible (Coleman
theorem), although the restriction disappears at large @xmath .

Holographically, symmetry breaking has been studied in several previous
works to explore the holographic dictionary and apply it to the less
understood case of symmetry breaking at strong coupling. Our purpose is
to holographically derive the Ward identities corresponding to symmetry
breaking in a 1+1 QFT. The action in the gravity side is that of the
holographic superconductor; we will break its @xmath gauge symmetry. In
2+1 bulk the holographic description of conserved current requires
alternative quantization for the @xmath vector field @xmath . This
happens because a massless vector field saturates the BF bound in 2+1
dimensions; this is the particular way in which the peculiarities of
three dimensional bulk are reflected on the Ward identities holographic
computation. Once we applied alternative quantization, the higher
dimensional field-theoretic Ward identities are correctly recovered.
Furthermore, we found an analytic Goldstone boson pole for the
spontaneous breaking case; this is not in contradiction with Coleman
theorem since our use of holography corresponds to large @xmath .

The result above is an extension of previous ones on Ward Identities and
analytic Goldstone bosons to 1+1 CFT [ 11 ] . Concerning the goal of
learning about the applicability of the correspondence, we can draw two
lessons. The first is that we can interpret the quantitative holographic
reproduction of standard field-theoretic Ward identities in @xmath as
further evidence of the broad applicability of AdS/CFT beyond the
standard dimension @xmath . Our result is far from being the first
concerning @xmath , but we have given additional evidence.

The second lesson coming from our study is on whether gravitational
bottom-up models do have sensible field theories duals. It must be noted
that the holographic superconductor model can be embedded into string
theory for some values of the parameters in @xmath [ 86 ] and @xmath [
98 ] . For a particular bottom-up case presented in [ 11 ] , it was
possible to quantitatively reproduce GMOR relations and Goldstone boson
poles. In our case, it is difficult to assure with total certainty that
our action cannot be embedded in SUGRA, although it seems unlikely.
Despite it, the quantitative predictions for the Goldstone boson pole
were quantitatively correct.

We have investigated gravitational phase transitions, non-Abelian
T-duality and symmetry breaking in the context of AdS/CFT to test and
extend its applicability. All of the previous topics remain worthy of
further investigation on the open questions explained above. We also
want to mention some additional lines of research. For example the
generation of new solutions, in particular time dependent ones, via
combination of Abelian and non-Abelian dualities, and possibly other
generating techniques. A particularly interesting project is to apply
the Abelian transformation to the theories found in [ 165 ] . This work
is in progress, and the result about invariance of BH entropy will be
published soon [ 70 ] . Another possibility for dualities in the SUGRA
limit is the study of more field theory observables like baryon vertex,
giant gravitons and couplings defined by probe branes, as suggested in [
128 ] .

Another interesting test of the conjecture would be to extend our result
about symmetry breaking to the finite @xmath holography. In [ 9 ] the
thermal field theory analog of Coleman theorem was also tested
successfully for a holographic superconductor both for the large @xmath
limit and leading @xmath corrections. It should be possible to repeat
their quantum gravity analysis in our setup to confirm or disproof the
vanishing VEV expected for finite @xmath .

Clearly, many question remain open about what can be described via
AdS/CFT and the precise form of the correspondence. Although we have
learned many non-trivial lessons in the last 20 years, a more precise
map between bulk and boundary theories is only starting to to be
developed, for example in the recent efforts about bulk reconstruction.
This is expected to clarify in more detail how geometry emerges from
field theory. The literature about quantum gravity corrections to the
gravity side of the duality is still limited in comparison to the
classical limit. The extensions to asymptotically dS and flat spaces are
much less common than the AdS case. The same can be said about the
correspondence at weak coupling with respect to the standard infinitely
strong limit. There are many other relevant questions out of this short
list. Clearly, AdS/CFT will remain a very active field of research in
the next few years.

## Chapter 7 Resumen

Los problemas estudiados en la presente tesis tienen como objetivo a
largo plazo explorar la validez y extender el dominio de aplicación de
la correspondencia AdS/CFT. Este objetivo se ha concretado en tres
problemas diferentes que se resumen en este capítulo junto con los
resultados principales.

Situemos el presente trabajo en el contexto del desarrollo de la Física
en el siglo XX que llevó hacia la citada correspondencia AdS/CFT. La
Teoría Cuántica contiene los principios más fundamentales de la materia
a la más pequeña escala. Su éxito en explicar y predecir fenómenos
físicos en Física de la materia condensada, Molecular, Atómica, Nuclear
y de Partículas no tiene parangón. La otra gran revolución es la teoría
General de la Relatividad, que explica la gravedad pero afecta
profundamente a los fundamentos conceptuales de la Física en todas sus
ramas. Cuando se intentan aplicar los principios de la Teoría Cuántica a
la Relatividad General de forma estándar, la teoría resultante no es
renormalizable. De hecho, el problema de encontrar una descripción
cuántica de la gravedad está en los más profundos de la Física Teórica
actual.

Una propuesta que ha sido objeto de estudio muy profundo es la Teoría de
Cuerdas. Independientemente de su potencial para explicar fenómenos de
la Física Fundamental a muy altas energías, a través de ella se ha
descubierto la correspondencia AdS/CFT. Ella establece que ciertas
Teorías Cuánticas de Campos en el límite de acoplo fuerte y gran @xmath
pueden ser entendidas como teorías de gravedad. Esto hace posible
calcular ciertos observables físicos en ellas que normalmente son
imposibles usando sólo la Teoría Cuántica de Campos. Es en el contexto
de esta correspondencia donde se desarrolla la presente tesis doctoral.
Señalemos a continuación los problemas estudiados y sus resultados.

### 7.1 Transiciones de fase entre AdS y dS en teorías de gravedad con
correcciones de order superior en la curvatura

Se ha examinado el papel de las correcciones de curvatura superior en
transiciones de fase térmicas entre geometrías asintóticamente AdS y dS
(Anti de Sitter y de Sitter respectivamente).

Las correcciones de orden superior en la curvatura a la acción
gravitatoria de Einstein-Hilbert se estudian por varios motivos: como
límite de bajas energías de la Teoría de Cuerdas u otras compleciones
ultravioleta, para explorar sus efectos cosmológicos, desde un punto de
vista puramente gravitacional, para entender sus implicaciones
holográficas, etcétera. En esas teorías, la acciones de Lovelock ocupan
un lugar destacado. Se ha estudiado la corrección cuádratica de esas
teorías, conocida como gravedad de Lanczos-Gauss-Bonnet. En nuestro caso
concreto, el interés holográfico se debe a que el un proceso dinámico
hace que se pase de un espacio asintóticamente AdS, en el que la
correspondencia se aplica de forma conocida, a otro asintóticamente dS
donde su utilización está menos comprendida.

Pese al énfasis en las teorías con correcciones de curvatura superior,
las transiciones de fase gravitacionales también ocurren en la teoría de
Einstein-Hilbert, por ejemplo la transición de Hawking-Page [ 106 ] .
Transiciones entre valores efectivos diferentes de la constante
cosmológica puede ocurrir en ausencia de correcciones de curvatura
superior por fluctuaciones térmicas entre los mínimos del potential de
un campo escalar.

El papel específico de las correciones de orden superior en la curvatura
es que la transición es posible incluso en ausencia de cualquier tipo de
materia . El proceso está mediado por la formación de burbujas, de modo
similar a las transiciones de fase en ebullición de los líquidos. El
interior de dichas burbujas contiene una solución con geometría dS en su
interior. Por otra parte esta solución está yuxtapuesta a otra en la
parte exterior de la burbuja, que tiene la asintótica inicial. La
burbuja es dinámicamente inestable y se contrae o expande. En este
último caso la asintótica llega a cambiar cuando la burbuja alcanza la
frontera de AdS.

Nuestro principal resultado es una transición de fase de AdS térmico a
la formación de un horizonte cosmológico en gravedad de
Lanczos-Gauss-Bonnet. La transición ocurre por proliferación de burbujas
que contienen un agujero negro de geometría de Sitter en su interior. Se
espera que el fenómeno sea genérico de otras teorías de gravedad con
curvatura superior. La transición es favorecida hasta un valor máximo
del acoplo de la curvatura superior @xmath , mientras que esta
peculiaridad no puede aparecer en estudios anteriores porque en ellos
las burbujas contienen en su interior agujeros negros de geometría Anti
de Sitter.

Es importante señalar las limitaciones de nuestro tratamiento. La
principal es la inestabilidad de tipo Boulware-Deser en el vacío AdS
inicial. Esto significa que el campo del gravitón tiene fantasmas
alrededor de esa solución. Sin embargo, es fácil encontrar otras
correcciones de order superior en la curvature que tienen vacíos de
diferente constante cosmológica y no presentan fantasmas en ellos;
encontrar una transición de fase similar entre ellos es técnicamente
mucho más díficil. Para transiciones entre asintóticas AdS, se ha
comprobado explícitamente que es posible en la referencia [ 43 ] .
Existen buenos motivos para pensar que semejantes entre vacíos estables
AdS y dS es también posible.

No debemos olvidar otros comentarios sobre la validez de nuestro
cálculo. En [ 44 ] se mostró que las teorías cuadráticas de gravedad
presentan genéricamente violaciones de causalidad, haciéndolas
patológicas al menos en este aspecto. En la referencia [ 59 ] se
confirmó explícitamente que tal violación de causalidad aparece para
cierto scattering entre branas y cuerdas si se conservan sólo los modos
no masivos de la Teoría de Cuerdas. Sin embargo, si se toma en cuenta la
torre de estados completa, (en particular la ”Reggeización”), la
causalidad se preserva. A pesar de esta violación de causalidad, las
teorías cuadráticas y en particular LGB siguen siendo modelos efectivos
aceptables para otros propósitos, como es el caso de la hidrodinámica
holográfica, donde no manifiesta comportamientos físicamente
inaceptables.

La cuestión principal que sigue abierta es el significado holográfico de
las transiciones de fase encontradas, que sigue siendo esencialmente
desconocido. Un primer paso es analizar los observables de la
configuración estática de la burbuja, por ejemplo el lazo de Wilson en
el infrarrojo. Un segundo paso sería el cálculo de observables similares
para la expansión de la burbuja, de un modo paralelo al análisis de [
146 ] . Finalmente, se puede intentar estudiar directamente la geometría
dS en que finaliza la transición, siguiendo la línea de investigación
iniciada por Strominger en 2001 [ 193 ] .

### 7.2 Deformación de la Teoría de Campos conforme de Klebanov-Witten y
nuevas soluciones AdS@xmath través de T-dualidad no abeliana

Hemos encontrado nuevas soluciones de Supergravedad usando T-dualidad no
abeliana (TDNA), una técnica de generación de soluciones aparecida en el
contexto de Teoría de Cuerdas. Tales nuevas soluciones representan
flujos del grupo de renormalización de cuatro a dos dimensiones, y se
investigan también los efectos de la TDNA en los observables
holográficos. El problema tiene además una motivación de Supergravedad,
puesto que es frecuente que las soluciones generadas estén fuera de las
clasificaciones conocidas, como ocurre en la referencia [ 154 ] . Además
de ser interesantes en sí mismas, las nuevas teorías de campos pueden
ayudar a entender el efecto de TDNA en el modelo sigma de la Teoría de
Cuerdas, la aproximación de esta en Supergravedad y su relación con la
correspondencia holográfica.

Existen deformaciones de la solución de Supergravedad de Klebanov-Witten
(KW) @xmath que fluyen hacia un factor @xmath en el infrarrojo. Hemos
generado nuevos ejemplos mediante la aplicación de TDNA sobre casos
anteriormente conocidos. Las nuevas teorías de campos parecen estar
relacionadas con teorías de gauge ”quiver” largas y lineales. Este
párrafo resume toda la investigación realizada en este problema.

Para ser más detallado, se han considerado dos clases de geometrías en
las que se aplica TDNA. La primera está dada por los duales geómetricos
de algunas teorías de campos conformes en una variedad @xmath ; en
particular un flujo @xmath con @xmath y puntos fijos no supersimétricos
con @xmath ; las llamamos soluciones con ”twist”. La segunda clase es la
deformación de KW producida por Donos y Gauntlett [ 66 ] , que
llamaremos por este motivo solución de Donos-Gauntlett. Este último
background fue elegido como semilla de TDNA esencialmente por tres
razones: es una deformación que fluye hacia AdS @xmath , es
supersimétrica y regular, y está relacionada por dos T-dualidades
abelianas con @xmath . Esta última es el límite cerca del horizonte de
una intersección de branas D1-D5; una discusión de su posible teoría
dual puede encontrarse en [ 198 ] .

Las soluciones generadas que son T-duales a un flujo de renormalización
también corresponden holográficamente a un flujo de renormalización
entre AdS @xmath y AdS @xmath . Las soluciones encontradas son nuevas
geometrías en Supergravedad de tipo IIA y preservan la Supersimetría y
regularidad de los flujos iniciales. Debido a la naturaleza intrínseca
de TDNA, muchos campos se activan en las nuevas geometrías y las
dependencias funcionales son altamente no triviales. En una de las
nuevas soluciones hemos aplicado además T-dualidad abeliana. Todos los
casos de geometrías IIA se han embebido en Supergravedad de 11
dimensiones. La principal limitación del procedimiento de TDNA es que la
técnica no da una prescripción de los rangos de las coordenadas de las
soluciones generadas, y por lo tanto las propiedades globales no están
totalmente determinadas a priori. Sin embargo, el estudio detallado de
este problema ha dado lugar a avances significativos en la comprensión
de los efectos holográficos de la TDNA [ 156 ] .

Con respecto a los observables duales en las nuevas geometrías, se han
calculado las cargas de Page, función c, entropía de entrelazamiento en
una banda y lazo de Wilson rectangular antes y después de la aplicación
de TDNA. Los resultados principales han sido:

1.  Las nuevas teorías de campos generadas parecen estar relacionadas
    con teorías de gauge ”quiver” infinitamente largas. La relación
    entre la carga central y las cargas de Page es de la forma @xmath ,
    frente a la relación estándar de tipo cuadrático. Es esta relación
    la que sugiere la conexión con las teorías ”quiver”, lo que
    implicaría que @xmath está midiendo el número de branas D4 y NS5. La
    imagen que aparece es la de una teoría de campos en dos dimensiones
    que vive en la intersección de D2, D6 y NS5 branas, y nuevas cargas
    D4 se añaden cuando se cruza una brana NS5.

2.  La energía del par quark-antiquark calculada a través de lazo de
    Wilson es trivialmente invariante por efecto de la dualidad. La
    función c y la entropía de entrelazamiento son no trivialmente
    invariantes salvo por un factor constante a lo largo del flujo. Tal
    factor depende de las propiedades globales que la TDNA no establece
    a priori.

La relación con teorías quiver fue rápidamente profundizada en los
artículos [ 156 , 153 , 155 ] . En [ 128 ] , se calculó el espectro de
mesones antes y después de TDNA para AdS @xmath S @xmath . El cambio
encontrado en la teoría de campos dual no significa automáticamente que
TDNA no sea una simetría (perturbativa) de la teoría del modelo sigma,
aunque lo sugiere, como se explica en la referencia citada. Sus autores
proponen que, si no es debido a que TDNA no es simetría de Teoría de
Cuerdas, los cambios en la teoría de campos dual podrían ser causados
por correcciones en @xmath y acoplo finito que la dualidad no captura.

Otra posibilidad interesante para clarificar el rol de TDNA en Teoría de
Cuerdas proviene de una potencial aplicación a correcciones de orden
superior en la curvatura para Supergravedad. De hecho, los autores de [
165 ] encontraron una familia de accciones que es invariante por
T-dualidad abeliana e incluye como casos particulares límites de Teoría
de Cuerdas. Si las reglas de TDNA corregidas a orden @xmath no son una
simetría de esos casos particulares, entonces es más probable que
tampoco sea una simetría perturbativa de la Teoría de Cuerdas. También
puede ser interesante comparar los efectos con los casos que no
corresponden a Teoría de Cuerdas.

### 7.3 Identidades de Ward holográficas en Teoría Cuántica de Campos en
1+1

Hemos estudiado la extensión de la renormalización holográfica para
reproducir las identidades de Ward de la ruptura espontánea de simetría
en un modelo de superconductor holográfico en 1+1 dimensiones. El
resultado podría ser de interés en aplicaciones a modelos
unidimensionales de Materia Condensada. Otra motivación es saber si el
modelo ”bottom-up” utilizado se comporta de manera físicamente aceptable
en dimensiones bajas. Un objetivo adicional es también entender las
peculiaridades de gravedad en 2+1 dimensiones y sus implicaciones en la
teoría en la frontera.

La ruptura espontánea de simetría (RES) es importante en Fïsica de Altas
Energías así como en Materia Condensada. Un resultado clave sobre ella
es el Teorema de Goldstone: existe un bosón sin masa por cada grado de
libertad de simetría que esté roto en el vacío elegido. Las propiedades
de la ruptura de simetría están reflejadas en las identidades de Ward:
la función de un punto señala la RES mientras que la de dos puntos
contiene el espectro de bosones de Goldstone. Este poderoso resultado no
se aplica a teorías de campos en 1+1 dimensiones (no compactas): a
@xmath finito ni RES ni bosones de Goldstone son posibles (Tma. de
Coleman), mientras que esta restricción desaparece en el límite de gran
@xmath .

Holográficamente, la RES se ha estudiado con anterioridad para entender
el diccionario holográfico en este aspecto de la teoría de campos y con
posibles aplicaciones en el caso de acoplo fuerte, el cuál es difícil de
abordar sin AdS/CFT. La acción en el lado de gravedad viene dada por un
modelo de superconductor holográfico, y se rompe su simetría U(1). En la
teoría de gravedad en 2+1 la descripción holográfica de corrientes
conservadas involucra cuantización alternativa del campo gauge. Esto se
debe a que en 2+1 tal campo gauge sin masa está en el límite de
Breitenlohner-Freedman. Con la citada cuantización alternativa las
identidades de Ward son idénticas a los casos de dimensión más alta.
Además, se ha encontrado un bosón de Goldstone en el espectro. Esto
significa que el modelo bottom-up que estamos usando proporciona no
trivialmente tal resultado cuantitativamente correcto.

A lo largo de esta tesis, hemos investigado transiciones de fase
gravitacionales, T-dualidad no abeliana e identidades de Ward de la
ruptura espontánea de simetría en el contexto de AdS/CFT. Los tres
problemas anteriores tienen interés suficiente para futuros estudios
adicionales. Más concretamente, la generación de nuevas soluciones, en
particular dependientes del tiempo, a través de la combinación de
dualiades abelianas y no abelianas, y posiblemente otras técnicas de
generación de soluciones. Un caso más específico es el de las teorías
con curvatura superior presentadas en [ 165 ] . Este trabajo se
encuentra de hecho en curso, y resultados concernientes a la
transformación de la entropía de agujero negro serán publicados en breve
[ 70 ] . Otra posibilidad interesante es la extensión del tratamiento
holográfico de la ruptura espontánea de simetría al caso de correcciones
@xmath , de modo similar a como éstas se incluyen en [ 9 ] .

Claramente, muchas preguntas siguen abiertas sobre qué fenómenos de
Teoría de Campos se pueden describir gravitatoriamente y cómo hacerlo.
Aunque el progreso en los últimos veinte años ha sido extensísimo, el
mapa preciso entre ambos lados de la correspondencia aún tiene mucho
margen de desarrollo, como se ejemplifica en los recientes esfuerzos
para la reconstrucción de la geometría a partir del entrelazamiento en
la teoría en la frontera. Comparativamente las correcciones de @xmath
están mucho menos desarrolladas que el límite de acoplo fuerte. Otras
asintóticas distintas de AdS aún no son de uso común (con la excepción
de Lifshitz). Hay otros muchos temas de interés que no se han citado en
esta breve lista. Sin duda AdS/CFT seguirá siendo un campo de
investigación muy activo en los próximos años.