We investigate the effect of thermal expansion and gravity on the
propagation and stability of flames in inhomogeneous mixtures. We focus
on laminar flames in the simple configuration of an infinitely long
channel with rigid porous walls in order to understand the effect of
inhomogeneities on these fundamental structures.

The first part of the thesis is concerned with premixed flames
propagating against a prescribed parallel (Poiseuille) flow and subject
to thermal expansion. We show that in a narrow channel (corresponding to
a relatively thick flame), if the Peclet number is fixed and of order
unity, a premixed flame propagating against a parallel flow is governed
by the equation for a planar premixed flame with an effective diffusion
coefficient. The enhanced diffusion is shown to correspond to Taylor
dispersion, or shear-enhanced diffusion. Several important applications
of the results are discussed. One of the topics of relevance is the
bending effect of turbulent combustion. The results of our analysis show
that, for a large flow intensity, the effective propagation speed of the
premixed flame for depends only on the Peclet number (which is equal to
the Reynolds number if the Prandtl number is unity). This mimics the
behaviour of the turbulent premixed flame when the effective propagation
speed is plotted versus the turbulence intensity for fixed values of the
Reynolds number.

The second part of the thesis is concerned with triple flames, subject
to thermal expansion and buoyancy. A study is undertaken to investigate
the stability of a diffusion flame subject to these effects, which gives
rise to a problem analogous to the classical Rayleigh–Bénard convection
problem. A linear stability analysis in the Boussinesq approximation is
performed, which leads to analytical results showing that the
Burke-Schumann flame is unstable if the Rayleigh number is above a
critical value which is determined. Numerical results confirm and
complement the analytical results. A full numerical investigation of the
effects of gravity and thermal expansion on triple flames propagating in
a direction perpendicular to the direction of gravity is then carried
out. This configuration does not seem to have received dedicated
attention in the literature. It is found that the well-known monotonic
relationship between the propagation speed @xmath and the flame-front
thickness @xmath , which exists in the constant density case when the
Lewis numbers are of order unity or larger, persists for triple flames
undergoing thermal expansion. Under strong enough gravitational effects,
however, the relationship is no longer found to be monotonic, exhibiting
hysteresis if the Rayleigh number is large enough. Finally, the
initiation of triple flames from a hot two-dimensional ignition kernel
is investigated. Particular attention is devoted to the energy required
for ignition and the transient evolution of triple flames after
initiation. Steady, non-propagating, two-dimensional solutions
representing “flame tubes” are determined; their thermal energy is used
to define a minimum ignition energy for the two-dimensional triple flame
in the mixing layer. The transient behaviour of triple flames following
“energy-increasing” or “energy-decreasing” perturbations to the flame
tube solutions is described in situations where the underlying diffusion
flame is either stable or unstable.
