The purpose of my PhD thesis is to investigate different group
theoretical and geometrical aspects of supergravity theories. To this
aim, several research topics are explored: On one side, the construction
of supergravity models in diverse space-time dimensions, including the
study of boundary contributions, and the disclosure of the hidden gauge
structure of these theories; on the other side, the analysis of the
algebraic links among different superalgebras related to supergravity
theories.

In the first three chapters, we give a general introduction and furnish
the theoretical background necessary for a clearer understanding of the
thesis. In particular, we recall the rheonomic (also called geometric)
approach to supergravity theories, where the field curvatures are
expressed in a basis of superspace. This includes the Free Differential
Algebras framework (an extension of the Maurer-Cartan equations to
involve higher-degree differential forms), since supergravity theories
in @xmath space-time dimensions contain gauge potentials described by
@xmath -forms, of various @xmath , associated to @xmath -index
antisymmetric tensors. Considering @xmath supergravity in this set up,
we also review how the supersymmetric Free Differential Algebra
describing the theory can be traded for an ordinary superalgebra of
@xmath -forms, which was introduced for the first time in the literature
in the ‘80s. This hidden superalgebra underlying @xmath supergravity
(which we will refer to as the DF-algebra) includes the so called @xmath
-algebra being, in particular, a spinor central extension of it.

We then move to the original results of my PhD research activity: We
start from the development of the so called @xmath -Lorentz supergravity
in @xmath by adopting the rheonomic approach and discuss on boundary
contributions to the theory. Subsequently, we focus on the analysis of
the hidden gauge structure of supersymmetric Free Differential Algebras.
More precisely, we concentrate on the hidden superalgebras underlying
@xmath and @xmath supergravities, exploring the symmetries hidden in the
theories and the physical role of the nilpotent fermionic generators
naturally appearing in the aforementioned superalgebras. After that, we
move to the pure algebraic and group theoretical description of
(super)algebras, focusing on new analytic formulations of the so called
@xmath -expansion method. The final chapter contains the summary of the
results of my doctoral studies presented in the thesis and possible
future developments. In the Appendices, we collect notation, useful
formulas, and detailed calculations.

LaTeX PhD Thesis Physics Politecnico di Torino

\makenomenclature \degreetitle

Physics \cycle @xmath \supervisor Prof. L. Andrianopoli, Supervisor
Prof. R. D’Auria, Co-Supervisor \committee Prof. Antoine Van Proeyen,
Referee , KU Leuven
Prof. Dietmar Klemm, Referee , Università degli Studi di Milano, INFN -
Sezione di Milano
Prof. Giovanni Barbero, Internal Member , Politecnico di Torino
Prof. Leonardo Castellani, External Member , Università del Piemonte
Orientale, INFN - Sezione di Torino, Arnold-Regge Center
Prof. Vittorio Penna, Internal Member , Politecnico di Torino \subject
LaTeX

{declaration}

I hereby declare that the contents and organization of this dissertation
constitute my own original work and does not compromise in any way the
rights of third parties, including those relating to the security of
personal data.

{dedication}

Ai miei genitori,

che hanno reso tutto questo possibile.
