Superconducting qubits are among the most promising and versatile
building blocks on the road to a functioning quantum computer. One of
the main challenges in superconducting qubit architectures is to couple
qubits in a well-controlled manner, especially in circuit constructions
that involve many qubits. In order to avoid unwanted cross-couplings,
qubits are oftentimes coupled via harmonic resonators, which act as
buses that mediate the interaction.
This thesis is set in the framework of superconducting transmon-type
qubit architectures with special focus on two important types of
coupling between qubits and harmonic resonators: transverse and
longitudinal coupling . While transverse coupling naturally appears in
transmon-like circuit constructions, longitudinal coupling is much
harder to implement and hardly ever the only coupling term present.
Nevertheless, we will see that longitudinal coupling offers some
remarkable advantages with respect to scalability and readout.
This thesis will focus on a design, which combines both these coupling
types in a single circuit and provides the possibility to choose between
pure transverse and pure longitudinal or have both at the same time. The
ability to choose between transverse and longitudinal coupling in the
same circuit provides the flexibility to use one for coupling to the
next qubit and one for readout, or vice versa.
We will start with an introduction to circuit quantization, where we
will explain how to describe and analyze superconducting electrical
circuits in a systematic way and discuss which characteristic circuit
elements make up qubits and resonators. We will then introduce the two
types of coupling between qubit and resonator which are provided in our
design: transverse and longitudinal coupling. In order to show that
longitudinal coupling has some remarkable advantages with respect to the
scalability of a circuit, we will discuss a scalable qubit architecture,
which can be implemented with our design. Translating this discussion
from the Hamiltonian level to the language of circuit quantization, we
will show how to design circuits with specifically tailored couplings.
Having introduced these basic concepts, we will focus on our circuit
design that consists of an inductively shunted transmon qubit with
tunable coupling to an embedded harmonic mode. Using a symmetric design,
static transverse coupling terms are cancelled out, while the parity of
the only remaining coupling term can be tuned via an external flux. The
distinctive feature of the tunable design is that the transverse
coupling disappears when the longitudinal is maximal and vice versa.
Subsequently, we will turn to the implementation of our circuit design,
discuss how to choose the parameters, and present an adapted alternative
circuit, where coupling strength and anharmonicity scale better than in
the original circuit. Furthermore, we show how the anharmonicity and the
coupling can be boosted by additional flux-biasing. We will see that for
conveniently chosen parameters longitudinal and transverse coupling have
comparable values, while all other coupling terms can be suppressed. In
addition, we present a proposal for an experimental device that will
serve as a prototype for a first experiment.
Coming back to the scalable architecture mentioned above, we will show
how our design can be scaled up to a grid, which can be done in modular
fashion with strictly local couplings. In such a grid of fixed-frequency
qubits and resonators with a particular pattern of always-on
interactions, coupling is strictly confined to nearest and next-nearest
neighbor resonators; there is never any direct qubit-qubit coupling.
We will conclude the thesis discussing different possibilities to do
readout with our circuit design, including a short discussion of the
coupling between the circuit and the environment, and the influence of
dissipation.
