## Chapter \thechapter Introduction

At the end of the 19th century, many scientists believed that human
knowledge of physics was nearly complete. They were convinced that
“almost everything is already discovered, and all that remains is to
fill a few unimportant holes” [ 1 , 2 ] as Max Planck was told by one of
his professors in 1878. There were, however, a few experimental results
that could not be explained with what we now call classical physics , as
for example the photoelectric effect. In other cases, the theory led to
absurd results such as the ultraviolet catastrophe for black-body
radiation, which clearly did not agree with experimental results.
In 1900, Max Planck managed to explain black-body radiation by making
one crucial assumption, which was done as he later said “in an act of
despair” [ 3 ] . His assumption, the so-called Planck’s postulate [ 4 ]
, states that the radiation energy @xmath of a certain frequency @xmath
is quantized and can only appear in units of the fundamental constant
@xmath , that is

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (1)
  -- -------- -- -----

where @xmath is correspondingly known as Planck’s constant . While this
was at first considered to be a purely formal assumption, Planck’s
postulate turned out to revolutionize physics and is now considered to
be one of the foundations of quantum mechanics .
While most, but not all macroscopic phenomena can be accurately
described with classical physics, quantum mechanics evolved to be the
fundamental theory to describe physics at microscopic scales. In the
so-called correspondence limit (or classical limit), that is at energy
scales much larger than @xmath , we recover the results from classical
mechanics.
While for many years, quantum mechanics was used to gain a deep
understanding of phenomena found in nature, the new field of quantum
computation [ 5 ] takes up the challenge of designing systems which
exhibit controllable quantum behavior. In 1982, Richard Feynman first
conceived the idea of a computer, which would “itself be built of
quantum mechanical elements which obey quantum mechanical laws” [ 6 ] .
He states that while a classical computer is incapable of simulating the
behavior of a large quantum-mechanical system due to its many degrees of
freedom, a quantum computer could do such a simulation, given that it
exhibits the same quantum behavior as the system it wants to simulate.
In classical computers, information is stored in binary units, so-called
bits , which can have only two possible values, commonly represented as
@xmath and @xmath . The basic idea of a quantum computer consists in
substituting the classical bit by a quantum bit, that is a qubit , which
can, in principle, be any system with two possible quantum states, which
we will call @xmath and @xmath . Being a quantum-mechanical system, this
means that the qubit can represent any superposition of its two basic
states, that is

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (2)
  -- -------- -- -----

Astonishingly, when these quantum systems interact, they may end up in a
so-called entangled state, which means that their states cannot be
described independently of each other. Even when these entangled systems
are far apart, a manipulation of one of them will immediately influence
the other. This phenomenon, which is called quantum entanglement , is so
counter-intuitive that scientists found it difficult to accept it [ 7 ]
.
Based on the phenomena of quantum entanglement and superposition states,
Peter Shor presented a quantum algorithm for integer factorization in
1994 that scaled exponentially better than any classical factorizing
algorithm [ 8 ] , which made clear that a quantum computer could
outperform classical computers. Ever since, the interest in quantum
computers has grown and their immense potential is becoming more and
more evident.
For the realization of a quantum computer a high number of qubits is
necessary, which need to be individually accessible and controllable [ 9
] . To perform quantum computations, interactions need to be enabled at
least between neighboring qubits [ 5 ] . In order to protect their
quantum coherence, the qubits have to be shielded from environmental
influences. These requisites constitute a dilemma: we need to be able to
access and manipulate the qubits without destroying their coherence.
For the physical implementation of such a quantum computer, there are
many conceivable realizations. One of the most promising fields among
these are superconducting qubits . As opposed to most other
realizations, such as for example spin qubits, superconducting qubits
are macroscopic objects visible to the naked eye, which consist of small
electric circuits of superconducting material. Superconductivity itself
is a quantum phenomenon, where electrons spontaneously form a condensate
of so-called Cooper pairs, when the material is cooled below a certain
temperature. One of the crucial advantages of superconducting qubits is
the fact that their characteristic properties, such as frequency and
anharmonicity, as well as the coupling between them, can be designed and
customized for the experiment in question. Among superconducting qubits
a distinction is drawn between charge [ 10 ] , flux [ 11 ] , and phase
qubits. The transmon qubit was developed from charge qubits [ 12 ] and
soon became very popular due to its reduced sensitivity to charge noise.
While qubit coherence times have improved immensely in recent years [ 13
, 14 , 15 ] , it remains difficult to couple them in a well-controlled
manner, especially in circuit constructions that involve many qubits.
The challenge consists in performing quantum gates on selected qubits
without corrupting the others. In order to avoid unwanted
cross-couplings, superconducting qubits are oftentimes coupled via
harmonic resonators, which act as buses that mediate the interaction [
16 ] . This is supposed to make the interaction more controllable.
This thesis is set in the framework of coupling structures between
superconducting transmon-type qubits and harmonic resonators, focusing
on a circuit design that provides two inherently different types of
coupling between a qubit and a resonator in the same circuit. Most
commonly, superconducting qubit architectures work with the so-called
transverse coupling [ 17 , 18 ] , which is known from cavity quantum
electrodynamics. While this well-studied coupling type is easy to
implement and useful in terms of readout, it is increasingly challenging
to control in larger qubit architectures [ 19 , 20 , 21 ] , as unwanted
cross-couplings degrade the circuit’s performance. In contrast to this
stands longitudinal coupling [ 22 , 23 , 24 , 25 , 26 ] , which is
harder to implement but exhibits some remarkable advantages in terms of
scalability and readout.

### 1 Outline

This thesis will focus on these two inherently different coupling types
between qubits and resonators: transverse and longitudinal coupling. The
core of the thesis will be the design of an inductively shunted transmon
qubit with tunable transverse and longitudinal coupling to an embedded
resonator. This design was first published in Ref. [ 27 ] and further
enhanced and adapted in Ref. [ 28 ] .
We will start with an introduction to circuit quantization in Chapt.
\thechapter , which mostly follows Ref. [ 29 ] . We will explain how to
describe and analyze superconducting electrical circuits in a systematic
way and discuss which characteristic circuit elements make up qubits and
resonators. Going from a circuit description to a Hamiltonian, we will
discuss how to incorporate external fluxes and how to treat multi-mode
circuits with redundant degrees of freedom. Note that this discussion is
customized for transmon-like qubits, as we work in a harmonic oscillator
basis.
In Chapt. \thechapter , we will introduce the two types of coupling
between qubit and resonator which are provided in our design, transverse
and longitudinal coupling, and explain how the corresponding
Hamiltonians can be diagonalized. We will then discuss a scalable qubit
architecture conceived by Billangeon et al. in Ref. [ 22 ] , which
relies on longitudinal coupling. Finally, we will show how to translate
this discussion to the circuit theory language from Chapt. \thechapter
in order to design circuits with specifically tailored couplings.
Chapter \thechapter will focus on our circuit design that consists of an
inductively shunted transmon qubit with tunable coupling to an embedded
harmonic mode, which was presented in Refs. [ 27 , 28 ] . We will
demonstrate that the architecture provides the possibility to
flux-choose between pure longitudinal and pure transverse coupling, or
have both at the same time. While transverse coupling naturally appears
in transmon-like circuit constructions, longitudinal coupling is usually
much smaller and hardly ever the only coupling term present. The
distinctive feature of the tunable design is that the transverse
coupling disappears when the longitudinal is maximal and vice versa. As
opposed to other approaches, pure longitudinal coupling can be reached
with moderate changes in the qubit frequency. Being able to choose
between either kind of coupling in the same circuit provides the
flexibility to use one for coupling to the next qubit and one for
readout, or vice versa.
Subsequently, Chapt. \thechapter will be about the implementation of the
circuit design presented in Chapt. \thechapter . We will discuss how to
choose the parameters obeying experimental constraints. We will also
present an adapted alternative circuit, where coupling strength and
anharmonicity scale better than in the original circuit and show how the
anharmonicity and the coupling can be boosted by additional
flux-biasing. We will see that for conveniently chosen parameters
longitudinal and transverse coupling have comparable values, while all
other coupling terms can be suppressed. Finally, we present a proposal
for an experimental device that will serve as a prototype for a first
experiment. The sample, most of which can be fabricated using standard
thin-film aluminum, could be embedded in a 3D waveguide with strong
coupling to the resonator mode.
In Chapt. \thechapter will come back to the scalable architecture
mentioned in Chapt. \thechapter and show how our design can be scaled up
to a grid following the scheme from Ref. [ 22 ] . In such a grid of
fixed-frequency qubits and resonators with a particular pattern of
always-on interactions, coupling is strictly confined to nearest and
next-nearest neighbor resonators; there is never any direct qubit-qubit
coupling. We note that just a single unique qubit frequency suffices for
the scalability of this scheme. The same is true for the resonators, if
the resonator-resonator coupling constants are varied instead. We will
present different circuit alternatives and show that the scale-up can be
done in modular fashion with strictly local couplings.
Chapter \thechapter will be about different possibilities to do readout
with our circuit design, including a short discussion of the coupling of
the circuit to the environment and the influence of dissipation.
Finally, Chapt. \thechapter contains some conclusions and an outlook on
future research and open questions.
Please note that parts of this thesis are taken from or based on Refs. [
27 , 28 ] , as also stated at the begin of the corresponding chapters.
The abstract, introduction and conclusions of this thesis contain
sentences taken from Refs. [ 27 , 28 ] .

## Chapter \thechapter Circuit Quantization

Superconducting qubits are a realization of quantum bits that consist of
superconducting electrical circuits which exhibit quantum behavior
despite of being macroscopic objects. In superconducting materials,
electrons spontaneously form Cooper pairs when the material is cooled
below a critical temperature. These Cooper pairs, each consisting of two
electrons with opposite spin, are bosonic objects and can therefore all
occupy the same ground state. This is a macroscopic quantum phenomenon,
where the Cooper pairs form a condensate that can be described by a
collective degree of freedom, that is a single wave function.
In order to explain and analyze the quantum behavior of electrical
circuits, we have to find a quantized mathematical description of them.
As these circuits can be very large many-mode systems, we will need a
systematic way of analyzing them. The method that will mostly be used
here follows the pedagogic approach by Devoret [ 29 ] , though we will
later have a look on a similar method by Burkard et al. [ 30 , 31 ] ,
whose systematic circuit analysis is especially useful for circuits that
include dissipative elements. A good introduction to circuit quantum
electrodynamics is also given in the thesis of Bishop [ 32 ] .
We will assume that the superconducting circuits in question can be
described and depicted as lumped element circuits, which means that the
elements of the circuit are much smaller than the wavelengths of the
circuit modes. Borrowing terms from graph theory, we can describe an
electrical circuit as a compound of nodes and branches, where every
circuit element, such as a capacitor or an inductor, is considered as a
branch that connects two nodes. We will start by describing two
important single-mode circuits, before turning to larger many-mode
systems. Having established the basic methods for circuit quantization,
we will examine flux-dependent circuits and circuits with dissipative
elements.

### 2 Quantum Lc Resonator

Let us have a look at the example circuit depicted in Fig. 2 , which is
a simple @xmath resonator. It consists of two nodes, which are connected
by two branches, an inductor in parallel with a capacitor. A circuit
with two nodes is always a single-mode system. This becomes immediately
plausible when we apply Kirchhoff’s voltage law, which states that the
voltage differences around a closed path add up to zero. For our example
this means that the voltage across one of the branches depends on the
voltage across the other. In general, we can state that every closed
path in a circuit results in a dependent degree of freedom. The total
number of degrees of freedom in a circuit with @xmath nodes can thus
never be larger than @xmath . The variables we will use to describe such
circuits are the magnetic flux @xmath and its conjugate variable, the
charge @xmath . While the magnetic flux is the time integral over the
voltage @xmath across an element

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (3)
  -- -------- -- -----

its conjugate variable, the charge, is the time integral over the
current @xmath flowing through the same branch

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (4)
  -- -------- -- -----

The current @xmath through an inductive element stands in a simple
linear relation to the magnetic flux @xmath threading the inductor. It
is

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (5)
  -- -------- -- -----

where the inductance @xmath defines the proportionality between them. In
a capacitive element the capacitance @xmath defines the proportionality
between the charge @xmath on the capacitor plates and the voltage @xmath
across it

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (6)
  -- -------- -- -----

In order to get a mathematical description of the circuit in terms of
equations of motion, we can start by enforcing Kirchhoff’s current law,
saying that all currents that flow in or out a node must add up to zero.
Using Eqs. 3 - 6 , the equation of motion for the single degree of
freedom of the @xmath resonator in terms of the magnetic flux is given
by

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (7)
  -- -------- -- -----

where the dot in @xmath is a shorthand that stands for the time
derivative. This equation of motion corresponds to a harmonic
oscillator, where the acceleration is inversely proportional to the
deflection. From the equation of motion, we can deduce the Lagrangian
using the so-called Euler-Lagrange equation

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (8)
  -- -------- -- -----

where @xmath for @xmath are the @xmath degrees of freedom of the system.
While the equations of motion of a system are unique, any Lagrangian
that leads to these equations via Euler-Lagrange is correct. For the
example of the @xmath resonator, we can thus write

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (9)
  -- -------- -- -----

It is easy to see that this Lagrangian leads to the equation of motion
from above (Eq. 7 ) by using Euler-Lagrange (Eq. 8 ). Note that while
the inductive term depends on the flux @xmath , the capacitive term
depends on its time derivative @xmath . In this flux representation, it
thus makes sense to interpret capacitive terms as the kinetic energy of
a system and inductive terms as the potential energy. In this picture,
the flux @xmath is the analog to a position variable, while @xmath
represents its velocity. Using a Legendre transformation, we can go the
Hamiltonian representation

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (10)
  -- -------- -- ------

where we introduce the conjugate variable to the flux, the charge @xmath
. The Hamiltonian thus reads

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (11)
  -- -------- -- ------

where the first term corresponds to the electrostatic energy that is
stored in the capacitor, while the second term stands for the magnetic
energy in the inductor. We will now employ the second quantization
formalism by treating @xmath and @xmath as operators that can be
expressed in terms of the creation and annihilation operators @xmath and
@xmath . These are given by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (12)
  -- -------- -- ------

where the Fock states @xmath are the eigenstates of the harmonic
oscillator and @xmath and @xmath satisfy the commutation relation

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (13)
  -- -------- -- ------

(compare App. \thechapter ). The ansatz we take for the quantization
will be

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (14)
  -- -------- -- ------

(compare [ 29 ] ), where the characteristic impedance @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (15)
  -- -------- -- ------

The ansatz (Eq. 14 ) is chosen such that the Hamiltonian has the form

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (16)
  -- -------- -- ------

i.e. such that any non-diagonal terms disappear. For the eigenfrequency
the ansatz yields

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (17)
  -- -------- -- ------

which is equal to the classical result for an uncoupled @xmath
resonator. Clearly, the quantization ansatz given in Eq. 14 fulfills the
commutation relation for the conjugate variables @xmath and @xmath as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (18)
  -- -------- -- ------

A simple @xmath resonator can thus be described as a quantum harmonic
oscillator. Figure 2 shows its potential and lowest eigenstates. A
harmonic oscillator has a quadratic potential function, here given by
the inductive energy of the circuit. The eigenstates of a harmonic
oscillator are given by Hermite’s polynomials (see for example Ref. [ 33
] ). Importantly, its eigenenergies are all equally-spaced, being simply
the multiples of the eigenenergy @xmath (see Eq. 16 ). This is, in fact,
the reason why such a system can not be easily used as a qubit. As
stated by DiVincenzo in Ref. [ 9 ] , a qubit needs to be a well-defined
two-level system. A harmonic oscillator, however, is a multi-level
system, where no transition between two levels is unique. It is thus
impossible to pick out two levels and define them as a qubit, as we
could never be sure the excitations would stay in this code space.

### 3 A Simple Qubit

Nevertheless, it is possible to use a multi-level superconducting
circuit as a qubit. The only thing we need is a sufficiently anharmonic
potential, in order to lift the degeneracy of the eigenenergies. This
can be realized by using so-called Josephson junctions [ 34 , 35 ] .
While normal inductors and capacitors are known from usual
high-temperature electric circuits, a Josephson junction is a circuit
element that only exists in superconducting circuits. It can be made
from a thin insulating barrier in between two superconductors, as
depicted in Fig. 1 . Tunneling of Cooper pairs through the barrier leads
to a current across the junction. As the Cooper pairs on both sides of
the junction form a condensate that can be described by a single wave
function, we can define a phase difference @xmath across the barrier.
The current across the junction is related to this superconducting phase
difference by the first Josephson relation, that is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (19)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the critical current of the junction, that is the
maximal tunneling current through the junction. The second Josephson
relation relates the phase difference @xmath to the voltage across the
junction

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (20)
  -- -------- -- ------

where the constant @xmath is called the magnetic flux quantum .
Comparing Eq. 20 to Eq. 3 , we can conclude that the superconducting
phase across the junction formally corresponds to a rescaled magnetic
flux @xmath associated with the junction. As a circuit element, the
Josephson junction can be seen as a non-linear inductance due to the
non-linear relation between current and phase or flux given in Eq. 19 .

\sidecaptionvpos

figurec

Now the simplest superconducting qubit we can imagine consists of a
single Josephson junction with a capacitor in parallel to it, as
depicted in Fig. 3 . Just as the harmonic resonator circuit described
above, this circuit is a system with a single degree of freedom, which
can be taken to be the phase difference between the two nodes. To get a
mathematical description, we start again by writing down the equation of
motion according to Kirchhoff’s current law, yielding

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (21)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

in terms of the phase difference between the two nodes. The
corresponding Lagrangian due to Euler-Lagrange (Eq. 8 ) is given by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (22)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the so-called Josephson energy, which is proportional to
the critical current of the junction. When going to the Hamiltonian
representation, we can either use the conjugate variables flux and
charge as done above (Eq. 11 ) or use unitless variables, which are very
common in circuits with Josephson junctions. With the charging energy
@xmath of the junction, we find

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (23)
  -- -------- -- ------

where we introduced the conjugate variable to the flux, the charge
@xmath (again via Eq. 10 ), and its unitless version @xmath , which
corresponds to the number of Cooper pairs on a node. This Hamiltonian in
terms of the superconducting phase @xmath and the number of Cooper pairs
@xmath is known from transmon qubits [ 12 ] , as well as charge qubits
such as the Cooper pair box [ 10 ] . Now the only difference between
this Hamiltonian (Eq. 23 ) and the one given for the harmonic resonator
(Eq. 11 ) is the anharmonic cosine potential instead of the harmonic
potential. Figure 3 shows the qubit potential and its lowest eigenstates
for a weakly anharmonic case. The crucial difference to the resonator
potential is that the eigenstates are not equally-spaced any more, due
to the anharmonicity of the cosine. This is why we can use the system as
a qubit. Picking out the lowest two eigenstates, we effectively have a
two-level system, as the energy transition between them is unique. As
long as the anharmonicity is large enough, transitions between the two
qubit states can be driven without leaving this code space.
While this Hamiltonian (Eq. 23 ) is exactly solvable in terms of Mathieu
functions [ 32 ] , we will use an approximative approach here that is
valid for weakly anharmonic systems such as the transmon qubit [ 12 ] .
As opposed to the Cooper pair box, the transmon qubit is characterized
by its large capacitance, such that @xmath in Eq. 23 . While this
reduces the anharmonicity, the capacitance shunts the qubit very
effectively against charge noise. In the limit of weak anharmonicity,
quantization can be done by first treating the system as harmonic and
then defining its anharmonicity, that is its quartic deviation from a
harmonic system. We thus assume that the anharmonicity of the system is
small enough to be captured by a Duffing oscillator approach, which is
an anharmonic oscillator with a quartic potential energy term. This is
valid for weakly anharmonic transmon-like qubits. We will use

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (24)
  -- -------- -- ------

with the creation and annihilation operators as defined in Eq. 12 ,
which we call @xmath and @xmath to distinguish them from the operators
for the resonator. This ansatz corresponds to the one given in Eq. 14
with a characteristic impedance of @xmath . The harmonic approximation
of Eq. 23 is given by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (25)
  -- -------- -- ------

Leaving out the constant term, the quantization ansatz (Eq. 24 ) leads
to

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (26)
  -- -------- -- ------

where

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (27)
  -- -------- -- ------

is the harmonic approximation to the frequency of the qubit. The ansatz
given in Eq. 24 clearly fulfills the commutation relation for the
conjugate variables @xmath and @xmath , as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (28)
  -- -------- -- ------

while the unitless variables fulfill @xmath . In order to define the
quartic anharmonicity of the qubit, we simply have to expand the
Hamiltonian (Eq. 23 ) up to fourth order, that is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (29)
  -- -------- -- ------

and insert the quantization ansatz (Eq. 24 ). Using

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (30)
  -- -------- -- ------

(compare [ 12 ] ) and of course @xmath , the energy of state @xmath up
to fourth order is

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (31)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

The quartic anharmonicity of the qubit yields

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (32)
  -- -------- -- ------

with @xmath , while the so-called relative anharmonicity is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (33)
  -- -------- -- ------

When we plug the quantization (Eq. 24 ) into the fourth-order
Hamiltonian (Eq. 29 ) we can use a rotating wave approximation to
rewrite

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (34)
  -- -------- -- ------

(compare Eq. 30 ), which means we leave out the fast-rotating
non-diagonal terms. The Hamiltonian thus yields

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (35)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

where we used the definition for the creation and annihilation operators
(Eq. 12 ) and left out constant terms. This expression makes clear why
this system, as opposed to a harmonic oscillator, can be used as a
qubit. The frequency difference @xmath of adjacent energy states depends
on the level @xmath . It is thus possible to pick out the two lowest
levels and treat them as a qubit since their transition frequency is
unique. Now, assuming the system is anharmonic enough, the so-called
two-level approximation is justified. We can thus make the transition

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
              @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (36)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

(compare App. \thechapter ), that is truncating to the first two levels.
In this two-level approximation the Pauli matrices @xmath replace the
creation and annihilation operators @xmath and @xmath . Ignoring the
constant term in Eq. 26 , as well as the identity operator @xmath in Eq.
36 , we can write

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (37)
  -- -------- -- ------

for the Hamiltonian of the qubit with the effective qubit transition
frequency

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (38)
  -- -------- -- ------

Note that the transition frequency between the two qubit levels is not
the pure harmonic frequency, but experiences a shift due to the
anharmonicity (compare Ref. [ 36 ] ).

### 4 Multidimensional Circuits

We have thus introduced the two most important building blocks in
superconducting qubits - a simple qubit and a harmonic resonator. Both
example circuits were systems with only one degree of freedom. This
makes the circuit analysis very easy. However, as soon as a system has
more than one degree of freedom, we have the choice how to define the
variables. When treating systems with multiple degrees of freedom, it is
convenient to work with so-called node phases or, equivalently, node
fluxes. This means that we associate each node in the circuit with a
superconducting phase @xmath or an associated magnetic flux @xmath .
Remembering that the phase or flux are given by the integral over the
voltage across an element (Eqs. 3 and 20 ), it becomes clear that the
real variables are the differences between these node variables.
Equivalently, we could say that the overall phase is undefined and a
node phase or flux only makes sense in relation to another. The concept
of node fluxes is thus a bit artificial, but it gives us a lot of
flexibility in choosing the variables in which we want to describe the
circuit. It is also very useful from a pedagogic point of view, as it
allows us to write down any circuit Lagrangian in terms of the node
fluxes simply by sight, however complicated the circuit may be.

\sidecaptionvpos

figurec

Let us consider the example circuit depicted in Fig. 2 . The circuit has
three nodes, which corresponds to a maximum of two independent
variables. We could also say that it has six branches forming four
closed paths, which leaves two independent variables. Remember that this
is due to the fact that the voltage differences around a closed path
must add up to zero, as stated in Kirchhoff’s voltage law. Looking at
the Lagrangians of the example circuits above (Eqs. 9 , 22 ), we can
directly write down the Lagrangian for this circuit in terms of the node
fluxes, that is

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (39)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

Each circuit element corresponds to one term in this Lagrangian in terms
of the node fluxes on either side of the branch. Note that we did not
need to assign directions to the branches, given that the sign of the
fluxes does not play a role, as long as no external fluxes are applied.
It is obvious that one node flux variable must depend on the others, as
the circuit can only have two independent variables.
As mentioned above, we have the freedom to choose the variables in which
we want to represent the circuit. We can thus choose any two independent
flux differences in the circuit, as well as any linearly independent
superpositions of these. This condition of linear independence implies
that the chosen flux differences do not build a closed path in the
circuit, as the flux differences around a closed path can never be
independent.
This freedom of choice in the variables means of course that there will
be several equivalent descriptions of the circuit. Consider the
following choice of variables

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (40)
  -- -------- -- ------

that is the flux differences across the two inductors. When inserting
these in the Lagrangian (Eq. 39 ), it becomes clear that the system is
inherently two-dimensional, as the third variable simply disappears. We
find

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (41)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

We can see that this choice of variables (Eq. 104 ) leads to a symmetric
Lagrangian in the variables @xmath and @xmath . Note that equivalently,
we could define one node as ground without loss of generality and
consider the remaining nodes as so-called active nodes as done by
Devoret in Ref. [ 29 ] . This would lead to the same Lagrangian as the
one given here (Eq. 41 ).
Now, what can we say about this system by looking at the Lagrangian?
Remembering that the distinction between the two basic building blocks,
that is qubits and resonators, was made via the anharmonicity in the
potential energy, we note that in this description both variables @xmath
and @xmath have an anharmonic potential energy term via the Josephson
junction in addition to the harmonic terms via the inductances. They can
thus be classified as anharmonic systems, though their anharmonicity is
reduced due to the presence of the harmonic inductance terms. Whether
they can be used as qubits, depends of course on the concrete
parameters. We can also see that the two modes interact both via the
kinetic (first term in Eq. 41 ) and the potential energy (last term in
Eq. 41 ). The circuit can thus be seen as a system of two qubits that
interact via different coupling terms.
However, as mentioned above, this description of the system is not
unique. To see this, consider a different choice of variables, that is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (42)
  -- -------- -- ------

These variables are clearly independent of each other, as none can be
represented as a superposition of the other. Note that these variables
are simply the sum and the difference of the variables used above (Eq.
40 ). When inserting the new variables in the Lagrangian (Eq. 39 ), we
find

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (43)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

We can see that with this choice of variables, only one of the two
degrees of freedom has an anharmonic potential. While @xmath could thus
be treated as a qubit mode, the potential for @xmath is purely harmonic.
The system can thus be seen as a qubit coupled to a resonator. What is
interesting about this choice of variables, is that the coupling between
the two variables depends only on the asymmetry between the two
inductances @xmath and @xmath and the two capacitances @xmath and @xmath
. For a symmetric choice of parameters, that is @xmath and @xmath , the
coupling terms disappear.
Now, how do we get an accurate description of such a multi-dimensional
system in second quantization? The strategy used here will be to do the
quantization separately for each variable, assuming that all others are
in their equilibrium positions, that is at @xmath . This will be done
for the harmonic approximation, while treating all anharmonic terms as a
perturbation, as done in Sec. 3 for the qubit. This procedure is similar
to the black-box quantization approach presented in Ref. [ 37 ] .
By way of example, we will do the quantization for the resonator within
the coupled system. Using a Legendre transformation (Eq. 10 ), we go to
the Hamiltonian representation and find

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (44)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

We will now consider only the quadratic terms in @xmath and @xmath ,
while setting @xmath . We find

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (45)
  -- -------- -- ------

The ansatz from equation 14 gives again

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (46)
  -- -------- -- ------

with

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (47)
  -- -------- -- ------

for the characteristic impedance and

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (48)
  -- -------- -- ------

for the frequency of the coupled resonator. For the entirely symmetric
case with inductances @xmath and @xmath , the coupling terms in Eq. 44
disappear and @xmath converges to

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (49)
  -- -------- -- ------

the frequency of the uncoupled harmonic resonator. The coupling to the
qubit thus yields in a rescaling of the frequency of the resonator. When
the coupling disappears, we regain the expression for the uncoupled
system.
The quantization for the qubit can be done in the same fashion, again
assuming that the resonator is in its equilibrium position at @xmath .
Having done the quantization for both degrees of freedom, we take a look
at the coupling terms. There are two terms in the Hamiltonian (Eq. 44 )
that involve both degrees of freedom, a capacitive term and an inductive
term. In order to get an expression for the coupling terms, we need to
plug in the quantization as given in Eqs. 14 and 24 with the prefactors
adapted to the coupled system and apply the two-level approximation for
the qubit. For the first term, we find

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (50)
  -- -------- -- ------

where we took

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (51)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

for the qubit operators in the two-level approximation (compare again
App. \thechapter ). The coupling strength @xmath includes the
coefficient of @xmath from the Hamiltonian (Eq. 44 ) as well as the
prefactors from the quantization ansatz (Eqs. 14 and 24 ). In the same
way, we can write

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (52)
  -- -------- -- ------

with

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (53)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

for the inductive coupling term. The full Hamiltonian for the system
depicted in Fig. 2 for the variables as chosen in Eq. 42 is thus given
by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (54)
  -- -------- -- ------

Note that we neglected the constant term from Eq. 46 .

### 5 Flux-Dependent Circuits

Let us now examine what happens, when external magnetic fields come into
play. We have stated above that the Cooper pairs in a superconductor
form a condensate that can be described by a collective many-particle
wave function @xmath with a coherent superconducting phase @xmath . As
the Cooper pairs are charged particles, they will acquire a phase shift
@xmath when traveling in a region with non-zero magnetic potential
@xmath . This effect is called the Aharonov-Bohm effect [ 39 ] , which
states that the acquired phase shift is given by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (55)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath denotes the charge of the particle. Remarkably, this is
true even if the magnetic field @xmath , as the phase shift depends on
the vector potential @xmath , not on the magnetic field itself. Note
that this phase shift depends on the path of the integral, not only on
the start and end point.
Let us consider a closed loop of superconducting material in a region
with non-zero magnetic potential. For the wavefunction to be
single-valued, we have to demand that the phase acquired in a contour
integral around the closed loop must be a multiple of @xmath , that is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (56)
  -- -------- -- ------

for integer @xmath . This means that the enclosed magnetic flux @xmath
corresponding to the phase shift @xmath must be a multiple of the
magnetic flux quantum @xmath . This flux quantization condition is given
by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (57)
  -- -------- -- ------

The circuit shown in Fig. 5 contains such a loop of superconducting
material, formed by the Josephson junction and the inductor. When we
apply an external flux through that loop, the concept of node phases
used in the previous sections breaks down due to the Aharonov-Bohm
effect. It makes sense to use branch phases instead, as denoted in the
figure. Intuitively, the branch phase @xmath across the inductor should
be equal to the branch phase @xmath across the Josephson junction, as
both circuit elements connect the same nodes. However, though their
start and end points are the same, these branch phases correspond to
different path integrals according to Eq. 55 . The flux quantization
rule now demands that

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (58)
  -- -------- -- ------

for integer @xmath , where @xmath denotes the external magnetic flux
threading the loop between the inductor and the Josephson junction. This
means that the deviation @xmath between the two branch phases on either
side of the loop is equal to the rescaled external flux @xmath up to an
integer multiple of @xmath .
In terms of signs note that the magnetic field is taken to point out of
the drawing, as explained in Fig. 5 . The branch phase @xmath across the
Josephson junction goes around the loop in clockwise direction, while
the branch phase @xmath across the inductor goes in counterclockwise
direction. Hence, @xmath appears in Eq. 58 with a positive sign, while
@xmath appears with a negative. Even though @xmath due to the external
flux, we can use Eq. 58 to eliminate @xmath . The potential energy for
this circuit can thus be written as

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (59)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

In order to save the concept of node fluxes, we can follow again Devoret
[ 29 ] and define a spanning tree in the circuit, that is a collection
of branches that connects all the nodes in the circuit, but has no
closed paths. For a circuit with @xmath nodes, the spanning tree has
@xmath elements. The phase differences across the circuit elements in
the tree are taken to be the independent variables, in which the circuit
is described. They are simply the differences between the corresponding
node phases. Each remaining branch now defines a unique closed path in
the circuit when added to the spanning tree. The phase differences
across these elements include the external flux, in addition to the
difference between the node phases. With this strategy, we ensure that
the external fluxes are not included twice, while the number of
independent variables still corresponds to the number of nodes minus
one. Importantly, the sign of the external flux depends on its
orientation in relation to the phase variables, see Figs. 5 and 5 .
To understand the role of the external flux on a system such as the one
depicted in Fig. 5 , we have to remember that the derivations of
frequencies, anharmonicities and coupling terms as done above, all rely
on series expansions in @xmath around its equilibrium position, while
fixing the other variables @xmath at their equilibrium positions.
Without external fluxes these equilibrium positions, which correspond to
the minimum of the potential energy, are always at @xmath . Looking at
the potential energy of the system described above (Eq. 59 ), it is
clear that the position of the potential minimum depends on the external
flux, as well as on the parameters @xmath and @xmath .

Figure 5 shows the potential energy of this system for different values
of the external flux @xmath for a weakly anharmonic case, where the
energy of the linear inductance @xmath is dominant compared to the
energy of the Josephson junction @xmath . In such weakly anharmonic
cases the potential energy is governed by the harmonic potential due to
the linear inductance and has a form similar to a parabola with a single
minimum. In this case, the external flux shifts the potential minimum,
but leaves the general form of the potential roughly the same. In more
anharmonic cases, where @xmath is dominant, the influence of the
anharmonic cosine term in the potential energy becomes evident. If the
influence of the cosine is strong enough, the potential will have more
than one minimum. However, as long as there are no external fluxes, the
deepest one will always be at @xmath due to the linear inductance. This
strong influence of the cosine potential has the effect that external
fluxes can change the potential drastically - for example from a single
well potential at zero flux to a double-well potential at a flux of
@xmath , as shown in Fig. 5 . Explicitly, the potential given in Eq. 59
, has a double-well form with two symmetric minima left and right of
@xmath as soon as @xmath .
While such a double-well potential can also be used to implement a
qubit, it would be a whole different kind of qubit than the one
presented in Sec. 3 . So-called flux qubits [ 11 ] employ double-well
potential with each well representing a qubit state. As opposed to that,
weakly anharmonic transmon-type qubits are defined by a single well
potential or a selected well within a cosine potential, as done in Sec.
3 . They can thus be analyzed using harmonic approximations, while
treating the anharmonicity as a perturbation. Depending on the parameter
regime, the circuit in Fig. 5 can thus either implement a single-well
transmon-type qubit or a double-well flux-qubit as shown in Figs. 5 and
5 , respectively.

### 6 Elimination of Degrees of Freedom

We will now come to another example circuit in order to introduce a very
useful elimination technique for superfluous degrees of freedom. While
we stated that the number of independent degrees of freedom in a circuit
corresponds to the number of nodes minus one, we can oftentimes reduce
this number by applying simple addition rules for parallel or series
connections of inductances or capacitances. This leads to a simplified
equivalent circuit with fewer nodes that behaves exactly as the original
circuit.

\sidecaptionvpos

figurec

Even when these simple rules do not apply, it is at times possible to
further reduce the number of degrees of freedom. In some cases, one can
use a Born Oppenheimer approximation to eliminate degrees of freedom [
40 ] , arguing that some degrees of freedom move much faster than
others. However, the method presented here does not need any
approximations. It is usually applicable whenever a degree of freedom
appears in the kinetic but not in the potential energy, or vice versa.
The example circuit shown in Fig. 3 has four nodes, that is at maximum
three independent degrees of freedom. We will show here that one degree
of freedom decouples from the others and can thus be discarded.
As soon as circuits get larger, it makes sense to write the Lagrangian
in a matrix representation, such as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (60)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is a vector that represents the variables in which the
circuit is described, @xmath is the capacitance matrix and @xmath a
matrix containing the linear inductances. For simplicity, the chosen
example here does not contain non-linear inductances. We will describe
the circuit in terms of the following variables

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (61)
  -- -------- -- ------

which are three flux differences in the circuit that do not form a
closed path and therefore are linearly independent. Using

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (62)
  -- -------- -- ------

the capacitance matrix for the circuit depicted in Fig. 3 yields

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (63)
  -- -------- -- ------

while the linear inductance matrix is given by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (64)
  -- -------- -- ------

Looking at the inductance matrix, we see that it does not have full
rank, as there is no term including @xmath in the potential energy. This
special situation, where one degree of freedom does not appear in either
the kinetic or the potential energy, gives us the possibility to
decouple it with an easy transformation. There are several linear
transformations that can be used to diagonalize a matrix. One of them is
the so-called Cholesky decomposition (see App. \thechapter ), where a
Hermitian positive-definite matrix is represented as the product of an
upper triangular matrix and its transpose. We will exploit the
triangular form of the Cholesky decomposition by defining the following
transformation matrix

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (65)
  -- -------- -- ------

This matrix consists of the first line of the Cholesky decomposition of
@xmath (Eq. 63 ), rescaled to be dimensionless, while the rest of the
matrix is a simple identity transformation. This defines a variable
transformation @xmath with @xmath that leaves @xmath and @xmath
unchanged, while decoupling the first variable. Note that we have chosen
the order of the variables in Eq. 62 , such that the variable we want to
discard is the first one. The capacitance matrix transforms to

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (66)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

whereby the first variable is decoupled from the other two. As the
transformation @xmath acts as an identity transformation on @xmath and
@xmath , the inductance matrix remains the same, that is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (67)
  -- -------- -- ------

The transformation corresponds to the mapping

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (68)
  -- -------- -- ------

which is a linear, invertible transformation. In terms of the original
node variables, the new variable @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (69)
  -- -------- -- ------

In these new variables, the Lagrangian has the following form

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (70)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

In this description, it becomes clear that the variable @xmath decouples
from the other two and therefore does not influence their evolution. It
can be discarded, thus treating the system as a system with two degrees
of freedom only. This technique can be very valuable when treating
systems with many degrees of freedom, as it leads to a description where
only the relevant degrees of freedom play a role. Importantly, the
degrees of freedom we want to keep are unaffected by the transformation.
Note that no approximation had to be made for this elimination
procedure.

### 7 Dissipative Circuits

The example circuits treated until here all consisted of
dissipation-free elements such as capacitors, inductors, and Josephson
junctions. When we want to take lossy elements such as resistances into
account, we have to adapt our treatment of the circuits to the resulting
dissipation. A very useful method for the treatment of dissipative
circuits is presented in Refs. [ 30 , 31 ] by Burkard and others.
In order to describe dissipation, they rely on the so-called
Caldeira-Leggett formalism [ 41 ] . In this formalism, a dissipative
circuit is divided into two parts: a dissipation-free system and the
environment it interacts with. This environment is depicted as a bath
with infinitely many degrees of freedom. While in principle, the
Hamiltonian formalism cannot capture dissipation, as the energy is
always conserved, the irreversible loss of energy due to dissipation can
be formally described as a transition of energy from the system to the
bath.
Burkard describes electrical circuits as directed graphs with
arbitrarily assigned directions. The relevant degrees of freedom are
chosen in terms of a spanning-tree (as also done by Devoret in Ref. [ 29
] ), a subgraph that connects all the nodes in the circuit without any
closed paths. Ref. [ 31 ] defines clear rules on how this spanning-tree
should be chosen. Lossy elements, such as external impedances are
represented as a bath that interacts with the dissipation-free part of
the circuit. While Burkard’s method is very systematic, it misses the
pedagogy from Devoret’s approach, as many intermediate results are
needed before the Hamiltonian can be written down. However, with these
intermediate results, it is possible to write down simple formulas for
relaxation and decoherence times. Appendix A contains a discussion of
Burkard’s method by means of an explicit example, showing how the
system-bath coupling leads to finite relaxation and decoherence times
for the modes of the dissipation-free system.

## Chapter \thechapter Coupling Schemes

One of the main challenges in superconducting qubit architectures is to
couple qubits in a well-controlled manner, especially in circuit
constructions that involve many qubits. The difficulty consists in
performing quantum gates on selected qubits without corrupting the
others. In order to avoid unwanted cross-couplings, qubits are
oftentimes coupled via harmonic resonators, which act as buses that
mediate the interaction [ 16 ] . This is supposed to make the
interaction more controllable.
In this chapter, we will examine different coupling types between qubits
and harmonic resonators, with a focus on two inherently different types
of coupling, which will be designated as transverse and longitudinal
coupling . Note that parts of this chapter were already published in
Ref. [ 27 ] .
Most commonly, superconducting qubit architectures work with transverse
coupling [ 17 , 18 ] , which is known from cavity quantum
electrodynamics and involves coupling of the displacement degree of
freedom of a resonator to the @xmath degree of freedom of the qubit. In
contrast to this stands longitudinal coupling [ 22 , 23 , 24 , 25 , 26 ]
, which means coupling of the displacement degree of freedom of a
resonator to the @xmath degree of freedom of the qubit. While transverse
coupling naturally appears in transmon-like circuit constructions,
longitudinal coupling is much harder to implement and hardly ever the
only coupling term present. Nevertheless, we will see that longitudinal
coupling offers some remarkable advantages, for example with respect to
scalability [ 22 ] and readout [ 23 ] .

### 8 Transverse Coupling

Let us consider the case of transverse coupling, which involves coupling
of the displacement degree of freedom of a resonator to the @xmath
degree of freedom of the qubit. The corresponding Hamiltonian is the
Rabi Hamiltonian

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (71)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the frequency of the resonator and @xmath is the gap of
the qubit, which is taken to be a two-level system. This Hamiltonian is
known from cavity quantum electrodynamics, where it describes the
interaction of a two-level atom with a quantized mode of an
electro-magnetic field in a cavity. The atom can change between its
ground and excited state by spontaneous emission or absorption of a
photon from the field. In the case treated here, the qubit is an
artificial two-level system, playing the role of the atom. It is
therefore sometimes referred to as an artificial atom [ 32 ] , while the
physics of such artificial atoms interacting with resonators is
designated circuit quantum electrodynamics.
In order to work with the Rabi Hamiltonian, it is oftentimes simpler to
go to a diagonal frame. If the coupling @xmath between the qubit and the
resonator is small compared to their detuning @xmath (this is called the
dispersive regime ), the Rabi Hamiltonian can be approximately
diagonalized using the Schrieffer-Wolff unitary transformation

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (72)
  -- -------- -- ------

where the qubit raising and lowering operators are given by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (73)
  -- -------- -- ------

(see also App. \thechapter ), while @xmath , and @xmath (see [ 42 ] , [
43 ] and [ 44 ] ). To second order in @xmath we find

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (74)
  -- -------- -- ------

with @xmath . Note that this is a perturbative treatment. The last term
in Eq. 74 is the so-called dispersive shift that makes the transition
frequency of the resonator dependent on the qubit’s state and vice
versa. While this shift is useful for read-out, it also means that the
always-on interaction between the resonator and the qubit will
inevitably entangle them. Another undesirable effect of the dispersive
shift is that it makes the qubit relaxation rate dependent on the photon
lifetime (the so-called Purcell effect [ 45 ] ).
If we couple two qubits to the same resonator and use it as a quantum
bus, a perturbative transformation similar to Eq. 72 will indicate
direct always-on coupling between the qubits. In this manner, the
resonator can be used to mediate the coupling between the qubits.
However, the always-on coupling can be problematic when we want to scale
such a system up to a larger grid, as the interactions can have a very
long range and it will be difficult to address the individual qubits
independently. A thorough analysis of such a two-qubit system with
transverse coupling to the same resonator is provided in Ref. [ 22 ] .
A very common simplification of the Rabi Hamiltonian is the
Jaynes-Cummings Hamiltonian, which we obtain by neglecting the
fast-rotating terms in Eq. 71 . To understand that, we move to a
rotating frame using the unitary transformation @xmath with

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (75)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath includes the non-interacting terms in Eq. 71 . In this
rotating frame we find the coupling terms rotating at either the sum or
the difference of the frequencies of qubit and resonator, namely

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath               
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (76)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

where the @xmath operator was rewritten in terms of raising and lowering
operators. Assuming that @xmath , we can neglect the fast rotating terms
in a so-called rotating wave approximation . Transforming back to the
original non-rotating frame, the Hamiltonian is given by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (77)
  -- -------- -- ------

the Jaynes-Cummings Hamiltonian. As opposed to the Rabi Hamiltonian, the
Jaynes-Cummings Hamiltonian has an exact analytic solution [ 32 ] due to
its block-diagonal form. In the dispersive limit, it can be diagonalized
by a transformation similar to the one done above (Eq. 72 ). It yields

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (78)
  -- -------- -- ------

with @xmath . The dispersive shift is still present in the
Jaynes-Cummings model. The term proportional to @xmath in Eq. 74 , which
is neglected due to the rotating wave approximation, is a so-called
Bloch-Siegert shift [ 46 ] .

### 9 Longitudinal Coupling

We will now turn our attention to an inherently different way of
coupling a qubit to a resonator, which is designated as longitudinal
coupling . Consider the Hamiltonian

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (79)
  -- -------- -- ------

where the displacement degree of freedom of the resonator is coupled to
the @xmath degree of freedom of the qubit, instead of the usual (
transverse ) @xmath -type coupling of the Rabi Hamiltonian (Eq. 71 ). A
detailed analysis of this coupling type can be found in Ref. [ 22 ] .
Note that the term longitudinal coupling is not uniquely defined and
sometimes refers to a coupling type that is diagonal in both degrees of
freedom. As opposed to the case of transverse coupling, there is an
exact unitary transformation that diagonalizes this Hamiltonian. As
shown in Ref. [ 22 ] , the so-called Lang-Firsov transformation [ 47 ]

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (80)
  -- -------- -- ------

with @xmath directly leads to

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (81)
  -- -------- -- ------

In contrast to Eq. 74 , there is no dispersive shift, that is no
residual interaction between qubit and resonator. Remarkably, the
energies associated with the qubit and the resonator remain unaffected
by the transformation. Note that while the treatment in the transverse
case (Eq. 72 ) is only perturbative, the Lang-Firsov transformation is
exact , with no restrictions on the coupling strength or detuning of the
system. This has the advantage that even for large coupling strengths,
the qubit relaxation rate is not degraded by a dependence on the finite
photon lifetime. We have thus gone to a frame where the Hamiltonian is
diagonal without any residual coupling.
Such a frame where qubit and resonator are uncoupled, may seem
unhelpful, remembering that the resonator is supposed to mediate the
coupling between neighboring qubits. However, the coupling between qubit
and resonator can be turned on in the diagonal frame by driving the
qubit. A transverse drive on the qubit with amplitude @xmath and
frequency @xmath

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (82)
  -- -------- -- ------

has to be transformed to the diagonal frame, again using Eq. 80 , where
it reintroduces a coupling between qubit and resonator (see again Ref. [
22 ] ). The coupling can thus be turned on and off simply by driving.
This is clearly advantageous for scalability, as it is difficult to
control always-on coupling in larger architectures. In a diagonal frame
such as the one given by Eq. 81 , qubit and resonator do not interact,
unless we want them to. As shown explicitly in Ref. [ 22 ] , a drive at
the qubit’s frequency @xmath , enables single-qubit operations (within
the rotating wave approximation), while a drive at @xmath leads to
sideband transitions between the qubit and the resonator that can be
used to implement a controlled-phase gate between neighboring qubits
(see Sec. 10.1 ).

### 10 Scalable Architecture

As proposed in Ref. [ 22 ] , this idea can be extended to a grid (see
Fig. 4 ), where a unit cell consists of a qubit coupled longitudinally
to four resonators and every resonator is coupled to a resonator of the
neighboring unit cell. The proposed Hamiltonian for two qubits coupled
via two resonators is

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (83)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

\sidecaptionvpos

figurec

Note that the two adjacent resonators are coupled through a conjugate
degree of freedom, that is @xmath instead of @xmath . As shown
explicitly in Ref. [ 22 ] , the Hamiltonian can be exactly diagonalized
by a series of unitary transformations leading to

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (84)
  -- -------- -- ------

While the qubit frequencies are unaffected by the transformations, the
resonator frequencies get rescaled to

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (85)
  -- -------- -- ------

As the qubit Hamiltonian commutes with the longitudinal coupling term
and the diagonalizing transformation (Eq. 80 ), it is clear that adding
more resonators coupled to the same qubit does not interfere with this
diagonalization procedure. The fact that the Hamiltonian with two qubits
coupled via two resonators (Eq. 83 ) is diagonalizable thus means that
the Hamiltonian for a grid as depicted in Fig. 4 must also be
diagonalizable. As described above, a transverse drive on one of the
qubits

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (86)
  -- -------- -- ------

has to be transformed to the diagonal frame as well. The interaction
induced by this drive will be rigorously confined to a small
neighborhood of the qubit being driven, without generating any direct
qubit-qubit coupling (see Ref. [ 22 ] ). These sideband transitions are
possible due to the absence of the dispersive shift in Eqs. 81 and 84 ,
since a certain transition will stay resonant irrespective of the number
of photons in the resonators.
Within the rotating wave approximation, we can frequency-select the gate
we want to drive, by choosing the appropriate driving frequency @xmath
in Eq. 86 . While single-qubit operations on qubit @xmath are
implemented by a drive on the qubit at @xmath , sideband transitions
between the qubit and either one or both neighboring resonators can be
driven using respectively @xmath or @xmath , where @xmath are the
effective frequencies of the resonators in the diagonal frame (see Eq.
85 ). There is rigorously no qubit-qubit interaction.

\sidecaptionvpos

figurec

On a grid, where every qubit has four nearest neighbor resonators and
four next-nearest neighbor resonators (see Fig. 4 ), we need eight
different effective frequencies @xmath , @xmath , for unequivocal
frequency selection. Remarkably, as can be seen from Eq. 85 , this can
be realized even if all eight original frequencies were equal, just by
having four different values of @xmath , @xmath . As coupling will be
strictly restricted to the nearest and next-nearest neighbor resonators
of each qubit, all qubits could, in principle, have the same frequency.
This allows us to choose unambiguously which sideband transition we want
to drive (see Fig. 4 ).

#### 10.1 Two-Qubit Phase Gate

As shown explicitly in Ref. [ 22 ] , read-out (see Sec. 25 ) and a
controlled-phase gate between two neighboring qubits are possible via a
series of sideband transitions between either qubit and one or both
resonators. There is never any direct qubit-qubit coupling needed. The
fact that all other qubits are unaffected by these actions is a
significant advantage concerning the scalability of this scheme. Their
strategy consists of three steps. We first map the state of qubit two on
resonator two (that is, its adjacent resonator) and then apply a
sideband transition between qubit one and both resonators, which leads
to a selective phase accumulation. At last, we map the state of
resonator two back on qubit two.
Following closely Ref. [ 22 ] , we will assume an arbitrary state for
two neighboring qubits, while both resonators between them are in their
ground state, that is

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (87)
              @xmath      (88)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

Applying the sideband transition @xmath for half a period maps the state
of qubit two on resonator two, that is

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (89)
              @xmath      (90)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

Now, we apply the sideband transition @xmath , which couples only to the
state @xmath , but to none of the others. This leads to a selective
phase accumulation, namely

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (91)
              @xmath      (92)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

Finally, we map the state of resonator two back to qubit two by applying
@xmath again for half a period. We find

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (93)
              @xmath      (94)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

As we can see, this sequence of sideband transitions leads effectively
to a two-qubit phase gate for two neighboring qubits. Importantly, this
is possible without any direct coupling between the two qubits.

### 11 Implementing Longitudinal Coupling

Having introduced different possibilities to couple a qubit and a
resonator in Secs. 8 and 9 , we would like to translate these to the
circuit language from Chapt. \thechapter . How do these coupling terms
look like in a circuit description? And what kind of circuit could
reproduce the coupling terms described above?
The resonators and qubits introduced in Sec. 2 are described as harmonic
oscillators and weakly anharmonic Duffing oscillators, respectively. In
the second quantization formalism, the conjugate variables flux and
charge are replaced by the creation and annihilation operators (Eqs. 14
and 24 ). In a flux representation, we can associate the flux @xmath
with a displacement degree of freedom and the charge @xmath with a
momentum degree of freedom. For weakly anharmonic transmon-type qubits
as introduced in Sec. 3 , these correspond to the qubit operators @xmath
and @xmath in the two-level approximation, as shown in Eqs. 51 and 53 .
The coupling terms that naturally appear in multidimensional circuits
with inductances or capacitances (see Sec. 4 ) are always bilinear in
flux or charge, such as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (95)
  -- -------- -- ------

This implies that the transverse coupling term in Eq. 71 is the natural
coupling term that appears in coupled circuits between resonators and
transmon-type qubits. The @xmath operator needed for longitudinal
coupling, however, corresponds to the number operator @xmath (compare
Eqs. 35 and 36 ) in terms of creation and annihilation operators and is
therefore a second order term in charge or flux. A quadratic term in
charge or flux corresponds thus to a diagonal term in the operator
sense, as @xmath or @xmath do not change the state of the qubit or
resonator. We can state that operators with odd parity correspond to
linear, that is odd terms in the circuit variables, while operators with
even parity correspond to quadratic, that is even terms. The only
possibility to create such a second order coupling term in transmon-type
qubits is to employ a non-linear circuit element: the Josephson
junction. Such a coupling term between a qubit and a resonator variable
is given by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (96)
  -- -------- -- ------

(compare Eq. 41 ) in terms of the unitless phase variables @xmath . Up
to second order in @xmath , this leads to two different coupling terms.
Following again Eqs. 14 and 24 , we can associate

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (97)
  -- -------- -- ------

which is again a transverse coupling term, and

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (98)
  -- -------- -- ------

While this is a @xmath coupling term, it is clearly not the longitudinal
coupling term introduced in Eq. 79 . The trigonometric expansion in Eq.
96 reveals that a Josephson coupling term involves terms which are even
in both variables and terms which are odd in both variables.
Longitudinal coupling as defined in Eq. 79 , however, is a coupling term
that has even parity in the qubit variable and odd parity in the
resonator variable. This can be realized by applying an external
magnetic flux @xmath through a loop containing a Josephson junction,
which gives

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (99)
  -- -------- -- ------

At an external flux of @xmath the parity of the coupling term changes to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (100)
  -- -------- -- -------

The first term in Eq. 100 is even in @xmath and odd in @xmath , which
corresponds to the desired longitudinal coupling. Using the rules from
above, we can associate

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (101)
  -- -------- -- -------

as the longitudinal coupling term as defined above, and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (102)
  -- -------- -- -------

as its counterpart with reversed parity. Higher order series expansions
would of course lead to more coupling terms. Depending on the
parameters, we can however assume that these will be smaller than the
ones presented here. The circuit presented in Chapt. \thechapter uses
Josephson junctions and flux-tuning to create longitudinal coupling and
a specific symmetric design, which ensures that all other coupling terms
can be canceled out.
The parity observations made here stay of course true when coupling two
qubits or two resonators. Coupling terms created by inductances or
capacitances will always be linear in both variables, while coupling
terms with even parity can only be created by Josephson junctions. For
coupling terms with asymmetric parity (odd in one variable, even in the
other, such as in Eqs. 101 and 102 ), external fluxes are necessary.

## Chapter \thechapter Circuit Design: Inductively Shunted Transmon
Qubit

This chapter will be about the design of an inductively shunted transmon
qubit with flux-tunable coupling to an embedded harmonic mode, as first
presented in Ref. [ 27 ] and further refined and adapted in Ref. [ 28 ]
. Note that most of this chapter was already published in Ref. [ 28 ] .
This design is the core of the thesis and while this chapter provides a
detailed analysis of its characteristics, the next chapters will focus
on adaptations and their implementation (Chapt. \thechapter ), as well
as possible applications (Chapts. \thechapter and \thechapter ) of the
circuit presented here.
The circuit construction offers the possibility to flux-choose between
the two inherently different coupling types introduced in Chapt.
\thechapter : transverse and longitudinal coupling, that is coupling of
the displacement degree of freedom of the resonator to the @xmath or
@xmath degree of freedom of the qubit, respectively. We will see that by
applying an external magnetic flux we can change the parity of the
coupling between qubit, and resonator mode in order to flux-choose
between pure longitudinal and pure transverse coupling, or have both at
the same time. Being able to choose between either kind of coupling in
the same circuit provides the flexibility to use one for coupling to the
next qubit and one for readout, or vice versa. As opposed to other
approaches, pure longitudinal coupling can be reached with moderate
changes in the qubit frequency.
While transverse coupling naturally appears in transmon-like circuit
constructions, longitudinal coupling is usually much smaller and hardly
ever the only coupling term present. The distinctive feature of the
tunable design presented here is that the transverse coupling disappears
when the longitudinal is maximal and vice versa. For conveniently chosen
parameters, we show that longitudinal and transverse coupling have
comparable values, while all other coupling terms can be suppressed.
Using the methods introduced in Chapt. \thechapter , we will start by
having a closer look at the circuit and explicitly derive the relevant
quantities (frequencies, couplings and anharmonicities) as a function of
the external flux.
Throughout this and the following chapters, we will describe all
circuits in terms of the superconducting phase, which is a rescaled flux
or, equivalently, the time integral over a voltage

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (103)
  -- -------- -- -------

(compare Eq. 20 ). This dimensionless variable is advantageous as the
circuits involve numerous Josephson junction whose behavior is governed
by the superconducting phase. For simplicity, we will work with
so-called node phases as introduced in Chapt. \thechapter . Note that,
as the overall phase is undefined, the real variables are the phase
differences between the nodes, which reduces the number of independent
variables by one. The circuit shown in Fig. 6 has three nodes, which
corresponds to two independent variables: a qubit coupled to a
resonator. We will start by explaining the characteristic design of the
circuit on the basis of its Lagrangian in Sec. 12 , go to second
quantization in Sec. 13 in order to find the Hamiltonian from which we
draw the frequencies and anharmonicities and turn to the different
resulting coupling terms in Sec. 14 .

### 12 Qubit-Resonator System With Flux-Tunable Coupling

Figure 6 shows the circuit that implements an inductively shunted
transmon qubit with flux-tunable coupling to an embedded resonator. The
qubit essentially consists of a single Josephson junction with energy
@xmath , with a capacitance @xmath in parallel. We include the parallel
plate capacitance of the qubit junction in @xmath . The rest of the
circuit is made up of two symmetric branches, each consisting of one or
several Josephson junctions in parallel with a capacitor and an
inductor. Similarly to the fluxonium qubit [ 48 , 49 ] , the inductive
shunting protects the qubit from charge noise. The qubit and resonator
variables are chosen such that the superconducting phase differences
across these two coupling branches are the sum and the difference of
qubit and resonator variables, that is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (104)
  -- -------- -- -------

\sidecaptionvpos

figurec

where @xmath are the phases at the nodes of the circuit as depicted in
Fig. 6 . Because of the left-right symmetry of the design, all coupling
terms via the capacitances and inductances identically cancel out, and
the coupling between qubit and resonator is only created by the coupling
junctions (or junction arrays) @xmath and @xmath . We will see that the
external flux @xmath through the two coupling loops can be used to
change the parity of the coupling term in order to implement
longitudinal coupling. We will show here that the external flux @xmath
can also be used to tune between pure longitudinal and pure transverse
coupling at conveniently chosen realistic parameters, and we analyze the
system as a function of this flux. Furthermore, we will allow for an
additional external flux in the big loop @xmath and show how the
coupling and anharmonicity are boosted at @xmath , where @xmath is the
magnetic flux quantum. The kinetic energy of the qubit-resonator system
is given by

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (105)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

with the dimensionless phase variables as defined in Eq. 104 . Clearly,
there is no coupling between qubit and resonator via the kinetic energy.
The corresponding potential energy can be written as

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (106)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the external flux through the two coupling loops and
@xmath is the external flux through the big loop, both rescaled to be
dimensionless. We will assume @xmath in this section and consider its
effect in Sec. 16 . As depicted in Fig. 6 , we might want to use arrays
of @xmath equal Josephson junctions for the coupling branches in order
to suppress the nonlinearity of the resonator as well as higher-order
coupling terms. In Sec. 18 , we will have a closer look at these arrays.
The resonator is designed symmetrically, such that the coupling between
qubit and resonator is only defined by the two coupling junction arrays
@xmath , that is the second line in Eq. 106 . A trigonometric expansion
leads to four different coupling terms, which we will classify by their
parity (see Tab. 1 ). These are given by

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (107)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the sum of the coupling junctions, while @xmath is their
difference. For the qubit, there are two terms with odd parity and two
terms with even parity, meaning that these terms are an odd or even
function in the qubit variable @xmath . The same is true for the
resonator.
Longitudinal coupling involves the coupling of the displacement degree
of freedom of the resonator to the @xmath degree of freedom of the
qubit. This means that the coupling term is an odd function in the
resonator variable, and an even function in the qubit variable, which is
true for the second term in Eq. 107 . The longitudinal coupling @xmath
is maximal at @xmath , when it is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (108)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is an even function in the qubit variable and an odd function in
the resonator variable. The longitudinal coupling term is proportional
to the sum of the coupling junctions @xmath .
Transverse coupling on the other hand involves the coupling of the
displacement degree of freedom of the resonator to the @xmath degree of
freedom of the qubit. This means that the coupling term is an odd
function in both the resonator variable and the qubit variable, which is
true for the first term in Eq. 107 . The transverse coupling @xmath is
maximal at zero flux, @xmath , when it is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (109)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is an odd function both in the qubit and the resonator variable.
As opposed to the longitudinal coupling, the transverse coupling is
proportional to the junction asymmetry @xmath , which may be designed to
be about 3 - 8 % of @xmath . It is important to notice that the
transverse term disappears at @xmath , where the longitudinal coupling
has its maximum, while the longitudinal coupling, on the other hand,
disappears at zero flux. We will see later that for favorably chosen
parameters, the other two coupling terms in Eq. 107 , @xmath and @xmath
, will be negligible, such that we can flux-choose between pure
longitudinal and pure transverse coupling. Having both types of coupling
in the same circuit gives us the flexibility to use one for coupling to
the next qubit and one for readout, or vice versa.

### 13 Quantization

Let us take a step back and do an explicit derivation of the kinetic and
potential energy given above (Eqs. 105 and 106 ) using the methods
introduced in Chapt. \thechapter . The kinetic energy in terms of the
node phases depicted in Fig. 6 simply yields

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (110)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Inserting the variables for qubit and resonator mode as defined in Eq.
104 directly leads to Eq. 105 .
Deriving the potential energy is more complicated due to the different
external fluxes and their directions. Figure 7 shows a simplified
version of the circuit from Fig. 6 employing branch phases instead of
node phases to emphasize the role of the external fluxes. We will focus
on single coupling junctions instead of the array, in order to derive
the potential energy of the circuit for @xmath . The simplified figure
includes the five circuit elements that take part in the potential
energy. The branch phases across these elements are called @xmath . They
form three superconducting loops, each threaded by an external flux
@xmath . The external fluxes all point out of the drawing (compare Fig.
5 ). For each of these loops, we can formulate the flux quantization
condition, that is

\sidecaptionvpos

figurec

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (111)
  -- -------- -- -------

as introduced in Eq. 58 from Chapt. \thechapter . Note that the branch
phases with clockwise orientation around the external fluxes enter with
positive sign, while the branch phases with counterclockwise orientation
enter with negative sign. It is clear that Eq. 111 allows us to
eliminate three of the five variables. We will keep the branch phases
across the two inductors @xmath and @xmath and thus write the potential
energy as

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
                          (112)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

For simplicity, we define

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (113)
  -- -------- -- -------

as the effective external flux appearing in the term for the qubit
junction, such that the potential energy yields

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (114)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

now using unitless variables for the external fluxes. Rewriting this
with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (115)
  -- -------- -- -------

leads to the potential given in Eq. 106 for @xmath . We have seen that
the external flux @xmath that appears in the term for the qubit junction
actually depends on the flux @xmath through one of the coupling loops.
The case @xmath thus requires a compensating flux through the big loop.

In order to find expressions for the frequencies, anharmonicities, and
couplings, we will employ the second quantization formalism. We go to
the Hamiltonian representation and start by having a look at the
quadratic terms of one variable, while the other is fixed at zero as
done in Chapt. \thechapter . (More accurately, it should be fixed at the
potential minimum, which depends on the flux, as done in Chapt.
\thechapter . We will see, however, that the formulas given here are a
good approximation.)
In order to quantize the qubit, we will at first treat it as a harmonic
system and later on calculate its anharmonicity, that is its quartic
deviation from a harmonic system, following the strategy introduced in
Chapt. \thechapter . A series expansion of the Hamiltonian around @xmath
(at @xmath ) up to second order yields

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (116)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (117)
  -- -------- -- -------

is a rescaled charge and the conjugate variable to @xmath . The
potential energy of the qubit is governed by the Josephson energy of the
qubit junction @xmath , which is shunted by the inductance @xmath . In
order to describe the flux dependence of Eq. 116 , we introduce the
dimensionless coefficient

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (118)
  -- -------- -- -------

which disappears for pure longitudinal coupling, that is for @xmath .
This flux-dependence parameter is governed by the ratio between the
Josephson energy of the coupling array and the energy of the inductance
in parallel to it. Using Eq. 118 we define

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (119)
  -- -------- -- -------

as the inductively shunted effective Josephson energy and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (120)
  -- -------- -- -------

as the charging energy of the qubit, where @xmath is the total
capacitance in parallel to the qubit junction. With these abbreviations,
Eq. 116 can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (121)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Due to the effective Josephson energy, this is equivalent to the
expression from Chapt. \thechapter for the uncoupled qubit (Eq. 25 ). We
go to second quantization using

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (122)
  -- -------- -- -------

(compare Eq. 24 ) in Eq. 121 , which yields

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (123)
  -- -------- -- -------

with the harmonic qubit frequency

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (124)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The quantization rules for the qubit given in Eq. 122 , fulfill the
commutation relation for the conjugate variables flux @xmath and charge
@xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (125)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath . In order to determine whether the system can be treated as
a qubit, we need to know its anharmonicity, that is its quartic
deviation from a harmonic system. The fourth-order term in the potential
energy (Eq. 106 ) for @xmath is

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
              @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (126)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

using Eqs. 118 and 122 . Since

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (127)
  -- -------- -- -------

(see Ref. [ 12 ] ), where @xmath are the Fock state eigenvectors, the
energy of state @xmath up to fourth order is

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (128)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The quartic anharmonicity of the qubit is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (129)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath which leads to a correction to the qubit frequency, that is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (130)
  -- -------- -- -------

We see that the qubit anharmonicity is governed by the charging energy
of the qubit @xmath and the ratio between @xmath and @xmath .
Remembering again that @xmath for pure longitudinal coupling at @xmath ,
this is the same expression as the one given by Koch et al. in Ref. [ 12
] for the transmon anharmonicity, apart from the rescaling of the
Josephson energy due to the inductive shunting (Eq. 119 ). In Ref. [ 12
] Koch et al. give an estimation for a minimal required relative
anharmonicity of

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (131)
  -- -------- -- -------

As shown below, we can reach relative qubit anharmonicities which are
one order of magnitude higher than this. As we will show in Sec. 16 ,
the qubit anharmonicity can be significantly boosted using an additional
flux bias @xmath through the big loop (see Fig. 6 ).
In the two-level approximation, the qubit Hamiltonian is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (132)
  -- -------- -- -------

For the resonator we follow the strategy used above and do a series
expansion up to second order around @xmath (at @xmath ), that is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (133)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the flux @xmath and the charge @xmath are again conjugate
variables that fulfill the commutation relation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (134)
  -- -------- -- -------

The quantization step is done by inserting

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (135)
  -- -------- -- -------

(compare Eq. 14 ) in Eq. 133 and choosing the characteristic impedance
@xmath such that the Hamiltonian has the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (136)
  -- -------- -- -------

i.e. such that the non-diagonal terms disappear. This is satisfied for

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (137)
  -- -------- -- -------

which directly gives

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (138)
  -- -------- -- -------

for the resonator frequency. We see that @xmath acquires a
flux-dependence due to @xmath (see Eq. 118 ). However, the effect of
@xmath can be suppressed by increasing the number of junctions @xmath in
the array (see Sec. 18 ).
In order to investigate whether our resonator can really be treated as a
harmonic system, we will calculate its anharmonicity. Using Eq. 135 ,
the fourth-order term in the potential energy (Eq. 106 ), again for
@xmath , can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (139)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using again Eq. 127 , the energy of state @xmath up to fourth order is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (140)
  -- -------- -- -------

The anharmonicity of the resonator is then given by

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (141)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where again @xmath . We see that the anharmonicity of the resonator is
proportional to the parameter @xmath . Remarkably, @xmath is zero at the
longitudinal coupling point @xmath , where the resonator anharmonicity
goes through zero and changes its sign. This remains true when we
include higher order terms, as all series terms in the potential energy
in @xmath from third order onward are proportional to @xmath . If we
want to work with a static system with pure longitudinal coupling, we
can thus assume our resonator to be perfectly harmonic. At any other
point in flux, though, we should choose our parameters carefully, in
order to ensure that @xmath remains small.
For the implementation of the scalable architecture discussed in Sec. 10
, it is very important that the resonator is a harmonic system, as both
the controlled-phase gate and the readout scheme (see Sec. 25 ) rely on
sideband transitions. These are possible due to the absence of the
dispersive shift for longitudinal coupling (see Sec. 9 ), which implies
that a certain sideband transition stays resonant irrespective of the
number of photons in the resonator. In Chapt. \thechapter , we will see
that while the point in flux where the transverse coupling disappears is
slightly shifted away from @xmath due to the flux dependence of the
potential minimum. However, the same is true for the zero-crossing of
the resonator anharmonicity. We can thus assume that pure longitudinal
coupling always goes along with an almost perfectly harmonic resonator.

### 14 Analyzing the Coupling Terms

Now, we would like to have a look at the coupling terms, taking into
account the four terms with different parities shown in Tab. 1 (compare
also Sec. 11 ). We will do a series approximation of the potential
energy up to second order in both @xmath and @xmath around zero, which
is assumed to be the potential minimum (see Chapt. \thechapter for a
more exact numerical treatment). For two identical coupling junctions
(or coupling arrays), only @xmath -type coupling terms are possible, as
all uneven terms in @xmath cancel out. This means that the @xmath
coupling terms are proportional to the sum of the coupling junctions
@xmath , while the @xmath coupling terms are proportional to their
difference @xmath .
At zero flux @xmath , we find the transverse coupling, which we call
@xmath as it has odd parity both in @xmath and @xmath . It is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (142)
  -- -------- -- -------

with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (143)
  -- -------- -- -------

There is a competing term with a similar flux dependence, which has even
parity in both @xmath and @xmath , namely

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (144)
  -- -------- -- -------

with

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (145)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

At @xmath both @xmath and @xmath vanish, while two other coupling terms
are at their joint maximum. One is the longitudinal coupling term

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (146)
  -- -------- -- -------

with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (147)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the @xmath in @xmath stands for even qubit parity and the @xmath
for odd resonator parity. The competing @xmath term has opposite parity

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (148)
  -- -------- -- -------

with

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (149)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

We will see later that for conveniently chosen parameters, only the
transverse coupling @xmath (which is the lowest order term) and the
longitudinal coupling @xmath play a role. The @xmath term is the highest
order term and therefore much smaller than the others. The @xmath term
is of the same order as the longitudinal coupling, but is suppressed by
the small junction asymmetry @xmath . As the flux dependences of
longitudinal and transverse coupling have a quadrature relation to one
another, each is at its maximum when the other disappears and vice
versa.
In Ref. [ 23 ] , similar expressions are obtained for transverse and
longitudinal coupling between a qubit and a resonator. However, the
qubit considered there is a split transmon with a single flux loop, in
which the two Josephson junctions play the role of qubit junctions and
coupling junctions at the same time. Ref. [ 50 ] includes a thorough
treatment of the flux-dependence of split transmon qubits such as the
one used in Ref. [ 23 ] . The harmonic frequency of a split transmon is
given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (150)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the relative junction asymmetry (compare Refs. [ 12 ]
and [ 50 ] ) and @xmath is the rescaled external flux through the loop
formed by the junctions. Clearly, the frequency has a minimum at @xmath
, which deepens with decreasing asymmetry @xmath . For small junction
asymmetries ( @xmath in Ref. [ 23 ] ), switching to pure longitudinal
coupling would be accompanied by a much larger change in the qubit
frequency compared to our design, where the roles of the qubit and
coupling junctions are separated. However, the goal in Ref. [ 23 ] is to
perform readout using a time-dependent flux with a small amplitude of up
to @xmath , thus avoiding immoderate frequency changes. In a
time-dependent frame, the transverse coupling due to spurious junction
asymmetry can argued to be non-relevant with rotating wave arguments.
Our concept, however, is to apply a much higher flux of @xmath in order
to switch to pure longitudinal coupling. As in our approach there is a
qubit junction @xmath in addition to the coupling junctions @xmath and
@xmath , the qubit frequency will vary much less over the full tuning
range than in a split transmon (compare Eq. 124 ). The additional qubit
junction in our design thus ensures a moderate flux dependence of the
frequency, independent of the coupling junction asymmetry.
As recently shown by Hutchings et al. in Ref. [ 50 ] , the qubit
dephasing rate of split transmons is proportional to the sensitivity of
the qubit frequency to the external flux. This work comes to the
conclusion that restricting the tunability of the qubit frequency to a
few hundred MHz over the full tuning range leads to dephasing times
which are nearly independent of flux noise. Staying in a regime with
moderate flux tunability in the range of hundreds of MHz (see Chapt.
\thechapter ), our qubit should be nearly unaffected by flux noise. Note
that this is true independent of the coupling junction asymmetry.
It is important to note that in our design the coupling can be tuned by
applying an external flux through the two smaller coupling loops, while
an additional flux through the big qubit loop can be used to boost the
anharmonicity (see Sec. 16 ). For the bigger loop, we consider the two
cases @xmath and @xmath , both of which are sweet-spots with respect to
flux noise.

## Chapter \thechapter Adaptations, Parameters, and Implementation

This chapter will be about the implementation of the circuit design
presented in Chapt. \thechapter . We will discuss how to choose the
parameters and present two adaptations of the original circuit from Fig.
6 , as well as a proposal for the physical implementation of a prototype
device. Note that most of this chapter was already published in Ref. [
28 ] . The section concerning the physical implementation of the design
(that is Sec. 20 and Fig. 21 ) was part of Ref. [ 28 ] and provided by
my co-authors Nataliya Maleeva, Sebastian T. Skacel and Ioan M. Pop.
A possible experiment to verify the model could be a measurement of the
qubit-resonator dispersive shift as a function of the external flux
through the coupling loops @xmath . While the transverse coupling @xmath
leads to a qubit-state dependence of the resonator frequency, the
longitudinal coupling @xmath does not. This means that the
qubit-resonator dispersive shift should disappear at @xmath , where
@xmath goes through zero and we have pure longitudinal coupling,
assuming that all other coupling terms are negligible.
We will treat the cases of single coupling junctions and coupling
junction arrays separately as they require different restrictions on the
parameters. In addition, for both cases we will examine the effect of a
flux-biasing of @xmath in the big loop. As the design strongly relies on
symmetry, we will have a look on the effect of asymmetries in Sec. 17 .
In Sec. 19 we will come to an adapted circuit, where the coupling and
the anharmonicity scale better than for the original circuit.
One approximation we made in deriving the formulas for frequencies,
anharmonicities, and couplings in Chapt. \thechapter was to assume that
the potential energy minimum is always at @xmath . This is crucial as
all important quantities were derived using series approximations around
the potential minimum. However, looking closely at the potential
function given in Eq. 106 , we see that this is only true at fluxes
@xmath for integer multiples @xmath , but nowhere in between. The exact
position of the minimum depends of course strongly on the chosen
parameters. The solution is thus to numerically determine the potential
energy minimum for a given set of parameters (including the external
fluxes) and calculate the frequencies, anharmonicities, and couplings
again by series approximations around this potential minimum. As we will
see in the next section, the formulas given above are a good
approximation. Though they cannot capture the flux dependence exactly,
they always give the right values at fluxes @xmath . This numerical
treatment becomes especially important, when we allow for a flux in the
big loop @xmath , which can be used to boost the anharmonicity (see
Secs. 16 and 19 ).

### 15 Case One: Single Coupling Junctions

In this section we will discuss how to favorably choose the parameters
for the experiment described above given the constraints of the real
system. We will start with the case of single coupling junctions, which
means we set @xmath in all the formulas from Chapt. \thechapter . There
are several restrictions we have to obey, in order to find a convenient
set of parameters. For example we will require the resonator frequency
to always stay in the range of @xmath GHz, which is a convenient
microwave range, recently used in the setup of Ref. [ 51 ] to perform
multiplexed quantum readout. We want the qubit frequency to be well
separated from the resonator frequency, as any overlap could lead to
unwanted cross talk. As mentioned in Sec. 14 , it is advisable to stay
in a regime with moderate flux tunability of the qubit frequency in
order to avoid dephasing due to flux noise. These being hard
constraints, our goal is that the qubit anharmonicity should be as high
as possible, while the anharmonicity of the resonator should be
negligible. As we are aiming here for a system where we can flux-choose
between transverse and longitudinal coupling, we will choose our
parameters such that the longitudinal coupling is as high as possible,
while the transverse coupling should be comparable. Note that the
transverse coupling can be easily controlled via the junction asymmetry.
All other coupling terms should be negligible in order to have pure
longitudinal or transverse coupling.
Looking at the expression for the resonator frequency given in Eq. 138 ,
it becomes clear that the absolute value of @xmath should not become
bigger than @xmath , since within our series approximation @xmath would
not be well-defined. Following from Eq. 118 , it is clear that @xmath
will have a maximum at zero flux and a minimum at @xmath . In order to
ensure that it always stays between 6 and 8 GHz, we can fix the
capacitance @xmath in terms of @xmath and @xmath , such that @xmath GHz
at its maximum, and then define a maximal inductance @xmath , such that
@xmath GHz at its minimum. With these hard constraints and the goal of
having high coupling and qubit anharmonicity, while keeping the qubit
frequency well separated from the resonator frequency, we tried out
different parameter values until we found the optimal solution. The
junction asymmetry @xmath is chosen such that the maximal transverse
coupling @xmath is approximately as big as the maximal longitudinal
coupling @xmath .

\sidecaptionvpos

figurec

Table 2 shows the chosen parameters and the frequencies,
anharmonicities, and couplings they lead to. Figure 8 shows the
frequencies of qubit and resonator as a function of the flux through the
coupling loops. As we can see, they always stay well separated. Solid
lines in the figure show our accurate numerical results including the
effect of the flux-dependent potential energy minimum (see above),
dashed lines show the predictions using the formulas from Chapt.
\thechapter . While the predictions are always accurate at the maxima
and minima, they deviate slightly in between. The lighter color curve
shows results at a flux @xmath through the big loop (see Sec. 16 ). Note
that the formulas from Chapt. \thechapter are only applicable for @xmath
.

While both the longitudinal and the transverse coupling reach values
above 50 MHz, the spurious terms are far from being negligible (see Fig.
9 ). The unwanted @xmath coupling reaches 11 % of the longitudinal
coupling @xmath at their joint maximum, while the unwanted @xmath
reaches 9 % of the transverse coupling @xmath at their maximum. The
dashed lines show again the predictions using the formulas from Chapt.
\thechapter . We see that they are a good but not perfect approximation.
In particular, the point where the transverse coupling disappears and
the longitudinal coupling peaks is shifted. The lighter color curves
show what happens when we consider the large-loop flux-biasing (see Sec.
16 ).

\sidecaptionvpos

figurec

The resonator anharmonicity is clearly a problem, as it is almost as
large as the qubit anharmonicity (see Fig. 10 ). While it goes through
zero almost exactly when the transverse coupling disappears, it is much
too high at all other values of flux. The lighter color curve shows
again results at a flux @xmath in the big loop, to be discussed now.

### 16 Flux-Biasing

Applying a flux of @xmath through the big loop as suggested in Eq. 106
has a very interesting effect on the circuit’s behavior. It changes the
qubit spectrum, but does not affect the resonator. As shown in Fig. 8 ,
the qubit frequency drops to 2.5 - 4 GHz, while the resonator frequency
remains unchanged. The qubit anharmonicity is now positive and boosted
up to 17 % (see Fig. 10 ). The coupling also gets a boost and is
approximately doubled (see Fig. 9 ). The zero-crossing of the transverse
coupling is shifted away from @xmath , along with the maximum of the
longitudinal coupling.
Now, what exactly happens, when we put a flux through the big loop?
Looking again at the expression for the qubit frequency (Eq. 124 ) and
its derivation, it becomes clear that a flux @xmath through the big loop
corresponds to the transition @xmath in the potential function. The
qubit potential thus consists primarily of a parabola with its minimum
at @xmath (due to the inductive part) and a cosine with a maximum at
@xmath (due to the qubit junction). Clearly, this could lead to a
double-well potential, similar to flux qubits [ 13 , 52 ] . This is a
case which we want to avoid - we have chosen not to explore flux (i.e.
persistent-current) qubits, and thus all our analysis is designed for a
single-well treatment. As long as we stay out of this double-well
regime, the minimum of the total potential will still be at @xmath (this
is without the effect of the flux through the coupling loops) and we can
reuse the expressions from Chapt. \thechapter with @xmath . For the
harmonic qubit frequency, we thus find

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (151)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the energy stored in the inductor. This explains the
drop in the qubit frequency shown in Fig. 8 . It also shows that we need
to make sure that @xmath is always bigger than @xmath , such that the
qubit frequency remains well-defined and we avoid the double-well
potential. This implies another critical (maximal) inductance, which is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (152)
  -- -------- -- -------

For the parameters used here (see Tab. 2 ), @xmath is, however, bigger
than the @xmath defined in Sec. 15 , such that it does not limit the
permitted parameter space any further. The qubit anharmonicity also
changes considerably due to the flux in the big loop. It is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (153)
  -- -------- -- -------

\sidecaptionvpos

figurec

With the parameters from Tab. 2 , @xmath is approximately half of @xmath
, which means that the denominator in Eq. 153 is positive (this is
actually required by Eq. 152 ), while the numerator is negative,
yielding a positive anharmonicity. Figure 11 shows that the qubit
anharmonicity has a steep maximum at @xmath . While it is negative in a
large range around @xmath , it changes sign when approaching @xmath .
This implies that there is a point in between where the qubit
anharmonicity is zero. The qubit with @xmath is reminiscent of the
capacitively shunted flux qubit (CSFQ) (see Ref. [ 13 ] ). Note that due
to the positive anharmonicity, the effective qubit frequency (see Eq.
130 ) does not drop as much as Eq. 151 suggests.
We have stated above that the point where the transverse coupling
disappears is considerably shifted due to the flux-biasing. As the
maximum of the longitudinal coupling experiences the same shift, this
does not seem very important. However, this also means that the
zero-crossing of the transverse coupling gets shifted away from the
zero-crossing of the resonator anharmonicity, as can be seen in Fig. 12
. It shows the transverse coupling with and without the flux-biasing (as
also shown in Fig. 8(a) ), along with the resonator anharmonicity. The
lighter purple curve shows the transverse coupling at a flux of @xmath
in the big loop, while the dark purple curve shows the transverse
coupling at @xmath . The blue curve shows the resonator anharmonicity,
which has its zero-crossing almost at the same point as the dark purple
curve. Note that as opposed to Fig. 10 , this is not a relative
anharmonicity. The resonator anharmonicity is not affected by the
flux-biasing, which only influences the qubit.
With respect to the implementation of the scalable architecture
discussed in Sec. 10 , this effect of the flux-biasing is problematic.
As also mentioned in Sec. 13 , the scalable architecture relies on
sideband transitions, both for the controlled-phase gate described in
Sec. 10.1 and the readout scheme discussed in Sec. 25 . These are
possible due to the absence of the dispersive shift for longitudinal
coupling (see Sec. 9 ), which implies that a certain sideband transition
stays resonant irrespective of the number of photons in the resonator.
Without the flux-biasing, we can assume that pure longitudinal coupling
always goes along with an almost perfectly harmonic resonator. Figure 12
shows, however, that this is not true anymore when we consider
flux-biasing.

\sidecaptionvpos

figuret

In the following, we will try out different adaptations of the original
circuit, one simply being arrays of Josephson junctions instead of the
single coupling junctions. We will see that this leads to a significant
suppression of both the unwanted coupling terms @xmath and @xmath and
the resonator anharmonicity. However, we will first have a look at the
effect of asymmetries in the next section.

### 17 Effect of Asymmetries

The capacitances and inductances in the design shown in Fig. 6 are
supposed to be symmetric, such that the coupling between qubit and
resonator is only created by the coupling junctions @xmath and @xmath .
This has the advantage that the resulting transverse coupling (Eq. 143 )
is flux-dependent and goes through zero at @xmath , which leads to pure
longitudinal coupling. Transverse coupling terms caused by asymmetric
inductances or capacitances would, however, be independent of the
external flux. While the capacitances in our design (see Sec. 20 ) can
be fabricated very accurately, the asymmetry in the inductances could be
in the neighborhood of @xmath .
To first order in @xmath , the frequencies and anharmonicities of qubit
and resonator are unaffected by this asymmetry. The same is true for the
coupling terms with even qubit parity, such as the longitudinal coupling
@xmath . The coupling terms with odd qubit parity, such as the
transverse coupling @xmath , contain, however, a term proportional to
@xmath . To first order in @xmath , the total transverse coupling is
given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (154)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the symmetric flux-dependent part is given by Eq. 143 . The
asymmetric part due to the unequal inductances is a constant offset
independent of flux. From Eq. 154 it is clear that as long as @xmath ,
there is still a point in flux where the total transverse coupling
@xmath goes through zero. For a significant @xmath of a few percent,
this point might, however, be considerably shifted from the ideal value
of @xmath , where the longitudinal coupling is maximal (compare Fig.
12(a) ). To first order in @xmath , the point in flux where the
transverse coupling disappears obeys

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (155)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note that while @xmath is proportional to @xmath , @xmath is
proportional to the coupling junction asymmetry @xmath . It is clear
from Eq. 155 that for a fixed ratio of @xmath , the transverse coupling
will always disappear at the same point in flux. If the asymmetry in the
inductances should be problematically high, this could be compensated by
an increased coupling junction asymmetry @xmath (compare Fig. 12(b) ).
An asymmetry in the external fluxes through the two coupling loops
mainly has an impact on the coupling terms with odd qubit parity, such
as the transverse coupling, while its effect on all other quantities is
negligible. In the transverse coupling, it leads to a reshaping of the
flux dependence and thereby also slightly shifts the zero-crossing point
as shown in Fig. 14 . Assuming that the flux asymmetry can be kept below
one percent, it would not lead to any significant degradation of the
system’s behavior. In the case of asymmetric inductances, an asymmetric
flux through the coupling loops could even be beneficial, as it could be
used to move the zero-crossing of the transverse coupling back to the
maximum of the longitudinal coupling.

\sidecaptionvpos

figuret

### 18 Case Two: Coupling Junction Arrays

When we want to substitute the single coupling junctions by coupling
arrays as suggested in Fig. 6 , there are a few things we have to take
into account. Assuming that all junctions in such an array are equal, we
can describe the potential energy of an array of @xmath junctions as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (156)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the total phase over the junction array and @xmath is
the integer number of flux quanta in a loop formed by the junctions,
thereby numbering the metastable solutions for @xmath . For the coupling
scheme to work, we require @xmath to be constant in time over long
durations. As described in Ref. [ 53 , 54 ] , so-called phase-slip
events, that is integer changes in @xmath , can be detected by jumps in
the frequency of the system. However, phase slips are suppressed by
choosing a large @xmath ratio for each individual junction, and time
spans on the order of hours or days with constant @xmath can be
realistically achieved [ 55 ] . We will take @xmath to be zero here and
expand for large @xmath , finding

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (157)
  -- -------- -- -------

with an effective inductance of @xmath . The effective inductance of
such an array is thus proportional to the number of junctions @xmath .

With such a treatment, we are of course neglecting the dynamics of the
internal degrees of freedom of the array [ 56 , 57 ] . This is justified
as long as the energies of these degrees of freedom are far enough
separated from the relevant energies of our system, that is the
frequencies of qubit and resonator. Explicitly, we have to require their
plasma frequencies @xmath to be above 20 GHz in order to push the
self-resonant modes of the array well above the resonator mode. Apart
from that, we require that @xmath 100 to prevent phase slips [ 54 , 55 ]
, where @xmath is the charging energy of each individual junction.
Putting these two constraints together, we can conclude that each
coupling junction in such an array needs to have a Josephson energy
larger than @xmath 70 GHz, which is a lot bigger than what we assumed
for the single-junction case. Apart from this restriction, we proceed
just as in the previous section, trying out different parameter values,
now including the number of junctions @xmath per coupling array, until
we find the optimal solution.

Table 3 shows the chosen parameters for the multi-junction case, here
for @xmath junctions per array. While we ascertain that the unwanted
coupling terms are considerably suppressed compared to the longitudinal
and the transverse coupling, the coupling is smaller in general (see
Fig. 15 ). The longitudinal coupling is suppressed by almost one order
of magnitude compared to the single-junction case. While the unwanted
@xmath coupling reaches approximately 4 % of the longitudinal coupling
@xmath at their joint maximum, the unwanted @xmath coupling reaches only
0.4 % of the transverse coupling @xmath at their maximum.

The resonator anharmonicity is considerably suppressed to less than
0.007 %, while the qubit anharmonicity stays roughly the same (see Fig.
16 ). Putting a flux of @xmath through the big loop has a similar effect
as before. The qubit anharmonicity changes sign and is boosted to up to
more than 30 %, while the resonator anharmonicity is not affected by the
large-loop flux-biasing. The zero-crossing of the transverse coupling is
shifted due to the flux-biasing, along with the maximum of the
longitudinal coupling. Even though the suppression of the unwanted
coupling and the resonator anharmonicity are a considerable improvement
over the single-junction case, the simultaneous suppression of the
longitudinal coupling is unfortunate. We will therefore try out another
adaptation of the original circuit, as described in Sec. 19 .

### 19 Case Three: Circuit With Additional Inductance

Figure 19 shows an adaptation of the original circuit in which we have
added an additional inductor in each coupling branch, in series with
both the coupling junction array and the already existing inductor.
Clearly, this adds an additional degree of freedom to each coupling
branch. However, this additional variable can be considered to be a
dependent variable (just like the internal degrees of freedom within the
coupling array) that can be eliminated, as it does not have a
significant capacitive term and therefore no low-frequency dynamics on
its own.

To explain this, we will start with a description of a single coupling
branch as shown in Fig. 19 . This is a system with @xmath nodes, where
@xmath is the number of junctions in the array. That makes @xmath
degrees of freedom, @xmath of them without their own dynamics. We define
@xmath as the phase difference across the whole device and denote the
dependent phase difference over the junction array as @xmath as depicted
in Fig. 19 , the phase difference over a single junction being @xmath ,
assuming the junctions are all equal and @xmath in Eq. 156 . This
already eliminates all phases inside the junction array. The phase
difference across the inductance @xmath must then be @xmath . The
Lagrangian for the system shown in Fig. 19 yields

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (158)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is again the reduced external flux through the coupling
loop. From here we can deduce the equations of motion for @xmath and
@xmath , being

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (159)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

As noted above, there is no capacitive term in the second equation. It
is thus not a differential equation, but simply a non-linear algebraic
equation in @xmath and @xmath , which can be used to eliminate @xmath .
However, it is not analytically possible to solve the second equation
for @xmath . Our strategy will therefore be to solve it for @xmath and
invert this function numerically for a given set of parameters in order
to eliminate @xmath . Solving for @xmath thus yields

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (160)
  -- -------- -- -------

with the abbreviations @xmath and @xmath , where @xmath corresponds to
the screening parameter known from SQUID terminology [ 58 ] , that is
the ratio between Josephson energy and inductive energy.

\sidecaptionvpos

figurec

In terms of the parameters @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , we can
distinguish two different cases. The function is invertible as long as
@xmath is above the critical value of one, compare Fig. 17 . If the
function is not invertible, the potential becomes multi-valued. This is
a parameter regime we want to avoid. In order to see what that condition
means, we can rewrite it as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (161)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the energy associated with the inductance and @xmath is
the same for the additional inductance @xmath . The condition given in
Eq. 161 thus means that the energy of the two inductances must be @xmath
times bigger than the energy of each junction in the array, in order to
ensure that Eq. 160 is invertible and there is a well-defined potential.
The potential energy for the complete qubit-resonator system depicted in
Fig. 19 is given by

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (162)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (163)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

is a function that describes one coupling branch as depicted in Fig. 19
, in which the dependent variable @xmath must be replaced by the
numerical inversion of Eq. 160 . The kinetic energy is the same as for
the original circuit (Eq. 105 ). In analogy to what we described in Sec.
16 , we want this circuit to be also usable at a flux-biasing of @xmath
through the big loop. We thus have to make sure that we do not go into
parameter ranges, where the potential is a double well. This can be done
by determining the curvature of the potential in the @xmath direction at
a flux @xmath through the big loop and @xmath through the coupling
loops. If the curvature is positive here, it will always be positive.
While we can not define a critical inductance as done in Sec. 16 (Eq.
152 ), the equivalent in this case is a critical (minimum) number of
junctions @xmath that ensures a positive curvature of the potential.

From here on, our strategy is the one described in Sec. 15 . For a given
set of parameters (including the external fluxes), we first determine
the position of the potential energy minimum in @xmath and @xmath and
then calculate the frequencies, anharmonicities, and couplings using
series approximations around that minimum. To choose the best
parameters, we again fix the capacitance @xmath in terms of the other
variables, such that the resonator frequency is @xmath GHz at zero flux,
where @xmath has its maximum. Then we try out different values for the
other parameters until we find the solution that gives the highest
longitudinal coupling and anharmonicity, while satisfying all the
conditions mentioned above. The chosen parameters for this circuit are
shown in Tab. 4 .
Figure 18 shows the frequencies of qubit and resonator as a function of
the flux through the coupling loops @xmath . Their flux dependence looks
a lot like in the two cases described above. The lighter color curve
shows results at a flux @xmath in the big loop. The qubit frequency
again experiences a drop due to the large-loop flux-biasing, while the
resonator is unaffected by this.

\sidecaptionvpos

figurec

Figure 19 shows the four most important coupling terms, again as a
function of the flux through the coupling loops @xmath . Compared to the
single-junction case, the coupling is smaller and loses its resemblance
to the trigonometric functions in the formulas given in Chapt.
\thechapter . The unwanted coupling terms are suppressed. The unwanted
@xmath coupling reaches 4 % of the longitudinal coupling at their joint
maximum, while the unwanted @xmath coupling is about 0.5 % of the
transverse coupling at zero flux. Though the longitudinal coupling
@xmath is smaller than in the single-junction case, it is slightly
bigger than in the case of the coupling junction array without the
additional inductor. The lighter color curves show what happens at a
flux @xmath in the big loop. Due to the large-loop flux-biasing, the
longitudinal coupling is almost doubled. The point where the transverse
coupling disappears is considerably shifted, along with the maximum of
the longitudinal coupling.

The qubit anharmonicity is slightly bigger than in the single-junction
or the coupling-array case, while the resonator anharmonicity is
suppressed to less than 0.03 % (see Fig. 20 ). The large-loop
flux-biasing leads again to a boost in qubit anharmonicity, here to up
to 18 %.
We can conclude that the adapted circuit with the additional inductor
works better than the circuit using only the junction array. The
single-junction case seems problematic due to the high resonator
anharmonicity. In all cases flux-biasing with @xmath in the big loop
leads to a boost in anharmonicity and to an increase of coupling
strength of almost a factor of two.

### 20 Physical Implementation

Figure 21 shows a possible physical implementation of the inductively
shunted transmon qubit. One of the main challenges is to realize
compact, low-loss and linear inductances, in the range of several @xmath
, required for the shunting inductors @xmath and @xmath (see Fig. 21 a
). For this purpose, we propose the use of a superconducting strip
consisting of a high kinetic inductance material such as granular
aluminum, or niobium and titanium nitrides, which have been shown to
achieve inductances in the range of @xmath [ 59 , 60 , 61 , 62 ] . The
rest of the circuit, including all Josephson junctions, can be
fabricated using standard thin-film aluminum. The electrical connections
between these different metallic layers can be realized using recently
developed argon ion cleaning and contacting techniques which preserve
the coherence of the circuit [ 63 , 64 , 65 ] .
The capacitances required for shunting the qubit, @xmath , and the
resonator, @xmath , as well as the coupling capacitors, @xmath and
@xmath , can all be implemented by the relatively simple structure shown
in Fig. 21 b . For clarity, the three superconducting island phases are
labeled using the same notation as in Fig. 6 . The structure is designed
to couple to the first propagating mode of a 3D waveguide, following the
sample-holder geometry described in Ref. [ 51 ] . The electric-field
magnitude is indicated by the color scale. The maximum values, in the
range of @xmath for an energy of @xmath stored in the mode, are
comparable to the electric field values reported in Ref. [ 65 ] , which
enabled the measurement of microwave resonators with internal quality
factors exceeding @xmath in the quantum regime. Notice that the proposed
implementation satisfies the required left-right symmetry of the
schematics in Fig. 21 a , with comfortable margins of error, below
@xmath , for either optical or electron-beam lithography.
The 3D waveguide model shown in Fig. 21 c offers the advantage of strong
coupling for the resonator mode inside the designed pass band between
@xmath and @xmath , as indicated by the table in Fig. 21 b , while the
qubit mode can be efficiently decoupled from the microwave environment.
The finite-element simulations indicate a qubit mode coupling quality
factor as high as @xmath .
The magnetic field required to tune the fluxes @xmath and @xmath (see
Fig. 6 ) can be controlled using a direct current coil, which can be
attached to the exterior of the sample holder, with the current flowing
in a plane perpendicular to the x-axis. In the simplest implementation,
the same coil can bias both fluxes, making use of a large ratio between
the areas of the superconducting loops enclosing @xmath and @xmath .
Thus, small field variations can be used to tune @xmath ,
quasi-independently from @xmath .
The currently proposed physical implementation is meant as a prototype
to test the tunability of the transverse and longitudinal coupling,
nevertheless the design shown in Fig. 21 c could be adapted for a higher
density of qubits. In Fig. 21 d we show a direct extension of the
concept for two qubits using capacitive coupling between the resonators.
With more involved RF designs, it is possible to enlarge the qubit
matrix, and add strictly local qubit and resonator drives by using
recent advancements in flip-chip and micromachined superconducting
circuit technology [ 15 , 66 , 67 ] .

## Chapter \thechapter Application: Scalable Design

An application of longitudinal coupling is the scalable design discussed
in Sec. 10 , which was conceived by Billangeon et al. in Ref. [ 22 ] .
In the architecture proposed there, each unit cell consists of a qubit
longitudinally coupled to four resonators, while each resonator is
coupled to a resonator from the next unit cell via a conjugate degree of
freedom (see Eq. 83 and Fig. 4 ). The design introduced in Chapt.
\thechapter implements pure longitudinal coupling to a resonator for a
certain value of the external flux. By tuning this flux, the coupling to
the resonator can be switched between pure transverse and pure
longitudinal coupling. In this chapter, we will show how the design from
Chapt. \thechapter can be scaled up to a grid that implements the
architecture from Ref. [ 22 ] . We will focus here on the case of single
coupling junctions, but the extensions discussed here are applicable to
all adaptations from Chapt. \thechapter . Note that parts of this
chapter were already published in Ref. [ 27 ] .

### 21 EXTENSION TO n RESONATORS \sidecaptionvpos

figurec

The design depicted in Fig. 6 is easily extendable to a block of one
qubit coupled separately to any number of resonators as depicted in Fig.
22 . This is done by multiplying the resonator structure in parallel to
the qubit. Fortunately, adding another resonator arm to the system does
not have any effect on the first resonator and the only coupling terms
are the ones between the qubit and each resonator. As shown in Fig. 22 ,
each resonator adds a node @xmath to the system. The variables for qubit
and resonators are taken to be

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (164)
  -- -------- -- -------

so that the qubit is still defined by the phase difference across the
qubit junction, as in Sec. 12 . We assume that each resonator arm
contains two symmetric capacitances @xmath and two symmetric inductances
@xmath , as well as two slightly asymmetric coupling junctions @xmath
and @xmath . As the resonators are independent of each other, there is
no need for any symmetries between two resonators. For simplicity
reasons, we will restrict this discussion to the case of single coupling
junctions instead of coupling junction arrays (see Secs. 12 and 18 ) and
ignore fluxes through the big loops. The kinetic energy of the
multi-resonator system is given by

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (165)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

which clearly includes no coupling terms. The potential energy yields

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (166)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath refers to the (rescaled) flux through the coupling loops of
resonator @xmath . Note that the coupling between the qubit and a
resonator can be controlled separately for each resonator by tuning this
flux. Transverse and longitudinal coupling can be chosen depending on
the application.
The frequencies of the resonators will still be given by Eq. 138 , as
the resonators are independent of each other. The qubit frequency and
anharmonicity, however, will be influenced by each resonator the qubit
couples to. Hence, the effective Josephson energy and the charging
energy of the qubit are obtained by the substitutions @xmath and @xmath
in Eq. 119 and Eq. 120 . With these substitutions, all the results from
Chapt. \thechapter , including the qubit frequency and anharmonicity, as
well as the coupling terms, apply also here. As each resonator arm adds
another harmonic term to the qubit’s potential, it will be important to
set @xmath to be sufficiently large compared with @xmath to maintain the
qubit’s anharmonicity. Note that the parameters shown in Chapt.
\thechapter are adjusted for a single resonator and should be adapted
when coupling more than one resonator to a qubit.

### 22 Two Coupled Blocks \sidecaptionvpos

figurec

In order to implement Eq. 83 , we need to couple one of these blocks to
the next one via the charge degree of freedom of the resonator. Fig. 23
shows the simplest way we have found to obtain the desired coupling
between two blocks. A slightly more complicated alternative, which might
be better suited for experimental reasons, will be shown in the next
section. We connect two neighboring resonator branches by tying their
@xmath nodes together and connect all qubit nodes to a common ground
node @xmath via capacitances @xmath and @xmath . Note that the two
blocks are uncoupled for @xmath . As the node phases are only defined up
to an overall phase, we have the freedom to set @xmath ( ground node [
29 ] ) without loss of generality. However, we will keep @xmath here in
order to show that possible fluctuating charge offsets between ground
and the rest of the circuit can not influence our system. The kinetic
energy of this coupled system in terms of the node phases marked in Fig.
23 is

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (167)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Inserting the variables for the qubits and resonators, that is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (168)
  -- -------- -- -------

leads to

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (169)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

with @xmath . We can see that, apart from the two qubit and resonator
variables, a fifth variable @xmath appears in Eq. 169 that mediates the
coupling between the resonator variables @xmath and @xmath . We will
show here that this variable decouples from the others and can thus be
discarded. In the potential energy there is no coupling between the two
blocks

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (170)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

and the fifth variable @xmath does not appear. This situation, where a
variable appears in the kinetic but not in the potential energy, allows
for a variable elimination following the recipe described in Sec. 6 and
App. \thechapter . We use the substitution

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (171)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is a linear, invertible transformation that leaves the variables
for qubits and resonators (Eq. 168 ) unchanged. It leads to

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (172)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

with the abbreviation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (173)
  -- -------- -- -------

which makes clear that there is a direct capacitive coupling between the
two resonator variables as desired, while the unwanted variable @xmath
decouples. As @xmath does not appear at all in the potential energy of
the coupled system and is decoupled in the kinetic energy, it can be
safely discarded.
We have thus found a system that implements the Hamiltonian proposed by
Billangeon (Eq. 83 ) for two qubits and two resonators and is scalable
to a grid (see Sec. 21 ).
Note that as @xmath appears only in the discarded variable @xmath , a
charge offset between ground and the rest of the circuit can not
influence our system variables (Eq. 168 ). The rest of the circuit is
protected against charge noise due to the inductive shunting. However, a
grid made of the circuit in Fig. 23 would include large superconducting
loops. As this is experimentally problematic, because the flux cannot be
controlled precisely over large areas, we will present an alternative in
the next section, where the superconducting loops are broken by an
additional capacitor between the two blocks.

#### 22.1 Alternative Circuit

Fig. 24 shows an alternative circuit to the one shown in Fig. 23 , which
has the advantage that large superconducting loops are avoided. Instead
of fusing the two blocks’ @xmath nodes into one, they are now connected
via a capacitance @xmath . Apart from that, the circuit is equal to the
one presented in the last section. Due to the additional capacitor, it
clearly has one node more than before. When the capacitance between the
@xmath nodes goes to infinity, which means fusing the two nodes
together, version two smoothly converges to version one. We will have a
look at the quantization of the two-qubit-two-resonator system for both
possible versions.

\sidecaptionvpos

figurec

The potential energy of the circuit is clearly the same as before (Eq.
170 ), where the phase variables for the qubits and resonators are now
defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (174)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note that in terms of branch variables, these are equal to the variables
used above (Eq. 168 ). The potential energy only contains the four
variables for the qubits and the resonators. Clearly, there is no
coupling between the two blocks via the potential energy. In the kinetic
energy, however, two additional variables appear, which we would like to
eliminate in a similar way as in Sec. 22 . It is

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
                          (175)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

with @xmath . Just as in the last section in Eq. 169 , the additional
variables mediate the interaction between the two resonators.
A simple transformation similar to the one done above (Eq. 171 )
decouples the two unwanted variables, as explicitly shown in App.
\thechapter . Remarkably, this can be done without changing any of the
system variables (Eq. 174 ). Therefore, the potential energy remains
again unaffected by the elimination procedure. We are left with a
four-dimensional system of two qubits and two resonators, as expected.
The kinetic energy is now given by

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (176)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

with the abbreviation (compare Eq. 173 )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (177)
  -- -------- -- -------

When the capacitance @xmath between the blocks goes to infinity, which
means fusing the @xmath nodes together, we find @xmath . This means both
possible versions are correctly described by Eq. 176 (compare Eq. 172
after discarding @xmath ). For unconnected blocks @xmath disappears,
that is when either @xmath or @xmath or @xmath are equal to zero. If
@xmath , we simply find @xmath .

#### 22.2 Quantization

The expressions for the qubits in second quantization can be easily
adapted for the system of two coupled blocks by the transition @xmath in
the charging energy for the qubit (Eq. 120 ). For the resonator,
however, we will redo the quantization procedure here for the circuit
with the capacitor between the blocks presented in Sec. 22.1 . As
mentioned above, the transition to the system without the capacitor
(Sec. 22 ) is done by setting @xmath (compare Eq. 177 ). In order to go
to second quantization, we need to go to the Hamiltonian representation.
The Legendre transformation (compare Eq. 10 ) of the kinetic energy
given in Eq. 176 can be written as

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (178)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where we introduced the abbreviation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (179)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is clear that for unconnected blocks, that is for @xmath , the
coupling term in Eq. 178 disappears, which directly leads back to the
uncoupled case (Eqs. 116 and 133 in Chapt. \thechapter ).
Following the strategy for the quantization from Chapt. \thechapter , we
look at the quadratic terms in the Hamiltonian for one of the
resonators, setting all other variables to zero. It is

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (180)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (181)
  -- -------- -- -------

was defined as in Eq. 118 .

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (182)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

with the conjugate variables @xmath and @xmath . We go to second
quantization using again the ansatz from Eq. 14 . Choosing the
characteristic impedance such that all non-diagonal terms disappear as
done in Sec. 2 leads to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (183)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (184)
  -- -------- -- -------

For zero coupling, that is @xmath , both these expressions converge to
the ones from Chapt. \thechapter (Eqs. 137 and 138 ). The Hamiltonian in
second quantization yields of course

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (185)
  -- -------- -- -------

The coupling between the two resonators is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (186)
  -- -------- -- -------

with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (187)
  -- -------- -- -------

Clearly, this is directly proportional to @xmath and goes smoothly to
zero when the blocks are uncoupled.

#### 22.3 Stray Capacitances

Stray capacitances might appear between the resonator nodes @xmath and
ground as shown in Fig. 25 . As we will see, this only leads to a
rescaling of the coupling but does not affect its form or its strict
locality. While this is true for both the circuits introduced above, we
will focus here on the simpler circuit introduced in Sec. 22 for reasons
of brevity. Such a stray capacitance will add a term @xmath with @xmath
to the kinetic energy given in Eq. 167 . In order to compensate for this
extra term, we have to adapt the transformation given in Eq. 171 to

\sidecaptionvpos

figurec

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (188)
  -- -------- -- -------

This leads to rescaling of the coupling term to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (189)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note again that Eq. 188 leaves the system variables unchanged. Thus, the
main effect of the stray capacitance @xmath is the shunting of the
coupling term in Eq. 189 .

### 23 Extension to Grid

It is straightforward to extend this idea to the grid proposed by
Billangeon [ 22 ] (see Fig. 4 ), where every qubit couples
longitudinally to its resonators and every resonator couples
capacitively to a resonator of the next block. In analogy to the two
coupled blocks described in the last section, Fig. 26 shows a plaquette
of four coupled blocks, which corresponds to the circuit shown in Fig.
24 . Every two adjacent resonators are coupled by a capacitance @xmath
between the nodes @xmath and @xmath , where @xmath labels the connection
between the two resonators and @xmath the qubit they belong to as
indicated in Fig. 26 . When the capacitance between two resonators goes
to infinity @xmath , the nodes on either side of it are fused to a
single node @xmath , which corresponds to the circuit shown in Fig. 23 .
All qubit nodes (blue colored nodes) are connected to the same ground
node @xmath (compare Sec. 22 ) via capacitances @xmath .
In order to see why this coupling is entirely local, we have to remember
that there is no coupling between two resonators coupled to the same
qubit, as shown in Sec. 21 . While the qubits are coupled to their
resonators via the potential energy (see Eq. 166 ), the coupling between
two adjacent resonators is via the kinetic energy. For every unit of two
qubits coupled via two resonators, we will find the kinetic energy to be
equal to Eq. 175 , or Eq. 169 in the case of @xmath . In order to
emphasize this locality, we can rewrite the kinetic energy for the ring
of four coupled qubits depicted in Fig. 26 as

\sidecaptionvpos

figurec

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (190)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath (compare Eq. 174 ) correspond to
two adjacent resonators, which belong to the qubits @xmath and @xmath
and are connected by the capacitance @xmath . For every unit of two
coupled resonators, there are two superfluous variables @xmath , which
will be eliminated following the strategy from Sec. 22 . Note that there
is no connection between two such units of coupled resonators and none
of the variables in @xmath appears in @xmath . The capacitance matrix
@xmath in Eq. 190 is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (191)
  -- -------- -- -------

The elimination of the superfluous variables (compare App. \thechapter )
can be done separately for each such unit of two coupled resonators, as
done in Sec. 22 . Note again that this variable elimination leaves the
variables for qubits and resonators unchanged. In the new basis @xmath ,
the capacitance matrix is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (192)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is defined as in Eq. 173 for every two resonators @xmath
and @xmath coupled via a capacitance @xmath . In this new frame, the
resonators are directly coupled to each other, while the superfluous
variables @xmath and @xmath are decoupled and can thus be discarded. The
kinetic energy thus transforms to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (193)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath are left unchanged. For the case
of @xmath , we find

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (194)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath as defined in Eq. 173 . This corresponds again to the
circuit from Fig. 23 , that is Eq. 172 , which has one superfluous
variable less.
To sum up, we can say that while the potential energy of a grid
corresponding to Fig. 26 contains the longitudinal coupling between a
qubit and its resonators with no connection between two blocks @xmath
and @xmath , the kinetic energy contains the transverse coupling between
two resonators, with no connection between two such units @xmath and
@xmath . The coupling thus remains entirely local, when the circuit is
scaled up to a grid.
As discussed in Sec. 10 , we need eight different frequencies @xmath
with @xmath for unequivocal frequency selection, where @xmath are the
effective frequencies in the diagonal frame, as defined in Eq. 85 . In
principle, this can be realized even if all eight original frequencies
were equal, just by having four different values of @xmath . As there is
rigorously no coupling between neighboring qubits, there is no
restriction on the qubit frequencies and they could all chosen to be the
same.
For our implementation, this could mean that we fabricate all blocks of
a qubit and its resonators identically and vary only the coupling
capacitance @xmath between them. Looking at Figs. 5 and Fig. 26 (and
again Eq. 85 ), it is clear that only four different coupling
capacitances are needed on a grid to achieve eight different effective
frequencies @xmath with @xmath for the nearest and next-nearest neighbor
resonator of a qubit. While this would lead to equal qubit frequencies
for all qubits on the grid, Eq. 183 shows that the bare resonator
frequencies would be already slightly different due to the variation of
@xmath . Explicitly, this means that every two adjacent resonators would
have the same bare frequency (but different effective frequencies @xmath
), while every qubit would be surrounded by four resonators with
different bare frequencies.

## Chapter \thechapter Application: Readout

The device presented in Chapt. \thechapter offers several possibilities
to perform readout of the qubit. It is suitable to use the embedded
resonator as a readout resonator, such that the qubit remains without
direct coupling to the environment in order to protect its coherence.
The resonator thus needs to be coupled to a readout cavity or a
transmission line, in order to extract the information. As shown in Sec.
26 , this can be done without any direct coupling between the qubit and
the environment. Since the qubit can be coupled separately to several
resonators (see Sec. 21 ), one resonator could be used for readout,
while the other(s) are used to mediate the coupling to the nearby qubits
(see Sec. 22 ). We will see that the qubit’s state can be read out using
either longitudinal or transverse coupling to the readout resonator,
though in a very different way.
Regular dispersive readout [ 18 ] uses the dispersive shift that arises
due to transverse coupling, which leads to a qubit state dependence of
the resonator frequency. Driving the resonator at its bare frequency
@xmath , one can see a peak in the transmission spectrum at frequency
@xmath , where @xmath is the dispersive shift (see Eq. 78 ). While this
technique is the standard measurement method in superconducting qubits,
it is only approximately quantum non-demolition and has the further
disadvantage that the dispersive shift makes the qubit’s coherence time
dependent on the finite photon lifetime. In this chapter, we will thus
discuss the possibility to use longitudinal coupling for readout. As
opposed to standard dispersive readout with transverse coupling,
longitudinal coupling offers at least two different readout schemes,
which are exactly quantum non-demolition.

### 24 Readout Using Modulated Coupling

One possibility to do readout using longitudinal coupling is the flux
modulation procedure introduced by Didier et al. in Ref. [ 23 ] . Their
strategy is based on the modulation of the longitudinal coupling between
a qubit and its resonator at the frequency of the resonator. The
longitudinal coupling term @xmath plays the role of a qubit-state
dependent drive on the resonator. As we will see, this leads in
steady-state to a qubit-state dependent displacement of the cavity
field. The amplitude of this displacement is negligible in the static
case, but it can be boosted by modulating the coupling in time.
Let us assume a system with static longitudinal coupling between qubit
and resonator, that is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (195)
  -- -------- -- -------

As shown in Ref. [ 23 ] (and in App. C ), the longitudinal coupling
leads to a qubit state-dependent displacement of the cavity field with
amplitude

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (196)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the coupling between the resonator and the environment
(see again App. C ). As in most cases @xmath , this displacement is
usually negligibly small and therefore does not serve for readout.
However, it can be significantly boosted by modulating the coupling at
the frequency of the resonator, that is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (197)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the modulation amplitude and @xmath a possible constant
offset. We move to a rotating frame using the unitary transformation
@xmath with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (198)
  -- -------- -- -------

which leads to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (199)
  -- -------- -- -------

where any fast rotating terms were neglected in a rotating wave
approximation (see App. C ). In this frame, the longitudinal coupling
term is standing still, while all the diagonal terms are gone. We can
thus adapt Eq. 196 by setting @xmath and @xmath , which gives a much
bigger amplitude of the cavity field displacement than in Eq. 196 ,
namely

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (200)
  -- -------- -- -------

As stated in Ref. [ 23 ] , this displacement should correspond to a few
hundred photons and it should make the two qubit states easily
distinguishable by homodyne detection. As explicitly shown there, the
displacement of the cavity field goes in opposite directions for the two
different qubit states (see also Eq. 284 in App. C ). In the case of
dispersive measurement, however, the corresponding displacement does not
take the optimal path in phase space, which requires longer measurement
times compared to the strategy described just now.
The device suggested in Ref. [ 23 ] has a lot of similarities to ours
and especially leads to the same flux dependences in the transverse and
longitudinal coupling (Eqs. 143 and 147 ). However, the crucial
difference is that in the design of Didier et al. there are two
Josephson junctions which play the roles of both qubit junction and
coupling junctions at the same time, while these are separated in our
design. As stated in Sec. 14 , the additional qubit junction in our
design allows us to sweep through a full cycle of the external flux at
moderate changes in the qubit frequency. Just as in Didier’s design, a
time-dependent flux variation @xmath will lead to time-dependent
transverse and longitudinal coupling modulated with the drive frequency,
though our design allows higher flux variation amplitudes. The
transverse coupling term will be time-dependent both in the original and
in the rotating frame of Eq. 199 and can thus be neglected in the
rotating wave approximation. In Ref. [ 23 ] it is stated that spurious
transverse coupling does not affect the signal-to-noise ratio of the
measurement at short measurement times @xmath , that is for @xmath .

### 25 Readout Using Sideband Transitions

An alternative possibility to use longitudinal coupling for readout is
described by Billangeon et al. in Ref. [ 22 ] . Their strategy is based
on the system described in Sec. 10 , where two qubits are each coupled
longitudinally to a resonator, while the two resonators are coupled via
a conjugate degree of freedom. The readout scheme they conceived uses a
series of sideband transitions between the qubit and its nearest and
next-nearest neighbor resonator to fill up one of the resonators with a
significant number of excitations.
As mentioned in Sec. 10 , the corresponding Hamiltonian, that is Eq. 83
, can be exactly diagonalized using a series of unitary transformations,
which lead to a frame where the two qubits and two resonators are
uncoupled from each other. However, the coupling can be turned on again
by applying a transverse drive on one of the qubits. Within the rotating
wave approximation, different sideband transitions can be selected via
the frequency of the drive. This renders sideband transitions between a
qubit and its nearest and next-nearest neighbor resonator possible, but
never induces direct coupling to the next qubit. Applying a combination
of two sideband transitions fills one of the resonators with
excitations, if the qubit is in the excited state.
Let us suppose that the two resonators are in their ground state, while
the qubit we want to measure is either in its @xmath or @xmath state. We
will apply a combination of the two sideband transitions @xmath and
@xmath , where @xmath acts on the nearest neighbor resonator and @xmath
acts on the next-nearest neighbor resonator of the qubit in question.
Clearly, both sideband transitions can only have an effect, if the qubit
is in its @xmath state. If the system is in the @xmath at the beginning,
it will stay there and not be affected by neither of the sideband
transitions.
If, however, the system starts in the state @xmath , the first sideband
transition will lead to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (201)
  -- -------- -- -------

The second sideband transition then leads

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (202)
  -- -------- -- -------

After a few repetitions, the next-nearest neighbor resonator will be
filled with a significant number of excitations, while the qubit and its
nearest neighbor resonator simply oscillate between their ground and
first excited state.
Note that this scheme relies on the fact that there are two resonators
between the two qubits. The presence of the second resonator, which is
not filled with excitations, is essential, as it prevents the qubit’s
ground state from coupling to the sideband transitions. The resonator is
thus only filled with photons, if the qubit is in the excited state.
We should also note that this scheme using sideband transitions is
possible due to the absence of the dispersive shift, as the frequency of
the resonator(s) does not depend on the state of the qubit and vice
versa. This means that the sideband transitions always stay resonant,
even though the photon number in the resonator changes (compare again
Ref. [ 22 ] for details).
The device presented in Sec. 22 of this thesis is an implementation of
this system with two qubits and two resonators. Placing such a device in
a readout cavity or coupling it to a transmission line as described
below, would allow for the detection of the photons in the resonators.
In order to do the sideband transitions, we need a way to drive the
qubit. This can be done simply by varying the external flux through the
big qubit loop in Fig. 6 . Setting @xmath in Eq. 106 yields

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (203)
  -- -------- -- -------

for the qubit term, where @xmath is the rescaled amplitude of the flux
drive and @xmath is its modulation frequency. To first order in @xmath ,
we can identify

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (204)
  -- -------- -- -------

(compare Eq. 122 ), which corresponds to a transverse driving term. As
shown in Ref. [ 22 ] , sideband transitions between the qubit and its
nearest and next-nearest neighbor resonator can be selected via the
frequency of the drive @xmath . An alternative way to implement such a
transverse drive would be an @xmath voltage between the qubit nodes
@xmath and @xmath in Fig. 6 .

### 26 Coupling to a Transmission Line

Both readout methods described above require the resonator(s) to be
coupled to a readout cavity or a transmission line, in order to extract
the information. Ideally, this should be done without any direct
coupling between the qubit and the readout device. We can see our
coupled qubit-resonator system as two orthogonal dipoles, which
correspond to the qubit and resonator modes. The qubit consists of a
dipole between the qubit nodes @xmath and @xmath , while the dipole
corresponding to the resonator mode is composed of @xmath and @xmath on
the one hand and @xmath on the other hand (compare Fig. 27 ). This
coincides with the phase variables for qubit and resonator as defined in
Eq. 104 . Aligning the resonator dipole with the electric field in a
cavity, will lead to coupling between the resonator and the cavity mode,
while the orthogonal qubit mode will remain uncoupled. This is the case
in the proposal for the physical implementation shown in Fig. 21 .
The same is true when we couple the resonator capacitively to a
transmission line as shown in Fig. 27 . The transmission line, which can
be modeled as an external impedance @xmath , is connected between node
@xmath and ground, while two identical capacitors connect the qubit
nodes @xmath and @xmath to ground. This symmetric arrangement with
respect to the qubit junction ensures that the qubit mode remains
uncoupled from the transmission line, as long as the two capacitances
from the qubit nodes to ground @xmath are equal. Note that the
transmission line is connected to our original circuit (that is Fig. 6 )
in the same way as the two blocks are coupled in Sec. 22 . Just as the
qubit does not couple to the transmission line in Fig. 27 , there is no
direct coupling between the qubit and the next-nearest neighbor
resonator in Sec. 22 .

\sidecaptionvpos

figurec

The coupling between the qubit-resonator system and its environment,
which is indispensable for readout, can induce both relaxation and
decoherence. In Ref. [ 31 ] , Burkard et al. give expressions for the
relaxation time @xmath and the decoherence time @xmath . In order to
describe a dissipative circuit, they construct a so-called
Caldeira-Leggett Hamiltonian, in which the circuit is split up into a
dissipation-free part called system and a bath that interacts with the
system

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (205)
  -- -------- -- -------

Appendix A contains a detailed discussion of Burkard’s method of
treating dissipative circuits, using the circuit from Fig. 27 as an
example. As explained there, the expressions for relaxation and
decoherence times depend on the system-bath coupling, which is chosen to
be of the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (206)
  -- -------- -- -------

(see Ref. [ 31 ] ), where @xmath is a vector that describes the coupling
between system and bath, and @xmath is the charge variable vector of the
system. For each mode in the circuit, the relaxation and decoherence
times are given in terms of the matrix elements of @xmath with the
states @xmath and @xmath of the corresponding mode. It is

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (207)
     @xmath   @xmath      (208)
     @xmath   @xmath      (209)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the dephasing time, @xmath is the transition frequency
between the ground and first excited state of the corresponding mode,
and @xmath is the spectral density of the bath (see again App. A ). For
the circuit depicted in Fig. 27 , we find that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (210)
  -- -------- -- -------

which means that only the resonator couples to the bath, while there is
no direct coupling between the qubit and the bath as desired. This means
that in principle, the qubit has infinite relaxation and decoherence
times, as long as the circuit is perfectly symmetric. As capacitances
can be fabricated very accurately, we can assume that the influence of
the system-bath coupling on the qubit is negligible. For pure
longitudinal coupling between qubit and resonator, the absence of the
dispersive shift further protects the qubit from decoherence.
The resonator, however, acquires finite @xmath and @xmath times due to
its coupling to the environment. We find, however, that the dephasing
time @xmath of the resonator diverges, as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (211)
  -- -------- -- -------

(see App. A for details). This means that the decoherence time is simply
twice the relaxation time, @xmath . The matrix element in Eq. 207 is
however unequal to zero, as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (212)
  -- -------- -- -------

Naturally, @xmath diverges if either the capacitances from the qubit
nodes to ground @xmath or the capacitance between the the system and the
transmission line @xmath go to zero (see Fig. 27 ). The full expression
for @xmath is given in App. A .

## Chapter \thechapter Conclusions

In conclusion, we presented a circuit design for an inductively shunted
transmon qubit that can be tuned between pure transverse and pure
longitudinal coupling to an embedded resonator mode, by changing the
external magnetic flux.
We have given an introduction to circuit quantization showing how to go
from a circuit description to a second-quantized Hamiltonian in a
systematic way. With the help of some concrete examples, we discussed
how to include external fluxes and dissipative elements. On the
Hamiltonian level, we introduced the two inherently different coupling
types present in our design, that is transverse and longitudinal
coupling.
In order to apprehend the remarkable advantages of longitudinal coupling
in terms of scalability, we discussed a scalable qubit architecture
conceived by Billangeon et al. in Ref. [ 22 ] . The crucial advantage of
this architecture is that the system is exactly diagonalizable using a
series of unitary transformations. In this diagonal frame, there are no
dispersive shifts or residual couplings between any qubits or
resonators. Single-qubit operations and sideband transitions between a
qubit and any of its resonators can be done by driving the qubit at the
corresponding frequency. The coupling is strictly confined to the
nearest and next-nearest neighbor resonators of each qubit; there is
never any direct qubit-qubit coupling.
Translating this discussion from the Hamiltonian level to the language
of circuit quantization, we have shown how to design circuits with
specifically tailored couplings.
The core of this thesis consists of the circuit design of an inductively
shunted transmon qubit with flux-tunable coupling to an embedded
harmonic mode, which we first presented in Ref. [ 27 ] and further
refined and adapted in Ref. [ 28 ] . Using a symmetric design, static
transverse coupling terms are cancelled out, while the parity of the
only remaining coupling term can be tuned via an external flux.
Similarly to the fluxonium qubit, the inductive shunting protects the
qubit from charge noise. The distinctive feature of the tunable design
is that the transverse coupling disappears when the longitudinal is
maximal and vice versa. As opposed to other approaches, pure
longitudinal coupling can be reached with moderate changes in the qubit
frequency.
We performed quantitative analytical and numerical calculations for
several qubit-resonator coupling designs, including a discussion of the
effect of unwanted asymmetries. We found that by applying an additional
magnetic flux through the loop of the inductively shunted qubit, both
the coupling terms and the qubit anharmonicity increase significantly.
Additionally, we showed that using single Josephson junctions in the
qubit-resonator coupling elements is not feasible, because of the
resulting large unwanted coupling terms and high resonator
anharmonicity. Using junction arrays in the coupling elements is more
favorable, because the ratio between the longitudinal coupling and the
unwanted coupling terms can be increased by an order of magnitude, and
the resonator anharmonicity is strongly suppressed. Including an
additional inductance in the coupling branches helps to further increase
the qubit anharmonicity and the longitudinal coupling by up to a factor
of two. Finally, we proposed a prototype design based on standard
circuit fabrication, integrated with high kinetic inductance elements.
Furthermore, we have shown that our design can be used to implement the
scalable architecture conceived in Ref. [ 22 ] . We presented a proposal
for a circuit QED system where a qubit couples to several resonators via
its longitudinal degree of freedom and every resonator is capacitively
coupled to a resonator from the next unit cell. This proposal is easily
scalable to any number of resonators per qubit and any number of unit
cells. Remarkably, just a single unique qubit frequency suffices for the
scalability of this scheme. The same is true for the resonators, if the
resonator-resonator coupling constants are varied instead.
We have included a short discussion of two different readout schemes
using longitudinal coupling, which could be implemented with our design.
In both cases, the resonator serves as a readout resonator which
mediates the coupling to the environment. We have shown that this can be
implemented without any direct coupling between the environment and the
qubit.

### 27 Outlook

In Sec. 20 , we have shown a prototype device for the implementation of
the inductively shunted transmon qubit with tunable transverse and
longitudinal coupling. This section and especially Fig. 21 were provided
by my co-authors from Ref. [ 28 ] , Nataliya Maleeva, Sebastian T.
Skacel and Ioan M. Pop from Karlsruhe Institute of Technology . The
physical realization of the design presented in this thesis will surely
lead to many interesting new questions and experimental challenges. I am
very much looking forward to see this prototype device being realized in
the near future.
Figure 21 already contains a sketch of a scaled-up version of the
prototype circuit with two qubits coupled via two resonators, as
proposed in Sec. 22 . This could be used to implement the two-qubit
phase gate described in Sec. 10.1 , which employs longitudinal coupling.
Hopefully, this approach could lead to high two-qubit gate fidelities,
given that it works without any direct qubit-qubit coupling. Following
the strategy discussed in Chapt. \thechapter , the circuit could be
scaled up to a grid with strictly local interaction following the scheme
of Ref. [ 22 ] .
The adapted circuit presented in Sec. 19 provides quite a lot of
interesting physics, which we have not gone to explore. As mentioned
there, Eq. 160 is only invertible in a certain parameter regime, out of
which the potential energy becomes multi-valued. While we have chosen
our parameters such that this case is avoided, it is surely an
interesting question to see what happens in this multi-valued regime.
Another open question is the effect of the neglected capacitances both
in the adapted circuit from Sec. 19 and the coupling junction array from
Sec. 18 . While we assume that their effect is small, some future work
could be done to investigate this question.

## Chapter \thechapter Operators and Commutators

The creation and annihilation operators for quantum harmonic oscillators
are defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (213)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the Fock states @xmath are the eigenstates of the harmonic
oscillator and @xmath and @xmath satisfy the commutation relation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (214)
  -- -------- -- -------

The creation and annihilation operators act on the Fock states as

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (215)
     @xmath   @xmath      (216)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

while their product is known as the number operator

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (217)
  -- -------- -- -------

The Fock states @xmath are the eigenstates of the number operator with
eigenvalue @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (218)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

If a Fock space is truncated to the two lowest levels @xmath and @xmath
, as done in the so-called two-level approximation (see Sec. 3 ) for
qubits, the creation and annihilation operators transform to the qubit
raising and lowering operators @xmath , as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (219)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (220)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath with @xmath are the Pauli matrices. These are given by

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (221)
     @xmath   @xmath      (222)
     @xmath   @xmath      (223)
     @xmath   @xmath      (224)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where we have included the identity matrix @xmath . It is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (225)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (226)
  -- -------- -- -------

Their commutation relation is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (227)
  -- -------- -- -------

for @xmath . Using the Pauli matrices, the number operator @xmath yields

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (228)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

in the truncated Fock space. Note that just as @xmath is an eigenstate
of the number operator, the qubit operator @xmath does not change the
state of the qubit, as opposed to the @xmath and @xmath operators.

## Chapter \thechapter Variable Elimination Using the Cholesky
Decomposition

The so-called Cholesky decomposition [ 68 ] of a Hermitian
positive-definite matrix @xmath consists of an upper triangular matrix
@xmath with real and positive diagonal entries and its conjugate
transpose @xmath , such that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (229)
  -- -------- -- -------

Explicitly, @xmath has the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath               (230)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (231)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (232)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the complex conjugate of @xmath . For a real and
symmetric @xmath matrix @xmath with all positive entries, the Cholesky
decomposition is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (233)
  -- -------- -- -------

The Cholesky decomposition has oftentimes a much simpler form than a
square root decomposition, making analytic calculations a lot easier.
Especially the first row of @xmath has a very simple form. This can be
used for the elimination of unwanted variables as done in Secs. 6 , 22 ,
and 23 .
As an explicit example of such a variable elimination, let us take the
kinetic energy of the circuit shown in Fig. 24 , that is Eq. 175 , which
can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (234)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath (compare also Eq. 190 ). The capacitance matrix @xmath in
terms of these variables is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (235)
  -- -------- -- -------

While it is not trivial to find the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of
@xmath , its Cholesky decomposition (the first row in particular) has a
quite simple form. As the two variables @xmath do not appear in the
potential energy of the system (Eq. 170 ), we can use a Cholesky
decomposition to decouple them in the kinetic energy without changing
the potential energy. Let us define the linear, invertible
transformation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (236)
  -- -------- -- -------

which consists of the first row of the Cholesky decomposition of @xmath
(rescaled by its first entry to be unitless) and an identity matrix for
the other three rows. It is clear that the transformation @xmath leaves
the resonator variables @xmath and @xmath untouched and that therefore
the potential energy of the system is unchanged. The transformation
decouples the first variable @xmath in the capacitance matrix, which now
has the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (237)
  -- -------- -- -------

We can use the first line of the Cholesky decomposition of the lower
block in Eq. 237 (again rescaled to be dimensionless) to define

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (238)
  -- -------- -- -------

which decouples the next superfluous variable @xmath . Note again that
this transformation leaves the resonator variables @xmath and @xmath
untouched, as it acts exclusively on @xmath . The final capacitance
matrix yields

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (239)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

with @xmath and @xmath as defined in Eq. 173 . We see that both
superfluous variables variables @xmath are decoupled, while there is now
a direct coupling term between the resonator variables @xmath and @xmath
. In total, the kinetic energy thus transforms to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (240)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath and @xmath as given in Eq. 239 . The decoupled variables can
be discarded, as they do not influence the evolution of the variables we
are interested in. This method for the elimination of superfluous
variables is oftentimes applicable whenever the kinetic energy includes
more variables than the potential energy or vice versa.

## Chapter \thechapter Dissipation and Readout

## Appendix A Circuit Theory Following Burkard

A very useful method for the treatment of dissipative circuits is
presented in Refs. [ 30 , 31 ] by Burkard and others. In order to
describe dissipation, Burkard et al. rely on the so-called
Caldeira-Leggett formalism [ 41 ] . In this formalism, a dissipative
circuit is split up in two parts: a dissipation-free system and the
environment it interacts with. This environment is depicted as a bath
with infinitely many degrees of freedom. While in principle, the
Hamiltonian formalism cannot capture dissipation as the energy is always
conserved, the irreversible loss of energy due to dissipation can be
formally described as a transition of energy from the system to the
bath. A lossy element, such as an external impedance, can thus be
represented as a bath of infinitely many harmonic oscillators.
The Caldeira-Leggett Hamiltonian of a dissipative circuit with a single
external impedance can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (241)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is divided into the dissipation-free system , the bath , and the
interaction between them. Formally, the bath can be written as a sum of
infinitely many harmonic oscillators, that is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (242)
  -- -------- -- -------

while the system-bath coupling is chosen to be of the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (243)
  -- -------- -- -------

(see Ref. [ 31 ] ), where @xmath is a vector that describes the coupling
between system and bath, and @xmath is the charge variable vector of the
dissipation-free system. While the specific form of the bath will have
no influence on the dissipation-free system, the influence of the
system-bath coupling becomes evident in terms of relaxation and
decoherence times (see below).
Burkard describes an electrical circuit as a directed graph, arbitrarily
assigning directions to the branches, that is the circuit elements.
Among those branches a so-called tree is chosen (as also done by Devoret
in Ref. [ 29 ] ), that is a subgraph that connects all the nodes in the
circuit without any closed paths. The remaining branches are called
chords. Necessarily, every chord defines a unique closed path in the
circuit when added to the tree. The number of elements in the tree
corresponds to the number of independent degrees of freedom.
In Ref. [ 31 ] , the tree is chosen such that it includes all Josephson
junctions, external impedances, and voltage sources and as many
inductances as necessary. Capacitances are not included in the tree.
These rules imply that circuits with closed paths that contain nothing
else than Josephson junction, external impedances and voltage sources
cannot be treated with this method. Apart from that, the circuit needs
to have enough capacitances to ensure that the Legendre transformation
(Eq. 10 ) is applicable. In the matrix representation introduced in
Chapt. \thechapter (Eq. 60 ), this means that the capacitance matrix
needs to be invertible. In Ref. [ 30 ] , the rules for choosing the tree
are slightly different. Note that here we will adhere to the conventions
from Ref. [ 31 ] .

\sidecaptionvpos

figurec

In order to treat the circuit from Sec. 26 (Fig. 27 ) with Burkard’s
method, we have to make a small adaptation, as shown in Fig. 28 . We
formally substitute the qubit junction by a normal inductance @xmath ,
such that the tree can include all Josephson junctions without having
any closed paths. In the Hamiltonian, we can later resubstitute the
inductance term with a Josephson term. Apart from that we will keep to
the case of single coupling junctions (compare Chapt. \thechapter and
Sec. 15 ) for reasons of simplicity. The chosen tree, which includes the
two coupling junctions @xmath and @xmath and the external impedance
@xmath , is marked in Fig. 28 in thick black lines with arbitrarily
chosen directions.
This choice of tree already defines the variables, in which the circuit
is represented. Note that these are branch variables, as opposed to the
node variables chosen in Chapt. \thechapter and Ref. [ 29 ] . The two
branch variables across the Josephson junctions belong to the
dissipation-free system , while the external impedance @xmath is
represented as a bath , as defined in Eq. 241 . Following Ref. [ 31 ] ,
the Hamiltonian of the dissipation-free system is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (244)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the capacitance matrix and @xmath a vector with the
conjugate flux variables to the charge variable @xmath . Note that the
branch variables across the Josephson junctions used here are simply the
sum and the difference of the qubit and resonator variables defined in
Eq. 104 . After a transformation to the variables from above, we find
the same potential energy as in Eq. 106 , while in the kinetic energy is
given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (245)
  -- -------- -- -------

This corresponds to the the Legendre transformation of Eq. 105 with the
simple substitution @xmath in order to account for the capacitance to
ground in Fig. 28 . With this substitution we can reuse all the formulas
given in Chapt. \thechapter .
Following the strategy described in Ref. [ 31 ] , the system-bath
coupling for the circuit in Fig. 28 can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (246)
  -- -------- -- -------

in terms of the variables defined in Eq. 104 . This means that only the
resonator couples to the bath, while the qubit remains without direct
coupling to the environment.
Burkard et al. give explicit formulas for the relaxation time @xmath and
the decoherence time @xmath for each mode in the circuit in terms of the
matrix elements of @xmath with the states @xmath and @xmath of the
corresponding mode. @xmath and @xmath thus depend directly on the
system-bath coupling given in Eqs. 243 and 246 . Explicitly, these are
given by

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (247)
     @xmath   @xmath      (248)
     @xmath   @xmath      (249)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the dephasing time, @xmath is the transition frequency
between the ground and first excited state of the corresponding mode,
and @xmath is the spectral density of the bath. Following Ref. [ 31 ]
and using

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (250)
  -- -------- -- -------

we find

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (251)
  -- -------- -- -------

for the spectral density of the bath. As can be seen from Eqs. 246 - 249
, the resonator acquires finite @xmath and @xmath times due to its
coupling to the environment, while for the qubits these are in principle
infinite. Looking at the quantization given for the resonator in Eq. 135
, we find @xmath , which gives

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (252)
  -- -------- -- -------

This means that the dephasing time @xmath of the resonator diverges, and
therefore the decoherence time @xmath is simply twice the relaxation
time. The matrix element in Eq. 207 , however, is given by

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
              @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (253)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where we took the expression for the quantization of the resonator as
given Eq. 135 , but with @xmath . Using Eq. 253 , we can calculate the
relaxation time of the resonator, which yields

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (254)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

with the spectral density of the bath as given in Eq. 251 and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (255)
  -- -------- -- -------

Naturally, @xmath goes to zero for both @xmath (as the matrix element
disappears) and @xmath (as @xmath disappears).

## Appendix B Coupling to the Bath

In order to give a concrete value to the resonator-bath coupling (Eq.
243 ), we must match the bath spectral density @xmath (Eq. 251 ) to the
expression given in Ref. [ 31 ] , that is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (256)
  -- -------- -- -------

To do this matching, we can use that in

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (257)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

the integral over @xmath in the first line converges, giving a function
of @xmath (compare Ref. [ 69 ] ). Discretizing the integral and matching
the first and the last expression in Eq. 257 as a function of @xmath ,
yields

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (258)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where we assumed that the frequencies of the bath modes @xmath are
equally spaced in steps of @xmath . This simply means that when @xmath
tends to zero, the sum over @xmath can be rewritten as an integral

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (259)
  -- -------- -- -------

We would now like to rewrite the full system-bath Hamiltonian in second
quantization. For the bath variables, we take

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (260)
  -- -------- -- -------

such that Eq. 242 yields

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (261)
  -- -------- -- -------

For the quantization of the resonator, we can reuse Eq. 135 , where we
have to make the transition @xmath in order to include the capacitances
to ground shown in Fig. 27 . With this and Eq. 260 , the coupling
between system (that is the resonator) and bath can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (262)
  -- -------- -- -------

Neglecting the two-photon terms in a rotating wave approximation, we
rewrite the coupling Hamiltonian as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (263)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the system-bath coupling is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (264)
  -- -------- -- -------

with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (265)
  -- -------- -- -------

In this discrete description, @xmath depends on the frequency spacing
@xmath . We will see, however, that it drops out when we do the
transition to a continuous picture with @xmath .

## Appendix C Langevin Formalism

In order to derive Eqs. 196 and 200 , we resort to the so-called
Langevin formalism [ 70 ] . We will start with a Hamiltonian with static
longitudinal coupling between qubit and resonator, while the resonator
is coupled to a bath

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (266)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

(compare Eq. 263 ). The Langevin equations that describe the dynamics of
@xmath and @xmath are given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (267)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (268)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where we used that @xmath . This is a system of coupled differential
equations. The homogeneous equation for @xmath is easily solved as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (269)
  -- -------- -- -------

Assuming that the inhomogeneous solution will be similar, we use @xmath
as ansatz in Eq. 268 and find

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (270)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

and therefore

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (271)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

as the full solution for @xmath , that is the sum of the homogeneous and
the inhomogeneous solution. When we plug this result into the
differential equation for @xmath , we find

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (272)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

At this point, we will drop last term in the first line, as it
corresponds to the input field @xmath , which we take to be the vacuum
here (the resonator will not be driven). Apart from that, we will use
that @xmath (Eq. 264 ) and find

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (273)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Using Eq. 259 , we assume that for @xmath this can be rewritten to

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (274)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

with the continuous function @xmath . We will now assume that @xmath ,
and therefore also @xmath , is almost constant in the frequency interval
we are interested in and can thus be taken out of the integral in @xmath
. Using this and @xmath , we find the decoupled differential equation
for @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (275)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . To solve the differential equation for @xmath , we start
again by solving the homogeneous equation, that is

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (276)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Assuming again that the inhomogeneous solution will be similar to the
homogeneous one, we use @xmath as ansatz in Eq. 267 and find

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (277)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The full solution for @xmath is thus given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (278)
  -- -------- -- -------

We can now choose the constant @xmath such that @xmath , which leads to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (279)
  -- -------- -- -------

As @xmath is in most cases much smaller than @xmath , this longitudinal
coupling term would lead to a negligibly small state separation in phase
space. However, as proposed in Ref. [ 23 ] , we can circumvent this
problem by modulating the coupling at the resonator’s frequency @xmath ,
that is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (280)
  -- -------- -- -------

We set @xmath in Eq. 266 move to a rotating frame using the unitary
transformation @xmath with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (281)
  -- -------- -- -------

which leads to

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (282)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Note that we now use the continuous version of Eq. 266 with @xmath
instead of @xmath . When we cross out the fast-rotating terms in a
rotating wave approximation, we find an Hamiltonian, that is equivalent
to Eq. 266 , but for the diagonal terms, that is

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (283)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The only change we have to make to the expression of the output field
(Eq. 279 ) is thus to set @xmath and @xmath . We therefore find

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (284)
  -- -------- -- -------

which gives a much larger state separation in phase space than in the
static case (Eq. 279 ). Note that Eq. 284 is purely imaginary, which
means that the cavity field displacement goes in opposite directions for
the two different qubit states. This corresponds to the ideal path in
phase space, as it yields high distinguishability even at short
measurement times. Eq. 279 , however, has both real and imaginary parts,
such that it does not take the optimal path in phase space, which
requires longer measurement times. The same is true for the dispersive
case, as shown in Ref. [ 23 ] .
