## 1 Introduction

Pseudodifferential operators are an indispensable tool in the study of
elliptic differential operators (like Dirac operators) and their index
theory. The calculus of pseudodifferential operators on compact
manifolds encompasses parametrices of elliptic differential operators,
i.e., their inverses up to smoothing operators, which enables one to
deduce the usual important results about elliptic operators like
elliptic regularity. Also, the first published proof of the
Atiyah–Singer index theorem [ AS68 ] goes via pseudodifferential
operators.

The first goal of the present paper is to set up a suitable calculus of
pseudodifferential operators on non-compact manifolds. It turns out that
the only for us useful definition of such a calculus is the uniform one,
and that such a definition is only possible on manifolds of bounded
geometry. Let us explain why on non-compact manifolds we have to
consider uniform pseudodifferential operators. Recall that on @xmath an
operator @xmath is called pseudodifferential, if it is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath denotes the Fourier transform of @xmath and the function
@xmath satisfies for some @xmath the estimates @xmath for all
multi-indices @xmath and @xmath . On manifolds one calls an operator
pseudodifferential if one has the above representation in any local
chart. But if the manifold is not compact, we get the problem that this
is not sufficient to guarantee that the operator has continuous
extensions to Sobolev spaces. ¹ ¹ 1 We are ignoring in this discussion
the fact that on non-compact manifolds we also need a condition on the
behaviour of the integral kernel of @xmath at infinity. For this we
additionally have to require that the above bounds @xmath are uniform
across all the local charts. But since this is not well-defined
(choosing a different atlas may distort the bounds arbitrarily large
across the charts of the atlas), we will have to restrict the charts to
exponential charts and additionally we will have to assume that our
manifold has bounded geometry (these restrictions become clear when one
looks at Lemma 2.3 ).

Our calculus of pseudodifferential operators on manifolds of bounded
geometry is not totally new: Kordyukov [ Kor91 ] , Shubin [ Shu92 ] and
Taylor [ Tay08 ] already developed similar calculi. Let us explain the
difference between their calculi and the one we develop in this paper.
The underlying reason that different versions of such calculi are
possible is due to the fact that on non-compact manifolds one needs to
control the behaviour of the integral kernels of these operators at
infinity. One possibility is to impose finite propagation, i.e.,
demanding that there is an @xmath such that the integral kernel @xmath
of the pseudodifferential operator vanishes for all @xmath with @xmath
(recall that pseudodifferential operators always have an integral kernel
that is smooth outside the diagonal). More generally, one can require an
exponential decay of the integral kernel at infinity, and usually this
decay should be faster than the volume growth of the manifold. In the
present article we will require that our pseudodifferential operators
are quasilocal ² ² 2 An operator @xmath is quasilocal , if there exists
some function @xmath with @xmath for @xmath and such that for all @xmath
and all @xmath with @xmath we have @xmath . , since this seems to be in
a certain sense the most general notion which we may impose (see, e.g.,
the proof of Corollary 5.5 for how quasi-locality is used).

Let us explain why we want our operators to be quasilocal. To construct
the large scale index class of an operator @xmath of Dirac type, we have
to consider the operator @xmath , where @xmath is a Schwartz function
with @xmath . Now usually @xmath will not have finite propagation, but
it will be a quasilocal operator. This was proven by Roe for operators
of Dirac type [ Roe88 , Section 5] and we will generalize this crucial
fact to elliptic uniform pseudodifferential operators, see Corollary 7.3
. So even though we could restrict to finite propagation uniform
pseudodifferential operators and use the fact that @xmath will be
quasilocal whenever we need, we would leave our class of finite
propagation operators in this way. So working from the beginning with
quasilocal operators leads to the fact that we never have to leave this
class. Note that the proof of the fact that @xmath is quasilocal
requires substantial analysis and is one of our key technical lemmas. It
relies on a close analysis of the propagation properties of the wave
operators @xmath associated to an elliptic uniform pseudodifferential
operator @xmath , see Lemma 7.1 .

The approach to index theory preferred by the author is the one via
@xmath -homology. This is a generalized homology theory in which
elliptic operators naturally define classes. On non-compact manifolds of
bounded geometry an important branch of index theory (large scale index
theory) is investigated via, e.g., the rough assembly map @xmath
developed by Špakula (the coarse setting is actually more common, ³ ³ 3
Coarse index theory was mainly developed by Roe [ Roe93 , Roe96 , Roe03
] . but since we have to work with uniform operators anyway the more
natural approach is to use the rough theory which is as a uniform
version of the coarse one). Here @xmath denotes uniform @xmath -homology
and @xmath is the @xmath -theory of the uniform Roe algebra. Given an
operator of Dirac type over a manifold of bounded geometry, Špakula
showed [ Špa09 , Section 3] that it has a class in uniform @xmath
-homology and therefore large scale index theory can be applied. Our
investigations of uniform pseudodifferential operators on manifolds of
bounded geometry and our analysis of the propagation properties of
functions of such operators enables us to generalize the result of
Špakula and show that elliptic uniform pseudodifferential operators also
have classes in uniform @xmath -homology. For the resulting index theory
see [ Eng15b ] and [ Eng15a , Section 5] .

###### Main Result (Theorem 9.2 and Proposition 9.3).

Let @xmath be a symmetric and elliptic uniform pseudodifferential
operator acting on a vector bundle of bounded geometry over a manifold
@xmath of bounded geometry.

Then @xmath defines naturally a uniform @xmath -homology class @xmath
and this class does only depend on the principal symbol of @xmath .

#### Acknowledgements

This article contains mostly Section 2 of the preprint [ Eng15a ] which
is being split up for easier publication. It arose out of the
Ph.D. thesis [ Eng14 ] of the author written at the University of
Augsburg.

## 2 Bounded geometry

We will define in this section the notion of bounded geometry for
manifolds and for vector bundles and discuss basic facts about uniform
@xmath -spaces and Sobolev spaces on them.

###### Definition 2.1.

We will say that a Riemannian manifold @xmath has bounded geometry , if

-   the curvature tensor and all its derivatives are bounded, i.e.,
    @xmath for all @xmath and @xmath , and

-   the injectivity radius is uniformly positive, i.e., @xmath for all
    points @xmath and for a fixed @xmath .

If @xmath is a vector bundle with a metric and compatible connection, we
say that @xmath has bounded geometry , if the curvature tensor of @xmath
and all its derivatives are bounded. ∎

###### Examples 2.2.

There are plenty of examples of manifolds of bounded geometry. The most
important ones are coverings of compact Riemannian manifolds equipped
with the pull-back metric, homogeneous manifolds with an invariant
metric, and leafs in a foliation of a compact Riemannian manifold (this
is proved by Greene in [ Gre78 , lemma on page 91 and the paragraph
thereafter] ).

For vector bundles, the most important examples are of course again
pull-back bundles of bundles over compact manifolds equipped with the
pull-back metric and connection, and the tangent bundle of a manifold of
bounded geometry.

Furthermore, if @xmath and @xmath are two vector bundles of bounded
geometry, then the dual bundle @xmath , the direct sum @xmath , the
tensor product @xmath (and so especially also the homomorphism bundle
@xmath ) and all exterior powers @xmath are also of bounded geometry. If
@xmath is defined over @xmath and @xmath over @xmath , then their
external tensor product ⁴ ⁴ 4 The fiber of @xmath over the point @xmath
is given by @xmath . @xmath over @xmath is also of bounded geometry. ∎

Greene proved in [ Gre78 , Theorem 2’] that there are no obstructions
against admitting a metric of bounded geometry, i.e., every smooth
manifold without boundary admits one. On manifolds of bounded geometry
there is also no obstruction for a vector bundle to admit a metric and
compatible connection of bounded geometry. The proof (i.e., the
construction of the metric and the connection) is done in a uniform
covering of @xmath by normal coordinate charts and subordinate uniform
partition of unity (we will discuss these things in a moment) and we
have to use the local characterization of bounded geometry for vector
bundles from Lemma 2.5 .

We will now state an important characterization in local coordinates of
bounded geometry since it will allow us to show that certain local
definitions (like the one of uniform pseudodifferential operators) are
independent of the chosen normal coordinates.

###### Lemma 2.3 ([Shu92, Appendix A1.1]).

Let the injectivity radius of @xmath be positive.

Then the curvature tensor of @xmath and all its derivatives are bounded
if and only if for any @xmath all the transition functions between
overlapping normal coordinate charts of radius @xmath are uniformly
bounded, as are all their derivatives (i.e., the bounds can be chosen to
be the same for all transition functions).

Another fact which we will need about manifolds of bounded geometry is
the existence of uniform covers by normal coordinate charts and
corresponding partitions of unity. A proof may be found in, e.g., [
Shu92 , Appendix A1.1] (Shubin addresses the first statement about the
existence of such covers actually to the paper [ Gro81 ] of Gromov).

###### Lemma 2.4.

Let @xmath be a manifold of bounded geometry.

For every @xmath there exists a covering of @xmath by normal coordinate
charts of radius @xmath with the properties that the midpoints of the
charts form a uniformly discrete set in @xmath and that the coordinate
charts with double radius @xmath form a uniformly locally finite cover
of @xmath .

Furthermore, there is a subordinate partition of unity @xmath with
@xmath , such that in normal coordinates the functions @xmath and all
their derivatives are uniformly bounded (i.e., the bounds do not depend
on @xmath ).

If the manifold @xmath has bounded geometry, we have analogous
equivalent local characterizations of bounded geometry for vector
bundles as for manifolds. The equivalence of the first two bullet points
in the next lemma is stated in, e.g., [ Roe88 , Proposition 2.5] .
Concerning the third bullet point, the author could not find any citable
reference in the literature (though Shubin uses in [ Shu92 ] this as the
actual definition).

###### Lemma 2.5.

Let @xmath be a manifold of bounded geometry and @xmath a vector bundle.
Then the following are equivalent:

-   @xmath has bounded geometry,

-    the Christoffel symbols @xmath of @xmath with respect to
    synchronous framings (considered as functions on the domain @xmath
    of normal coordinates at all points) are bounded, as are all their
    derivatives, and this bounds are independent of @xmath , @xmath and
    @xmath , and

-    the matrix transition functions between overlapping synchronous
    framings are uniformly bounded, as are all their derivatives (i.e.,
    the bounds are the same for all transition functions).

We will now give the definition of uniform @xmath -spaces together with
a local characterization on manifolds of bounded geometry. The
interested reader is refered to, e.g., the papers [ Roe88 , Section 2]
or [ Shu92 , Appendix A1.1] of Roe and Shubin for more information
regarding these uniform @xmath -spaces.

###### Definition 2.6 (@xmath-bounded functions).

Let @xmath . We say that @xmath is a @xmath -function , or equivalently
that it is @xmath -bounded , if @xmath for all @xmath . ∎

If @xmath has bounded geometry, being @xmath -bounded is equivalent to
the statement that in every normal coordinate chart @xmath for every
multiindex @xmath with @xmath (where the constants @xmath are
independent of the chart).

Of course, the definition of @xmath -boundedness and its equivalent
characterization in normal coordinate charts for manifolds of bounded
geometry make also sense for sections of vector bundles of bounded
geometry (and so especially also for vector fields, differential forms
and other tensor fields).

###### Definition 2.7 (Uniform @xmath-spaces).

Let @xmath be a vector bundle of bounded geometry over @xmath . We will
denote the uniform @xmath -space of all @xmath -bounded sections of
@xmath by @xmath .

Furthermore, we define the uniform @xmath -space @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is a Fréchet space. ∎

Now we get to Sobolev spaces on manifolds of bounded geometry. Much of
the following material is from [ Shu92 , Appendix A1.1] and [ Roe88 ,
Section 2] , where an interested reader can find more thorough
discussions of this matters.

Let @xmath be a compactly supported, smooth section of some vector
bundle @xmath with metric and connection @xmath . For @xmath and @xmath
we define the global @xmath -Sobolev norm of @xmath by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

###### Definition 2.8 (Sobolev spaces @xmath).

Let @xmath be a vector bundle which is equipped with a metric and a
connection. The @xmath -Sobolev space of @xmath is the completion of
@xmath in the norm @xmath and will be denoted by @xmath . ∎

If @xmath and @xmath both have bounded geometry than the Sobolev norm (
2.1 ) for @xmath is equivalent to the local one given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the balls @xmath and the subordinate partition of unity @xmath are
as in Lemma 2.4 , we have chosen synchronous framings and @xmath denotes
the usual Sobolev norm on @xmath . This equivalence enables us to define
the Sobolev norms for all @xmath , see Triebel [ Tri10 ] and
Große–Schneider [ GS13 ] . There are some issues in the case @xmath ,
see the discussion by Triebel [ Tri83 , Section 2.2.3] , [ Tri10 ,
Remark 4 on Page 13] .

Assuming bounded geometry, the usual embedding theorems are true:

###### Theorem 2.9 ([Aub98, Theorem 2.21]).

Let @xmath be a vector bundle of bounded geometry over a manifold @xmath
of bounded geometry and without boundary.

Then we have for all values @xmath continuous embeddings

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We define the space

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

and equip it with the obvious Fréchet topology. The Sobolev Embedding
Theorem tells us now that we have for all @xmath a continuous embedding

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For @xmath we will write @xmath for @xmath . This are Hilbert spaces and
for @xmath the space @xmath coincides with the dual of @xmath , regarded
as a space of distributional sections of @xmath .

We will now investigate the Sobolev spaces @xmath and @xmath of infinite
orders. They are crucial since they will allow us to define smoothing
operators and hence the important algebra @xmath in the next section.

###### Lemma 2.10.

The topological dual of @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let us equip the space @xmath with the locally convex topology defined
as follows: the Fréchet space @xmath is the projective limit of the
Banach spaces @xmath , so using dualization we may put on the space
@xmath the inductive limit topology denoted @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It enjoys the following universal property: a linear map @xmath to a
locally convex topological vector space @xmath is continuous if and only
if @xmath is continuous for all @xmath .

Later we will need to know how the bounded ⁵ ⁵ 5 A subset @xmath is
bounded if and only if for all open neighbourhoods @xmath of @xmath
there exists @xmath with @xmath . subsets of @xmath look like, which is
the content of the following lemma. In its proof we will also deduce
some nice properties of the spaces @xmath and @xmath .

###### Lemma 2.11.

The space @xmath is a regular inductive limit , i.e., for every bounded
subset @xmath exists some @xmath such that @xmath is already contained
in @xmath and bounded there. ⁶ ⁶ 6 Note that the converse does always
hold for inductive limits, i.e., if @xmath is bounded, then it is also
bounded in @xmath .

###### Proof.

Since all @xmath are Fréchet spaces, we may apply the following
corollary of Grothendieck’s Factorization Theorem: the inductive limit
@xmath is regular if and only if it is locally complete (see, e.g., [
PCB87 , Lemma 7.3.3(i)] ). To avoid introducing more burdensome
vocabulary, we won’t define the notion of local completeness here since
we will show something stronger: @xmath is actually complete ⁷ ⁷ 7 That
is to say, every Cauchy net converges. In locally convex spaces, being
Cauchy and to converge is meant with respect to each of the seminorms
simultaneously. .

From [ BB03 , Sections 3.(a & b)] we conclude the following: since each
@xmath is a Hilbert space, the Fréchet space @xmath is the projective
limit of reflexive Banach spaces and therefore totally reflexive ⁸ ⁸ 8
That is to say, every quotient of it is reflexive, i.e., the canonical
embeddings of the quotients into their strong biduals are isomorphisms
of topological vector spaces. . It follows that @xmath is distinguished,
which can be characterized by @xmath , where @xmath is the strong
topology on @xmath . Now without defining the strong topology we just
note that strong dual spaces of Fréchet space are always complete. ∎

## 3 Quasilocal smoothing operators

We will discuss in this section the definition and basic properties of
smoothing operators on manifolds of bounded geometry and we will
introduce the notion of quasilocal operators. The quasilocal smoothing
operators will be the @xmath -part of our uniform pseudodifferential
operators that we are going to define in the next section.

###### Definition 3.1 (Smoothing operators).

Let @xmath be a manifold of bounded geometry and @xmath and @xmath two
vector bundles of bounded geometry over @xmath . We will call a
continuous linear operator @xmath a smoothing operator . ∎

###### Lemma 3.2.

A linear operator @xmath is continuous if and only if it is bounded as
an operator @xmath for all @xmath .

Let us denote by @xmath the algebra of all smoothing operators from
@xmath to itself. Due to the above lemma we may equip it with the
countable family of norms @xmath so that it becomes a Fréchet space ⁹ ⁹
9 That is to say, a topological vector space whose topology is Hausdorff
and induced by a countable family of seminorms such that it is complete
with respect to this family of seminorms. .

Now let us get to the main property of smoothing operators that we will
need, namely that they can be represented as integral operators with a
uniformly bounded smooth kernel. Let @xmath be given. Then we get by the
Sobolev Embedding Theorem 2.9 a continuous operator @xmath and so may
conclude by the Schwartz Kernel Theorem for regularizing operators ¹⁰ ¹⁰
10 Note that the usual wording of the Schwartz Kernel Theorem for
regularizing operators requires the domain @xmath to be equipped with
the weak- @xmath topology @xmath and @xmath to be continuous against it.
But one actually only needs the domain to be equipped with the inductive
limit topology. To see this, one can look at the proof of the Schwartz
Kernel Theorem for regularizing kernels as in, e.g., [ Gan10 , Theorem
3.18] . that @xmath has a smooth integral kernel @xmath , which is
uniformly bounded as are all its derivatives, because of the bounded
geometry of @xmath and the vector bundles @xmath and @xmath , i.e.,
@xmath .

From the proof of the Schwartz Kernel Theorem for regularizing operators
we also see that the assignment of the kernel to the operator is
continuous against the Fréchet topology on @xmath . Furthermore, because
of Lemma 2.11 this topology coincides with the topology of bounded
convergence ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 A basis of neighbourhoods of zero for the topology
of bounded convergence is given by the subsets @xmath of all operators
@xmath with @xmath , where @xmath ranges over all bounded subsets of
@xmath and @xmath over a basis of neighbourhoods of zero in @xmath . on
@xmath . We need this equality of topologies in order for the next
proposition (which is a standard result in distribution theory) to be
equivalent to the version stated in [ Roe88 , Proposition 2.9] .

###### Proposition 3.3.

Let @xmath be a smoothing operator. Then @xmath can be written as an
integral operator with kernel @xmath . Furthermore, the map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which associates a smoothing operator its kernel, is continuous.

Let @xmath be any subset. We will denote by @xmath the seminorm on the
Sobolev space @xmath given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Definition 3.4 (Quasilocal operators, [Roe88, Section 5]).

We will call a continuous operator @xmath quasilocal , if there is a
function @xmath with @xmath for @xmath and such that for all @xmath and
all @xmath with @xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Such a function @xmath will be called a dominating function for @xmath .

We will say that an operator @xmath is a quasilocal operator of order
@xmath ¹² ¹² 12 Roe calls such operators “ uniform operators of order
@xmath ” in [ Roe88 , Definition 5.3] . But since the word “uniform”
will have another meaning for us (see, e.g., the definition of uniform
@xmath -homology), we changed the name. for some @xmath , if @xmath has
a continuous extension to a quasilocal operator @xmath for all @xmath .

A smoothing operator @xmath will be called quasilocal , if @xmath is
quasilocal as an operator @xmath for all @xmath (from which it follows
that @xmath is also quasilocal for all @xmath ). ∎

If we regard a smoothing operator @xmath as an operator @xmath , we get
a uniquely defined adjoint @xmath . Its integral kernel will be given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the dual element of @xmath .

###### Definition 3.5 (cf. [Roe88, Definition 5.3]).

We will denote the set of all quasilocal smoothing operators @xmath with
the property that their adjoint operator @xmath is also a quasilocal
smoothing operator @xmath by @xmath .

If @xmath , we will just write @xmath . ∎

###### Remark 3.6.

Roe defines in [ Roe88 , Definition 5.3] the algebra @xmath instead of
@xmath , i.e., he does not demand that the adjoint operator is also
quasilocal smoothing. The reason why we do this is that we want adjoints
of uniform pseudodifferential operators to be again uniform
pseudodifferential operators (and the algebra @xmath is used in the
definition of uniform pseudodifferential operators). ∎

## 4 Uniform pseudodifferential operators

Let @xmath be an @xmath -dimensional manifold of bounded geometry and
let @xmath and @xmath be two vector bundles of bounded geometry over
@xmath . Now we will get to the definition of uniform pseudodifferential
operators acting on sections of vector bundles of bounded geometry over
manifolds of bounded geometry.

Our definition is almost the same as the ones of Shubin [ Shu92 ] and
Kordyukov [ Kor91 ] . The difference is that our definition is slightly
more general, because we do not restrict to finite propagation operators
(since we allow the term @xmath in the definition below). The reason why
we have to do this is because of our results in Section 7 : we only get
quasi-local operators and not necessarily operators of finite
propagation (in fact, the main technical result is Lemma 7.1 stating
that the wave operators are quasi-local), and therefore we would leave
our calculus of pseudodifferential operators if we would insist of them
having finite propagation. Most of the results stated in this section
and in Section 6 are basically already known, resp., it is
straight-forward to generalize the corresponding statements in the
finite propagation case to our quasi-local case. We nevertheless include
a discussion of these statements in order for our exposition here to be
self-contained.

###### Definition 4.1.

An operator @xmath is a uniform pseudodifferential operator of order
@xmath , if with respect to a uniformly locally finite covering @xmath
of @xmath with normal coordinate balls and corresponding subordinate
partition of unity @xmath as in Lemma 2.4 we can write

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

satisfying the following conditions:

-   @xmath , i.e., it is a quasilocal smoothing operator,

-   for all @xmath the operator @xmath is with respect to synchronous
    framings of @xmath and @xmath in the ball @xmath a matrix of
    pseudodifferential operators on @xmath of order @xmath with support
    ¹³ ¹³ 13 An operator @xmath is supported in a subset @xmath , if
    @xmath for all @xmath in the domain of @xmath and if @xmath whenever
    we have @xmath . in @xmath , and

-   the constants @xmath appearing in the bounds

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    of the symbols of the operators @xmath can be chosen to not depend
    on @xmath , i.e., there are @xmath such that

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (4.2)
      -- -------- -- -------

    for all multi-indices @xmath and all @xmath . We will call this the
    uniformity condition for pseudodifferential operators on manifolds
    of bounded geometry.

We denote the set of all such operators by @xmath . ∎

###### Remark 4.2.

From Lemma 2.3 and Lemma 2.5 together with [ LM89 , Theorem III.§3.12]
(and its proof which gives the concrete formula how the symbol of a
pseudodifferential operator transforms under a coordinate change) we
conclude that the above definition of uniform pseudodifferential
operators on manifolds of bounded geometry does neither depend on the
chosen uniformly locally finite covering of @xmath by normal coordinate
balls, nor on the subordinate partition of unity with uniformly bounded
derivatives, nor on the synchronous framings of @xmath and @xmath . ∎

###### Remark 4.3.

We could also have given an equivalent definition of uniform
pseudodifferential operators, which does not need a choice of covering:
firstly, for each @xmath there should be a quasilocal smoothing operator
@xmath such that for any @xmath with @xmath and any @xmath we have
@xmath . This encodes that the integral kernel of a uniform
pseudodifferential operator @xmath is off-diagonally a quasilocal
smoothing operator.

Secondly, to encode the behaviour of the integral kernel of @xmath at
its diagonal, we must demand that in any normal coordinate chart of
radius less than the injectivity radius of the manifold with any choice
of cut-off function for this coordinate chart and with any choice of
synchronous framings of @xmath and @xmath in this coordinate chart the
operator @xmath looks like a pseudodifferential operator on @xmath , and
for the collection of all of these local representatives of @xmath
computed with respect to cut-off functions that have common bounds on
their derivatives we have the Uniformity Condition ( 4.2 ). ∎

###### Remark 4.4.

We consider only operators that would correspond to Hörmander’s class
@xmath , if we consider open subsets @xmath of @xmath instead of an
@xmath -dimensional manifold @xmath , i.e., we do not investigate
operators corresponding to the more general classes @xmath . The paper [
Hör67 , Definition 2.1] is the one where Hörmander introduced these
classes. ∎

Recall that in the case of compact manifolds a pseudodifferential
operator @xmath of order @xmath has an extension to a continuous
operator @xmath for all @xmath (see, e.g., [ LM89 , Theorem
III.§3.17(i)] ). Due to the uniform local finiteness of the sum in ( 4.1
) and due to the Uniformity Condition ( 4.2 ), this result does also
hold in our case of a manifold of bounded geometry.

###### Proposition 4.5.

Let @xmath . Then @xmath has for all @xmath an extension to a continuous
operator @xmath .

###### Remark 4.6.

Later we will need the following fact: we can bound the operator norm of
@xmath from above by the maximum of the constants @xmath with @xmath
from the Uniformity Condition ( 4.2 ) for @xmath multiplied with a
constant @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath only depend on @xmath and the
dimension of the manifold @xmath . This can be seen by carefully
examining the proof of [ LM89 , Proposition III.§3.2] which is the above
proposition for the compact case. ¹⁴ ¹⁴ 14 To be utterly concrete, we
have to choose normal coordinate charts and a subordinate partition of
unity as in Lemma 2.4 and also synchronous framings for @xmath and
@xmath and then use Formula ( 2.2 ) which gives Sobolev norms that can
be computed locally and that are equivalent to the global norms ( 2.1 ).
∎

Let us define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We will show @xmath : from the previous Proposition 4.5 we conclude that
@xmath is a smoothing operator (using Lemma 3.2 ). Since we can write
@xmath , where @xmath and the @xmath are supported in balls with
uniformly bounded radii, the operator @xmath is of finite propagation.
So @xmath is the sum of a quasilocal smoothing operator @xmath and a
smoothing operator @xmath of finite propagation, and therefore a
quasilocal smoothing operator. The same arguments also apply to the
adjoint @xmath of @xmath , so that in the end we can conclude @xmath ,
i.e., we have shown @xmath .

Since the other inclusion does hold by definition, we get the claim. ¹⁵
¹⁵ 15 Of course, our definition of pseudodifferential operators was
arranged such that this lemma holds.

###### Lemma 4.7.

@xmath .

One of the important properties of pseudodifferential operators on
compact manifolds is that the composition of an operator @xmath and
@xmath is again a pseudodifferential operator of order @xmath : @xmath .
We can prove this also in our setting by writing

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and then arguing as follows.

-   The first summand is an element of @xmath : in [ Roe88 , Proposition
    5.2] it was shown that the composition of two quasilocal operators
    is again quasilocal and it is clear that composing smoothing
    operators again gives smoothing operators, resp. it is easy to see
    that composing two operators which may be approximated by finite
    propagation operators again gives such an operator.

-   The second and third summands are from @xmath due to Proposition 4.5
    and since the sums are uniformly locally finite, the operators
    @xmath and @xmath are supported in coordinate balls of uniform radii
    (i.e., have finite propagation which is uniformly bounded from
    above) and their operator norms are uniformly bounded due to the
    uniformity condition in the definition of pseudodifferential
    operators.

-   The last summand is a uniformly locally finite sum of
    pseudodifferential operators of order @xmath (here we use the
    corresponding result for compact manifolds) and to see the
    Uniformity Condition ( 4.2 ) we use [ LM89 , Theorem III.§3.10] : it
    states that the symbol of @xmath has formal development @xmath . So
    we may deduce the uniformity condition for @xmath from the one for
    @xmath and for @xmath .

Other properties that immediately generalize from the compact to the
bounded geometry case is firstly, that the commutator of two uniform
pseudodifferential operators whose symbols commute (Definition 6.1 ) is
of one order lower than it should a priori be, and secondly, that
multiplication with a function @xmath defines a uniform
pseudodifferential operator of order @xmath .

So we have the following important proposition:

###### Proposition 4.8.

@xmath is a filtered @xmath -algebra, i.e., for all @xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and so @xmath is a two-sided @xmath -ideal in @xmath .

Furthermore, we have @xmath for @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , provided the
symbols of @xmath and @xmath commute.

Moreover, multiplication with a function @xmath defines a uniform
pseudodifferential operator of order @xmath whose symbol commutes with
any other symbol.

The last property that generalizes to our setting and that we want to
mention is the following (the proof of [ LM89 , Theorem III.§3.9]
generalizes directly):

###### Proposition 4.9.

Let @xmath be a uniform pseudodifferential operator of arbitrary order
and let @xmath for some @xmath .

Then, if @xmath is smooth on some open subset @xmath , @xmath is also
smooth on @xmath .

## 5 Uniformity of operators of non-positive order

Now we get to the important statement that the uniform
pseudodifferential operators we have defined are, in fact, “uniform” in
the meaning to be defined now (the discussion here is strongly related
to the fact that symmetric and elliptic uniform pseudodifferential
operators will define uniform @xmath -homology classes).

Let @xmath be a compact operator. We know that @xmath is the limit of
finite rank operators, i.e., for every @xmath there is a finite rank
operator @xmath such that @xmath . Now given a collection @xmath of
compact operators, it may happen that for every @xmath the rank needed
to approximate an operator from @xmath may be bounded from above by a
common bound for all operators. This is formalized in the following
definition.

###### Definition 5.1 (Uniformly approximable collections of operators).

A collection of operators @xmath is said to be uniformly approximable ,
if for every @xmath there is an @xmath such that for every @xmath there
is a rank- @xmath operator @xmath with @xmath . ∎

###### Examples 5.2.

Every collection of finite rank operators with uniformly bounded rank is
uniformly approximable.

Furthermore, every finite collection of compact operators is uniformly
approximable and so also every totally bounded subset of @xmath .

The converse is in general false since a uniformly approximable family
need not be bounded (take infinitely many rank- @xmath operators with
operator norms going to infinity).

Even if we assume that the uniformly approximable family is bounded we
do not necessarily get a totally bounded set: let @xmath be an
orthonormal basis of @xmath and @xmath the orthogonal projection onto
the @xmath -dimensional subspace spanned by the vector @xmath . Then the
collection @xmath is uniformly approximable (since all operators are of
rank @xmath ) but not totally bounded (since @xmath for @xmath ) ¹⁶ ¹⁶
16 Another way to see that @xmath is not totally bounded is to use the
characterization of totally bounded subsets of @xmath from [ AP68 ,
Theorem 3.5] : a family @xmath is totally bounded if and only if both
@xmath and @xmath are collectively compact, i.e., the sets @xmath and
@xmath have compact closure. . ∎

Let us define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Definition 5.3 ([Špa09, Definition 2.3]).

Let @xmath . We say that @xmath is uniformly locally compact , if for
every @xmath the collection

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is uniformly approximable.

We say that @xmath is uniformly pseudolocal , if for every @xmath the
collection

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is uniformly approximable. ∎

We will now show that uniform pseudodifferential operators of negative
order are uniformly locally compact and that uniform pseudodifferential
operators of order @xmath are uniformly pseudolocal. We will start with
the operators of negative order.

###### Proposition 5.4.

Let @xmath be a finite propagation operator of negative order @xmath ¹⁷
¹⁷ 17 See Definition 3.4 . Note that we do not assume that @xmath is a
pseudodifferential operator. such that its adjoint operator @xmath also
has finite propagation and is of negative order @xmath . Then @xmath is
uniformly locally compact. Even more, the collection

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is uniformly approximable for every @xmath , where @xmath consists of
all bounded Borel functions @xmath on @xmath with @xmath and @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath , @xmath and @xmath be the propagation of @xmath . The
operator @xmath , where @xmath is the characteristic function of @xmath
, factores as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The following properties hold:

-   multiplication with @xmath has operator norm @xmath , since @xmath ,
    and analogously for the multiplication with @xmath ,

-   the norm of @xmath can be bounded from above by the norm of @xmath
    (i.e., the upper bound does not depend on @xmath nor @xmath ),

-   the inclusion @xmath is compact (due to the Theorem of
    Rellich--Kondrachov) and this compactness is uniform, i.e., its
    approximability by finite rank operators ¹⁸ ¹⁸ 18 Here we mean the
    existence of an upper bound on the rank needed to approximate the
    operator by finite rank operators, given an @xmath . depends only on
    @xmath (the upper bound for the diameter of @xmath ) and @xmath ,
    but not on @xmath (this uniformity is due to the bounded geometry of
    @xmath and of the bundles @xmath and @xmath ), and

-   the inclusion @xmath is of norm @xmath .

From this we conclude that the operator @xmath is compact and this
compactness is uniform, i.e., its approximability by finite rank
operators depends only on @xmath and @xmath . So we can conclude that
@xmath is uniformly approximable.

Applying the same reasoning to the adjoint operator, ¹⁹ ¹⁹ 19 By
assumption the adjoint operator also has finite propagation and is of
negative order. So we conclude that @xmath is uniformly approximable.
But a collection @xmath of compact operators is uniformly approximable
if and only if the adjoint family @xmath is uniformly approximable. So
we get that @xmath is uniformly approximable. we conclude that @xmath is
uniformly locally compact. ∎

Using an approximation argument ²⁰ ²⁰ 20 Note that we will not
approximate the quasilocal operator @xmath itself by finite propagation
operators in this argument. In fact, it is an open problem whether
quasilocal operators may be approximated by finite propagation
operators; see Section 10 . we may also show the following corollary:

###### Corollary 5.5.

Let @xmath be a quasilocal operator of negative order and let the same
hold true for its adjoint @xmath . Then @xmath is uniformly locally
compact; in fact, it even satisfies the stronger condition from the
above Proposition 5.4 .

###### Proof.

We have to show that @xmath is uniformly approximable. Let @xmath be
given and let @xmath be such that @xmath for all @xmath , where @xmath
is the dominating function of @xmath . Then @xmath is @xmath -away from
@xmath and the same reasoning as in the proof of the above Proposition
5.4 shows that the approximability (up to an error of @xmath ) of @xmath
does only depend on @xmath and @xmath . From this the claim that @xmath
is uniformly approximable follows.

Using the adjoint operator and the same arguments for it, we conclude
that @xmath is uniformly locally compact. ∎

###### Corollary 5.6.

Let @xmath be a uniform pseudodifferential operator of negative order
@xmath . Then @xmath is uniformly locally compact.

Let us now get to the case of uniform pseudodifferential operators of
order @xmath , where we want to show that such operators are uniformly
pseudolocal.

Recall the following fact for compact manifolds: @xmath is pseudolocal
²¹ ²¹ 21 That is to say, @xmath is a compact operator for all @xmath .
if and only if @xmath is a compact operator for all @xmath with disjoint
supports. This observation is due to Kasparov and a proof might be found
in, e.g., [ HR00 , Proposition 5.4.7] . We can add another equivalent
characterization which is basically also proved in the cited
proposition: an operator @xmath is pseudolocal if and only if @xmath is
a compact operator for all bounded Borel functions @xmath and @xmath on
@xmath with disjoint supports.

We have analogous equivalent characterizations for uniformly pseudolocal
operators, which we will state in the following lemma. The proof of it
is similar to the compact case (and uses the fact that the subset of all
uniformly pseudolocal operators is closed in operator norm, which is
proved in [ Špa09 , Lemma 4.2] ). Furthermore, in order to prove that
the Points 4 and 5 in the statement of the next lemma are equivalent to
the other points we need the bounded geometry of @xmath . For the
convenience of the reader we will give a full proof of the lemma.

Let us introduce the notions @xmath for all bounded Borel functions on
@xmath and @xmath for its subset consisting of all function @xmath with
@xmath and @xmath .

###### Lemma 5.7.

The following are equivalent for an operator @xmath :

1.  @xmath is uniformly pseudolocal,

2.   for all @xmath the following collection is uniformly approximable:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

3.   for all @xmath the following collection is uniformly approximable:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

4.   for every @xmath there is a sequence @xmath of positive numbers
    (not depending on the operator @xmath ) such that

      -- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   
                  @xmath   
                  @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- --

    is uniformly approximable for all @xmath .

5.   for every @xmath there is a sequence @xmath of positive numbers
    (not depending on the operator @xmath ) such that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    is uniformly approximable for all @xmath .

###### Proof.

@xmath : Let @xmath with @xmath and @xmath have disjoint supports, i.e.,
@xmath . From the latter we conclude @xmath , from which the claim
follows (because @xmath is uniformly pseudolocal and because the
operator norm of multiplication with @xmath is @xmath ). Of course such
an argument also works with the roles of @xmath and @xmath changed.

@xmath : Let @xmath with @xmath and @xmath with @xmath . We define
@xmath . Since @xmath , the claim follows from writing @xmath and
because multiplication with @xmath has operator norm @xmath , and we of
course also may change the roles of @xmath and @xmath .

@xmath : Let @xmath . For given @xmath we partition the range of @xmath
into a sequence of non-overlapping half-open intervals @xmath , each
having diameter less than @xmath , such that @xmath intersects @xmath if
and only if @xmath . Denoting by @xmath the characteristic function of
@xmath , we get that @xmath if @xmath , since the support of @xmath has
diameter less than or equal to @xmath , and furthermore @xmath if @xmath
, since @xmath is @xmath -Lipschitz.

By Point 3 we have that the collections @xmath are uniformly
approximable for all @xmath with @xmath . Choosing points @xmath from
@xmath and defining @xmath , we get @xmath . The operator @xmath is
@xmath -away from @xmath , and since @xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since we already know that @xmath are uniformly approximable for all
@xmath with @xmath , it remains to treat the sum (note that the summand
for @xmath is zero)

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We split the sum into two parts, one where @xmath and the other one
where @xmath . The first part takes the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

i.e., is a direct sum of operators from @xmath to @xmath . Therefore its
norm is the maximum of the norms of its summands. But the latter are
@xmath since @xmath . We treat the second part of the sum in the above
display the same way and conclude that the sum in the above display is
in norm @xmath . Putting it all together it follows that @xmath is the
operator norm limit of uniformly pseudolocal operators, from which it
follows that @xmath itself is uniformly pseudolocal (it is proved in [
Špa09 , Lemma 4.2] that the uniformly pseudolocal operators are closed
in operator norm, as are also the uniformly locally compact ones).

@xmath : Clear. We have to set @xmath and the other values @xmath do not
matter (i.e., may be set to something arbitrary).

@xmath : This is similar to the proof of @xmath , but we have to smooth
the function @xmath constructed there. Let us make this concrete, i.e.,
let @xmath with @xmath and @xmath with @xmath be given. We define

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Note that @xmath on @xmath and @xmath outside @xmath . We cover @xmath
by normal coordinate charts and choose a “nice” subordinate partition of
unity @xmath as in Lemma 2.4 . If @xmath is now a mollifier on @xmath
supported in @xmath , we apply it in every normal coordinate chart to
@xmath and reassemble then all the mollified parts of @xmath again to a
(now smooth) function @xmath on @xmath . This function @xmath is now
supported in @xmath , and is constantly @xmath on @xmath . So @xmath
from which we may conclude the uniform approximability of the collection
@xmath for @xmath and @xmath satisfying @xmath with @xmath and @xmath
with @xmath . Note that the constants @xmath appearing in @xmath depend
on @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , but not on @xmath , @xmath or @xmath .
The dependence on @xmath and @xmath is ok, since we may just fix a
particular choice of them (note that the choice of @xmath also depends
on @xmath ), and the dependence on @xmath is explicitly stated in the
claim.

Of course we may also change the roles of @xmath and @xmath in this
argument.

@xmath : Clear. We just have to write @xmath and analogously for @xmath
.

@xmath : Clear. ∎

With the above lemma at our disposal we may now prove the following
proposition.

###### Proposition 5.8.

Let @xmath . Then @xmath is uniformly pseudolocal.

###### Proof.

Writing @xmath with @xmath , we may without loss of generality assume
that @xmath has finite propagation @xmath (since @xmath is uniformly
locally compact by the above Corollary 5.5 and uniformly locally compact
operators are uniformly pseudolocal).

We will use the equivalent characterization in Point 4 of the above
lemma: let @xmath and the corresponding sequence @xmath be given. We
have to show that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

is uniformly approximable for all @xmath .

We have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

since the supports of @xmath and @xmath are disjoint.

With Proposition 4.8 we conclude that multiplication with @xmath is a
uniform pseudodifferential operator of order @xmath (since @xmath ) and
furthermore, that the commutator @xmath is a pseudodifferential operator
of order @xmath . Therefore, by Corollary 5.6 , we know that the set
@xmath is uniformly approximable. So we conclude that our operators
@xmath have the needed uniformity in the functions @xmath .

It remains to show that we also have the needed uniformity in the
functions @xmath . Writing @xmath ²² ²² 22 Recall that we assumed
without loss of generality that there is no @xmath . , we get @xmath .
Now each @xmath is a uniform pseudodifferential operator of order @xmath
, their supports ²³ ²³ 23 Recall that an operator @xmath is supported in
a subset @xmath , if @xmath for all @xmath in the domain of @xmath and
if @xmath whenever we have @xmath . depend only on the propagation of
@xmath and on the value of @xmath (but not on @xmath nor on the concrete
choice of @xmath ) and their operator norms as maps @xmath are bounded
from above by a constant that only depends on @xmath , on @xmath and on
the values of all the @xmath (but again, neither on @xmath nor on @xmath
). The last fact follows from a combination of Remark 4.6 together with
the estimates on the symbols of the @xmath that we get from the proof
that they are uniform pseudodifferential operators of order @xmath . So
examining the proof of Proposition 5.4 more closely, we see that these
properties suffice to conclude the needed uniformity of @xmath in the
functions @xmath .

The operators @xmath may be treated analogously. ∎

## 6 Elliptic operators

In this section we will define the notion of ellipticity ²⁴ ²⁴ 24 It is
actually uniform ellipticity that we define here. But since non-uniform
ellipticity is not a natural notion for uniform pseudodifferential
operators, we just call it ellipticity what we define. for uniform
pseudodifferential operators and discuss important consequences of it
(elliptic regularity, fundamental elliptic estimates and essential
self-adjointness). Most of the results are already known and can be
found in the literature (at least in the case of finite propagation
operators). We nevertheless include a discussion of them so that our
exposition here is self-contained.

Let @xmath and @xmath denote the pull-back bundles of @xmath and @xmath
to the cotangent bundle @xmath of the @xmath -dimensional manifold
@xmath .

###### Definition 6.1 (Symbols).

Let @xmath be a section of the bundle @xmath over @xmath . We call
@xmath a symbol of order @xmath , if the following holds: choosing a
uniformly locally finite covering @xmath of @xmath through normal
coordinate balls and corresponding subordinate partition of unity @xmath
as in Lemma 2.4 , and choosing synchronous framings of @xmath and @xmath
in these balls @xmath , we can write @xmath as a uniformly locally
finite sum @xmath , where @xmath for @xmath and @xmath , and interpret
each @xmath as a matrix-valued function on @xmath . Then for all
multi-indices @xmath and @xmath there must exist a constant @xmath such
that for all @xmath and all @xmath we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

We denote the vector space all symbols of order @xmath by @xmath . ∎

From Lemma 2.3 and Lemma 2.5 we conclude that the above definition of
symbols does neither depend on the chosen uniformly locally finite
covering of @xmath through normal coordinate balls, nor on the
subordinate partition of unity (as long as the functions @xmath have
uniformly bounded derivatives), nor on the synchronous framings of
@xmath and @xmath .

If all the choices above are fixed, we immediately see from the
definition of uniform pseudodifferential operators that @xmath has a
symbol @xmath . Analogously as in the case of compact manifolds, ²⁵ ²⁵
25 see, e.g., [ LM89 , Theorem III.§3.19] we may show that if we make
other choices for the coordinate charts, subordinate partition of unity
and synchronous framings, the symbol @xmath of @xmath changes by an
element of @xmath . So @xmath has a well-defined principal symbol class
@xmath .

###### Definition 6.2 (Elliptic symbols).

Let @xmath . Recall that @xmath is a section of the bundle @xmath over
@xmath . We will call @xmath elliptic , if there is an @xmath such that
@xmath ²⁶ ²⁶ 26 This notation means the following: we restrict @xmath to
the bundle @xmath over the space @xmath . is invertible and this inverse
@xmath satisfies the Inequality ( 6.1 ) for @xmath and order @xmath (and
of course only for @xmath since only there the inverse is defined). Note
that as in the compact case it follows that @xmath satisfies the
Inequality ( 6.1 ) for all multi-indices @xmath , @xmath . ∎

The proof of the following lemma is straight-forward.

###### Lemma 6.3.

If @xmath is elliptic, then every other representative @xmath of the
class @xmath is also elliptic.

Due to the above lemma we are now able to define what it means for a
pseudodifferential operator to be elliptic:

###### Definition 6.4 (Elliptic @xmaths).

Let @xmath . We will call @xmath elliptic , if its principal symbol
@xmath is elliptic. ∎

The importance of elliptic operators lies in the fact that they admit an
inverse modulo operators of order @xmath . We may prove this analogously
as in the case of pseudodifferential operators defined over a compact
manifold. See also [ Kor91 , Theorem 3.3] where Kordyukov proves the
existence of parametrices for his class of pseudodifferential operators
(which coincides with our class with the additional requirement that the
operators must have finite propagation).

###### Theorem 6.5 (Existence of parametrices).

Let @xmath be elliptic.

Then there exists an operator @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath .

Using parametrices, we can prove a lot of the important properties of
elliptic operators, e.g., elliptic regularity (which is a converse to
Proposition 4.9 and a proof of it may be found in, e.g. [ LM89 , Theorem
III.§4.5] ):

###### Theorem 6.6 (Elliptic regularity).

Let @xmath be elliptic and let furthermore @xmath for some @xmath .

Then, if @xmath is smooth on an open subset @xmath , @xmath is already
smooth on @xmath . Furthermore, for @xmath : if @xmath on @xmath for
some @xmath , then @xmath is smooth on @xmath .

Later we will also need the following fundamental elliptic estimate (the
proof from [ LM89 , Theorem III.§5.2(iii)] generalizes directly):

###### Theorem 6.7 (Fundamental elliptic estimate).

Let @xmath be elliptic. Then for each @xmath there is a constant @xmath
such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath .

Another implication of ellipticity is that symmetric ²⁷ ²⁷ 27 This means
that we have @xmath for all @xmath . , elliptic uniform
pseudodifferential operators of positive order are essentially
self-adjoint ²⁸ ²⁸ 28 Recall that a symmetric, unbounded operator is
called essentially self-adjoint , if its closure is a self-adjoint
operator. . We need this since we will have to consider functions of
uniform pseudodifferential operators. But first we will show that a
symmetric and elliptic operator is also symmetric as an operator on
Sobolev spaces.

###### Lemma 6.8.

Let @xmath with @xmath be symmetric on @xmath and elliptic. Then @xmath
is also symmetric on the Sobolev spaces @xmath for @xmath , where we use
on @xmath the scalar product as described in the proof.

###### Proof.

Due to the fundamental elliptic estimate the norm @xmath (note that
@xmath by definition) on @xmath is equivalent to the usual ²⁹ ²⁹ 29 We
have of course possible choices here, e.g., the global norm ( 2.1 ) or
the local definition ( 2.2 ), but they are all equivalent to each other
since @xmath and @xmath have bounded geometry. norm @xmath on it. Now
@xmath is equivalent to @xmath which is induced by the scalar product

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath is symmetric for the @xmath -scalar product, we immediately
see that it is also symmetric for this particular scalar product @xmath
on @xmath .

To extend to the Sobolev spaces @xmath for @xmath we repeatedly invoke
the above arguments, e.g., on @xmath we have the equivalent norm @xmath
(again due to the fundamental elliptic estimate) which is induced by the
scalar product @xmath and now we may use that we already know that
@xmath is symmetric with respect to @xmath .

Finally, for @xmath for @xmath we use the fact that they are the dual
spaces to @xmath where we know that @xmath is symmetric, i.e., we equip
@xmath for @xmath with the scalar product induced from the duality:
@xmath , where @xmath are the dual vectors to @xmath (note that the
induced norm on @xmath is exactly the operator norm if we regard @xmath
as the dual space of @xmath ). ∎

Now we get to the proof that elliptic and symmetric operators are
essentially self-adjoint. Note that if we work with differential
operators @xmath of first order on open manifolds we do not need
ellipticity for this result to hold, but weaker conditions suffice,
e.g., that the symbol @xmath of @xmath satisfies @xmath (by the way,
this condition is incorporated in our definition of uniform
pseudodifferential operators by the uniformity condition). But if we
want essential self-adjointness of higher order operators, we have to
assume stronger conditions (see the counterexample [ Tau10 ] ).

Note that the following proposition is well-known in the case @xmath ,
see Shubin [ Shu92 ] . But for us it will be of crucial importance in
the next Subsection 7 (see the proof of Lemma 7.1 ) that we also have
the statement for all the other cases @xmath . Furthermore, note that in
order for the next proposition to make sense at all we have to invoke
the above Lemma 6.8 .

###### Proposition 6.9 (Essential self-adjointness).

Let @xmath with @xmath be elliptic and symmetric. Then the unbounded
operator @xmath is essentially self-adjoint for all @xmath , where we
equip these Sobolev spaces with the scalar products as described in the
proof of the above Lemma 6.8 .

###### Proof.

This proof is an adapted version of the proof of this statement for
compact manifolds from [ Tau10 ] .

We will use the following sufficient condition for essential
self-adjointness: if we have a symmetric and densely defined operator
@xmath such that @xmath , then the closure @xmath of @xmath is
self-adjoint and is the unique self-adjoint extension of @xmath .

So let @xmath , i.e., @xmath . From elliptic regularity we get that
@xmath is smooth and using the fundamental elliptic estimate for @xmath
³⁰ ³⁰ 30 Note that @xmath is elliptic if and only if @xmath is. we can
then conclude @xmath , i.e., @xmath . Repeating this argument gives us
@xmath , i.e., @xmath lies in the domain of @xmath itself and is
therefore an eigenvector of it to the eigenvalue @xmath . But since
@xmath is symmetric we must have @xmath . This shows @xmath and
therefore @xmath is essentially self-adjoint. ∎

## 7 Functions of symmetric, elliptic operators

Let @xmath be a symmetric and elliptic uniform pseudodifferential
operator of positive order @xmath . By Proposition 6.9 we know that
@xmath is essentially self-adjoint. So, if @xmath is a Borel function
defined on the spectrum of @xmath , the operator @xmath is defined by
the functional calculus. In this whole section @xmath will denote such
an operator, i.e., a symmetric and elliptic one of positive order.

Given such a uniform pseudodifferential operator @xmath , we will later
show that it defines naturally a class in uniform @xmath -homology. For
this we will have to consider @xmath , where @xmath is a so-called
normalizing function, and we will have to show that @xmath is uniformly
pseudolocal and @xmath is uniformly locally compact. For this we will
need the analysis done in this section.

If @xmath is a Schwartz function, we have the formula @xmath , where
@xmath is the Fourier transform of @xmath . In the case that @xmath is
an elliptic, first-order differential operator and its symbol satisfies
@xmath , the operator @xmath has finite propagation (a proof of this may
be found in, e.g., [ HR00 , Proposition 10.3.1] ) from which (exploiting
the above formula for @xmath ) we may deduce the needed properties of
@xmath and @xmath . But this is no longer the case for a general
elliptic pseudodifferential operator @xmath and therefore the analysis
that we have to do here in this general case is much more sophisticated.

Note that the restriction to operators of order @xmath in this section
is no restriction on the fact that symmetric and elliptic uniform
pseudodifferential operators define uniform @xmath -homology classes. In
fact, if @xmath has order @xmath , then we know from Proposition 5.8
that @xmath is uniformly pseudolocal, i.e., there is no need to form the
expression @xmath in order for @xmath to define a uniform @xmath
-homology class.

We start with the following crucial technical lemma which is a
generalization of the fact that @xmath has finite propagation to
pseudodifferential operators. Note that we do not have to assume
something like @xmath that we had to for first-order differential
operators, since such an assumption is subsumed in the uniformity
condition that we have in the definition of pseudodifferential
operators.

###### Lemma 7.1.

Let @xmath be symmetric and elliptic. Then the operator @xmath is a
quasilocal operator @xmath for all @xmath and @xmath .

###### Proof.

This proof is inspired by the proof of [ MM13 , Theorem 3.1] .

We will need the following two facts:

1.  @xmath for all @xmath , where @xmath denotes the operator norm of
    operators @xmath and

2.  there exists @xmath such that @xmath for all smooth @xmath , where
    @xmath does not depend on @xmath .

The first point above holds since @xmath is a unitary operator @xmath
with @xmath by using Proposition 6.9 , and by interpolation between the
different Sobolev exponents we get the needed norm estimate on any
@xmath with @xmath , i.e., not only for integer multiples of @xmath .

The second point above is due to the facts that by Proposition 4.8 the
commutator @xmath is a pseudodifferential operator of order @xmath
(recall that smooth functions with bounded derivatives are operators of
order @xmath ) and due to Remark 4.6 (where we have to recall the
formula how to compute the symbol of the composition of two
pseudodifferential operators from, e.g., [ LM89 , Theorem III.§3.10] ).

Let @xmath and let @xmath be supported within @xmath . Furthermore, we
choose an @xmath and a smooth, real-valued function @xmath with @xmath
on @xmath , @xmath on @xmath and the first @xmath derivatives of @xmath
(for @xmath as above) bounded from above by @xmath for a constant @xmath
which does not depend on @xmath . Concretely, one can construct @xmath
by mollifying the function @xmath with a uniform collection of local
mollifiers that are supported in balls of radius less than @xmath and
with midpoints in the region @xmath . If we denote a local mollifier by
@xmath , then we have for the Lipschitz constant the estimate

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

from which the needed property on the derivatives of @xmath follows.
Note that we only need to do this proof for large @xmath , i.e., we do
the arguments here only for @xmath bigger than, say, the injectivity
radius of @xmath . This means that the derivatives of the local
mollifiers that we use do not explode since there is now a lower bound
on the size of the coordinate charts in which we apply our mollifiers.

For all @xmath that are supported in @xmath we have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

i.e., @xmath and it remains to give an estimate for @xmath : we have
(the expressions are to be considered point-wise, i.e., after
application to a fixed vector @xmath )

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

which gives by factorizing the integrand as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the estimate

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath for all @xmath , we have shown

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

for all @xmath supported in @xmath and all @xmath in @xmath . Because
@xmath and @xmath , @xmath were arbitrary, the claim that @xmath is a
quasilocal operator @xmath for all @xmath and @xmath follows. ∎

###### Corollary 7.2 (cf. [Tay81, Lemma 1.1 in Chapter XII.§1]).

Let @xmath be a function on @xmath such that for an @xmath the functions
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath are integrable, i.e., belong to @xmath
.

Then the operator defined by @xmath is for all values @xmath a
quasilocal operator @xmath , i.e., is of order @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be a parametrix for @xmath , i.e., @xmath and @xmath , where
@xmath . Integration by parts @xmath times yields:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Since @xmath and @xmath are integrable and due to the Estimate ( 7.1 ),
we conclude with Lemma 7.1 that both integrals @xmath and @xmath define
quasilocal operators of order @xmath on @xmath . Note that for @xmath
this is just a first result which we will need now in order to show that
the order of this operator is in fact lower.

Now @xmath and the sum is a quasilocal smoothing operator because @xmath
is one. Since the composition of quasilocal operators is again a
quasilocal operator (see [ Roe88 , Proposition 5.2] ), we conclude that
the second summand @xmath of

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

is also a quasilocal smoothing operator. Now Equations ( 7.2 ) and ( 7.3
) together yield

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

from which the claim follows. ∎

Recall that if @xmath is a Schwartz function, then the operator @xmath
is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the Fourier transform of @xmath . Since @xmath is also a
Schwartz function, it satisfies the assumption in Corollary 7.2 for all
@xmath , i.e., @xmath is a quasilocal smoothing operator. Applying this
argument to the adjoint operator @xmath , we get with Lemma 4.7 our next
corollary:

###### Corollary 7.3.

If @xmath is a Schwartz function, then @xmath .

Recall from [ Špa09 , Lemma 4.2] that the uniformly pseudolocal
operators form a @xmath -algebra and that the uniformly locally compact
operators form a closed, two-sided @xmath -ideal in there. Since
Schwartz functions are dense in @xmath and quasilocal smoothing
operators are uniformly locally compact (Corollary 5.5 ), we get with
the above corollary that @xmath is uniformly locally compact if @xmath .

###### Corollary 7.4.

Let @xmath . Then @xmath is uniformly locally compact.

Now we turn our attention to functions which are more general than
Schwartz functions. To be concrete, we consider functions of the
following type:

###### Definition 7.5 (Symbols on @xmath).

For arbitrary @xmath we define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that we have @xmath , where @xmath denotes the Schwartz space. ∎

Let us state now the generalization of [ Roe88 , Theorem 5.5] from
operators of Dirac type to uniform pseudodifferential operators:

###### Proposition 7.6 (cf. [Roe88, Theorem 5.5]).

Let @xmath with @xmath . Then for all @xmath the operator @xmath is a
quasilocal operator of order @xmath , i.e., is an operator @xmath .

###### Proof.

The proof is analogous to Roe’s proof of [ Roe88 , Theorem 5.5] , but
more technical. First let us note that @xmath is a bounded operator of
order @xmath . To see this note that @xmath is a bounded function and
therefore @xmath is a bounded operator of order @xmath . Combining the
fact that @xmath is an operator of order @xmath together with the
fundamental elliptic estimate from Theorem 6.7 we get the result that
@xmath is bounded of order @xmath .

Now we want not only boundedness of @xmath but also that it is
quasilocal. Roe uses in his proof of [ Roe88 , Theorem 5.5] the fact
that @xmath has propagation @xmath for @xmath a Dirac operator. But for
pseudodifferential operators the best that we have is our Lemma 7.1 and
that’s the reason why we loose @xmath orders for the statement that
@xmath is quasilocal. The rest of our proof is analogous to Roe’s proof.
∎

At last, let us turn our attention to a result regarding differences
@xmath of operators defined via functional calculus. We will need the
following proposition in the proof of the proposition where we show that
symmetric, elliptic uniform pseudodifferential operators with the same
symbol define the same uniform @xmath -homology class.

###### Proposition 7.7 ([Hr00, Proposition 10.3.7]313131The cited
proposition requires additionally a common invariant domain for @xmath
and @xmath. In our case here this domain is given by, e.g., @xmath.).

Let @xmath be a bounded Borel function whose distributional Fourier
transform @xmath is such that the product @xmath is in @xmath .

If @xmath and @xmath are symmetric and elliptic uniform
pseudodifferential operators of positive order @xmath such that their
difference @xmath has order @xmath , then we have for all @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the constant @xmath does not depend on the operators.

###### Proof.

We first assume that @xmath is compactly supported and @xmath a smooth
function. Then we use the result [ HR00 , Proposition 10.3.5] ³² ³² 32
Though stated there only for differential operators, its proof also
works word-for-word for pseudodifferential ones. , which is a
generalization of Equation 7.4 to more general functions than Schwartz
functions, and get

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

for all @xmath . From the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and therefore

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Putting it all together, we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now the general claim follows from an approximation argument analogous
to the one at the end of the proof of [ HR00 , Proposition 10.3.5] . ∎

## 8 Review of uniform @xmath-homology

Let us first recall briefly the notion of multigraded Hilbert spaces.
They arise as @xmath -spaces of vector bundles on which Clifford
algebras act.

A graded Hilbert space is a Hilbert space @xmath with a decomposition
@xmath into closed, orthogonal subspaces. This is equivalent to the
existence of a grading operator @xmath such that its @xmath -eigenspaces
are exactly @xmath and such that @xmath is a selfadjoint unitary.

If @xmath is a graded space, then its opposite is the graded space
@xmath whose underlying vector space is @xmath , but with the reversed
grading, i.e., @xmath and @xmath . This is equivalent to @xmath .

An operator on a graded space @xmath is called even if it maps @xmath
again to @xmath , and it is called odd if it maps @xmath to @xmath .
Equivalently, an operator is even if it commutes with the grading
operator @xmath of @xmath , and it is odd if it anti-commutes with it.

###### Definition 8.1 (Multigraded Hilbert spaces).

Let @xmath . A @xmath -multigraded Hilbert space is a graded Hilbert
space which is equipped with @xmath odd unitary operators @xmath such
that @xmath for @xmath , and @xmath for all @xmath . ∎

Note that a @xmath -multigraded Hilbert space is just a graded Hilbert
space. We make the convention that a @xmath -multigraded Hilbert space
is an ungraded one.

###### Definition 8.2 (Multigraded operators).

Let @xmath be a @xmath -multigraded Hilbert space. Then an operator on
@xmath will be called multigraded , if it commutes with the multigrading
operators @xmath of @xmath . ∎

To define uniform Fredholm modules we will need the following notions.
Let us define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Definition 8.3 ([Špa09, Definition 2.3]).

Let @xmath be an operator on a Hilbert space @xmath and @xmath a
representation.

We say that @xmath is uniformly locally compact , if for every @xmath
the collection

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is uniformly approximable (see Definition 5.1 ).

We say that @xmath is uniformly pseudolocal , if for every @xmath the
collection

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is uniformly approximable. ∎

###### Definition 8.4 (Multigraded uniform Fredholm modules, cf. [Špa09,
Definition 2.6]).

Let @xmath . A triple @xmath consisting of

-   a separable @xmath -multigraded Hilbert space @xmath ,

-   a representation @xmath by even, multigraded operators, and

-   an odd multigraded operator @xmath such that

    -   the operators @xmath and @xmath are uniformly locally compact
        and

    -   the operator @xmath itself is uniformly pseudolocal

is called a @xmath -multigraded uniform Fredholm module over @xmath . ∎

###### Example 8.5 ([Špa09, Theorem 3.1]).

Špakula showed that the usual Fredholm module arising from a generalized
Dirac operator is uniform if we assume bounded geometry: if @xmath is a
generalized Dirac operator acting on a Dirac bundle @xmath of bounded
geometry over a manifold @xmath of bounded geometry, then the triple
@xmath , where @xmath is the representation of @xmath on @xmath by
multiplication operators and @xmath is a normalizing function (see
Definition 9.1 ), is a uniform Fredholm module. It is multigraded if the
Dirac bundle @xmath has an action of a Clifford algebra. ∎

A collection @xmath of uniform Fredholm modules is called an operator
homotopy if @xmath is norm continuous.

###### Definition 8.6 (Uniform @xmath-homology, [Špa09, Definition
2.13]).

We define the uniform @xmath -homology group @xmath of a locally compact
and separable metric space @xmath to be the abelian group generated by
unitary equivalence classes of @xmath -multigraded uniform Fredholm
modules with the relations:

-   if @xmath and @xmath are operator homotopic, then @xmath , and

-   @xmath ,

where @xmath and @xmath are @xmath -multigraded uniform Fredholm
modules. ∎

To prove that the uniform @xmath -homology class of an elliptic uniform
pseudodifferential operator only depends on the principal symbol of the
operator we will need the result that weakly homotopic Fredholm modules
define the same @xmath -homology class.

###### Definition 8.7 (Weak homotopies).

Let a time-parametrized family of uniform Fredholm modules @xmath for
@xmath satisfy the following properties:

-   the family @xmath is pointwise strong- @xmath operator continuous,
    i.e., for all @xmath we get a path @xmath in @xmath that is
    continuous in the strong- @xmath operator topology ³³ ³³ 33 Recall
    that if @xmath is a Hilbert space, then the strong- @xmath operator
    topology on @xmath is generated by the family of seminorms @xmath
    for all @xmath , where @xmath . ,

-   the family @xmath is continuous in the strong- @xmath operator
    topology on @xmath , i.e., for all @xmath we get norm continuous
    paths @xmath and @xmath in @xmath , and

-   for all @xmath the families of compact operators @xmath , @xmath and
    @xmath are norm continuous.

Then we call it a weak homotopy between @xmath and @xmath . ∎

###### Theorem 8.8 ([Eng15a, Theorem 3.30]).

Let @xmath and @xmath be weakly homotopic uniform Fredholm modules over
a manifold of bounded geometry. ³⁴ ³⁴ 34 The result hold more general
spaces, but in this paper we need it only for manifolds.

Then they define the same uniform @xmath -homology class.

## 9 @xmath-homology classes of uniform elliptic operators

We will show that symmetric, elliptic uniform pseudodifferential
operators of positive order naturally define classes in uniform @xmath
-homology. This result is a crucial generalization of [ Špa09 , Theorem
3.1] , where this statement is proved for generalized Dirac operators.

First we need a definition and then we will plunge right into the main
result:

###### Definition 9.1 (Normalizing functions).

A smooth function @xmath with

-   @xmath is odd, i.e., @xmath for all @xmath ,

-   @xmath for all @xmath , and

-   @xmath for @xmath

is called a normalizing function . ∎

###### Theorem 9.2.

Let @xmath be a manifold of bounded geometry and without boundary,
@xmath be a @xmath -multigraded vector bundle of bounded geometry,
@xmath be a symmetric and elliptic uniform pseudodifferential operator
on @xmath of positive order @xmath , and let @xmath be odd and
multigraded.

Then @xmath is a @xmath -multigraded uniform Fredholm module over @xmath
, where the Hilbert space is @xmath , the representation @xmath is by
multiplication operators and @xmath is a normalizing function.
Furthermore, the uniform @xmath -homology class @xmath does not depend
on the choice of @xmath .

###### Proof.

To show that @xmath defines a uniform Fredholm module over @xmath we
have to show that @xmath is uniformly pseudolocal and that @xmath and
@xmath are uniformly locally compact.

Since @xmath is real-valued and @xmath is essentially self-adjoint (by
Proposition 6.9 ), we have @xmath , i.e., the operator @xmath is
trivially uniformly locally compact. Moreover, since we have @xmath and
@xmath , we conclude with Corollary 7.4 that @xmath is uniformly locally
compact.

Because the difference of two normalizing functions is a function from
@xmath , we conclude from the same corollary that in order to show that
@xmath is uniformly pseudolocal, it suffices to show this for one
particular normalizing function (and secondly, we get that the class
@xmath is independent of the concrete choice of @xmath since
perturbations by uniformly locally compact operators are operator
homotopic).

From now on we proceed as in the proof of [ Špa09 , Theorem 3.1] using
the same formulas: we choose the particular normalizing function @xmath
to prove that @xmath is uniformly pseudolocal. We have @xmath with
convergence of the integral in the strong operator topology ³⁵ ³⁵ 35
This follows from the equality @xmath for all @xmath . and get then for
@xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Suppose @xmath . Then the integral converges in operator norm. To see
this, we have to find upper bounds for the operator norms of @xmath and
@xmath , that are integrable with respect to @xmath . Recall Definition
7.5 of the symbol classes on @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since both @xmath and @xmath (with respect to the variable @xmath ,
i.e., for fixed @xmath ), the operators @xmath and @xmath are operators
of order @xmath by the first paragraph of the proof of Proposition 7.6 .
So @xmath is an operator of order @xmath since @xmath is of order @xmath
by Proposition 4.8 . So especially it is a bounded operator, and one can
show that there is an integrable upper bound on the operator norm with
respect to @xmath . The latter can be done by, e.g., using the estimates
that Roe derived in his proof of his version of Proposition 7.6 .
Analogously we can treat @xmath which is an operator of order @xmath .

Furthermore, there exists an @xmath which depends only on an @xmath ,
@xmath and the norms of the derivatives of @xmath , ³⁶ ³⁶ 36 The
dependence on @xmath and on the derivatives of @xmath comes from the
operator norm estimate of @xmath . such that there are @xmath and the
above integral is at most @xmath away from the sum of the integrands for
@xmath .

Since both @xmath and @xmath (with respect to the variable @xmath ,
i.e., for fixed @xmath ), the operators @xmath and @xmath are quasilocal
operators of order @xmath by Proposition 7.6 . This also holds for their
adjoints and so, by Corollary 5.5 , they are uniformly locally compact.
The same conclusion applies to the operators @xmath and @xmath which are
quasilocal of order @xmath and hence also uniformly locally compact.

So the first summand

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

of the integrand is the difference of two compact operators and their
approximability by finite rank operators depends only on @xmath and the
Lipschitz constant @xmath of @xmath . An analogous argument applies to
the second summand

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

of the integrand (note that @xmath is a bounded operator).

So the operator @xmath is for @xmath compact and its approximability by
finite rank operators depends only on @xmath , @xmath and the norms of
the derivatives of @xmath . That this suffices to conclude that the
operator is uniformly pseudolocal is exactly Point 5 in Lemma 5.7 .

To conclude the proof we have to show that @xmath is odd and
multigraded. But this was already shown in full generality in [ HR00 ,
Lemma 10.6.2] . ∎

We have shown in the above theorem that a symmetric, elliptic uniform
pseudodifferential operator naturally defines a class in uniform @xmath
-homology. Now we will show that this class does only depend on the
principal symbol of the pseudodifferential operator. Note that
ellipticity of an operator does only depend on its symbol (since it is
actually defined that way, see Definition 6.4 , which is possible due to
Lemma 6.3 ), i.e., another pseudodifferential operator with the same
symbol is automatically also elliptic.

###### Proposition 9.3.

The uniform @xmath -homology class of a symmetric and elliptic uniform
pseudodifferential operator @xmath does only depend on its principal
symbol @xmath , i.e., any other such operator @xmath with the same
principal symbol defines the same uniform @xmath -homology class.

###### Proof.

Consider in @xmath the linear path @xmath of operators. They are all
symmetric and, since @xmath , they all have the same principal symbol.
So they are all elliptic and therefore we get a family of uniform
Fredholm modules @xmath , where we use a fixed normalizing function
@xmath .

Now if the family @xmath of bounded operators would be norm-continuous,
the claim that we get the same uniform @xmath -homology classes would
follow directly from the relations defining uniform @xmath -homology.
But it seems that in general it is only possible to conclude the norm
continuity of @xmath if the difference @xmath is a bounded operator, ³⁷
³⁷ 37 see, e.g., [ HR00 , Proposition 10.3.7] i.e., if the order @xmath
of @xmath is @xmath (since then the order of the difference @xmath would
be @xmath , i.e., it would define a bounded operator on @xmath ); see
Proposition 7.7 .

In the case @xmath we get continuity of @xmath only in the strong-
@xmath operator topology on @xmath . This is seen with Proposition 7.7 ,
³⁸ ³⁸ 38 An example of a normalizing function @xmath fulfilling the
prerequisites of Proposition 7.7 may be found in, e.g., [ HR00 ,
Exercise 10.9.3] . which implies that the family @xmath is continuous in
the norm topology of operators of degree @xmath . Therefore, if @xmath
is an element of the Sobolev space @xmath , then @xmath is norm
continuous for the @xmath -norm. For general @xmath we do an
approximation argument.

To show that @xmath and @xmath define the same uniform @xmath -homology
class we will use Theorem 8.8 , i.e., we will show now that the family
@xmath is a weak homotopy.

The first bullet point of the definition of a weak homotopy is clearly
satisfied since our representation @xmath is fixed, i.e., does not
depend on the time @xmath . Moreover, we have already discussed the
second bullet point in the paragraph above, so it remains to varify that
the third point is satisfied. We will treat here only the case @xmath
since the arguments for @xmath are similar and the case of @xmath is
clear since @xmath , because @xmath is essentially self-adjoint.

So let @xmath be the normalizing function @xmath . This is the one used
in the proof of the above Theorem 9.2 and we use the integral
representation of @xmath derived in that proof. We will only treat the
second summand @xmath since it contains two more @xmath than the first
summand (i.e., it is harder to deal with the second summand than with
the first one). We have @xmath (with respect to @xmath ) and therefore
@xmath . So @xmath and @xmath , which means that both are @xmath
-integrable if @xmath , i.e., @xmath . Therefore the Fourier transform
of @xmath is @xmath -integrable. But the Fourier transform of @xmath is
@xmath , i.e., @xmath qualifies for Proposition 7.7 (that @xmath is not
bounded is ok, the proposition still works in this case). So @xmath will
be continuous in @xmath -norm. By elliptic regularity this means that
@xmath is continuous in @xmath -norm. Since @xmath is continuous in
@xmath -norm, we conclude that the whole second summand is continuous in
@xmath -norm. If @xmath , then @xmath . Since we have to choose @xmath ,
we choose it just beneath @xmath , i.e., so that @xmath . It then
follows that @xmath is continuous in operator norm, which concludes this
proof. ∎

## 10 Final remarks and open questions

### Quasilocal operators and questions of propagation

In the definition of uniform pseudodifferential operators we used for
the @xmath -part of them quasilocal smoothing operators. Now the
definition of quasi-local operators tempts one to think that such
operators might be approximable by finite propagation operators, but
this is actually an open problem.

The first results obtained in this direction were by
Rabinovich–Roch–Silbermann [ RRS98 ] , resp., of Lange–Rabinovich [ LR85
] that on @xmath every quasi-local operator is approximable by finite
propagation operators. This result was recently generalized by Špakula
and Tikuisis [ ŠT17 ] to all metric spaces with finite decomposition
complexity. The only other (partial) result that the author knows is his
own [ Eng15b ] that on spaces of polynomial growth one can approximate
operators with a super-polynomially fast decaying dominating function by
finite propagation operators.

Currently the main question in this matter is whether one can actually
construct a counter-example:

###### Question 10.1.

Does there exist a quasilocal operator which is not approximable by
finite propagation operators?

The class of uniform pseudodifferential operators defined in this
article is in the following sense connected to the above question:
assume that we would have defined our class of operators in such a way
that the @xmath -part would be an operator which is in the Fréchet
closure ³⁹ ³⁹ 39 That is to say, in the closure with respect to the
family of norms @xmath , where @xmath denotes the operator norm @xmath .
of the finite propagation smoothing operators. Then the results of
Section 5 would give a direct connection to the uniform Roe algebra: we
would then be able to conclude @xmath , where @xmath is the uniform Roe
algebra of @xmath , i.e., the closure of the finite propagation,
uniformly locally compact operators on @xmath .

If we would do the above, i.e., changing the definition from quasilocal
to approximable by finite propagation operators, there would be one
piece of information missing that we do have at our disposal by using
quasilocal operators: recall that in the analysis of uniform
pseudodifferential operators Lemma 7.1 was the main technical ingredient
which led, e.g., to Corollary 7.3 stating that if @xmath is a Schwartz
function, then @xmath for @xmath a symmetric and elliptic uniform
pseudodifferential operator of positive order. But the author does not
know whether Lemma 7.1 would also hold for the changed definition, i.e.,
whether under the conditions of that lemma the operator @xmath would be
approximable in the needed operator norm by finite propagation
operators.

###### Question 10.2.

Does Lemma 7.1 specialize to the statement that if the @xmath -part of
@xmath is in the Fréchet closure of the finite propagation smoothing
operators, then @xmath is approximable by finite propagation operators
of order @xmath in the operator norms @xmath for all @xmath ?

Given a generalized Dirac operator @xmath , the construction of its
rough index class ⁴⁰ ⁴⁰ 40 The construction of the rough index class is
analogous to the construction of the coarse one. A suitable reference
is, e.g., [ Roe93 , Section 4.3] . produces directly a representative of
it with finite propagation. The reason for this is that the wave
operator @xmath has finite propagation.

If we have a symmetric and elliptic uniform pseudodifferential operator
@xmath , we get a rough index class @xmath by first constructing @xmath
and then mapping it by the rough assembly map to @xmath . But
constructing @xmath directly by the same procedure as above for Dirac
operators, we get a problem: we only know from Lemma 7.1 that @xmath is
a quasilocal operator with linearly decaying dominating function. Since
we currently don’t have an answer for the above Question 10.2 , we can
not guarantee that this direct construction would produce a rough index
class of @xmath which lives in the @xmath -theory of the uniform Roe
algebra, i.e., which is approximable by finite propagation operators.

In [ Eng15b ] the author introduced a smooth subalgebra of the uniform
Roe algebra consisting of those operators whose dominating functions is
super-polynomially fast decaying. Since we showed in Lemma 7.1 that
@xmath has a linearly decaying dominating function, the question is
whether we can improve this result and so make it amenable to the
techniques of [ Eng15b ] . Note that Lemma 7.1 does not assume anything
on the dominating function of @xmath , i.e., one might hope that one can
get better rates of decay for the dominating function of @xmath if one
assume that @xmath itself already has good decay of its dominating
funtion.

###### Question 10.3.

Let @xmath be a symmetric and elliptic uniform pseudodifferential
operator.

Does the dominating function of @xmath have super-polynomial decay?
Maybe if we assume that @xmath has finite propagation or a
super-polynomially decaying dominating function?

### Further questions about uniform pseudodifferential operators

We know that the principal symbol map @xmath induces an isomorphism of
vector spaces @xmath for all @xmath and vector bundles @xmath , @xmath
of bounded geometry. For the case @xmath and @xmath we furthermore know
from Proposition 4.8 that @xmath is an algebra, and @xmath will be an
isomorphism of algebras.

In the case that the manifold @xmath is compact, it is known that @xmath
is continuous against the quotient norm ⁴¹ ⁴¹ 41 Which is induced from
the operator norm on @xmath . Since for @xmath compact we have @xmath ,
the quotient norm on @xmath is called the essential norm . on @xmath and
therefore @xmath will induce an isomorphism of @xmath -algebras @xmath .

###### Question 10.4.

Let @xmath be a non-compact manifold of bounded geometry. Does @xmath
induce an isomorphism of @xmath -algebras @xmath ?

To show this we would have to compare the quotient norms on @xmath and
on @xmath . The first to prove similar results in the compact case were
Seeley in [ See65 , Lemma 11.1] and Kohn and Nirenberg in [ KN65 ,
Theorem A.4] , and two years later Hörmander provided in [ Hör67 ,
Theorem 3.3] a proof of this for his class @xmath with @xmath of
pseudodifferential operators of order @xmath . Maybe one of these proofs
generalizes to our case of uniform pseudodifferential operators on open
manifolds.

The main technical part in the proof of Theorem 9.2 that a uniform
pseudodifferential operator defines a class in uniform @xmath -homology
was to show that the operator @xmath is uniformly pseudolocal for @xmath
a normalizing function. In Proposition 5.8 we have shown that uniform
pseudodifferential operators of order @xmath are automatically uniformly
pseudolocal. So if we could show that the operator @xmath is a uniform
pseudodifferential operator of order @xmath , the proof of Theorem 9.2
would follow immediately.

###### Question 10.5.

Under which conditions on the function @xmath (or the operator @xmath )
will be @xmath again a uniform pseudodifferential operator?

For a compact manifold @xmath there are quite a few proofs that under
certain conditions functions of pseudodifferential operators are again
pseudodifferential operators: the first one to show such a result was
Seeley [ See67 ] , where he proved it for complex powers of elliptic
classical pseudodifferential operators. It was then extended by
Strichartz [ Str72 ] from complex powers to symbols in the sense of
Definition 7.5 , and from classical operators to all of Hörmander’s
class @xmath . And last, we mention the result [ DS99 , Theorem 8.7] of
Dimassi and Sjöstrand for @xmath -pseudodifferential operators in the
semi-classical setting.

Now if we want to establish similar results in our setting, we get quite
fast into trouble: e.g., the proof of Strichartz does not generalize to
non-compact manifolds. He crucially uses that on compact manifolds we
may diagonalize elliptic operators, which is not at all the case on
non-compact manifolds (consider, e.g., the Laplace operator on Euclidean
space). Looking for a proof that may be generalized to the non-compact
setting, we stumble over Taylor’s result from [ Tay81 , Chapter XII] .
There he proves a result similar to Strichartz’ but with quite a
different proof, which may be possibly generalized to non-compact
manifolds. An evidence for this is given by Cheeger, Gromov and Taylor
in [ CGT82 , Theorem 3.3] , since this is exactly the result that we
want to prove for our uniform pseudodifferential operators, but in the
special case of the operator @xmath , and their proof is a
generalization of the one from the above cited book of Taylor. So it
seems quite reasonable that we may probably extend the result of
Cheeger, Gromov and Taylor to all uniform pseudodifferential operators
in our sense.

The above ideas were already used by Kordyukov [ Kor00 ] to derive
@xmath -estimates for functions of certain elliptic uniform
pseudodifferential operators. Furthermore, in the same article he also
used ideas surrounding the geometric optics equation, which are Taylor’s
main tool in [ Tay81 , Chapter VIII] , to show that functions of
elliptic pseudodifferential operators with positive scalar principal
symbol are again pseudodifferential operators.

Beals and Ueberberg both gave in their articles [ Bea77 ] and [ Ueb88 ]
characterizations of pseudodifferential operators via certain mapping
properties of these operators from the Schwartz space to its dual. From
that they derived that the inverse, if it exists, of a
pseudodifferential operator of order @xmath is again a
pseudodifferential operator.

###### Question 10.6.

Does there exists a similar characterization of uniform
pseudodifferential operators on manifolds of bounded geometry as the one
in [ Bea77 ] and [ Ueb88 ] by Beals and Ueberberg?
