Internet of Things (IoT), also referred to as the Internet of Objects,
is envisioned as a holistic and transformative approach for providing
numerous services. The rapid development of various communication
protocols and miniaturization of transceivers along with recent advances
in sensing technologies offer the opportunity to transform isolated
devices into communicating smart things. Smart things, that can sense,
store, and even process electrical, thermal, optical, chemical, and
other signals to extract user-/environment-related information, have
enabled services only limited by human imagination.

Despite picturesque promises of IoT-enabled systems, the integration of
smart things into the standard Internet introduces several security
challenges because the majority of Internet technologies, communication
protocols, and sensors were not designed to support IoT. Several recent
research studies have demonstrated that launching security/privacy
attacks against IoT-enabled systems, in particular wearable medical
sensor (WMS)-based systems , may lead to catastrophic situations and
life-threatening conditions. Therefore, security threats and privacy
concerns in the IoT domain need to be proactively studied and
aggressively addressed. In this thesis, we tackle several
domain-specific security/privacy challenges associated with IoT-enabled
systems.

We first target health monitoring systems that are one of the most
widely-used types of IoT-enabled systems. We discuss and evaluate
several energy-efficient schemes and algorithms, which significantly
reduce total energy consumption of different implantable and wearable
medical devices (IWMDs). The proposed schemes make continuous long-term
health monitoring feasible while providing spare energy needed for data
encryption.

Furthermore, we present two energy-efficient protocols for implantable
medical devices (IMDs), which are essential for data encryption: (i) a
secure wakeup protocol that is resilient against battery draining
attacks, along with (ii) a low-power key exchange protocol that shares
the encryption key between the IMD and the external device while
ensuring confidentiality of the key.

Moreover, we introduce a new class of attacks against the privacy of a
patient who is carrying IWMDs. We describe how an attacker can infer
private information about the patient by exploiting physiological
information leakage, i.e., signals that continuously emanate from the
human body due to the normal functioning of organs or IWMDs attached to
(or implanted in) the body.

Further, we propose a new generic class of security attacks, called
dedicated intelligent security attacks against sensor-triggered
emergency responses (DISASTER), that is applicable to a variety of
sensor-based systems. DISASTER exploits design flaws and security
weaknesses of safety mechanisms deployed in cyber-physical systems
(CPSs) to trigger emergency responses even in the absence of a real
emergency. In addition to introducing DISASTER, we comprehensively
describe its serious consequences and demonstrate the possibility of
launching such attacks against the two most widely-used CPSs:
residential and industrial automation/monitoring systems.

Finally, we present a continuous authentication system based on BioAura,
i.e., information that is already gathered by WMSs for diagnostic and
therapeutic purposes. We extensively examine the proposed authentication
system and demonstrate that it offers promising advantages over one-time
knowledge-based authentication systems, e.g., password-/pattern-based
systems, and may potentially be used to protect personal computing
devices and servers, software applications, and restricted physical
spaces.

\submitted

January 2017 \copyrightyear 2017 \adviser Niraj K. Jha \department
Electrical Engineering
