# Examining Committee Membership

The following served on the Examining Committee for this thesis. The
decision of the Examining committee is by majority vote.

External Examiner: Dr. Andrew Swann.

Supervisors: Dr. Spiro Karigiannis and Dr. Shengda Hu.

Internal Members: Dr. Ruxandra Moraru and Dr. David McKinnon.

Internal-External Member: Dr. Raymond McLenaghan.

AUTHOR’S DECLARATION

I hereby declare that I am the sole author of this thesis. This is a
true copy of the thesis, including any required final revisions, as
accepted by my examiners.

I understand that my thesis may be made electronically available to the
public.

## Acknowledgements

The first people I need to acknowledge are my two supervisors, Spiro and
Shengda.

Spiro has been my supervisor ever since I was a masters student,
coaching me all the way through my PhD. I learned so much from him, both
academically and professionally. I am definitely fortunate to have had
such an involved and down to earth supervisor.

Shengda became my co-supervisor when my research transitioned into
symplectic geometry. He was also an invaluable support in helping me
understand what research is and in formulating the content that
comprised my 2 papers.

I would also like to thank my defence committee for providing valuable
input and making my defence a day I will always remember.

Next, I need to acknowledge my family. My family experienced all of the
ups and downs of the PhD with me. They always had my back, and I could
not have gotten through the program without their love and support.

Lastly, I need to acknowledge my partner Sarah. Ever since we
reconnected a few years ago, she has only had a positive and healthy
impact on my life, and has made me so happy. I will always appreciate
her.

###### Table of Contents

-    1 Introduction
-    2 Background
    -    2.1 Symplectic Geometry
    -    2.2 Differential Graded Lie Algebras
    -    2.3 @xmath -Algebras
    -    2.4 Group Cohomology
    -    2.5 Lie Algebra Cohomology
-    3 Multisymplectic Geometry
    -    3.1 Multi-Hamiltonian Systems
    -    3.2 Weak Homotopy Moment Maps
-    4 Existence and Uniqueness of Weak Moment Maps
    -    4.1 Equivariance in Multisymplectic Geometry
    -    4.2 Infinitesimal Equivariance in Multisymplectic Geometry
    -    4.3 Existence of Not Necessarily Equivariant Weak Moment Maps
    -    4.4 Obtaining an Equivariant Weak Moment Map from a
        Non-Equivariant Weak Moment Map
    -    4.5 Uniqueness of Equivariant Weak Moment Maps
-    5 Multisymplectic Symmetries and Conserved Quantities
    -    5.1 A Generalized Poisson Bracket
    -    5.2 Conserved Quantities and their Algebraic Structure
    -    5.3 Continuous Symmetries and their Algebraic Structure
-    6 Noether’s Theorem in Multisymplectic Geometry
    -    6.1 Noether’s Theorem in Symplectic Geometry
    -    6.2 The Correspondence between Mutlisymplectic Conserved
        Quantities and Continuous Symmetries
    -    6.3 Weak Moment Maps as Morphisms
-    7 Applications
    -    7.1 Classical Multisymplectic Momentum and Position Forms
    -    7.2 Closed @xmath Structures
-    8 Concluding Remarks

## 1 Introduction

Multisymplectic geometry is the natural generalization of symplectic
geometry in which the symplectic @xmath -form is replaced by an ‘ @xmath
-plectic’ form, where @xmath is any positive integer. Manifolds that are
Kähler, hyper-Kähler, @xmath , and Spin @xmath are all naturally
multisymplectic. In physics, @xmath -plectic manifolds are used to
describe @xmath -dimensional covariant field theories (see e.g. [ 8 ] )
and the case @xmath is relevant to string theory (see e.g. [ 2 ] ).

The main idea this thesis is concerned with is generalizing moment maps
from symplectic geometry to multisymplectic geometry, and the
corresponding applications. In particular, we introduce a weak
(homotopy) moment map, defined in equation ( 1.2 ) below.

Recall that for a symplectic manifold @xmath , a Lie algebra @xmath is
said to act symplectically if @xmath , for all @xmath , where @xmath is
its infinitesimal generator. A symplectic group action is called
Hamiltonian if one can find a moment map, that is, a map @xmath
satisfying

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath .

In multisymplectic geometry, @xmath is replaced by a closed,
non-degenerate @xmath -form, where @xmath . The pair @xmath is called an
@xmath -plectic manifold. A Lie algebra action is called multisymplectic
if @xmath for each @xmath . A generalization of moment maps from
symplectic to multisymplectic geometry is given by a (homotopy) moment
map. These maps are discussed in detail in [ 3 ] . A homotopy moment map
is a collection of maps, @xmath , with @xmath , satisfying

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

for all @xmath , where @xmath is an infinitesimal generator (see
Definition 3.10 ) and @xmath is the @xmath -th Lie algebra homology
differential @xmath , defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath and @xmath . A weak (homotopy) moment map is a collection of
maps @xmath satisfying

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

for @xmath . Here @xmath is the Lie kernel, which is defined to be the
kernel of @xmath . We call the @xmath -th component @xmath of a weak
moment map a weak @xmath -moment map.

We see that any collection of functions satisfying equation ( 1.1 ) must
also satisfy ( 1.2 ). That is, any homotopy moment map induces a weak
homotopy moment map.

Also note that the @xmath -th component of a homotopy moment map
coincides with the multi-moment maps of Madsen and Swann introduced in [
16 ] and [ 16 ] .

Of central importance in this thesis is the applications of these weak
moment maps to multi-Hamiltonian systems. We define a multi-Hamiltonian
system to be a triple @xmath where @xmath is @xmath -plectic and @xmath
is a ‘Hamiltonian’ @xmath -form. This means that there exists a vector
field @xmath such that @xmath . In analogy to Hamiltonian mechanics, the
integral curves of the vector field are to be interpreted as the motions
in the relevant physical system.

One of our main results is a generalization of Noether’s theorem to
multisymplectic geometry. In order to state our version of Noether’s
theorem, we first develop a multisymplectic ‘Poisson’ bracket @xmath ,
which was introduced in [ 6 ] , and a notion of multisymplectic
conserved quantity and symmetry.

Multisymplectic conserved quantities were introduced in [ 20 ] . They
defined three types: A differential form @xmath is called a local,
global, or strict conserved quantity if it is Hamiltonian and @xmath is
closed, exact, or zero respectively. Here Hamiltonian means that there
exists a multivector field @xmath such that @xmath . By adding in this
requirement, we are then able to study how the extended ‘Poisson’
bracket interacts with the conserved quantities. We find that, analogous
to the case of Hamiltonian mechanics, the Poisson bracket of two
conserved quantities is always strictly conserved. That is,

###### Proposition 1.1.

Let @xmath and @xmath be two (local, global or strict) conserved
quantities on a multi-Hamiltonian system @xmath . Then @xmath is
strictly conserved, meaning @xmath .

From this proposition we show that the conserved quantities, modulo
closed forms, constitute a graded Lie algebra. We also show that when
restricted to a certain subspace, namely the Lie @xmath -algebra of
observables (see Definition 3.6 or [ 18 ] ), the conserved quantities
form an @xmath -algebra.

Similarly, we find that our continuous symmetries also generate a graded
Lie algebra. As an extension from Hamiltonian mechanics, we define a
symmetry to be a Hamiltonian multivector field with respect to which the
Lie derivative of the Hamiltonian has a specific form. Just as for the
conserved quantities, we have three types of continuous symmetry.
Namely, a multivector field @xmath is a local, global, or strict
symmetry on @xmath if @xmath and @xmath is closed, exact, or zero
respectively. A generalization from Hamiltonian mechanics is

###### Proposition 1.2.

Given any two (local, global, strict) continuous symmetries @xmath and
@xmath , their Schouten bracket @xmath is a continuous symmetry of the
same type.

From this proposition we show that the continuous symmetries, modulo
elements in the kernel of @xmath , form a graded Lie algebra.

Our first generalization of Noether’s theorem says that there is a
correspondence between these notions of symmetry and conserved quantity
on a multisymplectic manifold.

###### Theorem 1.3.

If @xmath is a (local or global) conserved quantity, then every
corresponding Hamiltonian multivector field @xmath is a (local or
global) continuous symmetry. Conversely, if @xmath is a (local or
global) continuous symmetry, then every corresponding Hamiltonian form
is a (local or global) conserved quantity.

As in symplectic geometry, this correspondence is not one-to-one.
Indeed, for a Hamiltonian form, any two of its corresponding Hamiltonian
multivector fields differ by an element in the kernel of @xmath .
Conversely, any two Hamiltonian forms corresponding to a Hamiltonian
multivector field differ by a closed form:

Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

denote the graded vector space of Hamiltonian forms, and let @xmath
denote the quotient of @xmath by closed forms. Similarily, we let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

denote the graded vector space of Hamiltonian multivector fields and
@xmath denote the quotient of @xmath by elements in the kernel of @xmath
. We slightly improve on the results of [ 5 ] and show that @xmath
descends to a well defined graded Poisson bracket on @xmath . Then we
show that

###### Theorem 1.4.

There is a natural isomorphism of graded Lie algebras between @xmath and
@xmath .

As a consequence of this theorem, we then show that our symmetries and
conserved quantities, after appropriate quotients, are in one-to-one
correspondence. In particular, we let @xmath , @xmath , @xmath denote
the spaces of local, global, and strict conserved quantities
respectively, and @xmath , and @xmath their quotients by closed forms.
Similarily, we let @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath denote the space of
local, global, and strict continuous symmetries respectively, and @xmath
, and @xmath their quotient by elements in the kernel of @xmath . We
obtain:

###### Theorem 1.5.

There exists an isomorphism of graded Lie algebras from @xmath and
@xmath and from @xmath to @xmath . Moreover, there exists an injective
graded Lie algebra homomorphism from @xmath to @xmath and from @xmath to
@xmath .

Furthermore, we show that under certain assumptions for a group action
on @xmath , a weak moment map @xmath gives rise to a whole family of
conserved quantities and continuous symmetries. Specifically, a group
action on a multi-Hamiltonian system @xmath is called locally, globally,
or strictly @xmath preserving if the Lie derivative of @xmath under each
infinitesimal generator from @xmath is closed, exact, or zero
respectively. Under a locally or globally @xmath preserving action, it
was shown in [ 20 ] that for any @xmath , the @xmath -th Lie kernel (see
Definition 2.12 ), @xmath is locally conserved, and if the group
strictly preserves @xmath then @xmath is globally conserved.

We add to this result by showing that under the above assumptions @xmath
is a local or global continuous symmetry. In particular, let @xmath
denote the infinitesimal generators coming from the Lie kernel. Then
@xmath is a differential graded Lie algebra. Let @xmath denote the image
of the moment map. We set @xmath and show that @xmath is an @xmath
-subalgebra of @xmath , the Lie @xmath -algebra of observables. We then
obtain

###### Theorem 1.6.

For any @xmath preserving action, a homotopy moment map induces an
@xmath -morphism from @xmath to @xmath .

We present two applications of our results:

First, we briefly recall the classical momentum and position functions
discussed in Chapter 5.4 of [ 1 ] . Let @xmath be a manifold and @xmath
. Then @xmath has a canonical symplectic form @xmath , and the pair
@xmath is called the phase space (see Example 3.13 ). Given a function
@xmath , by pulling it back to @xmath we obtain a function @xmath ,
called the classical position function corresponding to @xmath . Given a
vector field @xmath , we define @xmath , where @xmath is the complete
lift of @xmath (see Definition 7.3 ). We call the function @xmath the
classical momentum function corresponding to @xmath . These position and
momentum functions satisfy the following bracket relations: For @xmath
and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

These bracket relations form the bridging gap from classical to quantum
mechanics.

In Section @xmath we generalize these bracket relations in the following
way: Given a manifold @xmath , we let @xmath , for @xmath . Then @xmath
has a canonical @xmath -plectic structure @xmath and the pair @xmath is
called the multisymplectic phase space (see Example 3.13 ). For @xmath ,
we denote its pullback to @xmath by @xmath , and call it the classical
position form. Note that @xmath is in @xmath . Moreover, given @xmath we
define its classical momentum form to be

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

a @xmath -form on @xmath , where again @xmath is the complete lift of
@xmath (see Definition 7.3 for details). Letting @xmath , we find that
for @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Notice that these equations are generalization of equations ( 1.3 ), (
1.4 ), and ( 1.5 ) respectively.

In Section @xmath , we also apply our work to manifolds with closed
@xmath -structure. In particular, we derive some identities and extend
Example 6.7 of [ 16 ] by obtaining a homotopy moment map for a @xmath
action on a closed @xmath -manifold.

Lastly, in Section 4, we study the existence and uniqueness of weak
homotopy moment maps and show that the theory can be generalized
directly from symplectic geometry. We also show that the equivariance of
a weak moment map can be characterized in terms of @xmath -module
morphisms, analogous to the case of symplectic geometry. To state our
results, recall that in symplectic geometry we have the following
well-known results on the existence and uniqueness of moment maps, whose
proofs can be found in [ 4 ] .

###### Proposition 1.7.

Consider the symplectic action of a connected Lie group @xmath acting on
a symplectic manifold @xmath .

-    If the first Lie algebra cohomology vanishes, i.e. @xmath , then a
    not necessarily equivariant moment map exists.

-    If the second Lie algebra cohomology vanishes, i.e. @xmath , then
    any non-equivariant moment map can be made equivariant.

-    If the first Lie algebra cohomology vanishes, i.e. @xmath , then
    equivariant moment maps are unique,

and combining these results,

-    If both the first and second Lie algebra cohomology vanish, i.e.
    @xmath and @xmath , then there exists a unique equivariant moment
    map.

We generalize these results with the following theorems. Letting @xmath
denote the set of closed @xmath -forms on @xmath , we get the above
propositions, in their respective order, by taking @xmath .

###### Theorem 1.8.

If @xmath then there exists a not necessarily equivariant weak homotopy
@xmath -moment map.

###### Theorem 1.9.

If @xmath , then any non-equivariant weak homotopy @xmath -moment map
can be made equivariant.

###### Theorem 1.10.

If @xmath then an equivariant weak homotopy @xmath -moment map is
unique.

Combining these results, we obtain from the Kunneth formula (see e.g. [
21 ] ):

###### Theorem 1.11.

If @xmath and @xmath , then there exists a unique equivariant weak
@xmath -moment map @xmath . Moreover, if @xmath and @xmath for all
@xmath , then a full equivariant weak moment map exists and is unique.

We also show that the morphism properties of moment maps and their
relationship to equivariance in multisymplectic geometry is analogous to
the case of symplectic geometry. More specifically, recall that in
symplectic geometry the equivariance of a moment map @xmath is
characterized by whether or not @xmath is a Lie algebra morphism. That
is, @xmath is equivariant if and only if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath . However, as shown in Theorem 4.2.8 of [ 1 ] it is
always true that @xmath induces a Lie algebra morphism between @xmath
and @xmath , because @xmath .

We generalize these results to multisymplectic geometry by showing that:

###### Theorem 1.12.

For any @xmath , a weak @xmath -moment map is always a @xmath -module
morphism from @xmath . A weak @xmath -moment map is equivariant if and
only if it is a @xmath -module morphism from @xmath .

This thesis is a synthesis of the results obtained in [ 10 ] and [ 11 ]
. If not stated otherwise, we will always assume our manifold to be
connected.

## 2 Background

We start by recalling some basic concepts from symplectic geometry.

### 2.1 Symplectic Geometry

Let @xmath be a manifold and let @xmath be a @xmath -form. By
definition, for each @xmath we have that @xmath is a skew-symmetric
bilinear map @xmath .

###### Definition 2.1.

A @xmath -form @xmath is said to be symplectic if it is closed and if
@xmath is non-degenerate for each @xmath . Non-degeneracy of @xmath
means that the map

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

is an isomorphism for each @xmath . In such a case, the pair @xmath is
called a symplectic manifold.

###### Definition 2.2.

A triple @xmath where @xmath is a symplectic manifold and @xmath is
called a Hamiltonian system. The function @xmath is called the
associated Hamiltonian function.

###### Definition 2.3.

Given @xmath , we let @xmath represent the unique vector field in @xmath
satisfying

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The vector field @xmath is called the Hamiltonian vector field
associated to @xmath .

Hamiltonian vector fields allow us to define the Poisson bracket on
@xmath .

###### Definition 2.4.

Given @xmath their Poisson bracket is defined to be

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The Poisson bracket turns @xmath into a Lie algebra. To show this @xmath
, we use the fact from ( 2.2 ) and ( 2.3 ) that @xmath is also equal to
@xmath . Moreover, one can verify the Leibniz rule:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A straightforward computation shows that the map @xmath given by @xmath
is a Lie algebra anti-homomorphism. That is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

### 2.2 Differential Graded Lie Algebras

Recall the definition of a differential graded Lie algebra:

###### Definition 2.5.

A differential graded Lie algebra is a @xmath -graded vector space
@xmath together with a bracket @xmath and a differential @xmath . The
bilinear map @xmath is graded skew symmetric:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and satisfies the graded Jacobi identity:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Lastly, the differential and bilinear map satisfiy the graded Leibniz
rule:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here we have let @xmath and @xmath be arbitrary homogeneous elements in
@xmath of degrees @xmath and @xmath respectively.

###### Definition 2.6.

A Gerstenhaber algebra is a @xmath -graded algebra @xmath that is graded
commutative and has a bilinear map @xmath along with the following
properties:

-   @xmath ,

-   @xmath (the bilinear map has degree @xmath ),

-   @xmath (the bilinear map satisfies the Poisson identity),

-   @xmath ,

and lastly, the bilinear map satisfies the Jacobi identity:

-   @xmath .

Here we have let @xmath denote the degree of @xmath , and @xmath the
product of @xmath and @xmath in @xmath .

Let @xmath be a Lie algebra. The Schouten bracket turns @xmath , the
exterior algebra of @xmath , into a Gerstenhaber algebra. We quickly
recall some properties of the Schouten bracket. A more detailed
discussion can be found in [ 17 ] .

On decomposable multivectors @xmath and @xmath the Schouten bracket is
given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

###### Proposition 2.7.

The Schouten bracket is the unique bilinear map @xmath satisfying the
following properties:

-    If @xmath and @xmath then @xmath .

-   @xmath .

-    It coincides with the Lie bracket on @xmath .

-    It satisfies the graded Leibniz rule: For @xmath and @xmath of
    degree @xmath , and @xmath respectively,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

-    It satisfies the graded Jacobi identity: For @xmath , and @xmath of
    degree @xmath ,and @xmath respectively,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

###### Proof.

We leave the details of the proof to the reader, but note that existence
can be proved by showing the expression given in ( 2.4 ) satisfies the
desired properties. In particular, that the Schouten bracket satisfies
the graded Jacobi identity follows from the Jacobi identity for the Lie
bracket and the graded Leibniz rule. The uniqueness of the bracket
follows from the requirement that the bracket is @xmath -bilinear. More
details can be found in [ 17 ] , for example. ∎

We now let @xmath be a manifold and consider the Gerstenhaber algebra
@xmath .

###### Definition 2.8.

For a decomposable multivector field @xmath in @xmath and a differential
form @xmath , we define the contraction of @xmath by @xmath to be

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and extend by linearity to all multivector fields. We define the Lie
derivative of @xmath in the direction of @xmath to be

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note that this is the usual Lie derivative when @xmath .

Throughout the thesis we will make extensive use of the following
propositions.

###### Proposition 2.9.

Let @xmath and @xmath be arbitrary. For a differential form @xmath , the
following identities hold:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

###### Proof.

A full proof is given in Proposition A.3 of [ 6 ] . Note that equation (
2.6 ) follows by taking the differential of both sides of ( 2.5 ) and
using that @xmath . Equation ( 2.7 ) is proved by induction on the
tensor degrees of the multivector fields (see [ 6 ] ). Using equation (
2.7 ) we provide a proof of equation ( 2.8 ). We have that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Now using equation ( 2.6 ), this is equal to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which by ( 2.5 ) is equal to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as desired. Lastly, equation ( 2.9 ) can be proved directly. We have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

∎

Another formula for the interior product by the Schouten bracket is
given by the next proposition.

###### Proposition 2.10.

For @xmath and @xmath we have that interior product with their Schouten
bracket satisfies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the bracket on the right hand side is the graded commutator.
Written out fully, this says that for an arbitrary form @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Proof.

This is Proposition 4.1 of [ 17 ] . It can also be derived directly from
equations ( 2.5 ) and ( 2.7 ). We state it as a separate proposition
because equation ( 2.10 ) will be used frequently in the rest of the
thesis. ∎

Next we recall the Chevalley-Eilenberg complex. We start with a Lie
algebra @xmath and its exterior algebra @xmath . The Gerstenhaber
algebra @xmath is turned into a differential algebra by the following
differential.

###### Definition 2.11.

For a Lie algebra @xmath , consider the differential

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath , and extend by linearity to non-decomposables. Define @xmath
and @xmath to be the zero map. It follows from the graded Jacobi
identity that @xmath . The differential Gerstenhaber algebra @xmath is
called the Chevalley-Eilenberg complex.

###### Definition 2.12.

We follow the terminology and notation of [ 16 ] and call @xmath the
@xmath -th Lie kernel, which is a vector subspace of @xmath . Let @xmath
denote the direct sum of all the Lie kernels:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that if the Lie algebra is abelian then @xmath .

A straightforward computation gives the following lemma.

###### Lemma 2.13.

For arbitrary @xmath and @xmath we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

From this lemma we get the following.

###### Proposition 2.14.

We have @xmath is a differential graded subalgebra of the
Chevalley-Eilenberg complex, with @xmath .

###### Proof.

The only nontrivial thing we need to show is that the Schouten bracket
preserves the Lie kernel. While this follows immediately from the fact
that @xmath is a graded derivation of the Schouten bracket, we can also
show it using Lemma 2.13 . Indeed, for @xmath and @xmath we have that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Hence, @xmath is exact and therefore closed. ∎

We now define a differential graded Lie algebra consisting of
multivector fields.

Let @xmath be a connected Lie group acting on a manifold @xmath . For
@xmath let @xmath denote the infinitesimal generator of the induced
action on @xmath by the one-parameter subgroup of @xmath generated by
@xmath . For decomposable @xmath in @xmath we introduce the notation
@xmath for the associated multivector field, and extend by linearity.
Let

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

and set

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Proposition 2.15.

We have that @xmath is a graded Lie algebra. Moreover, for @xmath , we
have that @xmath . Note that we have abused notation and let @xmath
denote the Chevalley-Eilenberg differentials for both the Lie algebras
@xmath and @xmath .

###### Proof.

We first show that @xmath . Let @xmath and @xmath . Then we have that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Now extend by linearity to all @xmath Here we used the standard result
of group actions that @xmath . The first claim now follows since @xmath
is a graded Lie algebra by Proposition 2.14 . Moreover, we have that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Now extend by linearity to all @xmath . In particular then, if @xmath is
in the Lie kernel, we have that @xmath .

∎

The following lemma will be used repeatedly in the rest of the thesis.
We remark that it holds for arbitrary multivector fields; however, for
our purposes it will suffice to consider the restriction to elements of
@xmath .

###### Lemma 2.16.

( Extended Cartan Lemma) For decomposable @xmath in @xmath and
differential form @xmath we have that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

###### Proof.

This is Lemma 3.4 of [ 16 ] or Lemma 2.18 of [ 20 ] . ∎

Let @xmath be a Lie group action on @xmath .

###### Definition 2.17.

For @xmath we let @xmath denote the vector field given by the
push-forward of @xmath by @xmath . That is,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath . For a decomposable multivector field @xmath in @xmath we
will let @xmath denote the extended adjoint action

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and we will let @xmath denote the multivector field

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We also extend @xmath to a map @xmath by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

For an arbitrary multivector field @xmath , the above definitions are
all extended by linearity. Notice that for arbitrary @xmath , we have
@xmath .

The next proposition shows that the infinitesimal generator of the
extended adjoint action agrees with the pull back action.

###### Proposition 2.18.

Let @xmath be a group action. For every @xmath and @xmath we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Equivalently, the map @xmath given by @xmath is equivariant with respect
to the extended adjoint and pull back action.

###### Proof.

Fix @xmath , @xmath . First suppose that @xmath . Then by Proposition
4.1.26 of [ 1 ] we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The claim now follows since for @xmath in @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -- --
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --

∎

While in this thesis we will mostly be concerned with differential
graded Lie algebras, we will also have the need to consider the more
general structure of an @xmath -algebra.

### 2.3 @xmath-Algebras

We only state the definition of an @xmath -algebra and do not go into
detail. More detail can be found in [ 18 ] , for example.

###### Definition 2.19.

An @xmath -algebra is a graded vector space @xmath together with a
collection of graded skew-symmetric linear maps @xmath , with @xmath ,
satisfying the following identity for all @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath is a permutation of @xmath letters, @xmath is the sign of
@xmath , and @xmath is the Koszul sign. We will not have need for the
Koszul sign in this thesis and direct the reader to [ 18 ] for its
definition. The subset Sh @xmath of permutations on @xmath letters is
the set of @xmath -unshuffles. A permutation @xmath of @xmath letters is
called a @xmath -unshuffle if @xmath for @xmath .

An @xmath -algebra @xmath is called a Lie @xmath -algebra if @xmath for
@xmath .

@xmath algebras are not central to this thesis; however, they are needed
to define the @xmath algebra of observables from [ 18 ] and to state
Theorem @xmath .

Since any differential graded Lie algebra is a Lie @xmath -algebra
(indeed, just take @xmath , @xmath and @xmath for @xmath ), Propositions
2.14 and 2.15 show that the spaces @xmath and @xmath have @xmath
-algebra structures.

Next we recall the basic notions from group and Lie algebra cohomology
that will be needed in this thesis.

### 2.4 Group Cohomology

Let @xmath be a group and @xmath a @xmath -module. For @xmath and @xmath
, let @xmath denote the action of @xmath on @xmath . Let @xmath denote
the space of smooth alternating functions from @xmath to @xmath and
consider the differential @xmath defined as follows. For @xmath and
@xmath define

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (2.14)
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

A computation shows that @xmath so that @xmath is a cochain complex.
This cohomology is known as the differentiable cohomology of @xmath with
coefficients in @xmath . We let @xmath denote the @xmath -th cohomology
group and will call an equivalence class representative a @xmath
-cocycle.

### 2.5 Lie Algebra Cohomology

Let @xmath be a Lie algebra and @xmath a @xmath -module. Given @xmath
and @xmath , let @xmath denote the action of @xmath on @xmath . We let
@xmath denote the space of multilinear alternating functions from @xmath
to @xmath and consider the differential @xmath defined as follows. For
@xmath and @xmath define

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (2.15)
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

A computation shows that @xmath . We let @xmath denote the @xmath -th
cohomology group and call an equivalence class representative a (Lie
algebra) @xmath -cocycle. Note that for @xmath the map @xmath is given
by @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath . Thus, by definition,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For @xmath the map @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath and @xmath are in @xmath .

The standard example of Lie algebra cohomology is given when @xmath :

###### Example 2.20.

(Exterior algebra of @xmath ) Consider the trivial @xmath -action on
@xmath . Then @xmath , and the Lie algebra cohomology differential
@xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , and @xmath is a decomposable element of @xmath , and
extended by linearity to non-decomposables. It is easy to check that
@xmath . We will also make frequent reference to the corresponding Lie
algebra homology differential which is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

for @xmath . We define @xmath and @xmath to be the zero map.

## 3 Multisymplectic Geometry

In this section we develop the necessary background in multisymplectic
geometry.

### 3.1 Multi-Hamiltonian Systems

Multisymplectic manifolds are the natural generalization of symplectic
manifolds.

###### Definition 3.1.

A manifold @xmath equipped with a closed @xmath -form @xmath is called a
pre-multisymplectic (or pre- @xmath -plectic) manifold. If in addition
the map @xmath is injective, then @xmath is called a multisymplectic or
@xmath -plectic manifold.

The next example is a generalization of the phase space in Hamiltonian
mechanics. It comes up frequently in this thesis.

###### Example 3.2.

(Multisymplectic Phase Space)

Let @xmath be a manifold and let @xmath . Then @xmath is a vector bundle
over @xmath with canonical @xmath -form @xmath defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . The @xmath -form @xmath defined by
@xmath is the canonical @xmath -form. The pair @xmath is a @xmath
-plectic manifold. Notice that for @xmath we recover the usual
symplectic structure on the cotangent bundle.

###### Definition 3.3.

If for @xmath there exists @xmath such that @xmath then we call @xmath a
Hamiltonian @xmath -form and @xmath a corresponding Hamiltonian vector
field to @xmath . We let @xmath denote the space of Hamiltonian @xmath
-forms.

###### Remark 3.4.

If @xmath is @xmath -plectic then the Hamiltonian vector field @xmath is
unique. If @xmath is pre- @xmath -plectic then Hamiltonian vector fields
are unique up to an element in the kernel of @xmath . Also, notice that
in the @xmath -plectic (i.e. symplectic) case, every function is
Hamiltonian.

###### Definition 3.5.

In analogy to Hamiltonian mechanics, for a fixed @xmath -plectic form
@xmath and Hamiltonian @xmath -form @xmath , we call @xmath a
multi-Hamiltonian system. We denote the Hamiltonian vector field of
@xmath by @xmath .

There are many examples of multi-Hamiltonian systems and we refer the
reader to Section 3.1 of [ 20 ] for some results on their existence.

In [ 18 ] it was shown that to any multisymplectic manifold one can
associate the following @xmath -algebra.

###### Definition 3.6.

The Lie @xmath -algebra of observables, @xmath is the following @xmath
-algebra. Let @xmath where @xmath and @xmath for @xmath . The maps
@xmath of degree @xmath are defined as follows: For @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath is defined to equal @xmath . We introduce this notation as
this sign comes up frequently.

###### Remark 3.7.

It is easily verified that @xmath . For future reference we also note
that @xmath and @xmath

The following lemma from [ 18 ] will be useful later on in the thesis.

###### Lemma 3.8.

Let @xmath be arbitrary Hamiltonian @xmath -forms on a multisymplectic
manifold @xmath . Let @xmath denote the associated Hamiltonian vector
fields. Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

This is Lemma 3.7 of [ 18 ] . ∎

Lastly we recall the terminology for group actions on a multisymplectic
manifold.

###### Definition 3.9.

A Lie group action @xmath is called multisymplectic if @xmath . A Lie
algebra action @xmath is called multisymplectic if @xmath for all @xmath
. We remark that a multisymplectic Lie group action induces a
multisymplectic Lie algebra action. Conversely, a multisymplectic Lie
algebra action induces a multisymplectic group action if the Lie group
is simply-connected. Moreover, as in [ 20 ] , we will call a Lie group
action on a multi-Hamiltonian system @xmath locally, globally, or
strictly @xmath -preserving if it is multisymplectic and if @xmath is
closed, exact, or zero respectively, for all @xmath .

### 3.2 Weak Homotopy Moment Maps

For a group acting on a symplectic manifold @xmath , a moment map is a
Lie algebra morphism between @xmath and @xmath , where @xmath is the
Poisson bracket. In multisymplectic geometry, the @xmath -plectic form
no longer provides a Lie algebra structure on the space of smooth
functions. However, as we saw in the previous section, the @xmath
-plectic structure does define an @xmath -algebra, namely the Lie @xmath
-algebra of observables. A homotopy moment map is an @xmath -morphism
from @xmath to the Lie @xmath -algebra of observables. We explain what
this means in the following definition and refer the reader to [ 3 ] for
further information on @xmath -morphisms.

For the rest of this section, we assume a multisymplectic action of a
Lie algebra @xmath on @xmath .

###### Definition 3.10.

A (homotopy) moment map is an @xmath -morphism @xmath between @xmath and
the Lie @xmath -algebra of observables. This means that @xmath is a
collection of maps @xmath and @xmath for @xmath satisfying,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

for @xmath and @xmath . A moment map is called equivariant if each
component @xmath is equivariant with respect to the adjoint and pullback
actions respectively.

###### Definition 3.11.

A weak (homotopy) moment map, is a collection of maps @xmath with @xmath
satisying

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

###### Remark 3.12.

Notice that any collection of functions satisfying @xmath also satisfies
@xmath . That is, any homotopy moment map induces a weak homotopy moment
map. Moreover, the multi-moment maps of Madsen and Swann (in [ 16 ] and
[ 16 ] ) are given precisely by the @xmath -th component of our weak
homotopy moment maps. Lastly, notice that when @xmath , both full and
weak homotopy moment maps reduce to the standard definition in
symplectic geometry.

We conclude this section with some examples of weak moment maps. In
Hamiltonian mechanics, the phase space of a manifold @xmath is the
symplectic manifold @xmath . The next example generalizes this to the
setting of multisymplectic geometry.

###### Example 3.13.

(Multisymplectic Phase Space) As in Example 3.2 , let @xmath be a
manifold and let @xmath , with @xmath the projection map. Let @xmath and
@xmath denote the canonical @xmath and @xmath -forms respectively. Let
@xmath be a group acting on @xmath and lift this action to @xmath in the
standard way. Such an action on @xmath necessarily preserves @xmath . We
define a weak homotopy moment map by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath .

We now show that @xmath is a weak homotopy moment map. For @xmath ,
first consider a decomposable element @xmath in @xmath . Then, using
Lemma 2.16 and the fact that @xmath preserves @xmath , we find

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

By linearity, we thus see that this equation holds for an arbitrary
element in @xmath . That is, for all @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If we assume now that @xmath , it then follows from Proposition 2.15
that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus by equation @xmath we see @xmath is a weak homotopy moment map.

###### Remark 3.14.

In symplectic geometry, symmetries on the phase space @xmath have an
important relationship with the classical momentum and position
functions (see Chapter 4.3 of [ 1 ] ). These momentum and position
functions satisfy specific commutation relations which play an important
role in connecting classical and quantum mechanics. Once we extend the
Poisson bracket to multisymplectic manifolds and discuss a generalized
notion of symmetry, we will come back to this multisymplectic phase
space and give a generalization of these classical momentum and position
functions (see Section 6.1).

The next two examples will be used when we look at manifolds with a
torsion-free @xmath structure.

###### Example 3.15.

( @xmath with the standard holomorphic volume form) Consider @xmath with
standard coordinates @xmath . Let @xmath denote the standard holomorphic
volume form. Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It follows that @xmath is a @xmath -plectic form on @xmath . We consider
the diagonal action by the maximal torus @xmath given by @xmath . We
have @xmath and that the infinitesimal generators of @xmath and @xmath
are

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

respectively.

A computation then shows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Moreover,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath is abelian we have that @xmath . Thus, by equation @xmath
we see a weak homotopy moment map is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If instead of Re @xmath we were to consider Im @xmath then in the above
expressions for @xmath and @xmath we would just swap the roles of Re and
Im.

###### Example 3.16.

( @xmath with the standard Kahler form) Working with the same set up as
Example 3.15 , now consider the standard Kahler form @xmath . This is a
@xmath -plectic (i.e. symplectic) form on @xmath . A computation shows
that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus, by equation @xmath a weak homotopy moment map is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For our last example of this section, we consider a multi-Hamiltonian
system which models the motion of a particle, with unit mass, under no
external net force.

###### Example 3.17.

(Motion in a conservative system under translation)

Consider @xmath with the standard metric @xmath and standard coordinates
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath . Let @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath denote the induced coordinates on @xmath . The motion of
a particle in @xmath , subject to no external force, is given by a
geodesic. That is, the path @xmath of the particle is an integral curve
for the geodesic spray @xmath , a vector field on @xmath . Using the
metric to identify @xmath and @xmath , the geodesic spray is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as shown in Example 5.21 of [ 9 ] . This vector field @xmath is the
standard Hamiltonian vector field on the phase space. Since we our
working with the standard metric, the geodesic spray is just

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath and consider the multi-Hamiltonian system @xmath where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is the canonical volume form, and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so that the @xmath . That is, the Hamiltonian vector field in this
multi-Hamiltonian system is the geodesic spray. Consider the translation
action of @xmath on @xmath and pull this back to an action on @xmath .
The infinitesimal generators of @xmath on @xmath are @xmath and @xmath
respectively. We compute the moment map for this action:

Since @xmath it follows that @xmath satisfies @xmath . Similar
computations show that the following is a homotopy moment map for the
translation action on @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Remark 3.18.

In Section 5.3 we will come back to Example 3.17 and consider the
multisymplectic symmetries and conserved quantities coming from this
homotopy moment map.

## 4 Existence and Uniqueness of Weak Moment Maps

In this section we show that the classical results on the existence and
uniqueness of moment maps in symplectic geometry generalize directly to
weak homotopy moment maps in multisymplectic geometry. In particular, we
show that their existence and uniqueness is governed by a Lie algebra
cohomology complex which reduces to the Chevalley-Eilenberg complex in
the symplectic setup.

### 4.1 Equivariance in Multisymplectic Geometry

###### Definition 4.1.

A homotopy moment map is called equivariant if each component @xmath is
equivariant with respect to the adjoint and pullback actions
respectively. That is, @xmath is equivariant if for all @xmath , @xmath
, and @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Similarly, a weak homotopy moment map is equivariant if equation ( 4.1 )
holds for all @xmath .

Next we recall the cohomology theory governing equivariance from
symplectic geometry, without proof, and then generalize to the
multisymplectic setting. The results from symplectic geometry can all be
found in Chapter 4.2 of [ 1 ] for example. We will provide more general
proofs later on in this section. Let @xmath be a symplectic manifold,
and @xmath a symplectic Lie group action by a connected Lie group @xmath
. We consider the induced symplectic Lie algebra action @xmath . Suppose
that a moment map @xmath exists. That is, @xmath for all @xmath . By
definition, @xmath is equivariant if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Following Chapter 4.2 of [ 1 ] , for @xmath and @xmath define @xmath by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

###### Proposition 4.2.

For each @xmath and @xmath , the function @xmath is constant.

Since @xmath is constant, we may define the map @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the right hand side is the constant value of @xmath .

###### Proposition 4.3.

The map @xmath is a cocycle in the chain complex

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

That is, @xmath for all @xmath .

The map @xmath is called the cocycle corresponding to @xmath . The
following proposition shows that for any symplectic group action, the
cocycle gives a well defined cohomology class.

###### Proposition 4.4.

For any symplectic action of @xmath on @xmath admitting a moment map,
there is a well defined cohomology class. More specifically, if @xmath
and @xmath are two moment maps, then their corresponding cocycles @xmath
and @xmath are in the same cohomology class, i.e. @xmath .

By definition, we see that @xmath is measuring the equivariance of
@xmath . That is, @xmath if and only if @xmath is equivariant. Moreover,
if the cocycle corresponding to a moment map vanishes in cohomology, the
next proposition shows that we can modify the original moment map to
make it equivariant.

###### Proposition 4.5.

Suppose that @xmath is a moment map with corresponding cocycle @xmath .
If @xmath then @xmath for some @xmath and @xmath is an equivariant
moment map.

We now show how this theory generalizes to multisymplectic geometry. For
the rest of this section we let @xmath denote an @xmath -plectic
manifold and @xmath a multisymplectic connected group action. We
consider the induced multisymplectic Lie algebra action @xmath . Assume
that we have a weak homotopy moment map @xmath , i.e. a collection of
maps @xmath satisfying equation ( 3.2 ).

To extend equation ( 4.2 ) to multisymplectic geometry, for @xmath and
@xmath , we define the following @xmath -form:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The following proposition generalizes Proposition 4.2 .

###### Proposition 4.6.

The @xmath -form @xmath is closed.

###### Proof.

Since @xmath is injective and commutes with the differential, our claim
is equivalent to showing that @xmath is closed. Indeed we have that

  -- -------- -------- -- --
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --

∎

In analogy to symplectic geometry, we now see each component of a weak
moment map gives a cocycle.

###### Definition 4.7.

We call the map @xmath defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the cocycle corresponding to @xmath .

As a generalization of Proposition 4.3 we obtain:

###### Proposition 4.8.

The map @xmath is a @xmath -cocycle in the chain complex

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the action of @xmath on @xmath is given by the tensor product of
the co-adjoint and pullback actions. The induced infinitesimal action of
@xmath on @xmath is defined as follows: for @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

###### Proof.

By equation ( 2.14 ) we know that @xmath . For arbitrary @xmath we have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

∎

###### Definition 4.9.

Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath . We call the map @xmath the cocycle corresponding to @xmath
.

Since the components of a weak moment map do not interact, as a
corollary to Proposition 4.8 we obtain

###### Proposition 4.10.

The map @xmath is a cocycle in the complex

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The next theorem shows that multisymplectic Lie algebra actions
admitting weak moment maps give a well defined cohomology class,
generalizing Proposition 4.4 .

###### Theorem 4.11.

Let @xmath act multisymplectically on @xmath . To any weak moment map,
there is a well defined cohomology class @xmath in @xmath . More
precisely if @xmath and @xmath are two weak moment maps with cocycles
@xmath and @xmath , then @xmath is a coboundary.

###### Proof.

We need to show that @xmath is a coboundary for each @xmath . We have
that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

However, @xmath and @xmath are both moment maps and so @xmath . Thus
@xmath is in @xmath . Moreover, by equation ( 2.15 ), we see that @xmath
.

∎

If @xmath is not equivariant but its cocycle vanishes, then we can
define a new equivariant moment map from @xmath , in analogy to
Proposition 4.5 .

###### Proposition 4.12.

Let @xmath be a weak moment map with cocycle satisfying @xmath . Then
@xmath for some @xmath and the map @xmath is an equivariant weak moment
map.

###### Proof.

We have that @xmath is a moment map since @xmath is closed for all
@xmath . Let @xmath denote the corresponding cocycle. Note that by
equation ( 2.15 ) we have @xmath . By the injectivity of @xmath , to
show that @xmath , it is sufficient to show that @xmath for all @xmath
and @xmath . Indeed,

  -- -------- -------- -- --
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --

∎

### 4.2 Infinitesimal Equivariance in Multisymplectic Geometry

We now consider infinitesimal equivariance. We start by recalling the
notions from symplectic geometry. That is, we differentiate equation (
4.2 ) to obtain the map @xmath defined by @xmath . A straightforward
computation, which we generalize in Proposition 4.15 , gives that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Another quick computation shows that @xmath , showing @xmath is a
constant function for every @xmath . That is, @xmath is a function from
@xmath to @xmath .

###### Proposition 4.13.

The map @xmath is a Lie algebra @xmath -cocycle in the chain complex

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Definition 4.14.

A moment map @xmath is infinitesimally equivariant if @xmath , i.e. if

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

for all @xmath .

Notice that since @xmath is just the derivative of @xmath , it follows
that for a connected Lie group, infinitesimal equivariance and
equivariance are equivalent. Since we will always be working with
connected Lie groups, we will abuse terminology and call a moment map
equivariant if it satisfies equation ( 4.1 ) or ( 4.5 ).

Now we turn our attention towards the multisymplectic setting. As in
symplectic geometry, the infinitesimal equivariance of a weak moment map
comes from differentiating @xmath for fixed @xmath and @xmath .

###### Proposition 4.15.

Let @xmath denote @xmath . Then we have that @xmath is a map from @xmath
to @xmath and is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath and @xmath .

###### Proof.

We have that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath            
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

∎

Let @xmath . Then @xmath is a @xmath -module under the induced action
from the tensor product of the adjoint and Lie derivative actions.
Concretely, for @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Consider the chain complex

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the differential is given in equation ( 2.15 ).

The following is a generalization of Proposition 4.13 .

###### Proposition 4.16.

The map @xmath is in the kernel of @xmath . That is, @xmath is a
cocycle.

###### Proof.

We need to show that @xmath . Indeed, for @xmath and @xmath , we have
that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

By definition of the ad map, this is equal to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and using the definition of @xmath this becomes

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

By the Jacobi identity this is equal to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and this vanishes by equation ( 2.8 ).

∎

As in symplectic geometry, we have that for a connected Lie group, a
weak homotopy moment map is equivariant if and only if it is
infinitesimally equivariant. That is, the weak homotopy @xmath -moment
map is equivariant if and only if @xmath or @xmath . A weak homotopy
moment map is equivariant if @xmath or @xmath for all @xmath .

Now that we have generalized the notions of equivariance from symplectic
to multisymplectic geometry, we move on to study the existence and
uniqueness of these weak homotopy moment maps.

### 4.3 Existence of Not Necessarily Equivariant Weak Moment Maps

For a connected Lie group @xmath acting symplectically on a symplectic
manifold @xmath , recall the following standard results from symplectic
geometry. We refer the reader to [ 4 ] for proofs and note that we give
more general proofs later on in this section.

###### Proposition 4.17.

For any @xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proposition 4.18.

We have that @xmath if and only if @xmath .

Combining these two propositions, we obtain:

###### Proposition 4.19.

If @xmath , then any symplectic action admits a moment map, which is not
necessarily equivariant.

We now show how these results generalize to multisymplectic geometry.
Let a connected Lie group act multisymplectically on an @xmath -plectic
manifold @xmath .

###### Proposition 4.20.

For arbitrary @xmath in @xmath and @xmath we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

By linearity it suffices to consider decomposable @xmath . A quick
computation shows that @xmath . Using Lemmas 2.13 and 2.16 we obtain:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The claim now follows. ∎

The next proposition is a generalization of Proposition 4.18 .

###### Proposition 4.21.

If @xmath then @xmath .

###### Proof.

By equation ( 2.15 ), an element @xmath satisfies @xmath for all @xmath
. That is,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the annihilator of @xmath in @xmath . ∎

We now arrive at our main theorem on the existence of not necessarily
equivariant weak moment maps. The following is a generalization of
Proposition 4.19 .

###### Theorem 4.22.

Let @xmath act multisymplectically on @xmath . If @xmath then the @xmath
-th component of a not necessarily equivariant weak moment map exists.
Moreover, if @xmath for all @xmath , then a not necessarily equivariant
weak moment map exists. The same result holds if @xmath , and @xmath .

###### Proof.

Note that when @xmath , the space @xmath if and only if @xmath by the
Kunneth formula (see for example Theorem 3.6.3 of [ 21 ] ). The claim
now follows from Proposition 4.21 and Proposition 4.20 . Indeed,
Proposition 4.20 says we may define a weak moment map on elements of the
form @xmath by @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath , and Proposition 4.21
says every element in @xmath is a sum of elements of this form. ∎

###### Remark 4.23.

Notice that for the case @xmath , it is always true that @xmath since
any constant function is closed. Hence Theorem 4.22 gives a
generalization of Theorems 3.5 and 3.14 of [ 16 ] and [ 16 ]
respectively. It also agrees with Lemma 4.4 and Corollary 4.2 of [ 19 ]
. Moreover, by taking @xmath , we see that we are obtaining a
generalization from symplectic geometry.

###### Remark 4.24.

In [ 19 ] , Corollary 4.2 gives an existence result for a full homotopy
moment map under a weakly Hamiltonian action (see Definition 2.1 of [ 19
] ) on an @xmath -plectic manifold @xmath . The result guarantees
existence of a full homotopy moment map under the assumption of
vanishing de Rham cohomology, i.e. @xmath for all @xmath and the
vanishing of a specific cocycle @xmath . It follows that this corollary
provides an existence result for weak moment maps, since any full
homotopy moment map reduces to a weak moment map when restricted to the
Lie kernel. Corollary 4.2 of [ 19 ] appears to be independent from our
result as it deals with de Rham cohomology, whereas we are concerned
with Lie algebra cohomology.

###### Remark 4.25.

Further to the results of [ 19 ] , the results on the existence of full
homotopy moment maps provided in [ 7 ] also apply to weak moment maps,
as any full moment map reduces to a weak moment map. See for example
Proposition 2.5 of [ 7 ] . It is not clear if the results in [ 19 ] and
[ 7 ] are related to ours, since in those papers their existence theory
is derived from the double complex @xmath , with @xmath where @xmath is
the Chevalley-Eilenberg differential and @xmath is the de Rham
differential. In our work, we are considering a different cohomology
complex.

###### Example 4.26.

Consider the multisympletic manifold @xmath where @xmath is the standard
volume form. That is, we are working in the case @xmath . Let @xmath
denote the standard coordinates. Let @xmath act on @xmath by rotations.
The corresponding Lie algebra action is generated by the vector fields

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For the case @xmath , consider the distance function @xmath . It is
clear that the distance function is invariant under rotations and hence
@xmath for @xmath . Since @xmath is a closed @xmath -form, it follows
that @xmath is a non-zero element of @xmath . That is, @xmath .

For the case @xmath , consider @xmath . A quick calculation shows that
@xmath for @xmath so that @xmath is invariant under the @xmath action.
Since @xmath , it follows that @xmath as well.

Hence, by Theorem 4.22 , it follows that a weak moment map exists.

The next example gives a scenario for which Theorem 4.22 can only be
applied to specific components of a weak moment map.

###### Example 4.27.

Take the setup of Example 4.26 but instead consider the action of @xmath
. As in Example 4.26 , @xmath is a non-zero closed @xmath -form which is
invariant under the action. That is, @xmath . However, in this setup,
@xmath . Indeed, the infinitesimal generators of @xmath are of the form
@xmath where @xmath . An arbitrary @xmath -form may be written as @xmath
. A computation shows that the condition @xmath for all @xmath implies
that necessarily @xmath . Hence @xmath .

It follows that, in this case, Theorem 4.22 guarantees the existence of
the second component of a weak moment map, but does not guarantee the
existence of the first.

Another generalization of Proposition 4.19 to multisymplectic geometry
is given by:

###### Proposition 4.28.

If @xmath , then the @xmath -th component of a not necessarily
equivariant weak moment map exists.

###### Proof.

If @xmath then @xmath , since @xmath . But for @xmath we have that
@xmath for some @xmath . Then by Lemma 2.16 we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence we may define @xmath to be @xmath . ∎

###### Remark 4.29.

Proposition 4.28 gives another generalization of the results of Madsen
and Swann. Indeed, by taking @xmath we again arrive at Theorems 3.5 and
3.14 of [ 16 ] and [ 16 ] respectively. This also agrees with Lemma 4.4
of [ 7 ] .

### 4.4 Obtaining an Equivariant Weak Moment Map from a Non-Equivariant
Weak Moment Map

In this section we show that the theory involved in obtaining an
equivariant moment map from a non-equivariant moment map extends from
symplectic to multisymplectic geometry. We first recall the results from
symplectic geometry. A proof of the results can be found in [ 4 ] . We
give more general proofs later on in this section.

Proposition 4.13 shows that the map @xmath corresponding to a moment map
@xmath is a Lie algebra @xmath -cocycle. The next proposition says that
if the cocycle is exact then @xmath can be made equivariant.

###### Proposition 4.30.

Let @xmath be a moment map and @xmath its corresponding cocycle. If
@xmath for some @xmath , then @xmath is equivariant.

It follows from this that

###### Proposition 4.31.

If @xmath then one can obtain an equivariant moment map from a
non-equivariant moment map.

Now let @xmath be a connected Lie group acting on an @xmath -plectic
manifold @xmath . The following proposition generalizes Proposition 4.30
to multisymplectic geometry.

###### Proposition 4.32.

Let @xmath be the weak homotopy @xmath -moment map, and let @xmath
denote its corresponding cocycle. If @xmath for some @xmath , then
@xmath is equivariant.

###### Proof.

Fix @xmath and @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -------- -- --
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --

∎

We now arrive at our generalization of Proposition 4.31 :

###### Theorem 4.33.

If @xmath then any weak @xmath -moment map can be made equivariant. In
particular, if @xmath for all @xmath , then any weak moment map @xmath
can be made equivariant.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be a weak @xmath -moment map. If @xmath then the
corresponding cocycle @xmath is exact, i.e. @xmath for some @xmath . It
follows from Proposition 4.32 that @xmath is equivariant. ∎

### 4.5 Uniqueness of Equivariant Weak Moment Maps

We first recall the results from symplectic geometry without explicit
proof. A proof can be found by setting @xmath (i.e. the symplectic case)
in our more general Theorem 4.37 . A proof can also be found in [ 4 ] .
Let @xmath be a Lie algebra acting on a symplectic manifold @xmath .

###### Proposition 4.34.

If @xmath and @xmath are two equivariant moment maps, then @xmath is in
@xmath .

###### Proof.

For @xmath we have that @xmath since @xmath and @xmath are equivariant.
However, @xmath is a constant function since both @xmath and @xmath are
moment maps. The claim now follows since the Poisson bracket with a
constant function vanishes. ∎

From Proposition 4.34 it immediately follows that

###### Proposition 4.35.

If @xmath then equivariant moment moments are unique.

The following is a generalization of Proposition 4.34 .

###### Proposition 4.36.

If @xmath and @xmath are @xmath -th components of two equivariant weak
moment maps, then @xmath is in @xmath .

###### Proof.

If @xmath and @xmath are equivariant then @xmath . Moreover, @xmath is
closed since both @xmath and @xmath are moment maps. ∎

We now arrive at our generalization of Proposition 4.35 . Let @xmath be
a Lie algebra acting on an @xmath -plectic manifold @xmath .

###### Theorem 4.37.

If @xmath , then equivariant weak @xmath -moment maps are unique. In
particular, if @xmath for all @xmath then equivariant weak moment maps
are unique.

###### Proof.

If @xmath and @xmath are two equivariant weak @xmath -moment maps, then
Proposition 4.36 shows that @xmath is in @xmath .

∎

###### Remark 4.38.

This theorem gives a generalization of the results of Madsen and Swann.
Indeed, by taking @xmath we again arrive at Theorems 3.5 and 3.14 of [
16 ] and [ 16 ] respectively.

## 5 Multisymplectic Symmetries and Conserved Quantities

In this section we give a definition of conserved quantities and
continuous symmetries on multisymplectic manifolds. In symplectic
geometry, the Poisson bracket plays a large role in the discussion of
conserved quantities. To that end, we first generalize the Poisson
bracket to multisymplectic geometry.

### 5.1 A Generalized Poisson Bracket

We first extend the notion of a Hamiltonian @xmath -form to arbitrary
forms of degree @xmath .

###### Definition 5.1.

We call

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the set of Hamiltonian @xmath -forms. For a Hamiltonian @xmath -form
@xmath , we call @xmath a corresponding Hamiltonian @xmath -vector field
(or multivector field if @xmath is not explicit).

We call

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the set of Hamiltonian @xmath -vector fields. We will refer to a
primitive of @xmath as a corresponding Hamiltonian @xmath -form.

Of course, given a Hamiltonian @xmath -form, it does not necessarily
have a unique associated Hamiltonian multivector field. Moreover, a
Hamiltonian @xmath -vector field doesn’t necessarily have a unique
corresponding Hamiltonian @xmath -form. However, the following is clear:

###### Proposition 5.2.

For @xmath , any two of its Hamiltonian @xmath -vector fields differ by
an element in the kernel of @xmath . Conversely, for @xmath , any two of
its Hamiltonian forms differ by a closed form.

Proposition 5.2 motivates consideration of the following spaces. Let
@xmath denote the quotient space of @xmath by elements in the kernel of
@xmath . Let @xmath denote the quotient of @xmath by closed forms. We
let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Similarly, we let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is clear that the map from @xmath to @xmath given by @xmath is a
bijection.

###### Proposition 5.3.

The vector spaces @xmath and @xmath are isomorphic.

Later on, we will see that there are graded Lie brackets on the vector
spaces @xmath and @xmath making them isomorphic as graded Lie algebras.

The next proposition will be used to show that certain statements about
a Hamiltonian form are independent of the choice of the corresponding
Hamiltonian multivector field.

###### Proposition 5.4.

If @xmath is in the kernel of @xmath , then for any @xmath we have
@xmath .

###### Proof.

Since @xmath by definition @xmath . Using equation ( 2.7 ) together with
the fact that @xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

∎

The next proposition shows that, as in symplectic geometry, any
Hamiltonian multivector field preserves @xmath .

###### Proposition 5.5.

For @xmath we have that @xmath for all Hamiltonian multivector fields
@xmath of @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be a Hamiltonian multivector field. We have that

  -- -------- -------- -- --
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --

∎

We now put in a structure analogous to the Poisson bracket in
Hamiltonian mechanics, which has analogous graded properties.

Given @xmath and @xmath , a first attempt would be to define their
generalized bracket to be

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

mimicking the Poisson bracket in symplectic geometry. However, we can
see right away that this bracket is not graded anti-commutative since
@xmath . Hence, we modify our grading of the Hamiltonian forms,
following the work done in [ 5 ] .

###### Definition 5.6.

Let @xmath . That is, we are assigning the grading of @xmath to be
@xmath . For @xmath and @xmath (i.e. @xmath and @xmath ) we define their
(generalized) Poisson bracket to be

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Notice that this bracket is well defined follows directly from
Proposition 5.2 .

With this new grading, the generalized Poisson bracket is graded
commutative.

###### Proposition 5.7.

Let @xmath be a form of grading @xmath and @xmath a form of grading
@xmath . That is, @xmath and @xmath . Then we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

By definition,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

∎

The next lemma shows that the bracket of two Hamiltonian forms is
Hamiltonian. In symplectic geometry, we have @xmath (or @xmath if the
defining equation for a Hamiltonian vector field is @xmath ). In
multisymplectic geometry we have

###### Lemma 5.8.

For @xmath and @xmath their bracket @xmath is in @xmath . That is,
@xmath is a Hamiltonian form with grading @xmath . More precisely, we
have that @xmath is a Hamiltonian vector field for @xmath .

###### Proof.

We have that

  -- -------- -------- -- --
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --

∎

We now investigate the Jacobi identity for this bracket. In [ 5 ] it was
mentioned that the graded Jacobi identity holds up to a closed form. We
now show that the graded Jacobi identity holds up to an exact term.

###### Proposition 5.9.

(Graded Jacobi.) Fix @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Let @xmath and @xmath
denote arbitrary Hamiltonian multivector fields for @xmath and @xmath
respectively. Then we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

By definition, we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath is in @xmath , by ( 2.5 ) it follows that

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Thus,

  -- -------- -------- -- --
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --

Hence,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Similarly, since @xmath , we have that

  -- -------- -------- -- --
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --

Hence,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Lastly, using Lemma 5.8 and @xmath , we have that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now we notice that by ( 2.8 ) the terms involving @xmath from ( 5.2 ) ,
@xmath from ( 5.3 ) and @xmath from ( 5.4 ) add to zero. Hence we now
consider the term @xmath from ( 5.4 ). Using equations ( 2.7 ), ( 2.5 ),
and ( 2.6 ) it follows

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Thus

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath            (5.5)
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------

Thus, upon adding ( 5.2 ), ( 5.3 ) and ( 5.5 ) we are left with

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

∎

Summing up the results of this section we have confirmed Theorem 4.1 of
[ 5 ] :

###### Proposition 5.10.

With the above grading, @xmath is a graded Lie algebra.

###### Proof.

The bracket is well defined on @xmath since if @xmath is closed then
@xmath . Clearly the bracket is bilinear. Proposition 5.7 shows that the
bracket is skew graded and Proposition 5.9 shows that it satisfies the
Jacobi identity. ∎

### 5.2 Conserved Quantities and their Algebraic Structure

We now turn our attention towards conserved quantities. In symplectic
geometry, a conserved quantity is a @xmath -form @xmath that is
preserved by the Hamiltonian, i.e. satisfying @xmath . A generalization
of this definition to multisymplectic geometry was given in [ 20 ] ;
however, we add the requirement that a conserved quantity is also
Hamiltonian. By adding in this requirement, we can now take the
generalized Poisson bracket of two conserved quantities, as in
symplectic geometry.

We work with a fixed multi-Hamiltonian system @xmath with @xmath and
@xmath , and let @xmath denote the corresponding Hamiltonian vector
field.

###### Definition 5.11.

A Hamiltonian @xmath -form @xmath in @xmath is called

-   locally conserved if @xmath is closed,

-   globally conserved if @xmath is exact,

-   strictly conserved if @xmath .

As in [ 20 ] , we denote the space of locally, globally, and strictly
conserved forms by @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath respectively. We will
let @xmath , @xmath and @xmath denote the conserved quantities modulo
closed forms. Note that @xmath and @xmath .

The next lemma is a generalization of Lemma 1.7 in [ 20 ] .

###### Lemma 5.12.

Fix a Hamiltonian @xmath -form @xmath . If @xmath is a local conserved
quantity then @xmath , for some (or equivalently every) Hamiltonian
multivector field @xmath of @xmath . Conversely, if @xmath then @xmath
is locally conserved.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be an arbitrary Hamiltonian multivector field of @xmath . We
have that

  -- -------- -------- -- --
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --

∎

Recall the following standard result from Hamiltonian mechanics: If
@xmath is a Hamiltonian on a symplectic manifold and @xmath and @xmath
are two strictly conserved quantities, i.e. @xmath , then @xmath is
strictly conserved. This is because @xmath by the Jacobi identity.
Moreover, if @xmath and @xmath are local or global conserved quantities
(meaning that their bracket with @xmath is constant) then again @xmath
is strictly conserved by the Jacobi identity together with the fact that
the Poisson bracket with a constant function vanishes.

The next proposition generalizes these results to multisymplectic
geometry.

###### Proposition 5.13.

The bracket of two conserved quantities is a strictly conserved
quantity.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath and @xmath be any two conserved quantities. Let @xmath and
@xmath denote arbitrary Hamiltonian multivector fields corresponding to
@xmath and @xmath respectively. By definition,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

By ( 2.7 ) together with Lemma 5.12 we see that we can commute the Lie
derivative and interior product. Hence,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The claim now follows since @xmath , by Proposition 5.5 . ∎

As a consequence, we obtain:

###### Proposition 5.14.

The spaces @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are graded Lie subalgebras of
@xmath .

###### Proof.

Proposition 5.13 shows that each of these spaces is preserved by the
bracket. The claim now follows from Proposition 5.10 . ∎

We conclude this section by showing that the Hamiltonian forms
constitute an @xmath -subalgebra of the Lie @xmath -algebra of
observables. Moreover, restricting a homotopy moment map to the Lie
kernel gives an @xmath -morphism into this @xmath -algebra:

Let @xmath denote the graded vector space @xmath for @xmath , together
with the maps @xmath from the Lie @xmath -algebra of observables.

###### Theorem 5.15.

The space @xmath is an @xmath -subalgebra of @xmath .

###### Proof.

We note that @xmath preserves @xmath since closed forms are Hamiltonian.
For @xmath , since @xmath vanishes on elements of positive degree we
need only consider

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath are Hamiltonian @xmath -forms. By Lemma 3.8 we see that
@xmath is a Hamiltonian @xmath -form. ∎

###### Proposition 5.16.

The spaces @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are @xmath -subalgebras of
@xmath .

###### Proof.

The proof is analogous to the proof of Proposition 1.15 in [ 20 ] .
Since the proof is short, we include it here. From Theorem 5.15 we see
that each of the spaces @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are closed under
each @xmath . It remains to show that for Hamiltonian @xmath -forms
@xmath which are (locally, globally, strictly) conserved, that @xmath is
(locally, globally, strictly) conserved. Indeed,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using equation ( 2.7 ) together with Lemma 5.12 we see that we can
commute the Lie derivative and interior product. The claim then follows
since @xmath . ∎

### 5.3 Continuous Symmetries and their Algebraic Structure

Fix a multi-Hamiltonian system @xmath . Our motivation for the
definition of a continuous symmetry comes from Hamiltonian mechanics; we
directly generalize the definition. As is the case with conserved
quantities, we define three types of continuous symmetry.

###### Definition 5.17.

We say that a Hamiltonian multivector field @xmath is

-   a local continuous symmetry if @xmath is closed,

-   a global continuous symmetry if @xmath is exact,

-   a strict continuous symmetry if @xmath .

Note that a continuous symmetry automatically preserves @xmath by
Proposition 5.5 . We denote the space of local, global, and strict
continuous symmetries by @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath respectively.
Moreover, we let @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath denote the quotient by the
kernel of @xmath .

We will say that a multivector field @xmath is a weak (local, global,
strict) continuous symmetry if @xmath and @xmath is closed, exact, or
zero respectively. That is, a weak continuous symmetry is not
necessarily Hamiltonian.

###### Proposition 5.18.

We have @xmath is a graded Lie subalgebra of @xmath .

###### Proof.

By equation ( 2.10 ) we see that @xmath . Hence the space of Hamiltonian
multivector fields is closed under the Schouten bracket. ∎

###### Proposition 5.19.

The spaces @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are graded Lie subalgebras of
@xmath .

###### Proof.

We see that each of @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are closed under the
Schouten bracket directly from equations ( 2.6 ) and ( 2.8 ). ∎

The next lemma generalizes Lemma 2.9 (ii) of [ 20 ] .

###### Lemma 5.20.

Let @xmath . If @xmath is a local continuous symmetry, then @xmath .
Conversely, if @xmath and @xmath , then @xmath is a local continuous
symmetry.

###### Proof.

We have that

  -- -------- -------- -- --
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --

∎

Recall that for a group @xmath acting on a manifold @xmath we had
defined in equation @xmath the set @xmath . Proposition 2.15 showed that
@xmath was a graded Lie algebra. We now get the following.

###### Proposition 5.21.

The spaces @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are graded Lie subalgebras of
@xmath .

###### Proof.

By Proposition 5.19 we have that the spaces of symmetries are preserved
by the Schouten bracket. The claim now follows by Proposition 2.15 . ∎

## 6 Noether’s Theorem in Multisymplectic Geometry

In this section we show how Noether’s theorem extends from symplectic to
multisymplectic geometry. To see this generalization explicitly, we
first recall how Noether’s theorem works in symplectic geometry.

### 6.1 Noether’s Theorem in Symplectic Geometry

In this section we briefly recall the notions from symplectic geometry.
More information can be found in [ 9 ] , for example. Let @xmath be a
Hamiltonian system. That is @xmath is symplectic and @xmath is in @xmath
. Noether’s theorem gives a correspondence between symmetries and
conserved quantities. If @xmath is a (local, global) conserved quantity
then @xmath is a (local, global) continuous symmetry. Conversely, if a
vector field @xmath is a (local, global) continuous symmetry, then
@xmath is a (local, global) conserved quantity. Note that in the
symplectic case, local and strict symmetries and conserved quantities
are the same thing.

If @xmath is only a weak (local, global) continuous symmetry, then
@xmath so that by the Cartan formula around each point there is a
neighbourhood @xmath and a function @xmath such that @xmath on @xmath .
This function @xmath is a (local, global) conserved quantity in the
Hamiltonian system @xmath .

If we only consider the symmetries and conserved quantities coming from
a moment map @xmath then, under the assumption of an @xmath -preserving
group action, each symmetry @xmath has corresponding global conserved
quantity @xmath and vice versa.

The rest of this subsection formalizes this, and the following sections
will generalize it to multi-symplectic geometry.

Recall that an equivariant moment map gives a Lie algebra morphism
between @xmath and @xmath .

###### Proposition 6.1.

Let @xmath be a momentum map. For @xmath we have that @xmath . If the
moment map is equivariant then @xmath .

###### Proof.

See Theorem 4.2.8 of [ 1 ] . ∎

As stated above, it is clear that in the symplectic case @xmath and
@xmath . It is easily verified that the map @xmath is a Lie algebra
morphism from @xmath to @xmath and from @xmath to @xmath . However,
under the quotients this map turns into a Lie algebra isomorphism.

###### Proposition 6.2.

The map @xmath is a Lie algebra isomorphism from @xmath to @xmath and
@xmath to @xmath .

As a consequence of this proposition, we can now see how a momentum map
sets up a Lie algebra isomorphism between the symmetries and conserved
quantities it generates. Let @xmath and @xmath . Let @xmath be the
quotient of @xmath by constant functions. Let @xmath denote the quotient
of @xmath by the kernel of @xmath . Since the kernel of @xmath is
trivial, @xmath . Then we get an induced well defined Poisson bracket on
@xmath and an induced well defined Lie bracket on @xmath . We thus get a
Lie algebra isomorphism:

###### Proposition 6.3.

The map between @xmath and @xmath that sends @xmath to @xmath is a
Lie-algebra isomorphism.

With our newly defined notions of symmetry and conserved quantity on a
multisympletic manifold, we now exhibit how these concepts generalize to
the setup of multisymplectic geometry.

### 6.2 The Correspondence between Mutlisymplectic Conserved Quantities
and Continuous Symmetries

We first examine the correspondence between symmetries and conserved
quantities on multi-Hamiltonian systems. We will make repeated use of
the following equations. Fix @xmath . By definition we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

But we also know that @xmath , since @xmath . Thus, by definition of the
Poisson bracket and equation ( 2.5 ) we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Putting these together we obtain

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

###### Theorem 6.4.

If @xmath is a (local, global) conserved quantity then any corresponding
Hamiltonian @xmath -vector field is a (local, global) continuous
symmetry. Conversely, if @xmath is a (local, global) continuous
symmetry, then any corresponding Hamiltonian form is a (local, global)
conserved quantity.

###### Proof.

Consider @xmath . Let @xmath be an arbitrary Hamiltonian multivector
field. Then, by equation ( 6.1 ) we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus, if @xmath is a (local or global) conserved quantity then @xmath is
a (local or global) continuous symmetry.

Conversely, suppose that @xmath is a (local or global) continuous
symmetry and let @xmath be a corresponding Hamiltonian form. Following
the same argument above, we have by equation ( 6.2 )

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

∎

The correspondence between strictly conserved quantities and strict
continuous symmetries is a little bit different. We have that

###### Corollary 6.5.

If @xmath is a strictly conserved quantity then @xmath is a global
continuous symmetry. Conversely, if @xmath is a strict continuous
symmetry then the corresponding Hamiltonian @xmath -form @xmath is a
global conserved quantity.

###### Proof.

This follows from the proof of the above theorem. ∎

###### Remark 6.6.

If we were to consider weak continuous symmetries in the above theorem,
then by the Poincaré lemma, a continuous symmetry would still give a
conserved quantity, but only in a neighbourhood around each point of the
manifold.

The following simple example exhibits the correspondence.

###### Example 6.7.

Consider @xmath with volume form @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Then
@xmath so that @xmath . Also, @xmath and so @xmath . By the Cartan
formula, we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which means that @xmath . We also have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

That is, @xmath . Thus @xmath is a global conserved quantity and @xmath
is a global continuous symmetry.

### 6.3 Weak Moment Maps as Morphisms

We work with a fixed multi-Hamiltonian system @xmath with acting
symmetry group @xmath . By definition, a moment map is an @xmath
-morphism between the Chevalley-Eilenberg complex and the Lie @xmath
-algebra of observables. Recall that in Section 4 we had defined the
@xmath -algebra @xmath , where @xmath consisted entirely of Hamiltonian
forms: @xmath .

###### Proposition 6.8.

A weak homotopy moment map is an @xmath -morphism from @xmath to @xmath
.

###### Proof.

Equation ( 3.2 ) shows that a homotopy moment map sends each element of
the Lie kernel to a Hamiltonian form. Hence the claim follows from
Proposition 2.14 and Theorem 5.15 . ∎

Next we study how a weak homotopy moment map interacts with the
generalized Poisson bracket on the space of Hamiltonian forms. In
particular, to make a connection with Proposition 6.1 from symplectic
geometry, we compare the difference of @xmath and @xmath .

Let @xmath be a Lie group acting on a multi-Hamiltonian system @xmath .
Let @xmath be a weak homotopy moment map. By equation ( 3.2 ) we see
that under this restriction the image of the moment map is contained in
the @xmath -algebra @xmath of Hamiltonian forms. Moreover, we obtain
that every element in the image is a conserved quantity. This was one of
the main points of [ 20 ] . Indeed, in [ 20 ] Propositions 2.12 and 2.21
say:

###### Proposition 6.9.

If the group locally or globally preserves @xmath , then @xmath is a
local conserved quantity for all @xmath . If the group strictly
preserves @xmath then @xmath is a globally conserved quantity for all
@xmath .

Thus, by restricting a homotopy moment map to the Lie kernel, we see
that, under assumptions on the group action, every element is a
conserved quantity, analogous to the setup in symplectic geometry.

As a consequence of Theorem 6.4 we see that the moment map also gives a
family of continuous symmetries.

###### Proposition 6.10.

If the group locally or globally preserves @xmath , then @xmath is a
local continuous symmetry for all @xmath . If the group strictly
preserves @xmath then @xmath is a global continuous symmetry for all
@xmath .

###### Example 6.11.

(Motion in a conservative system under translation)

Recall that in Example 3.17 we considered the translation action of
@xmath on @xmath where @xmath , @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath are the standard coordinates on @xmath
and @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath are the induced
coordinates on @xmath . It is easy to check that each of @xmath are
exact for @xmath . That is, the group action globally preserves @xmath .
Hence, by Proposition 6.9 each of the differential forms, computed in
Example 3.17 ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

are all globally conserved. Thus, by Example 3.17 , the Lie derivative
of these differential forms by the geodesic spray are all exact.

Moreover, by Proposition 6.10 , each of @xmath and @xmath are global
continuous symmetries in this multi-Hamiltonian system.

###### Proposition 6.12.

Let @xmath and @xmath be arbitrary. Set @xmath and @xmath . Then we have
that @xmath is a Hamiltonian multivector field for @xmath .

###### Proof.

By definition of the moment map (equation ( 3.2 )) we have that @xmath
and @xmath are in the kernel of @xmath . Hence, by Proposition 5.4 we
have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proposition 5.4 also shows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The claim now follows from Proposition 5.8 . ∎

Our generalization of Proposition 6.1 to multisymplectic geometry is:

###### Proposition 6.13.

For @xmath and @xmath we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a closed @xmath -form.

###### Proof.

By definition of a homotopy moment map (equation ( 3.10 )) we have that

  -- -------- -------- -- --
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --

∎

From this proposition we see that a moment map does not necessarily
preserve brackets; however, we now show that once we pass to certain
cohomology groups then it will. Moreover, the moment map will give an
isomorphism of graded Lie algebras, generalizing Proposition 6.3 .
Recall that we had defined @xmath to be the quotient of @xmath by the
kernel of @xmath restricted to @xmath . We set @xmath .

###### Proposition 6.14.

The Schouten bracket on @xmath descends to a well defined bracket on
@xmath .

###### Proof.

This follows directly from Proposition 5.4 . ∎

Similarily, we let @xmath denote the quotient of @xmath by the closed
forms of degree @xmath and set @xmath . Recall that Proposition 5.10
showed that @xmath was a well defined graded Lie algebra.

###### Theorem 6.15.

The map @xmath is a graded Lie algebra isomorphism from @xmath to @xmath
.

###### Proof.

The map is well defined since the Hamiltonian multivector field of a
closed form is the zero vector field. The map is clearly surjective. It
is injective since if @xmath then @xmath . Lastly, by Lemma 5.8 , we
have that @xmath in the quotient space. ∎

We have now obtained a generalization of Proposition 6.2 from symplectic
geometry.

###### Corollary 6.16.

The map @xmath is a graded Lie algebra isomorphism from @xmath to @xmath
and from @xmath to @xmath .

###### Proof.

We know from Proposition 5.13 that each of the spaces of conserved
quantities are closed under the Poisson bracket. Similarly, by
Proposition 5.19 , the spaces of continuous symmetries are all closed
under the Schouten bracket. The claim now follows from Theorem 6.15 . ∎

We now give a generalization of Proposition 6.3 to multisymplectic
geometry: We let @xmath denote the image of the Lie kernel under the
moment map. That is, let @xmath . Let @xmath denote the quotient of
@xmath by closed forms and set @xmath . Recall that we had defined
@xmath to be the set @xmath . Let @xmath denote the quotient of @xmath
by elements in the Lie kernel and set @xmath . Our generalization of
Proposition 6.3 is given by the following corollaries.

###### Corollary 6.17.

For an @xmath -preserving group action, a momentum map induces an @xmath
-algebra morphism from @xmath to @xmath given by @xmath .

###### Proof.

We see by Proposition 6.13 that the Poisson bracket preserves @xmath .
The claim follows since by definition a homotopy moment map is an @xmath
-morphism. ∎

###### Corollary 6.18.

For an @xmath -preserving group action, an equivariant homotopy moment
map induces an isomorphism of graded Lie algebras between @xmath and
@xmath . Explicitly, the map is given by @xmath .

###### Proof.

The Lie algebra isomorphism given in Theorem 6.15 is precisely the
moment map. Indeed, if @xmath for @xmath , then @xmath in @xmath , since
both are Hamiltonian vector fields for @xmath . Proposition 6.13 now
shows that the moment map preserves the Lie brackets on these quotient
spaces.

∎

The morphism properties of a weak moment map are also related to its
equivariance. Recall that for a symplectic action of a connected Lie
group @xmath acting on a symplectic manifold @xmath and a moment map,
@xmath , then by Definition 4.14 , @xmath is equivariant if and only if
@xmath is a Lie algebra morphism from @xmath to @xmath . That is, if and
only if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Taking @xmath of both sides of this equation yields:

###### Proposition 6.19.

A moment map @xmath induces a morphism from @xmath onto the quotient of
@xmath by constant functions. That is, a moment map induces a Lie
algebra morphism from @xmath to @xmath , regardless of equivariance.
Moreover, the moment map @xmath is equivariant if and only if @xmath is
a morphism from @xmath to @xmath .

We now restate Proposition 6.19 in an equivalent way, but which will
allow for a direct generalization to multisymplectic geometry: Notice
that @xmath is a @xmath -module under the Lie bracket action and @xmath
is @xmath -module under the action @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath .
Proposition 6.19 is equivalent to:

###### Proposition 6.20.

A moment map @xmath always induces a @xmath -module morphism from @xmath
to @xmath . Moreover, the moment map @xmath is equivariant if and only
if it is a @xmath -module morphism from @xmath to @xmath .

Now let a connected Lie group @xmath act multisymplectically on an
@xmath -plectic manifold @xmath .

###### Proposition 6.21.

For any @xmath , we have that @xmath is a @xmath -module under the
action @xmath , where @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath is the Schouten
bracket.

###### Proof.

This follows since Lemma 2.13 shows that @xmath is in the Lie kernel. ∎

###### Proposition 6.22.

For any @xmath , we have that @xmath is a @xmath -module under the
action @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath .

###### Proof.

Suppose that @xmath is a Hamiltonian @xmath -form. Then @xmath for some
@xmath . Then, for @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -- --
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --

Hence @xmath is in @xmath .

∎

Our generalization of Proposition 6.20 to multisymplectic geometry is:

###### Theorem 6.23.

For any @xmath , the @xmath -th component of a moment map @xmath is a
@xmath -module morphism from @xmath to @xmath . Moreover, a weak @xmath
-moment map @xmath is equivariant if and only if it is a @xmath -module
morphism from @xmath to @xmath .

###### Proof.

Suppose that @xmath is a weak moment map. Then, by definition

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

This proves the first statement of the theorem. Now suppose @xmath is
equivariant. It follows that @xmath . Thus, by Proposition 4.15 we have
@xmath . Conversely, if @xmath is a @xmath -module morphism, that @xmath
for every @xmath and @xmath . That is, @xmath . ∎

## 7 Applications

We first apply the generalized Poisson bracket to extend the theory of
the classical momentum and position functions on the phase space of a
manifold to the multisymplectic phase space.

### 7.1 Classical Multisymplectic Momentum and Position Forms

Recall the following notions from Hamiltonian mechanics:

Let @xmath be a manifold and @xmath the canonical phase space. Given a
group action on @xmath we can extend this to a group action on @xmath
that preserves both tautological forms @xmath and @xmath . It is easy to
check that a moment map for this action is given by @xmath . From this
moment map we can introduce the classical momentum and position
functions, as discussed in Propositions 4.2.12 and 5.4.4 of [ 1 ] .
Given @xmath , its classical momentum function is @xmath defined by
@xmath . Corollary 4.2.11 of [ 1 ] then shows that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Next, given @xmath define @xmath by @xmath . The function @xmath is
referred to as the corresponding position function. The following
Poisson bracket relations between the momentum and position functions
are then obtained in Proposition 4.2.12 of [ 1 ] :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

These bracket relations are the starting point for obtaining a quantum
system from a classical system.

###### Remark 7.1.

In [ 1 ] their first bracket relation actually reads @xmath . This is
because their defining equation for a Hamiltonian vector field is @xmath
, as compared to our @xmath .

The goal of this subsection is to show how these concepts generalize to
the multisymplectic phase space. The results we obtain are all new. As
in Example 3.2 , let @xmath be a manifold and @xmath the multisymplectic
phase space. That is, @xmath and @xmath is the canonical @xmath -form on
@xmath . Let @xmath denote the projection map. In Example 3.13 we showed
that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

was a weak homotopy moment map for the action on @xmath induced from the
action on @xmath .

###### Definition 7.2.

Given decomposable @xmath in @xmath we define its momentum form @xmath
by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is in @xmath , and then extend by linearity to
non-decomposables. Moreover, given @xmath , we define the corresponding
position form to be @xmath , a @xmath -form on @xmath . Notice that in
symplectic case ( @xmath ) these definitions coincide with the classical
momentum and position functions.

###### Definition 7.3.

Given a vector field @xmath with flow @xmath , the complete lift of
@xmath is the vector field @xmath whose flow is @xmath . For a
decomposable multivector field @xmath we define its complete lift @xmath
to be @xmath and then extend by linearity.

For @xmath , let @xmath denote its infinitesimal generator on @xmath and
let @xmath denote its infinitesimal generator on @xmath . Similarly, for
@xmath in @xmath let @xmath denote @xmath and @xmath denote @xmath .
Notice that by definition, we are not abusing notation by letting @xmath
denote both the complete lift of @xmath and the infinitesimal generator
of @xmath under the induced action on @xmath .

Lastly, note that by the equivariance of @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We now examine the bracket relations between our momentum and position
forms. We first rewrite the momentum form in a different way:

###### Proposition 7.4.

For @xmath we have that @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be an arbitrary decomposable element of @xmath . Let @xmath
be arbitrary vector fields on @xmath . Fix @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

∎

As a corollary to the above proposition, we obtain a generalization of (
7.1 ) to multisymplectic geometry:

###### Corollary 7.5.

For @xmath in @xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

This follows immediately from Proposition 7.4 since @xmath is the
infinitesimal generator of @xmath on @xmath . ∎

In the symplectic case, given @xmath the complete lift @xmath preserves
the tautological forms @xmath and @xmath . Hence @xmath , showing that
each momentum function is Hamiltonian with Hamiltonian vector field the
complete lift of the base vector field.

In the multisymplectic case, it is no longer true that @xmath for a
multivector field @xmath . Instead, we need to restrict our attention to
multivector fields in the Lie kernel, which we defined in Definition
2.12 . We quickly recall this definition and some terminology and
notation introduced in [ 16 ] .

Any degree @xmath -multivector field is a sum of multivectors of the
form @xmath . We consider the differential graded Lie algebra @xmath
where @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As in [ 16 ] , for a differential form @xmath , let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A more general version of Lemma 2.16 is given by Lemma 3.4 of [ 16 ] :

###### Lemma 7.6.

For a differential form @xmath and @xmath we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Definition 7.7.

As in Definition 2.12 , we call @xmath the @xmath -th Lie kernel.

###### Proposition 7.8.

For an @xmath -multivector field in the Lie kernel, @xmath , we have
that @xmath is in @xmath . More precisely, @xmath is a Hamiltonian
multivector field for @xmath .

###### Proof.

Abusing notation, let @xmath denote the differential on both @xmath and
@xmath . By definition, we have @xmath . It follows that @xmath . Now,
since the action on @xmath preserves @xmath , we have that @xmath .
Thus, by Proposition 7.4 and Lemma 7.6 , we have that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where in the last equality we used Remark 3.7 . ∎

###### Remark 7.9.

In the setup of classical Hamiltonian mechanics, the phase space of
@xmath is just @xmath , and so @xmath . Since @xmath we see that we are
obtaining a generalization from Hamiltonian mechanics.

We now arrive at our generalization of equation ( 7.2 ):

###### Proposition 7.10.

For @xmath and @xmath we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Using Proposition 7.8 , Remark 3.7 and the definition of the bracket, we
have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath            (7.5)
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------

On the other hand, by Proposition 7.4 and Remark 3.7 we have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

By Proposition 7.8 and Remark 3.7 we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By equation ( 2.10 ) we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and using the two equations above, this is equal to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Simplifying this equation we obtain that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Equating equations ( 7.5 ) and ( 7.6 ) and using Remark 3.7 gives the
result. ∎

To generalize ( 7.3 ) and ( 7.4 ) to the multisymplectic phase space, we
need the following lemma:

###### Lemma 7.11.

Let @xmath be an arbitrary @xmath -form on @xmath and let @xmath be the
corresponding classical position form in @xmath . Then @xmath is
Hamiltonian and @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath denote coordinates on @xmath , and let @xmath denote the
induced fibre coordinates on @xmath . In these coordinates we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

An arbitrary @xmath -form @xmath on @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Abusing notation, it follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

An arbitrary @xmath -vector field on @xmath is of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now, the multivector field @xmath we are looking for satisfies @xmath .
An exercise in combinatorics shows that there always exists an @xmath
-vector field @xmath satisfying @xmath , proving that @xmath is
Hamiltonian. Note we can see directly from the equality @xmath that
necessarily

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus @xmath as desired.

∎

Our generalization of ( 7.3 ) is:

###### Proposition 7.12.

For @xmath and @xmath we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be arbitrary. Then,

  -- -------- -------- -- --
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --

∎

Our generalization of ( 7.4 ) is:

###### Proposition 7.13.

For @xmath and @xmath , we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be arbitrary. Then,

  -- -------- -------- -- --
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --

∎

### 7.2 Closed @xmath Structures

We first recall the standard @xmath structure on @xmath . More details
for the material in this section can be found in [ 12 ] . Let @xmath
denote the standard coordinates on @xmath and consider the @xmath -form
@xmath defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we have omitted the wedge product signs. The stabilizer of this
@xmath -form is given by the Lie group @xmath . For an arbitrary @xmath
-manifold we define a @xmath structure to be a @xmath -form @xmath which
has around every point @xmath local coordinates with @xmath , at the
point @xmath .

The @xmath -form induces a unique metric @xmath and volume form, vol,
determined by the equation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

From the volume form we get the Hodge star operator and hence a @xmath
-form @xmath . We will refer to the data @xmath as a manifold with
@xmath structure. We remark that the @xmath form @xmath is more than
just non-degenerate:

###### Proposition 7.14.

The @xmath form @xmath is fully nondegenerate. This means that @xmath is
non-zero whenever @xmath and @xmath are linearly independent.

###### Proof.

See Theorem 2.2 of [ 16 ] . ∎

For the rest of this section we assume that @xmath . We now briefly
recall some first order differential operators on a @xmath manifold,
while refering the reader to section 4 of [ 14 ] for more details. Given
@xmath we will let @xmath denote the metric dual one form @xmath .
Conversely, given @xmath , let @xmath denote the metric dual vector
field. Recall that given @xmath its gradient is defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

From the metric and the three form we can define the cross product of
two vector fields. Given @xmath the cross product @xmath is defined by
the equation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Equivalently, the cross product is defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In coordinates, this says that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

The last differential operator we will consider is the curl of a vector
field. We first need to recall the following decomposition of two forms
on a @xmath manifold.

###### Proposition 7.15.

The space of @xmath -forms on a @xmath manifold has the @xmath
irreducible decomposition

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The projection maps: @xmath and @xmath are given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

###### Proof.

See Section 2.2 of [ 13 ] . ∎

We can now define the curl of a vector field. Given @xmath its curl is
defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is equivalent to saying that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

In coordinates,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Levi-Civita connection corresponding to @xmath .
This is reminiscent of the fact that in @xmath the curl is given by the
cross product of @xmath with @xmath . Again, we refer the reader to
Section 4.1 of [ 14 ] for more details.

We now translate our definition of Hamiltonian forms and vector fields
into the language of @xmath geometry. By definition, we see that a
@xmath -form is Hamiltonian if and only if its differential is in @xmath
. That is,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Similarly,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that if @xmath is compact, then it follows from ( 7.8 ) and Hodge
theory that there are no non-zero Hamiltonian @xmath -forms.

###### Proposition 7.16.

If @xmath is a Hamiltonian @xmath -form then its corresponding
Hamiltonian vector field is @xmath .

###### Proof.

Since a Hamiltonian @xmath -form satisfies @xmath , this follows
immediately from equation ( 7.11 ). ∎

From Proposition 7.16 and equation ( 7.7 ) we see that the generalized
Poisson bracket is given by the cross product:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

for @xmath .

Proposition 5.5 showed that a Hamiltonian vector field preserves the
@xmath -plectic form. In the language of @xmath geometry this gives:

###### Proposition 7.17.

Given @xmath with @xmath , the curl of @xmath preserves the @xmath
structure. That is,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

This follows immediately from Propositions 7.16 and 5.5 . ∎

As a consequence of Proposition 5.8 , we get the following:

###### Proposition 7.18.

Let @xmath and @xmath be in @xmath with @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Moreover,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

By equation ( 7.13 ) and Lemma 5.8 we see that @xmath . Thus, @xmath is
in @xmath , showing that @xmath Moreover, we have that

  -- -------- -------- -- --
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --

The proposition now follows since @xmath is non-degenerate. ∎

We now consider the definition of a homotopy moment map in the setting
of a @xmath manifold. The equations defining the components of a
homotopy moment map, i.e. ( 3.2 ), reduce to finding functions @xmath
and @xmath satisfying

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

We finish this section by computing a homotopy moment map in the
following set up, extending Example 6.7 of [ 16 ] .

Consider @xmath with standard @xmath -form given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In terms of @xmath this is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we have omitted the wedge signs. Equivalently,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the standard holomorphic volume and @xmath is the
standard Kahler form on @xmath . That is, @xmath and @xmath .

As in Examples 3.15 and 3.16 we consider the standard action by the
diagonal maximal torus @xmath given by @xmath . We have @xmath and that
the infinitesimal generators of @xmath and @xmath are

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

respectively.

By Example 3.15 it follows that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Similarly,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

give the first component of a homotopy moment map. Plugging in @xmath
and @xmath into ( 7.9 ) shows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Moreover, using ( 7.12 ) one can directly verify that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

confirming ( 7.14 ).

Using Example 3.16 it follows that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Thus the second component of the homotopy moment map is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

in accordance with Example 6.7 of [ 16 ] . Written out in the
coordinates @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
the infinitesimal vector fields coming from the torus action are

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using the metric to identify @xmath -forms and vector fields, equation (
7.7 ) gives the cross product of @xmath and @xmath to be

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

confirming equation ( 7.15 ). We thus have extended Example 6.7 of [ 16
] by obtaining a full homotopy moment map for the diagonal torus action
on @xmath with the standard torsion-free @xmath structure.

## 8 Concluding Remarks

This work poses many natural questions for future research. The
following are just a few ideas:

1.  In our work, we provided a few examples of multi-Hamiltonian
    systems. What are some examples of other physical or interesting
    multi-Hamiltonian systems to which this work could be applied?

2.  In Section 6.1 we generalized the classical momentum and position
    functions on the phase space of a manifold to momentum and position
    forms on the multisymplectic phase space. Since, as discussed in [ 1
    ] , the classical momentum and position functions play an important
    role in connecting classical and quantum mechanics, a natural
    question is if there is an analogous application of our more general
    theory to quantum mechanics?

3.  In symplectic geometry, Proposition 4.13 shows that a moment map
    @xmath induces a Lie algebra morphism from @xmath to the quotient
    space @xmath , and if @xmath is equivariant then it is a Lie algebra
    morphism from @xmath to @xmath . Moreover, Proposition 4.10 showed
    that both @xmath and @xmath are graded Lie algebras while
    Proposition 5.9 showed that a weak homotopy moment map is always a
    graded Lie algebra morphism from @xmath to @xmath .

    Hence, a natural question is:

    If @xmath is an equivariant weak moment map, does it induce a graded
    Lie algebra morphism from @xmath to @xmath ? Does the converse hold?

4.  In our work, we provided a couple of examples of @xmath -plectic
    group actions to which our theory of the existence and uniqueness of
    moment maps could be applied. There are many other interesting
    @xmath -plectic geometries; see for example [ 3 ] , [ 9 ] and [ 20 ]
    . What does the work done in this thesis say about the existence and
    uniqueness of moment maps in these setups?

5.  Given a weak moment map @xmath with @xmath , does there exists a
    full homotopy moment map @xmath whose restriction to the Lie kernel
    is @xmath ? Moreover, in [ 7 ] an interpretation of homotopy moment
    maps was given in terms of equivariant cohomology. Is there an
    analogous interpretation for weak moment maps?