This thesis is devoted to various questions connected with duality. It
is composed of two parts.

The first part discusses some aspects of timelike T-duality. We explore
the possibility of compactification of supergravity theories with
various signatures (low energy limit of @xmath -theories which are dual
under timelike T-dualities) on parallelizable internal seven dimensional
(pseudo-)spheres. We show that, beside the standard theory, only one of
the dual theories known as @xmath -theory can admit such a solution. The
effective four dimensional theory is non-supersymmetric and due to the
presence of torsion the symmetry of seven dimensional (pseudo-)sphere
breaks down to @xmath .

In the second part, in an attempt to have a systematic discussion of
gaugings in supergravity, we show the isomorphism between the space of
local deformations of the appropriate zero coupling limit of the
embedding tensor Lagrangian and that of the second-order scalar-vector
Lagrangian, describing the bosonic sector of supergravity ignoring
gravity, in a chosen duality frame determined by embedding tensors. We
analyze the BV-BRST deformation of a class of scalar-vector coupled
Lagrangians, which contains supergravity Lagrangians as examples, and
find a set of constraints that guarantee the consistency of the
deformations of the Lagrangians. We show in principle that for a large
class of theories considered in this thesis, the only deformations are
those of the Yang-Mills type associated with a subgroup of the rigid
symmetries.

\deffootnote

1em0em \thefootnotemark \department Physique Mathématique des
Interactions Fondamentales \degree Docteur en Sciences \advisor
Supervisor: Prof. Marc Henneaux
Co-Supervisor: Prof. Jorge Zanelli \degreedate Bruxelles 2018

The thesis has been discussed privately on June 6, 2018 in front of the
jury including the following members:

-   Professor Riccardo Argurio (ULB)

-   Professor Glenn Barnich, President of jury (ULB)

-   Professor Andrès Collinucci, Secretary of jury (ULB)

-   Professor Joaquim Gomis (University of Barcelona)

-   Professor Marc Henneaux, Supervisor (ULB)

-   Professor Jorge Zanelli (Centro de Estudios Científicos (CECs),
    Chile)

The public presentation has been held on July 11, 2018 in front of the
aforementioned jury and public audience.

The research of the author during the academic years 2013-2016 was
partially supported by Centro de Estudios Científicos (CECs). The Centro
de Estudios Científicos (CECs) is funded by the Chilean Government
through the Centers of Excellence Base Financing Program of
CONICYT-Chile.

The author’s work during the academic years 2014-2018 was partially
supported by the ERC Advanced Grant “High-Spin-Grav” and by FNRS-Belgium
(convention FRFC PDR T.1025.14 and convention IIS N 4.4503.15).

This thesis has been written using the style ociamthesis which has been
modified by the author in order to fit the specific feature required for
its presentation.
