The digital telecommunications receiver is an important context for
inference methodology, the key objective being to minimize the expected
loss function in recovering the transmitted information. For that
criterion, the optimal decision is the Bayesian minimum-risk estimator.
However, the computational load of the Bayesian estimator is often
prohibitive and, hence, efficient computational schemes are required.
The design of novel schemes—striking new balances between accuracy and
computational load—is the primary concern of this thesis.

Because Bayesian methodology seeks to construct the joint distribution
of all uncertain parameters in a hierarchial manner, its computational
complexity is often prohibitive. A solution for efficient computation is
to re-factorize this joint model into an appropriate conditionally
independent (CI) structure, whose factors are Markov models of
appropriate order. By tuning the order from maximum to minimum, this
Markov factorization is applicable to all parametric models. The
associated computational complexity ranges from prohibitive to minimal.
For efficient Bayesian computation, two popular techniques, one exact
and one approximate, will be studied in this thesis, as described next.

The exact scheme is a recursive one, namely the generalized distributive
law (GDL), whose purpose is to distribute all operators across the CI
factors of the joint model, so as to reduce the total number of
operators required. In a novel theorem derived in this thesis, GDL—if
applicable—will be shown to guarantee such a reduction in all cases. An
associated lemma also quantifies this reduction. For practical use, two
novel algorithms, namely the no-longer-needed (NLN) algorithm and the
generalized form of the Forward-Backward (FB) algorithm, recursively
factorizes and computes the CI factors of an arbitrary model,
respectively.

The approximate scheme is an iterative one, namely the Variational Bayes
(VB) approximation, whose purpose is to find the independent (i.e.
zero-order Markov) model closest to the true joint model in the minimum
Kullback-Leibler divergence (KLD) sense. Despite being computationally
efficient, this naive mean field approximation confers only modest
performance for highly correlated models. A novel approximation, namely
Transformed Variational Bayes (TVB), will be designed in the thesis in
order to relax the zero-order constraint in the VB approximation,
further reducing the KLD of the optimal approximation.

Together, the GDL and VB schemes are able to provide a range of
trade-offs between accuracy and speed in digital receivers. Two
demodulation problems in digital receivers will be considered in this
thesis, the first being a Markov-based symbol detector, and the second
being a frequency estimator for synchronization. The first problem will
be solved using a novel accelerated scheme for VB inference of a hidden
Markov chain (HMC). When applied to weakly correlated M-state HMCs with
n samples, this accelerated scheme reduces the computational load from
@xmath in the state-of-the-art Viterbi algorithm to @xmath , with
comparable accuracy. The second problem is addressed via the TVB
approximation. Although its performance is only modest in simulation, it
nevertheless opens up new opportunities for approximate Bayesian
inference to address high Quality-of-Service (QoS) tasks in 4G mobile
networks.
