## 1 Introduction

Roughly, the goal of noncommutative projective geometry is to use
techniques and intuition from commutative geometry to study
noncommutative algebras. A major current goal of noncommutative geometry
is the classification of noncommutative projective surfaces; in the
language of algebras, a classification of connected graded domains of
GK-dimension 3. Within this, a major target is a classification of
algebras birational to the Sklyanin algebra. This problem provides the
main motivation of our work. In this introduction we will first present
our main results and then describe the role they play in the problem
mentioned above.

### 1.1 First definitions

First, as always, we need to get some basic definitions and formalities
out of the way. We note that the terms appearing below are given a
proper introduction in section 2 .

Fix an algebraically closed field @xmath . Let @xmath be an @xmath
-graded @xmath -algebra and a domain. We call @xmath connected graded
(cg) if @xmath and @xmath for all @xmath . Almost all algebras
considered will be cg domains of finite Gelfand Kirillov dimension
(defined in Notation 2.9 ). In particular we assume this for the next
few definitions.

The algebra @xmath sits inside its graded quotient ring , @xmath ,
formed by inverting the Ore set of all nonzero homogenous elements. The
division ring @xmath , will be called the noncommutative function field
of @xmath . If @xmath is another cg domain with @xmath , then @xmath and
@xmath are called equivalent orders if there exist nonzero elements
@xmath such that @xmath and @xmath . We call @xmath a maximal order if
there is no equivalent order @xmath to @xmath such that @xmath . Let
@xmath be another algebra such that @xmath . We call @xmath a a maximal
@xmath -order if there exists no graded equivalent order @xmath to
@xmath such that @xmath . Given @xmath , the @xmath -Veronese of @xmath
is the subring @xmath . It is (usually) given the grading @xmath .

A construction that plays a fundamental role in our work, and in general
noncommutative geometry, is that of a twisted homogenous coordinate
ring. Fix a projective scheme @xmath . Let @xmath be an invertible sheaf
on @xmath with global sections @xmath , and let @xmath be an
automorphism of @xmath . Write @xmath for the pullback sheaf @xmath .
Set @xmath and @xmath for @xmath . We define @xmath . There is a natural
ring structure on @xmath and we call it a twisted homogenous coordinate
ring .

Our results regard certain subalgebras of the Sklyanin algebra, which we
now define. Let @xmath , then we set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Provided @xmath are general enough (see Definition 2.43 ), then @xmath
has a central element @xmath , unique up to scalar multiplication and
such that @xmath . Here @xmath is a nonsingular elliptic curve, @xmath
is an invertible sheaf of degree 3, and @xmath is an automorphism of
@xmath . We call such @xmath a Sklyanin algebra .

### 1.2 The main results

The results of this thesis are analogous to those of [ 27 , 30 ]
described in Section 2.6 and Section 2.7 , where the authors tackled
similar problems inside the 3-Veronese subring @xmath of @xmath . Here,
as in [ 27 , 30 ] , our results concern certain blowup subalgebras and
virtual blowup subalgebras of @xmath at effective and so-called
virtually effective divisors on @xmath . Our assumption throughout is
Hypothesis 1.1 .

###### Hypothesis 1.1 (Standing Assumption).

Fix an algebraically closed field @xmath . Fix a 3 dimensional Sklyanin
algebra @xmath . Let @xmath be such that @xmath , where @xmath is a
smooth elliptic curve, @xmath an invertible sheaf on @xmath with @xmath
and @xmath an automorphism of @xmath . Assume that @xmath is of infinite
order.

Before presenting our results we set some notation as standard.

###### Notation 1.2.

n]x@ @xmath Given a subset @xmath , we write @xmath . Similarly for
@xmath , @xmath will denote its image in @xmath .

###### Definition 1.3 (Definition 4.1 and Definition 4.5).

n]sd@ @xmath Let @xmath be an effective divisor on @xmath with @xmath .
For @xmath , put

-   @xmath ,

-   @xmath ,

-   @xmath .

We define the blowup of @xmath at @xmath to be the subalgebra of @xmath
generated by @xmath , @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.3.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

When @xmath is a single point, ( 1.3.1 ) is an overkill and in fact
@xmath is generated in degree 1. The ring @xmath was studied in by
Rogalski, and proved to be the only degree 1 generated maximal order
inside @xmath . When @xmath is two points Definition 1.3 is both new,
and harder to understand than @xmath . The @xmath are the correct
analogue of the blowup subalgebras @xmath of @xmath defined by Rogalski
in [ 27 , Section 1] . The results of Rogalski are reviewed in section 2
along with the other undefined terms below.

###### Theorem 1.4 (Theorem 4.15).

Let @xmath be an effective divisor on @xmath of degree @xmath . Set
@xmath . Then:

1.  @xmath with @xmath . The Hilbert series of @xmath is

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

2.   The 3-Veronese @xmath is a blowup subalgebra of @xmath . More
    specifically

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

3.  @xmath is strongly noetherian meaning that @xmath remains noetherian
    for all commutative noetherian @xmath -algebras @xmath ; @xmath
    satisfies @xmath on the left and right (Definition 2.35 ), has
    cohomological dimension 2, and possesses a balanced dualizing
    complex;

4.  @xmath is Auslander-Gorenstein and Cohen-Macaulay;

5.  @xmath is a maximal order in @xmath .

Theorem 1.4 (3)(4) can be summarised as saying @xmath satisfies some of
the most useful homological properties. We give more details about why
these are desirable properties in Remark 2.60 . Missing from Theorem 1.4
is finite global dimension: Corollary 4.17 shows that this is never
obtained when @xmath . Although not explicit below, obtaining Theorem
1.4 is absolutely essential for the rest of our main results.

For a complete classification of maximal @xmath -orders we need to
introduce virtual blowups at virtually effective divisors. We only
define a virtually effective divisor here. For the purposes of the
introduction one may take the conclusions of Proposition 1.6 as the
definition of a virtual blowup.

###### Definition 1.5.

A divisor @xmath is called virtually effective if for all @xmath , the
divisor @xmath is effective.

###### Proposition 1.6 (Proposition 5.29 and Definition 5.23).

Let @xmath be a virtually effective divisor of degree at most 2. Then
there exists a virtual blowup @xmath . In particular:

1.  @xmath is a maximal order in @xmath and uniquely defines a maximal
    @xmath -order
    @xmath .

2.  @xmath and so @xmath . Moreover, in high degrees @xmath ,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

Despite the current notation, it is unknown whether the algebra @xmath
appearing in Proposition 1.6 is unique for a fixed virtually effective
divisor @xmath . Another unknown is when @xmath holds. We investigate
these problems in Section 5.3 .

The classification of maximal @xmath -orders then goes as follows.

###### Theorem 1.7 (Theorem 6.10).

Let @xmath be a connected graded maximal @xmath -order such that @xmath
. Then there exists a virtually effective divisor @xmath with @xmath ,
and a virtual blowup @xmath , such that @xmath is the unique maximal
order containing @xmath .

The assumption @xmath also appears in Rogalski, Sierra and Stafford’s
classification of maximal @xmath -orders. It is necessary as shown in
Example 7.19 .

Out of proving the above theorems we also obtain many nice properties
for maximal orders. The most striking of these is that we get that
maximal ( @xmath -)orders are noetherian for free.

###### Corollary 1.8 (Corollary 6.13 and Corollary 6.14).

Let @xmath be a cg maximal @xmath -order such that @xmath .
Equivalently, let @xmath for some virtual blowup @xmath at a virtually
effective divisor with @xmath . Then

1.  @xmath and @xmath are strongly noetherian, and are finitely
    generated as @xmath -algebras.

2.  @xmath and @xmath satisfy the Artin-Zhang @xmath conditions, have
    finite cohomological dimension, and possess balanced dualizing
    complexes.

The properties Auslander-Gorenstein and Cohen-Macaulay properties are
missing from Corollary 1.8 . It is shown in Corollary 7.17 that in
general we cannot expect these homological properties.

The ultimate goal of this line of research is to understand connected
graded algebras birational to the Sklyanin algebra. In other words,
algebras @xmath satisfying @xmath ; or equivalently @xmath for some
@xmath . Our results for higher Veroneses are as follows.

###### Theorem 1.9 (Theorem 6.11, Theorem 5.33 and Corollary 6.12).

Let @xmath be a cg maximal @xmath -order with @xmath . Equivalently let
@xmath for a virtual blowup @xmath at a virtually effective divisor with
@xmath . Then for any @xmath , @xmath is a maximal order in @xmath and
@xmath is a maximal @xmath -order.

and conversely . . .

###### Theorem 1.10 (Theorem 6.10).

Let @xmath be coprime to 3 and suppose that @xmath is a cg maximal
@xmath -order satisfying @xmath . Then there exists a virtually
effective divisor @xmath and virtual blowup @xmath such that @xmath .

Retain the notation of Theorem 1.10 . When @xmath is divisible by 3,
@xmath for a virtual blowup @xmath of @xmath . This is a result of
Rogalski, Sierra and Stafford. In contrast, when we prove Theorem 1.9 ,
we also prove the analogous statement for maximal @xmath -orders. This
result is an improvement on [ 30 ] . Out of these results we are able to
obtain the best answer yet to [ 30 , Question 9.4] .

###### Corollary 1.11 (Corollary 6.12).

Let @xmath be a cg graded subalgebra of @xmath satisfying @xmath and
such that @xmath . If @xmath is a maximal order then @xmath is a maximal
order for all @xmath .

A final achievement of this thesis is the explicit construction of a
virtual blowup - a first of its kind.

###### Theorem 1.12 (Theorem 7.1).

Let @xmath and @xmath . We set

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

Put @xmath . Then @xmath is a virtual blowup of @xmath at the virtually
effective divisor @xmath .

What’s curious about @xmath from Theorem 1.12 is the summand @xmath . It
would be more natural to take @xmath where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

- a definition more in keeping with the definition of @xmath . We show
in Example 7.15 that this second ring is far from being a maximal order.

### 1.3 History and motivation

In 1987, Artin and Schelter started a project to classify the
noncommutative analogues of polynomial rings in 3 variables [ 2 ] .
These are now called AS-regular algebras (Definition 2.42 ). The subject
of noncommutative projective geometry was born when Artin, Tate and Van
den Bergh completed this classification in [ 5 , 6 ] (see Theorem 2.48
). Their results can be thought of as a classification of noncommutative
projective planes.

More generally, one would like to classify all so-called noncommutative
curves and surfaces. Let @xmath be a cg noetherian domain, then we can
associate a noncommutative projective scheme @xmath to @xmath
(Definition 2.34 ). It can be thought of as the noncommutative analogue
of coherent sheaves, @xmath , over (the non-existent) @xmath . The
classification for noncommutative projective curves, when the
GK-dimension is 2, was completed by Artin and Stafford in [ 4 ] . They
show that in this case @xmath for a genuine integral projective curve
@xmath (Theorem 2.37 and Corollary 2.38 ). The question of
noncommutative surfaces (when @xmath ) is still very much open. It is
this ultimate goal that motivates this work.

Let @xmath be a cg domain with @xmath . Then @xmath ; a skew Laurent
polynomial ring over the division ring @xmath which is of transcendence
degree 2. A programme for the classification is to first classify the
possible birational classes (the possible @xmath ’s), and then classify
the algebras in each birational equivalence class. Artin conjectures in
[ 1 ] that we know all the possible division rings. They are:

1.  A division algebra which is finite dimensional over a central
    commutative subfield of transcendence degree 2.

2.  A division ring of factions of a skew polynomial extensions of
    @xmath , for a commutative curve @xmath .

3.  A noncommutative function field @xmath of a 3 dimensional Sklyanin
    algebra @xmath .

Whilst this conjecture is still a long way off, significant work has
been, and is being, done on the classification of algebras in each
birational class. Algebras with @xmath commutative (plus a geometric
condition) have been successfully classified by Rogalski and Stafford
and then Sierra in [ 32 , 33 ] and [ 35 ] respectively. This is a
significant subclass of (1) above. We are interested in case (3) when
@xmath . More specifically, we look at subalgebras @xmath of @xmath with
@xmath . Where would be a good place to start looking for such algebras?
Inside @xmath of course! How about a target to aim for? Maximal orders
are the noncommutative analogue of integrally closed domains, or
geometrically, of normal varieties. They are therefore a natural target
for such a classification.

The first major results in this direction were given by Rogalski. In [
27 ] Rogalski successfully classifies the degree 1 generated maximal
orders of the 3-Veronese ring @xmath of @xmath . These are classified as
so-called blowup subalgebras @xmath of @xmath at effective divisors on
@xmath of degree at most @xmath . This is extended to include all
maximal orders and maximal @xmath -orders by Rogalski, Sierra and
Stafford in [ 30 , 29 ] . A detailed review of their work can be found
in Section 2.6 and Section 2.7 . In this thesis we ask the question, why
work with @xmath ? Surely it is @xmath we are interested in?!

### 1.4 The proofs

In this thesis two proof strategies are prominent throughout. The first
follows the idea applied in [ 27 , 30 , 29 ] : prove what we can in the
factor @xmath and then lift up to @xmath . Indeed @xmath is a very well
understood ring. Hence, if @xmath is a subalgebra of @xmath , then
@xmath is a subalgebra @xmath and can be well understood. We can then
try to pull back information to @xmath . This is most easily achieved
when @xmath is @xmath -divisible (i.e. @xmath ). Despite there being a
subtle difference between Hypothesis 1.1 and the assumptions of [ 27 ,
30 , 29 ] , the techniques of Rogalski, Sierra and Stafford are often
applicable in the situations we find ourselves in.

The second strategy is to try to utilise the results of [ 27 , 30 , 29 ]
directly. Since what we want to prove here is essentially what Rogalski,
Sierra and Stafford proved in the 3-Veronese @xmath of @xmath , we can
hope that their results will shortcut a lot of hard work. Given a
subalgebra @xmath of @xmath , clearly @xmath is a subalgebra of @xmath ;
what does [ 27 , 30 , 29 ] say about @xmath ? What does this then say
about @xmath ? Playing this game allows us to bypass much of the
technicalities that Rogalski, Sierra and Stafford required.

Key to being able to utilise the strategies above is getting an analogue
of Rogalski blowup subalgebras @xmath . These are our rings @xmath .
Difficulties here arise in connection with the ring @xmath . Unlike
@xmath , the ring @xmath is not generated in degree 1. This means that
the techniques of Rogalski from [ 27 ] are not directly applicable.
Rogalski, Sierra and Stafford tackled a similar problem in constructing
@xmath when @xmath which resulted in the highly technical paper [ 29 ] .
A great strength of the present work is that we are able to avoid such
technicalities.

### 1.5 Thesis layout and intermediate results

As with any thesis, we have a background section. Here we develop the
essential theory of noncommutative projective geometry that we require.
Also included is a detailed review of the work of Rogalski, Sierra and
Stafford due to its significance to us.

It is section 3 where the thesis properly begins. In the first half of
section 3, we look at some of the first properties about subrings of
@xmath and introduce the vital property @xmath -divisibility (i.e.
@xmath ). Many of these results have analogues for subalgebras of @xmath
. The proof techniques used in that setting carry over without much
problem to @xmath . The second half of section 3 looks at the
interaction between maximal orders and Veronese rings. We obtain the
following result.

###### Proposition 1.13 (Proposition 3.37).

Let @xmath and let @xmath be a @xmath -divisible cg subalgebra of @xmath
with @xmath .

1.   If @xmath and @xmath is coprime to 3, then @xmath is a maximal
    order if and only if @xmath is a maximal order;

2.   If @xmath , then @xmath is a maximal order if and only if @xmath is
    a maximal order.

A limitation of this result is it does not pass between @xmath and
@xmath . It is not until later that we can bridge this gap.

###### Theorem 1.14 (Theorem 5.33).

Let @xmath be a virtual blowup of @xmath at a @xmath -virtually
effective divisor @xmath . Then @xmath is a virtual blowup of @xmath at
the @xmath -virtually effective divisor @xmath .

Proposition 1.13 and Theorem 1.14 are the crucial preliminary results
for Theorem 1.9 and Corollary 1.11 .

section 4 is dedicated to proving Theorem 1.4 . In other words, we prove
that the @xmath are the correct analogues of Rogalski’s blowups @xmath .
We remind the reader that the ring @xmath was studied by Rogalski in
earlier work, and proved to satisfy Theorem 1.4 . The definition of
@xmath is more complicated. It is then correspondingly more difficult to
understand @xmath . The biggest challenge here is to prove @xmath is
@xmath -divisible: at a certain point in the proof the Grassmannians
even make an unexpected appearance. Once @xmath -divisibility is
established, the rest follows quite quickly.

In section 5 we head towards a classification of @xmath -divisible
maximal @xmath -orders (Theorem 5.26 and Proposition 5.29 ). This is
essentially Theorem 1.7 with the assumption @xmath -divisibility
replacing @xmath . We are heavily indebted to [ 30 , Sections 6-7] for
the overall strategy employed in the section. The first major obstacle,
and most crucial ingredient, is to relate a @xmath -divisible maximal
@xmath -order to one of the blowup subalgebras @xmath .

###### Theorem 1.15 (Theorem 5.6 and Corollary 5.8).

Let @xmath be a @xmath -divisible maximal @xmath -order with @xmath .
Then there exists an effective divisor @xmath on @xmath with @xmath ,
and such that @xmath and @xmath are equivalent orders.

More precisely, there exists a @xmath -divisible @xmath -bimodule @xmath
that is finitely generated on both sides, and such that @xmath .

This result is analogous to a result proved for orders in @xmath by
Rogalski, Sierra and Stafford (see Theorem 2.69 for more details). For
their version, Rogalski, Sierra and Stafford require a detailed study of
right ideals of their blowups @xmath . On the other hand, we are able to
utilise some of their results directly, and hence avoid many of their
technicalities. Once we have Theorem 1.15 many of Rogalski, Sierra and
Stafford’s ideas become available to us. We proceed to study in detail
the endomorphism rings appearing in Theorem 1.15 . It is this study that
leads to the definition of a virtual blowup. With the language that we
develop, and with Theorem 1.15 , we are able to classify @xmath
-divisible maximal @xmath -orders. We end section 5 with a further study
of virtual blowups. The standout result is Theorem 1.14 above. In
addition to this, we also look at the open problems mentioned after
Proposition 1.6 .

The job of section 6 is to take the classification of @xmath -divisible
maximal @xmath -orders and turn it into Theorem 1.7 . For this we need
to replace the assumption of @xmath -divisibility with the assumption
@xmath . The idea here is to first prove @xmath (satisfying @xmath ) is
an equivalent order to the ring obtained by adding the element @xmath ,
denoted @xmath . Then one shows @xmath is equivalent to the unique
smallest @xmath -divisible overring, @xmath . As a consequence, if
@xmath is a maximal order then @xmath , and therefore is @xmath
-divisible. In particular, @xmath then fits into the classification of
@xmath -divisible maximal @xmath -orders from section 5. To end
section 6, we apply a trick of Rogalski, Sierra and Stafford which
allows us to disregard the assumption @xmath too. For this one must
allow the taking of Veronese subrings and the regrading of the algebra.

We finish this thesis with a section giving a few examples of the
theory. The highlight is Theorem 1.12 and its surrounding results. Let
@xmath be as in Theorem 1.12 . Central to understanding @xmath is
realising it as an endomorphism ring, and studying its 3-Veronese.

###### Proposition 1.16 (Proposition 7.14 and Proposition 7.11).

Let @xmath be as in Theorem 1.12 . Set @xmath and @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We in fact first prove that @xmath above is the virtual blowup that we
want. We then proceed to show @xmath . As mentioned after Theorem 1.12 ,
the summand @xmath is intriguing. The more natural definition (in
keeping with the definition of the @xmath ) would be @xmath below. As we
see, this definition leads to a ring which is far from being a maximal
order.

###### Example 1.17 (Example 7.15).

Let @xmath . Set

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

and put @xmath . Then @xmath is neither left nor right noetherian;
@xmath is an equivalent order to @xmath .

Moving on, an observation regarding the definition @xmath , is that we
do not know whether the @xmath is always necessary. That is, can @xmath
ever be generated by its elements of degrees 1 and 2? We show in Example
7.18 that for specific choices of @xmath and @xmath , @xmath is
necessary. Our final example, Example 7.19 , is a modification of an
example of Rogalski, Sierra and Stafford. It is an example of a maximal
order @xmath satisfying @xmath .

At the end of this thesis there is an appendix. It consists of a result
on Grassmannians which is required for Theorem 1.4 . We also provide two
indices, a notation index and a terminology index. These can be found at
the back.

## 2 Background and survey of the subject

### 2.1 Connected graded domains

Fix once and for good an algebraically closed field @xmath of any
characteristic.n]k@ @xmath We take the convention @xmath as it will be
more convenient for our purposes. All algebras are associative and have
a 1.

It is non-controversial to say that each algebraist has their favorite
elementary algebraic structure to study. For us it will be connected
graded domains.

###### Definition 2.1.

Let @xmath be a @xmath -graded @xmath -algebra. The algebra @xmath is
called connected graded (cg) if @xmath and @xmath for all @xmath . If
@xmath is also a domain we will call @xmath a cg domain .

The term “connected” comes from geometry: if @xmath is a commutative
connected graded domain, then @xmath is a connected topological space.

We now set out some basic notation.

###### Notation 2.2.

Let @xmath be a @xmath -graded @xmath -vector space. For @xmath we write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

n]ak@ @xmath , @xmath We also call @xmath the homogenous elements of
@xmath of degree @xmath .

If @xmath is a cg @xmath -algebra we always consider @xmath as a right
(and left) @xmath -module via

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Notation 2.3.

Given a @xmath -graded ring @xmath , a graded subring @xmath and a
subset @xmath , we write @xmath to be the subalgebra of @xmath generated
by @xmath and @xmath . In particular @xmath n]kx@ @xmath is the
subalgebra of @xmath generated by @xmath .

If @xmath is generated as a @xmath -algebra by @xmath for some @xmath
(i.e. @xmath ), then we say @xmath is generated in degrees @xmath ,…,
@xmath . A common assumption will be that @xmath is generated in degree
1 , i.e. @xmath .

We will often be concerned with behaviour in high degrees. Some
important notation is therefore the following.

###### Notation 2.4.

Given two graded subspaces @xmath of a @xmath -graded vector space, we
will write @xmath n]=@ @xmath to mean @xmath for all @xmath . If this
occurs we say @xmath and @xmath are equal in high degrees .

###### Definition 2.5.

Let @xmath be a cg @xmath -algebra. A right @xmath -module @xmath is a
@xmath -graded right @xmath -module if it has a @xmath -vector space
decomposition @xmath such that @xmath for all @xmath and @xmath .

###### Definition 2.6.

Let @xmath be a cg @xmath -algebra @xmath . Given a @xmath -graded right
@xmath -module @xmath and a @xmath , we can define the shift of @xmath
by degree @xmath to be the new @xmath -graded right @xmath -module

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus the set of homogenous elements of @xmath of degree @xmath is @xmath
.

###### Notation 2.7.

Let @xmath be a cg @xmath -algebra. We define @xmath n]Gra@ @xmath to be
the category of @xmath -graded right @xmath -modules. Given @xmath ,
@xmath n]HomGr@ @xmath consists of those homomorphisms of right @xmath
-modules @xmath such that @xmath for all @xmath . When @xmath is
noetherian, we set @xmath to be the subcategory of @xmath consisting of
finitely generated modules.

Typically the homomorphism set we want is @xmath - the set of all @xmath
-module homomorphisms. If @xmath from Notation 2.7 is finitely
generated, then the equation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

holds. In the later sections of this thesis, we will mostly be using
@xmath in the form appearing in Notation 3.8 .

When one studies cg @xmath -algebras one of the first results one would
come across is the graded version of Nakayama’s Lemma. Below in Lemma
2.8 , part (1) can be seen to be analogous its ungraded counterpart;
whereas (2) is the form in which it will be regularly used. The proof is
significantly easier than the ungraded case and is included for it
demonstrates some basic techniques.

###### Lemma 2.8 (Graded Nakayama’s Lemma).

Suppose @xmath is a finitely generated cg @xmath -algebra and let @xmath
be a @xmath -graded right @xmath -module such that @xmath for all @xmath
.

1.   If @xmath then @xmath .

2.   A set of homogenous elements @xmath generates @xmath as an @xmath
    -module if and only if the set @xmath generates @xmath as an @xmath
    -vector space.

###### Proof.

Suppose @xmath and let @xmath be minimal such that @xmath . Then we have
@xmath , and hence @xmath proving (1). For (2) apply (1) to the module
@xmath . ∎

###### Notation 2.9.

Given a cg @xmath -algebra @xmath , the Gelfand-Kirillov (GK) dimension
of @xmath can be defined as, and will be denoted by,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.9.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

while @xmath if and only if @xmath is finite dimensional as a @xmath
-vector space. We will also use the notation @xmath in sections where
GK-dimension is less prominent. This definition is cg @xmath -algebra
specific (see [ 20 , Lemma 6.1] ); in general GK-dimension can be
defined for an arbitrary @xmath -algebra. If @xmath is a finitely
generated right (or left) @xmath -graded @xmath -module, then similarly

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.9.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

If @xmath is not necessarily finitely generated, then equation ( 2.9.2 )
does not necessarily hold and its GK-dimension will depend on the ring
it is being considered over (hence the subscript @xmath in ( 2.9.2 )).
When @xmath is finitely generated, and the ring it is being considered
over is clear, we will often drop the subscript in ( 2.9.2 ).

In general it is possible for @xmath to be true although it will not be
the case for us. Bergman’s Gap Theorem [ 20 , Theorem 2.5] at least
shows there are no algebras @xmath with @xmath . The standard book on
GK-dimension (which will be referenced throughout) is [ 20 ] .

Related to GK-dimension is the Hilbert series of a cg @xmath -algebra.

###### Definition 2.10.

n]ha@ @xmath , @xmath Let @xmath be a cg @xmath -algebra. The Hilbert
series of @xmath is the power series

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Given a @xmath -graded right or left @xmath -module @xmath , we
similarly have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A Hilbert series @xmath lives inside @xmath ; however, it is often more
useful to consider it in the overring of Laurent series, @xmath . For
example the Hilbert series of the polynomial ring in one variable is
@xmath .

###### Remark 2.11.

All cg algebras considered in the main body of work will be domains of
finite GK-dimension (unless obviously not). In particular, by [ 23 ,
Corollary 8.1.12] , all our algebras are Ore domains and Definition 2.12
applies.

###### Definition 2.12.

n]qgr@ @xmath n]dgr@ @xmath n]qa@ @xmath Let @xmath be a cg domain.
Assume that @xmath is an Ore domain (see Remark 2.11 ). Then the set
@xmath consisting of all nonzero homogenous elements of @xmath is an Ore
set (see [ 25 , C.I.1.6] ). We can then obtain the graded quotient ring
@xmath of @xmath by localising at the set @xmath . By [ 25 , A.14.3] ,
@xmath is always of the form @xmath ; a skew Laurent polynomial ring
over the division ring @xmath . Here @xmath can be any nonzero
homogenous element of minimal positive degree and @xmath is the
automorphism @xmath . We call the division ring @xmath the
noncommutative function field of @xmath . A ring of the form @xmath for
some cg domain @xmath will be called a graded division ring . In
particular an element of a graded division ring is invertible if and
only if it is homogenous.

Similarly one can invert all nonzero elements of @xmath obtain the full
Goldie quotient ring @xmath of @xmath .

If @xmath is a commutative cg domain, then @xmath , where necessarily
@xmath n]kx@ @xmath is the function field of the projective variety
@xmath . For this reason we consider @xmath as the noncommutative
analogue of the function field. We will see more on the connection
between noncommutative algebra and geometry throughout this thesis.

Our main results concern a classification of maximal orders which we now
define.

###### Definition 2.13.

Let @xmath be a graded division ring. A graded subring @xmath of @xmath
is called an order in @xmath if @xmath . Given two orders @xmath and
@xmath in @xmath , we call @xmath and @xmath equivalent orders if there
exists nonzero homogenous @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath . The
relation “equivalent orders” forms an equivalence class on the orders in
@xmath . We call @xmath a maximal order if @xmath is maximal (with
respect to inclusion) in its equivalence class. Given a graded subring
@xmath of @xmath with @xmath , an order @xmath satisfying @xmath is
called a maximal @xmath -order if it is maximal its equivalence class
among graded rings contained in @xmath .

The reason why maximal orders are a good choice for a classification
theorem might at first be unclear. However, for a commutative integral
domain @xmath with field of fractions @xmath , we have that @xmath is a
maximal order in @xmath if and only if @xmath is integrally closed in
@xmath [ 23 , 5.1.3] . In other words maximal orders are the
noncommutative analogue to integrally closed domains, or geometrically,
the noncommutative analogue of normal varieties. Maximal order are
therefore a natural class of rings to study. Definition 2.13 is
(obviously) graded specific; traditionally it is the ungraded version
that has been the subject of more study. The ungraded definition is
Lemma 2.14 (2) below.

###### Lemma 2.14.

[ 26 , Lemma 9.1] Let @xmath be an @xmath -graded noetherian domain with
graded quotient ring @xmath and full Goldie quotient ring @xmath . Then
the following are equivalent:

1.   The ring @xmath is a maximal order in @xmath in the sense of
    Definition 2.13 .

2.   For all (not necessarily graded) rings @xmath satisfying @xmath :
    if @xmath for some nonzero @xmath , then @xmath .

The significance of Lemma 2.14 is that in the literature, rings
satisfying Definition 2.13 are rather uncommon; on the contrary, there
is a wealth of results on standard ungraded maximal orders. With Lemma
2.14 , these results become available to us. As with Lemma 2.14 , it is
often the case that many ring theoretic properties have graded
analogues. Typically results carry over smoothly between the two
settings without too much effort. See for example [ 14 ] for a graded
version of Goldie’s Theorem.

We now review some homological properties that we will encounter.
Perhaps the most important of these for us is the Cohen-Macaulay
property.

###### Definition 2.15.

Let @xmath be a ring and @xmath a right @xmath -module. The grade of
@xmath is defined as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

n]jm@ @xmath where we allow @xmath if no such @xmath exists. We say
@xmath satisfies the Auslander condition if for every @xmath and all
left submodules @xmath we have @xmath . The grade and the Auslander
condition have analogous definition for left @xmath -modules.

The ring @xmath is Auslander-Gorenstein if the modules @xmath and @xmath
have the same finite injective dimension, and every finitely generated
left and right @xmath -module satisfies the Auslander condition. Suppose
that in addition that @xmath . Then we say @xmath is Cohen-Macaulay if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all finitely generated left and right modules @xmath .

The Cohen-Macaulay property above was extensively studied in [ 22 ] .
Through [ 22 ] , Levasseur gives us ways of obtaining the Cohen-Macaulay
property (which turns out to be very useful) for certain rings. The
Cohen-Macaulay property is closely related to maximal orders, as shown
in [ 40 ] , and more specifically for us [ 27 , Theorem 6.7] .

Finally we look at Veronese subrings and submodules.

###### Definition 2.16.

Let @xmath be an @xmath -graded ring and fix an integer @xmath . The
@xmath th Veronese subring of @xmath is

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

with gradation given by @xmath . For a @xmath -graded @xmath -module we
can define the @xmath -module @xmath , again with the grading @xmath .

We review some known results about properties passing between Veronese
rings.

###### Lemma 2.17.

[ 8 , Proposition 5.10] [ 4 , Lemma 4.10] Let @xmath be an @xmath
-graded @xmath -algebra. If @xmath is noetherian then @xmath is
noetherian for all @xmath . If in addition @xmath is a domain then the
converse is also true. ∎

Given a cg @xmath -algebra @xmath and @xmath there are naturally defined
functors

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.17.1)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.17.2)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Given @xmath it is not hard to show @xmath . The converse is true if
@xmath is generated in degree 1.

###### Theorem 2.18.

[ 46 , Theorem A-5] Let @xmath be a cg @xmath -algebra generated in
degree 1, and fix @xmath . Then @xmath and @xmath as in ( 2.17.1 ) and (
2.17.2 ) give an equivalence of categories

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

### 2.2 Twisted homogenous coordinate rings

An important class of examples for us will be twisted homogenous
coordinate rings. Not only do they motivate the definition of a
noncommutative projective scheme, they play a fundamental role in
noncommutative projective geometry as a whole. We start with the
construction of a homogenous coordinate ring .

###### Notation 2.19.

n]ln@ @xmath Fix a projective scheme @xmath . Let @xmath be an
invertible sheaf on @xmath , with global sections @xmath n]hoxl@ @xmath
. Write @xmath for @xmath and @xmath .

###### Definition 2.20.

Fix Notation 2.19 and set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

From the isomorphisms @xmath we have natural multiplication maps

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

These maps turn @xmath into a commutative cg @xmath -algebra. We call
@xmath a homogenous coordinate ring .

Provided @xmath is a connected normal and closed, @xmath is an
integrally closed domain [ 16 , II Exercise  5.14] . A simple example is
if @xmath , and @xmath - the twisting Serre sheaf on @xmath , then
@xmath .

The motivation for the definition of a noncommutative projective scheme
comes from Serre’s Theorem. To state Serre’s Theorem we need a bit more
notation. We remark that there is no commutativity assumption in
Notation 2.21 and Notation 2.22

###### Notation 2.21.

n]tors@ @xmath , @xmath Let @xmath be a cg @xmath -algebra. Recall
@xmath and @xmath from Notation 2.7 . We call a @xmath torsion if for
any @xmath , we have @xmath for all @xmath . We write @xmath to be the
subcategory of @xmath consisting of torsion modules. When @xmath is
noetherian we put @xmath .

Assume that @xmath is a noetherian cg @xmath -algebra and that @xmath is
a finitely generated torsion right @xmath -module. Then, choosing @xmath
such that @xmath for each @xmath , we see @xmath and hence @xmath .
Conversely, if @xmath then clearly @xmath is torsion. This shows @xmath
are exactly all the graded right @xmath -modules such that @xmath .

Another straightforward argument, with this time @xmath arbitrary, shows
that given a short exact sequence @xmath in @xmath : @xmath if and only
if @xmath . In particular @xmath is a Serre subcategory and the quotient
category @xmath can be considered.

###### Notation 2.22.

n]qgr@ @xmath , @xmath Let @xmath be a cg @xmath -algebra. Let @xmath
and @xmath be as in Notation 2.21 . We set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

to be the quotient category and denote by @xmath , the canonical functor
@xmath . Similarly, when @xmath is noetherian, we set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Objects of @xmath are easy to describe, they are all of the form @xmath
for some (non-unique) @xmath . The morphisms are more subtle and we only
describe them for @xmath when @xmath is noetherian. Indeed in this case,
given @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the direct limit is taken over the maps induced from @xmath .

###### Remark 2.23.

A key observation for us is that given @xmath , @xmath in @xmath if and
only if for all @xmath , @xmath in @xmath .

We will be returning to @xmath and @xmath for @xmath noncommutative
later in Section 2.3 . At this point we state Serre’s Theorem.

###### Theorem 2.24 (Serre’s Theorem).

Let @xmath be a projective scheme and @xmath an invertible sheaf on
@xmath . Assume that @xmath is ample [ 16 , II Definition 7.4] . Then
@xmath is a commutative cg noetherian @xmath -algebra. Moreover there
are equivalences of categories

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath n]qcoh@ @xmath and @xmath n]coh@ @xmath are denoting
quasi-coherent sheaves and coherent sheaves on @xmath respectively.

We now head towards the noncommutative version of Serre’s Theorem. The
following notation will always be used when discussing twisted
homogenous coordinate rings.

###### Notation 2.25.

Let @xmath and @xmath as in Notation 2.19 , and let @xmath be an
automorphism of @xmath . Write @xmath n]ls@ @xmath for the pullback
sheaf @xmath . Given an open @xmath and @xmath , write @xmath . Finally
set @xmath and @xmath n]ln@ @xmath for @xmath .

###### Definition 2.26 (Twisted homogenous coordinate ring).

Retain Notation 2.25 and define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

From the isomorphism @xmath we get an induced map of global sections

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

These maps make @xmath into a graded @xmath -algebra with @xmath . We
call @xmath a twisted homogenous coordinate ring . Details of this
construction can be found in [ 7 ] .

One of the first examples of a twisted homogenous coordinate ring is the
following.

###### Example 2.27.

[ 41 , Example 3.4] Let @xmath denote the Serre twisting sheaf on @xmath
, and let @xmath be the automorphism @xmath for some nonzero @xmath .
Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath .

Just as with @xmath we need an ample hypotheses to ensure @xmath is nice
in an appropriate sense.

###### Definition 2.28.

Let @xmath , @xmath and @xmath be as above. Then @xmath is called @xmath
-ample if for any coherent sheaf @xmath and @xmath , we have @xmath for
all @xmath .

###### Theorem 2.29.

[ 7 , Theorem 1.4] . Retain Notation 2.25 . Suppose that @xmath is
@xmath -ample. Then @xmath is a finitely generated noetherian cg @xmath
-algebra. Moreover, if @xmath is irreducible then @xmath is a domain.

When @xmath is the identity on @xmath , the definition of @xmath
-ampleness coincides with the traditional definition of ampleness [ 16 ,
Proposition III.5.3] . The concept of @xmath -ampleness as in Definition
2.28 was originally called right @xmath -ampleness, with @xmath
replacing @xmath for left @xmath -ampleness. Keeler proved that these
two notions are equivalent along with a characterisation of @xmath
-ampleness in [ 19 ] . A useful fact for us will be that

  -- -- -- ----------
           (2.29.1)
  -- -- -- ----------

###### Theorem 2.30 (Noncommutative Serre’s Theorem).

[ 7 , Theorem 1.3] Retain Notation 2.25 . Assume that @xmath is @xmath
-ample and let @xmath . By Theorem 2.29 , @xmath is noetherian. Moreover
there are equivalences of categories

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath as in Theorem 2.30 . The functor @xmath in Theorem 2.30 is
given by the formula

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.30.1)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Now necessarily, @xmath , hence given a finitely generated graded right
@xmath -submodule @xmath of @xmath , one can identify @xmath for each
@xmath . When @xmath is a smooth curve, Theorem 2.30 along with ( 2.30.1
) then gives us a classification (up to a finite dimensional vector
space) of finitely generated modules inside @xmath . It is the next
statement that is most useful for us. We recall Notation 2.4 and Remark
2.23 for the statement.

###### Corollary 2.31.

Retain the hypotheses of Theorem 2.30 . Additionally assume that @xmath
is a smooth curve. If @xmath is a finitely generated graded right @xmath
-module, then

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

for some divisor @xmath on @xmath .

When studying homogenous and twisted homogenous coordinate rings, the
appearance of the @xmath tells us that the Riemann-Roch theorem will be
important to us. To end this section we state the Riemann-Roch Theorem
in the form that we will most regularly use and make a few remarks on
its significance for twisted homogenous coordinate rings.

###### Theorem 2.32 (Riemann-Roch Theorem).

Let @xmath be a smooth irreducible curve of genus @xmath and let @xmath
be an invertible sheaf on @xmath . Then

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Let @xmath be a twisted homogenous coordinate where @xmath is a smooth
and irreducible curve. Assume that @xmath is an integral scheme. Then by
[ 16 , Proposiiton II6.15] @xmath n]oxd@ @xmath for some divisor @xmath
on @xmath . It then follows that @xmath , and hence

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.32.1)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Applying the Riemann-Roch theorem we have

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.32.2)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Moreover, by Serre duality and [ 16 , Example IV1.3.4] , if @xmath then
@xmath . Thus by ( 2.32.1 ) and ( 2.32.2 ), if @xmath , we have that for
@xmath

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.32.3)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This is easily calculable. For our work, we will be interested in the
case when @xmath is a (necessarily smooth) elliptic curve. In this case
the genus of @xmath is 1 and so (provided @xmath ) @xmath always holds
and ( 2.32.3 ) reduces to the following corollary.

###### Corollary 2.33.

Retain Notation 2.25 . Suppose that @xmath is a smooth elliptic curve
and that @xmath is ample. Set @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

### 2.3 Noncommutative projective curves and surfaces

Roughly, the goal of noncommutative geometry is to use techniques from
commutative geometry to study noncommutative algebras. Now, vital to
commutative geometry are prime ideals which we cannot expect
noncommutative algebras to have in general. Serre Theorem provides us
with an alternative: the categories @xmath and @xmath can still be
defined in the noncommutative case.

###### Definition 2.34.

Let @xmath be a cg @xmath -algebra. Recall

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the canonical functor @xmath from Notation 2.22 . We call the pair (
@xmath , @xmath ) the noncommutative projective scheme associated to the
graded algebra @xmath .

For arbitrary noetherian @xmath , @xmath and @xmath were first studied
by Artin and Zhang in [ 8 ] . For example, it was shown that there
exists is a right adjoint to @xmath , @xmath ; and that the category
@xmath is a Grothendieck category. The latter means in particular that
there are enough injective objects. A key property that arose in their
work is the @xmath property (Definition 2.35 below). Indeed, with @xmath
, Artin and Zhang are able to provide a noncommutative analogue of
Serre’s Finiteness Theorem [ 8 , Theorem 7.4] . Again strong evidence
that we have a good noncommutative analogue.

###### Definition 2.35.

Let @xmath be noetherian cg @xmath -algebra and write @xmath for the
right @xmath -module @xmath . Fix @xmath , then @xmath is said to
satisfy @xmath on the right if @xmath for all finitely generated right
@xmath -modules @xmath , and all @xmath . We say @xmath satisfies @xmath
if @xmath satisfies @xmath for all @xmath . We can define @xmath and
@xmath analogously on the left. The conditions @xmath and @xmath are
often referred to as the Artin-Zhang @xmath -conditions .

The property @xmath holds for most “natural” noetherian rings. An
example of a noetherian ring that does not satisfy @xmath is given in [
42 ] .

Now we claim to have a good definition of a noncommutative projective
scheme we can start trying to classify noncommutative projective curves
and noncommutative projective surfaces. There is no one definition for
what noncommutative projective curves and surfaces should be - we take
the next definition.

###### Definition 2.36.

Let @xmath be a cg noetherian @xmath -algebra. Suppose @xmath . Then we
call @xmath a @xmath -dimensional noncommutative projective scheme .

We will be restricting to the case where @xmath is a domain, and hence
the noncommutative analogue of integral projective schemes. By work of
Small and Warfield, any finitely generated domain with GK dimension 1 is
commutative [ 38 ] . By Bergman’s Gap Theorem there are no algebras
@xmath with @xmath . Hence the first main case is when @xmath , or in
other words noncommutative projective integral curves. As a future
warning the “projective” and “integral” will often be dropped from
noncommutative projective integral curves/surfaces.

Artin and Stafford proved very strong results on the noncommutative
curve case.

###### Theorem 2.37.

[ 4 , Theorem 0.1(i), 0.2] Let @xmath be a cg finitely generated domain
with @xmath . Then:

1.  @xmath for some integral projective commutative curve @xmath , and
    an automorphism @xmath induced from an automorphism @xmath .

2.   If @xmath is generated in degree 1, then

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    for some invertible sheaf @xmath on @xmath . That is, in high
    degrees @xmath is a twisted homogenous coordinate ring.

If @xmath above is not necessarily generated in degree one Artin and
Stafford still have strong results on its structure. This will depend on
the order of the automorphism @xmath appearing. We will be interested in
the case when @xmath . Applying the Noncommutative Serre’s Theorem
(Theorem 2.30 ) we get the fun-to-say statement that “noncommutative
curves are commutative.”

###### Corollary 2.38.

Let @xmath be a cg domain GK-dimension 2 generated in degree 1 and let
@xmath be given by Theorem 2.37 . Then we have an equivalence of
categories

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In the reverse direction to Theorem 2.37 Artin and Stafford also prove:

###### Theorem 2.39.

[ 4 , Theorem 0.1(ii)] Let @xmath be an integral projective commutative
curve and @xmath an automorphism. If @xmath is a cg subalgebra of @xmath
, then @xmath .

In [ 4 ] , Artin and Stafford conjecture that there is no cg domain with
GK-dimension strictly between 2 and 3. In other words, there is nothing
between noncommutative curves and noncommutative surfaces. This
conjecture was proved to be true by Smoktunowicz in [ 39 , Theorem 1] .
Hence the next step is to classify noncommutative surfaces.

Such a complete classification as Theorem 2.37 does not yet exist for
noncommutative integral projective surfaces; it is in fact the subject
of much research today. indeed our work lies within this realm. A
strategy for this has been suggested by Artin in [ 1 ] - it is to model
such a classification on the commutative version. In short, one first
classifies commutative projective surfaces into birational classes, and
then within each birational class, one can obtain all other surfaces by
a process of blowing up and down a various points.

###### Definition 2.40.

Let @xmath and @xmath be two cg domains. Write @xmath and @xmath as in
Notation 2.12 . Then @xmath and @xmath are said to be birational if
@xmath ; that is, if @xmath and @xmath have isomorphic noncommutative
function fields.

In [ 1 ] , Artin conjectures that for noncommutative integral projective
surfaces, we at least know all the birational classes. The definition of
a skew polynomial extension ring, appearing in (2) below, can be found
in [ 15 , section 1] . The definition of the Sklyanin algebra appearing
in (3) is saved for the next section.

###### Conjecture 2.41 (Artin’s Conjecture).

Let @xmath for a connected graded domain @xmath with @xmath . Then one
of the following holds.

1.  @xmath is finite dimensional over a central commutative subfield of
    transcendence degree 3.

2.  @xmath is a division ring of fractions of a skew polynomial
    extension of @xmath , for a commutative curve @xmath .

3.  @xmath for a three dimensional Sklyanin algebra @xmath .

Despite this conjecture still being a long way off, much work has been
(and is being) done on classifying algebras in each of the birational
classes of Conjecture 2.41 . When @xmath is commutative, or more
specifically @xmath for a integral projective surface @xmath and
automorphism @xmath induced from an automorphism of @xmath , we say
@xmath is birationally geometric . Birationally geometric surfaces - a
significant subclass of (1) - have been successfully classified by
Rogalski and Stafford and then Sierra in [ 32 , 33 ] and [ 35 ]
respectively. These were classified in terms of so called naïve blowups
, which are certain subalgebras of twisted homogenous coordinate rings.
Work by Chan and Ingalls in [ 12 ] looks at the case for rings finitely
generated over their centres which also has significant overlap with
case (1).

Connected graded algebras with noncommutative fields falling into class
(2) of Artin’s Conjecture has yet to be studied. Our work concerns class
(3), or in other words, algebras that are birational to the Sklyanin
algebra. We meet the Sklyanin algebra in the next section.

### 2.4 AS-regular algebras and ATV

In [ 2 ] Artin and Schelter begun a project to classify the
noncommutative analogues of polynomial rings, now called AS-regular
algebras.

###### Definition 2.42.

Let @xmath be a finitely generated connected graded @xmath -algebra, and
identify @xmath as a right and left @xmath -module. We call @xmath
Artin-Schelter regular , or AS-regular , of dimension @xmath if

1.  @xmath ;

2.  @xmath ;

3.  As left @xmath -modules, and for some degree shift @xmath ,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

Property (3) is called the Artin-Schelter Gorenstein or AS-Gorenstein
condition.

Artin and Schelter successfully classified the AS-regular algebras of
dimension 2. There are only two: the quantum plane and the Jordan plane,
respectively

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In studying AS-regular algebras of dimension 3, they ran into an algebra
that they did not understand - the Sklyanin algebra.

###### Definition 2.43 (The Sklyanin algebra).

Let @xmath . Suppose that @xmath satisfy

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.43.1)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Then the algebra

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is called a 3-dimensional Sklyanin algebra .

We will drop the “3-dimensional” from above as we will discuss no other
Sklyanin algebra. We do however warn that a 4-dimensional Sklyanin
algebra exists and is a subject of current research.

Retain notation from Definition 2.43 . An important fact for us, which
Artin and Schelter showed via a computer search in [ 2 ] , is that
@xmath contains a central element @xmath of degree 3 given by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.43.2)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The classification of 3 dimensional AS-regular algebras was completed by
Artin, Tate and Van den Bergh in [ 5 , 6 ] . Key to their paper, and a
basis for noncommutative projective geometry, is relating the algebras
to an underlying geometry via point modules.

###### Definition 2.44.

Let @xmath a finitely generated cg @xmath -algebra. Suppose in addition
that @xmath is generated in degree 1. A graded right @xmath -module
@xmath is a point module if:

1.  @xmath for some @xmath ,

2.  @xmath for all @xmath .

More generally, if @xmath is a commutative @xmath -algebra an @xmath
-point module for @xmath is a graded @xmath -module @xmath such that

1.  @xmath where @xmath ,

2.  for each @xmath , @xmath is a locally free @xmath -module of rank 1.

The point modules of a cg algebra @xmath are always in one to one
correspondence with an inverse limit, @xmath , of closed subsets of
@xmath for some @xmath and @xmath . Thus

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.44.1)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In fact what Artin, Tate and Van den Bergh show is that the point
modules are parameterised by @xmath in a formal way. We use [ 10 ,
section I.3.1] as a reference for this formalisation.

Definition 2.44 (2) gives rise to a functor @xmath from the category of
commutative @xmath -algebras to the category of sets. This functor takes
@xmath to the set of isomorphism classes of @xmath -point modules @xmath
. Given a ring homomorphism @xmath , the corresponding function @xmath
is defined by tensoring up: @xmath . On the other hand, given a @xmath
-scheme @xmath , there is a natural functor @xmath from commutative
@xmath -algebras to sets: @xmath . We say @xmath parameterises the point
modules of @xmath if the functors @xmath and @xmath are naturally
isomorphic.

One issue above is we do not know whether the product of @xmath ’s in (
2.44.1 ) can be made finite. This is remedied by the next definition.

###### Definition 2.45.

A noetherian @xmath -algebra @xmath is called strongly noetherian if for
all commutative noetherian @xmath -algebras @xmath , @xmath remains
noetherian.

###### Theorem 2.46.

[ 9 , Corollary E4.12] . Let @xmath be a cg strongly noetherian @xmath
-algebra. Then the point modules of @xmath are parameterised by a closed
subscheme of @xmath for some @xmath .

In this thesis we will often obtain the strongly noetherian property for
the rings that we are interested in. We immediately then have the nice
corollary given by Theorem 2.46 . A warning is that not every noetherian
ring is strongly noetherian. The first such examples were the naïve
blowups appearing in the classification of birational geometric surfaces
[ 32 , Theorem 1.1] . Indeed for point modules of naïve blowups the
product in ( 2.44.1 ) cannot be made finite.

We now give this parametrisation for the point modules of the Sklyanin
algebra.

###### Example 2.47.

Let @xmath denote the Sklyanin algebra from Definition 2.43 . Let @xmath
n]e@ @xmath be the closed subset of @xmath defined by the equation

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.47.1)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Then conditions ( 2.43.1 ) imply that @xmath is a smooth elliptic curve,
and the closed points of @xmath parameterise the point modules of @xmath
.

In more detail, for @xmath , the set @xmath in ( 2.44.1 ) can be taken
as the subset of @xmath , @xmath for an automorphism @xmath n]sigma@
@xmath . In particular @xmath . On the open set of @xmath for which the
formula ( 2.47.2 ) below is valid, @xmath can be given by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.47.2)
  -- -------- -- ----------

A detailed argument for the above can be found in [ 10 , Example I.3.6]
.

Artin, Tate and Van den Bergh’s classification of AS-regular algebras on
dimension 3 is in terms of this geometric data. We give a simple version
of this classification when @xmath is assumed to be generated in degree
1.

###### Theorem 2.48.

[ 5 , 6 ] Let @xmath be an AS regular algebra of dimension 3. Assume
that @xmath is generated in degree 1.

1.  @xmath is a noetherian domain and has the Hilbert series of a
    weighted polynomial ring in 3 variables.

2.   Now (restricting to the case of interest to us) assume that the
    polynomial ring in (1) is unweighted. Let @xmath be the closed
    subset of @xmath parameterising the point modules of @xmath . Then
    either:

    1.  @xmath and @xmath for some invertible sheaf @xmath on @xmath and
        automorphism @xmath ;

    2.  @xmath is a cubic curve in @xmath and there is a natural
        surjection @xmath for some invertible sheaf @xmath on @xmath and
        automorphism @xmath .

    The AS-regular algebras of dimension 3 are then classified from this
    data.

The proof of Theorem 2.48 (1) goes via part (2). Artin, Tate and Van den
Bergh first prove @xmath is a noetherian domain. Then, when in case (b)
of Theorem 2.48 (2), they study the ring homomorphism @xmath to obtain
Theorem 2.48 (1).

For the Sklyanin algebra Theorem 2.48 means the following.

###### Example 2.49.

Let @xmath be a Sklyanin algebra as in Definition 2.43 . Then @xmath is
AS-regular of dimension 3. By Example 2.47 the point modules of @xmath
are parameterised by a (necessarily smooth) elliptic curve @xmath and so
@xmath falls into case (2b) of Theorem 2.48 . More specifically, there
exists a central homogenous element @xmath of degree 3, such that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.49.1)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Here @xmath (given by ( 2.47.1 )) is embedded as a degree 3 divisor
@xmath , @xmath is the pull back sheaf of the twisting Serre sheaf
@xmath of @xmath , and @xmath is given in ( 2.47.2 ). The element @xmath
is given in ( 2.43.2 ) and is unique up to scalar.

### 2.5 The generic Sklyanin algebra

We switch our attention to the Sklyanin algebra appearing in Definition
2.43 , Example 2.47 and Example 2.49 . The Sklyanin algebra is named
after E. K. Sklyanin who was first to construct a (in fact
4-dimensional) Sklyanin algebra in [ 36 , 37 ] .

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

The use of geometry in proving Example 2.49 is absolutely crucial; it
was not until recently in [ 18 ] where a purely algebraic and
combinatorial approach yielded similar results. A notably absentee of [
18 ] is proving that @xmath is a domain. On the contrary one can quite
easily prove @xmath is a domain via ( 2.49.1 ) and the fact that @xmath
is a domain. Indeed a key strategy in understanding @xmath is going via
( 2.49.1 ). We have already seen in Section 2.2 that twisted homogenous
coordinate rings are well understood. Let @xmath as in ( 2.49.1 ). We
gather some more properties on @xmath in the next theorem. The result we
use is [ 27 , Lemma 2.2] where the author gives relevant references for
the original proofs.

###### Theorem 2.50.

Let @xmath be a nonsingular elliptic curve, @xmath an automorphism and
@xmath a @xmath -ample invertible sheaf with @xmath . Set @xmath .

1.  @xmath is a strongly noetherian domain with @xmath .

2.  @xmath satisfies @xmath on both sides.

3.  @xmath is Auslander-Gorenstein and Cohen-Macaulay.

4.   If @xmath , then @xmath is generated in degree 1. Otherwise @xmath
    is generated in degrees @xmath and @xmath .

Using ( 2.49.1 ), much of Theorem 2.50 can be lifted to @xmath . For
referencing purposes we include a proof of Theorem 2.51 below.

###### Theorem 2.51.

Retain the notation of Example 2.49 . Then

1.  @xmath is AS-regular of dimension 3 with @xmath , and has Hilbert
    series given by @xmath .

2.  @xmath is a strongly noetherian domain and satisfies @xmath on both
    sides.

3.  @xmath is Auslander-Gorenstein and Cohen-Macaulay.

4.  @xmath is a maximal order in @xmath .

###### Proof.

(1) is Example 2.49 above. The first part of (2) follows from Theorem
2.50 (1), ( 2.49.1 ) and [ 3 , Proposition 4.9(1)] . The second part of
(2) is by Theorem 2.50 (2), ( 2.49.1 ) and [ 8 , Theorem 8.8] . (3)
comes from [ 22 , Theorem 5.10] , Theorem 2.50 (3) and ( 2.49.1 ).
Finally (4) follows from [ 40 , Theorem 2.10] . ∎

Our standing assumption (Hypothesis 1.1 ) assumes that @xmath has
infinite order. With this assumption being the generic case, such a
Sklyanin algebra is often referred to as the the generic Sklyanin
algebra . When @xmath is of finite order @xmath has very different
properties.

###### Lemma 2.52.

[ 6 , Theorem II] Retain the notation of Example 2.49 . The following
are equivalent:

1.   The automorphism @xmath has finite order;

2.  @xmath satisfies a polynomial identity;

3.  @xmath is finitely generated over its centre.

For two different approaches to the Sklyanin algebra with the order of
@xmath finite, see work by Walton, Wang and Yakimov in [ 47 ] and work
by De Laet and Le Bruyn in [ 21 ] .

With the additional assumption that @xmath one can say more about @xmath
. First we make an observation which will be regularly used.

###### Remark 2.53.

Let @xmath be a automorphism of @xmath of infinite order. Then @xmath is
a translation in the group law on @xmath by a point of infinite order
(see [ 4 , pages 248-249] ). In particular @xmath will have no fixed
points.

The next result is a special case A of [ 4 , Theorem 5.11] given in [ 30
] .

###### Theorem 2.54.

[ 30 , Theorem 3.1] Let @xmath be a cg @xmath -algebra with @xmath , for
a smooth elliptic curve @xmath and automorphism @xmath of infinite
order. By regrading we may assume @xmath . Then there exists an ideal
sheaf @xmath and a @xmath -ample invertible sheaf @xmath on @xmath such
that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Retain the notation of Theorem 2.54 . Then @xmath is a right ideal of
@xmath , and thus a rephrasing of Theorem 2.54 is that @xmath is equal
in high degrees to the ring @xmath for some right ideal @xmath of @xmath
.

Another advantage of working with @xmath is that the ideal structure of
@xmath is very rigid as demonstrated in [ 28 ] . Our wording is slightly
different to [ 28 , Corollary 2.10] and so we include a short proof.

###### Proposition 2.55.

[ 28 , Corollary 2.10] Retain the hypotheses of Theorem 2.54 . Then

1.   Every subalgebra of @xmath is both finitely generated and
    noetherian.

2.  @xmath is just infinite in the sense that for every nonzero ideal
    @xmath of @xmath , @xmath .

In particular (1) and (2) hold for the twisted homogenous coordinate
ring @xmath .

###### Proof.

(1) By Theorem 2.54 , @xmath is (at least in high degrees) a subring of
a twisted homogenous @xmath . By [ 28 , Theorem 2.9] every subalgebra of
@xmath is both finitely generated and noetherian and hence the same is
true for @xmath . (2) then follows from (1) as shown in the second
paragraph of the discussion in [ 28 , Section 3] . ∎

### 2.6 Rogalski’s blowup subalgebras of @xmath

As mentioned in the introduction and at the end of Section 2.3 a current
and realistic goal is the classification of algebras birational to the
(generic) Sklyanin algebra. A starting place for this has been the
classification of the maximal orders inside the Sklyanin algebra. It was
Rogalski in [ 27 ] who first look at this problem. Rogalski successfully
classified the degree one generated maximal orders contain inside the
3-Veronese @xmath of @xmath . These were classified as so-called blowup
subalgebras of @xmath . In later work, [ 30 , 29 ] Rogalski, along with
Sierra and Stafford extended this to include all maximal orders inside
@xmath . The reason for working inside @xmath as opposed to @xmath , is
that now the central element @xmath from Example 2.49 is in degree 1.
Our work aims to generalise the results of Rogalski, Sierra and Stafford
and for that reason we briefly summarize their work here. For
consistency we use notation of the papers [ 30 , 29 ] .

###### Notation 2.56.

n]emt@ @xmath n]tau@ @xmath Let @xmath be a Sklyanin algebra and retain
the notation of Example 2.49 . Assume that @xmath . Set @xmath n]t@
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath ; whence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We give a few observations regarding Notation 2.56 . Firstly (and the
whole point of considering @xmath ) we indeed have @xmath . Second,
since @xmath , @xmath has degree @xmath , and by the Riemann-Roch
(Corollary 2.33 ) @xmath is a 9 dimensional @xmath -vector space. It
then follows @xmath . Finally, @xmath is also a translation by a point
of @xmath of infinite order, and one @xmath -orbit is partitioned into 3
distinct @xmath -orbits.

We are now ready to define Rogalski’s blowup subalgebras of @xmath . We
recall that for @xmath , we are writing @xmath .

###### Definition 2.57.

[ 27 , Section 1] Let @xmath be an effective divisor on @xmath with
@xmath . Set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The subalgebra @xmath of @xmath is called the blowup of @xmath at @xmath
.

Let @xmath be an effective divisor on @xmath with @xmath . One
immediately sees @xmath . Moreover

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and it follows by Theorem 2.50 (4) that @xmath - straight away we have a
good understanding of @xmath . From the Riemann-Roch Theorem we know
@xmath , and then @xmath .

###### Remark 2.58.

The use of the term “blowup” is due to the link with Van den Bergh’s
categorical blowups of @xmath from [ 45 ] . In unpublished work by
Rogalski it is shown that @xmath is such a blowup. In [ 45 ] , Van den
Bergh proves that @xmath has many properties in common with commutative
blowups. One of the advantages of the ring theoretic blowups of
Definition 2.57 over Van den Bergh’s blowups in the ease at which they
are defined; a disadvantage is that we are missing a blowup. If one
studies [ 45 ] , one sees that it should be possible to blowup at 8
points (instead of the 7 above). The natural definition @xmath where
@xmath for a degree 8 effective divisor @xmath , gives @xmath : a
commutative polynomial ring. Using [ 45 ] as a guide, Rogalski, Sierra
and Stafford found the correct definition for the 8 point blowup
subalgebra of @xmath given in [ 29 ] . We will not be needing the 8
point blowup and so we omit it from this work.

The significance of Definition 2.57 is shown by the following theorems.

###### Theorem 2.59.

[ 27 , Theorem 1.1] Let @xmath be an effective divisor with @xmath , and
set @xmath . Then

1.  @xmath and @xmath . It has Hilbert series given by @xmath .

2.  @xmath is strongly noetherian and satisfies the Artin-Zhang @xmath
    conditions. It has cohomological dimension 2 and (by [ 29 ,
    Proposition 2.4] ) has a balanced dualizing complex.

3.  @xmath Auslander-Gorenstein and Cohen-Macaulay.

4.  @xmath is a maximal order in @xmath .

###### Remark 2.60.

We should explain why the properties appearing in Theorem 2.59 (2)(3)
are desirable. For strongly noetherian and the Artin-Zhang @xmath
conditions this can be found in and around their respective definitions
(Definition 2.45 and Definition 2.35 ). Cohomological dimension and
balanced dualizing complexes will not feature in this thesis, with the
exception of results in the same vein as Theorem 2.59 . The technical
definitions are therefore omitted. We note that a definition of
cohomological dimension can be found in [ 27 , Section 2] . For a
definition of a balanced dualizing complex the reader is referred to the
original paper by Yekutieli [ 48 ] . The strength of balanced dualizing
complexes is that they allow one to use significant homological
techniques from algebraic geometry. This is demonstrated in a series of
papers by Yekutieli, Zhang and Van den Bergh among others. Having finite
cohomological dimension is important for the dualizing complexes. The
properties Auslander-Gorenstein and Cohen-Macaulay are prominent in [ 27
, 30 , 29 ] as well as this thesis. In particular the proof of Theorem
2.59 (4) (presented in [ 27 , Theorem 6.7] ) uses the Cohen-Macaulay
property.

For Theorem 2.59 the key is obtaining @xmath . This property will be
important for us.

###### Definition 2.61.

Let @xmath be a subalgebra of @xmath containing @xmath and @xmath a
right @xmath -module with @xmath . The module @xmath is called @xmath
-divisible if @xmath . The ring @xmath is @xmath -divisible if it is
@xmath -divisible as a right (equivalently left) module over itself. The
right @xmath -module @xmath is the unique smallest @xmath -divisible
right @xmath -module containing @xmath . It is called the @xmath
-divisible hull of @xmath .

Once @xmath is proven to be @xmath -divisible we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Theorem 2.59 (2)(3) can then be lifted freely from the corresponding
properties of @xmath . In general, @xmath -divisible rings will be
easier to understand. The proof of Theorem 2.59 (1) is something we
generalise later. For this reason, we include a detailed sketch of the
proof. Recall that a map @xmath is called lower semi-continuous if for
each @xmath , the set @xmath is closed in the Zariski topology [ 16 ,
Remark 12.7.1] .

###### Sketch proof of Theorem 2.59(1).

As remarked above, the key step is to prove that @xmath is @xmath
-divisible. The proof is by induction on @xmath with the base case
@xmath being trivial. So suppose that @xmath for some @xmath and that
@xmath is @xmath -divisible for all effective divisors @xmath with
@xmath .

First we add the additional hypothesis that @xmath and @xmath are
supported on different @xmath -orbits. With this assumption it is fairly
easy to prove that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.61.1)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The @xmath -divisibility of @xmath follows from this by induction.

To prove the general statement one uses a semi-continuous argument. More
specifically one constructs a lower semi-continuous map @xmath as
follows. Let @xmath , identify @xmath with the Grassmannian of
co-dimension 1 subspaces of the vector space @xmath and now allow @xmath
to vary. The natural map @xmath , @xmath can be shown to be a morphism
of algebraic varieties. On the other hand, for fixed @xmath , one can
define a function @xmath , sending a codimension 1 subspace @xmath of
@xmath to @xmath . It can be argued that @xmath is lower
semi-continuous. It then follows that composition @xmath is also a lower
semi-continuous function; furthermore, since all @xmath ’s are generated
in degree 1, @xmath is exactly the map @xmath .

Finally, from the lower semi-continuity of the map @xmath , together
with the fact that @xmath is @xmath -divisible when @xmath and @xmath
are on distinct @xmath -orbits, it is proved that for general @xmath ,
@xmath has the correct Hilbert series. This forces @xmath to be @xmath
-divisible. ∎

Once @xmath -divisibility is obtained the properties of @xmath in
Theorem 2.59 can be lifted from @xmath via the next result. Proposition
2.62 is a really a result of Rogalski, who proved it with the additional
assumption that @xmath . It is noted in [ 29 ] that this assumption was
unnecessary.

###### Proposition 2.62.

[ 29 , Proposition 2.4] Let @xmath be a cg @xmath -algebra which is a
domain. Suppose that there exists a homogenous central element @xmath
for some @xmath such that @xmath for some elliptic curve @xmath ,
invertible sheaf @xmath with @xmath , and an infinite order automorphism
@xmath .

Then @xmath is strongly noetherian, Auslander-Gorenstein, Cohen-Macaulay
and a maximal order. Also @xmath satisfies the Artin-Zhang @xmath
conditions, has cohomological dimension 2 and possesses a balanced
dualizing complex.

The important thing is of course to understand subalgebras of @xmath .
This is provided by the following result.

###### Theorem 2.63.

[ 27 , Theorem 1.2] Let @xmath for some @xmath such that @xmath . Then
there exists a unique effective divisor @xmath on @xmath with @xmath
such that @xmath is the unique maximal order containing, and an
equivalent order to, @xmath .

In particular, if @xmath is a maximal order generated in degree 1, then
@xmath for some effective divisor @xmath on @xmath with @xmath .

Theorem 2.63 is where the majority of effort in [ 27 ] is spent. A
crucial ingredient is the next proposition. We recall Notation 2.9 for
GK-dimension.

###### Proposition 2.64.

[ 27 , Theorem 10.4] Let @xmath be an effective divisor with degree
@xmath . Put @xmath . Then @xmath has a graded ideal @xmath of @xmath
such that @xmath and is minimal in the following sense. Given any graded
ideal @xmath of @xmath with @xmath , there exits an @xmath such that
@xmath .

Ideals like @xmath in Proposition 2.64 are important for us.

###### Definition 2.65.

[ 27 , Definition 6.5] An ideal @xmath in a cg algebra @xmath satisfying
@xmath is called a minimal sporadic ideal if for all other ideals @xmath
of @xmath satisfying @xmath we have that @xmath for some @xmath .

Recall Notation 2.22 and Remark 2.23 . Another way of phrasing
Definition 2.65 is that @xmath is minimal in @xmath among objects of the
form @xmath where @xmath an ideal of @xmath satisfying @xmath .

One difficulty with @xmath when @xmath is that unlike @xmath and @xmath
, there may exist ideals @xmath such that @xmath (see [ 27 , Section 11]
). Typically these ideals can lead to strange behaviours. The existence
of minimal sporadic ideals as in Proposition 2.64 helps control
precisely this.

Also included in [ 27 ] is a classification of the degree 1 generated
maximal orders inside @xmath [ 27 , Theorem 12.1] . There are only two
of these @xmath and @xmath from Definition 1.3 . We save the statement
for later (Proposition 4.2 ) as best fits our work.

### 2.7 Rogalski, Sierra and Stafford’s classification of maximal orders
in @xmath

The next direct work on classifying algebras birational to the Sklyanin
algebra was conducted by Rogalski, Sierra and Stafford in twin papers [
30 , 29 ] where they generalised the earlier work of Rogalski. The paper
[ 29 ] is dedicated to finding an alternative definition to Definition
2.57 which includes @xmath for @xmath . The definition (which is [ 29 ,
Definition 5.1] ) is significantly harder to write down compared with
Definition 2.57 . As already mentioned Definition 2.57 is sufficient for
us and so a brave reader is referred to [ 29 ] for details. We will
concentrate on [ 30 ] and ask the reader to trust that when @xmath ,
@xmath exists and satisfies the conclusions of Theorem 2.59 .

In short [ 30 ] successfully classifies all maximal @xmath -orders.
These are classified in terms of so-called virtual blowups at virtually
effective divisors . We give the definition of a virtually effective
divisor now but postpone the definition of a virtual blowup until
Definition 2.73 . Throughout this subsection we continue to use Notation
2.56 for @xmath .

###### Definition 2.66.

[ 30 , Definitions 7.1] . A divisor @xmath on @xmath is called @xmath
-virtually effective if @xmath is effective for all @xmath .

The main results of [ 30 ] are given in the next two theorems.

###### Theorem 2.67.

[ 30 , Theorem 1.5, Corollary 1.4] Let @xmath be a @xmath -virtually
effective divisor. Then a virtual blowup @xmath of @xmath at @xmath
exists. Moreover:

1.  @xmath is a maximal order in @xmath and uniquely defines a maximal
    @xmath -order @xmath . Moreover @xmath and @xmath are closely
    related, in the sense that: there is an ideal @xmath of @xmath
    contained in @xmath with @xmath .

2.  @xmath and @xmath are strongly noetherian, satisfy the Artin-Zhang
    @xmath conditions and have balanced dualizing complexes.

###### Theorem 2.68.

[ 30 , Theorem 1.2] Let @xmath be a cg maximal @xmath -order such that
@xmath . Then there is a unique virtually effective divisor @xmath with
@xmath and a unique virtual blowup @xmath at @xmath such that @xmath .
In particular @xmath is noetherian and Theorem 2.67 holds for the pair
@xmath .

We give an outline of how these results were obtained. The first
significant, and perhaps most crucial step is Theorem 2.69 . Here the
authors link a general @xmath -divisible subalgebra to a blowup @xmath .

###### Theorem 2.69.

[ 30 , Theorem 5.26] . Let @xmath be a @xmath -divisible graded
subalgebra of @xmath with @xmath . Then there exists an effective
divisor @xmath on @xmath with @xmath called a normalised divisor for
@xmath (Definition 5.3 ), and such that @xmath and @xmath are equivalent
orders.

Suppose that @xmath is a @xmath -divisible graded subalgebra of @xmath
with @xmath . Applying Theorem 2.54 to @xmath , one knows its structure
in high degrees. It is then reasonably straight forward to obtain a
similar result to Theorem 2.69 for @xmath inside @xmath [ 30 ,
Proposition 5.7] . More precisely, out of the geometric data of @xmath
one can construct a divisor @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath are
equivalent orders, and that @xmath for some @xmath . The hard work in
proving Theorem 2.69 lies in lifting this up to @xmath .

###### Proposition 2.70.

[ 30 , Proposition 5.19] [ 29 , Theorem 5.3(6)] Suppose that @xmath is a
cg @xmath -divisible subalgebra of @xmath with @xmath . Let @xmath be a
normalised divisor for @xmath . Then there exists a finitely generated
right @xmath -module @xmath such that @xmath . If @xmath , then one can
take @xmath for some @xmath .

When we encounter a similar problem in Proposition 5.6 , we are able to
use a few Veronese tricks to utilise Proposition 2.70 directly. This
bypasses much of the technicalities that Rogalski, Sierra and Stafford
required. Perhaps more important than the statement of Theorem 2.69 was
how the equivalence was obtained.

###### Corollary 2.71.

[ 30 , Theorem 5.26] Let @xmath and @xmath be as in Theorem 2.54 . The
@xmath bimodule @xmath is a finitely generated @xmath -divisible @xmath
-module. If @xmath , then @xmath , @xmath is finitely generated and
@xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are all equivalent orders.

Let @xmath be a @xmath -divisible maximal @xmath -order, then by
Corollary 2.71 we know that @xmath for some @xmath and @xmath -divisible
@xmath . Rogalski, Sierra and Stafford go on to study these endomorphism
rings appearing. By [ 13 , Theorem 2.7] one knows that @xmath is the
unique maximal order containing @xmath . In [ 30 , Proposition 6.4]
Rogalski, Sierra and Stafford investigate the connection between @xmath
and @xmath , and the ideal in Theorem 2.67 (1) appears. A key result is
then to understand the factor @xmath in @xmath .

###### Proposition 2.72.

[ 30 , Theorem 6.7, Proposition 7.3(1)] Let @xmath be an effective
divisor on @xmath of @xmath and @xmath a finitely generated @xmath
-divisible right @xmath -module satisfying @xmath . Set @xmath and
@xmath . Then there exists an effective divisor @xmath on @xmath such
that (using Notation 2.4 )

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Moreover, @xmath and @xmath satisfy Theorem 2.67 (1). The divisor @xmath
is virtually effective.

It is Proposition 2.72 that gives rise to the definitions of a virtual
blowup and virtually effective divisor.

###### Definition 2.73.

Retain the notation of Proposition 2.72 . The algebra @xmath is called a
virtual blowup at @xmath .

We note that Definition 2.73 looks different to the definition of a
virtual blowup in [ 30 , Definition 6.9] . It is implicit in [ 30 ,
Proposition 6.4 and Corollary 6.6] that these definitions are
equivalent.

With this terminology Rogalski, Sierra and Stafford then are able to
classify the @xmath -divisible maximal orders [ 30 , Theorem 7.4] ,
which is a version of Theorem 2.68 with @xmath -divisibility replacing
@xmath ). The final task is to weaken the assumption of @xmath
-divisibility to obtain Theorem 2.67 . For this one needs to show that
any subalgebra @xmath of @xmath satisfying @xmath is contained in, and
an equivalent order to, a @xmath -divisible ring. This is done via two
steps. First one shows @xmath is equivalent to the algebra obtained by
adding @xmath , @xmath n]ag@ @xmath . Next one proves the algebra @xmath
is an equivalent order with its @xmath -divisible hull, @xmath . This
idea first appeared in [ 27 , Section 7] and is where minimal sporadic
ideals appear.

After the success of [ 27 , 30 , 29 ] and developing a good notion of
noncommutative ring theoretic blowing up, Rogalski, Sierra and Stafford
have continued the project to understand algebras birational to the
Sklyanin algebra. Following ideas of the commutative classification of
projective surfaces, one needs a notion of blowing down. Hidden in the
above, but prominent in [ 27 , 29 ] , is the exceptional line module
associated to a blowup at a point [ 27 , Definition 9.2] . We won’t
define it but the analogy with commutative blowups is clear: blowup at a
point and get a line. In [ 31 ] Rogalski, Sierra and Stafford go in the
reverse direction. Given a line module @xmath (with a noncommutative
analogue of self intersection equal to -1) over an elliptic algebra
@xmath (a generalisation of the @xmath ’s) then one can “blowdown @xmath
to a point @xmath ”. In practice this means one obtains a overring
@xmath such that if we blowup @xmath at @xmath we have @xmath with
exceptional line module associated to this blowup equal to @xmath .

Having good notions of blowing up and down, and following ideas from
commutative geometry, leads to the following question. At what point is
it no longer possible to blowdown? Or in other words, what are the
minimal models? At various seminars Rogalski, Sierra and Stafford have
announced results in this direction.

Our research takes a different direction to [ 31 ] . In this thesis we
say “hold on, why did we look at @xmath ? Surely it is @xmath we are
interested in?” Indeed we generalise the work in [ 27 , 30 , 29 ] to
hold in the entire Sklyanin algebra.

## 3 Preliminary results

It is finally time to do some actual mathematics. We fix once and for
all the standing assumption of this thesis.

###### Hypothesis 3.1 (Standing Assumption).

Fix an algebraically closed field @xmath . Let @xmath be a 3-dimensional
Sklyanin algebra. Suppose that @xmath is central and such that @xmath ,
where @xmath is a smooth elliptic curve, @xmath an invertible sheaf on
@xmath with @xmath and @xmath an automorphism of @xmath . Assume that
@xmath has infinite order.

###### Remark 3.2.

Retain notation from Hypothesis 3.1 . The results of Section 2.5 ,
Section 2.6 and Section 2.7 will always be applicable to @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath .

Our first proper section is split distinctly into two halves. Section
3.2 and Section 3.3 develop a basic theory of @xmath -divisible
subalgebras of @xmath (Definition 3.16 ). Much of this follows in a
similar manner to @xmath -divisible subalgebras of @xmath . Indeed this
part of the section follows [ 30 , Section 2] closely. In the latter
part, Section 3.4 and Section 3.5 we turn our attention to the
interaction between maximal orders and Veronese rings. In particular we
are able to prove (in both @xmath and @xmath ) that given a @xmath
-divisible subalgebra @xmath , @xmath is a maximal order in @xmath (or
@xmath if and only if a higher Veronese subring @xmath is a maximal
order (Proposition 3.37 ). The case when @xmath is something that was
missing from [ 30 ] . A limitation of this result is that it does not
pass from @xmath to @xmath . More precisely, when @xmath , we can only
take @xmath to be coprime to @xmath .

### 3.1 Basics

Before we start looking at subalgebras of the Sklyanin algebra we state
and prove a few simple results about general connected graded domains
for which we lack good references.

###### Lemma 3.3.

Let @xmath be a cg domain with @xmath and such that @xmath . Then @xmath
for all @xmath .

###### Proof.

Since @xmath there exist nonzero homogenous @xmath with @xmath and
@xmath for some @xmath so that @xmath . First note that because @xmath
is a domain @xmath are nonzero elements of @xmath respectively. Then for
@xmath , write @xmath with @xmath and @xmath then @xmath ; proving
@xmath for all @xmath . ∎

###### Remark 3.4.

The assumption @xmath in Lemma 3.3 does not cause any problems. Given
any cg domain @xmath , it is clear from Definition 2.12 that we can
always regrade such that @xmath holds.

###### Lemma 3.5.

Let @xmath be a cg domain with graded quotient ring @xmath . Suppose
@xmath are finitely generated graded right @xmath -modules such that
@xmath , and that @xmath are finitely generated graded left @xmath
-modules such that @xmath . Then @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be such that @xmath and @xmath . By repeating the argument
for @xmath and @xmath , it is enough to show @xmath . Write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then @xmath . Let @xmath . We claim that the inclusion @xmath holds.
Take a homogenous @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath , we have @xmath for each @xmath . This forces @xmath .
Therefore, for each @xmath , @xmath . Thus @xmath , proving the claim.
Since we have the obvious inclusion @xmath , the claim shows that @xmath
. By replacing @xmath by @xmath a symmetric argument with @xmath shows
@xmath as required. ∎

Recall Remark 2.11 which observes that our rings are all Ore domains. We
give a couple of consequences of the Ore condition [ 23 , 1.13] .

###### Lemma 3.6.

Let @xmath be a @xmath -graded domain with graded quotient ring @xmath .

1.   For any homogenous @xmath , we can choose homogenous elements
    @xmath of @xmath with @xmath , and such that @xmath for each @xmath
    .

2.   Let @xmath be a finitely generated graded right @xmath -submodule
    of @xmath . Then there exists a nonzero @xmath such that @xmath .

###### Proof.

Since @xmath exists @xmath must be an Ore domain. (1) is then a simple
application of the Ore condition (see [ 15 , Lemma 4.21] ). For (2)
write @xmath with each @xmath homogenous. By the left hand version of
(1), we can pick a nonzero @xmath , with @xmath such that @xmath . In
which case

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Another standard application of the Ore condition is the following.

###### Lemma 3.7.

Let @xmath be a graded domain with graded quotient ring @xmath . Let
@xmath be nonzero right @xmath -submodules of @xmath . Then we can
identify

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We make the identification in Lemma 3.7 a standard throughout.

###### Notation 3.8.

n]homa@ @xmath n]homa@ @xmath Let @xmath be a cg domain with graded
quotient ring @xmath . Let @xmath be finitely generated graded nonzero
right @xmath -submodules of @xmath . Via Lemma 3.7 we will identify
@xmath In particular n]end@ @xmath n]M@ @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Moreover @xmath is a graded subspace of @xmath . We also make the
analogous identifications on the left.

###### Lemma 3.9.

Let @xmath be a cg domain with @xmath , and @xmath a finitely generated
nonzero graded right @xmath -module. Then @xmath is also a connected
graded domain satisfying @xmath .

###### Proof.

By Lemma 3.7 we can identify @xmath . It is then clear @xmath is an
@xmath -graded domain and @xmath . Let @xmath , with @xmath homogenous,
say @xmath . Then, for @xmath , @xmath , and so @xmath . Now fix @xmath
and @xmath such that @xmath . We have @xmath which forces @xmath .
Finally, @xmath is an artinian domain, hence division ring. It is finite
dimensional over a central algebraically closed field @xmath ; this
ensures @xmath . Thus @xmath is connected graded.

It remains to show @xmath . By Lemma 3.6 (2) there exists a nonzero
homogenous @xmath such that @xmath . Let @xmath , then one can check

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.9.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Clearly also @xmath . Moreover, @xmath because @xmath . Then given
@xmath with @xmath and @xmath , we have @xmath , showing @xmath . Using
( 3.9.1 ), if @xmath with @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It follows @xmath . ∎

Lastly we present a standard lemma on the Cohen-Macaulay property. The
notation relegating to GK-dimension can be found in Notation 2.9 ; it is
applicable thought this thesis.

###### Lemma 3.10.

Let @xmath be a cg noetherian domain with @xmath . Suppose that @xmath
is Auslander-Gorenstein and Cohen-Macaulay of GK-dimension at least 2.

1.   There does not exist a right nor left @xmath -module @xmath such
    that @xmath and @xmath .

2.   If @xmath is another cg subalgebra of @xmath such that @xmath ,
    then @xmath .

3.   Let @xmath be finitely generated right @xmath -modules. If @xmath ,
    then @xmath .

###### Proof.

(1). Assume for a contradiction that such @xmath exists, and set @xmath
. Consider the short exact sequence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath is a domain, this sequence cannot be split. It is well
known (see [ 34 , Proposition 7.24] ) that this implies @xmath , and
hence @xmath . On the other hand, because @xmath is Cohen-Macaulay, we
have @xmath . Now @xmath because @xmath , and @xmath by assumption; thus
@xmath . This contradicts @xmath .

(2). Assume that @xmath . Let @xmath and set @xmath . Consider @xmath as
a right @xmath -module. Then as in Notation 3.8 ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Clearly both @xmath and @xmath ; in particular, @xmath because @xmath .
Choose homogenous @xmath , then we have a natural surjection @xmath
given by @xmath . It is well defined because @xmath . Hence @xmath is
finite dimensional, which contradicts (1).

(3). Assume that @xmath . Without loss of generality say @xmath
(otherwise relabel), then @xmath . Pick a homogenous @xmath , and
consider the right @xmath -module @xmath . Because @xmath , for @xmath
we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence @xmath , again contradicting (1). ∎

### 3.2 @xmath-divisible rings

What is clear from the work Rogalski, Sierra and Stafford is that the
property of @xmath -divisibility will play an important role: a @xmath
-divisible subring is significantly easier to describe as properties
pass a lot more smoothly between a ring and its image in @xmath . Here,
and in Section 3.3 , we will mimic large chunks of [ 30 , Section 2] .
In particular, the proofs of Lemma 3.17 and Lemma 3.19 here come from
analogous results [ 30 , Lemma 2.10(1)] and [ 30 , Lemma 2.15] . These
proofs demonstrate many useful techniques for @xmath -divisible rings
and are included for the reader’s convenience.

We work in the slightly bigger ring obtained by inverting elements
outside @xmath .

###### Lemma 3.11.

The set @xmath consisting of the homogenous elements in @xmath is an Ore
set.

###### Proof.

Take homogeneous @xmath and @xmath . Write @xmath with @xmath maximal,
and hence @xmath . Since @xmath is an Ore domain (see Remark 2.11 ),
there exists nonzero homogenous @xmath such that @xmath . Moreover,
because @xmath and @xmath is a completely prime ideal, @xmath if and
only if @xmath . Cancelling @xmath ’s if necessary we may assume @xmath
. But then @xmath , showing @xmath is right Ore. Symmetrically @xmath is
left Ore. ∎

###### Notation 3.12.

n]sg@ @xmath Let @xmath denote the homogenous localisation of @xmath at
the completely prime ideal @xmath . That is, @xmath where @xmath is the
set consisting of the homogenous elements in @xmath . It is clear that
@xmath and

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.12.1)
  -- -------- -- ----------

For a subset @xmath , we extended Notation 1.2 to @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As @xmath one has @xmath ; in particular the notation @xmath is
unambiguous.

Before we start with @xmath -divisibility we prove a straight forward
fact about @xmath .

###### Lemma 3.13.

The only homogenous right or left ideals of @xmath are those of the form
@xmath for some @xmath .

###### Proof.

First note from ( 3.12.1 ) that @xmath is a graded division ring; it
therefore has no non-trivial proper homogenous right ideals. Thus, if
@xmath is a nonzero proper homogenous right ideal, then @xmath . Choose
@xmath maximal such that @xmath (and so @xmath ). Write @xmath for some
@xmath . A quick check shows @xmath is a nonzero right ideal of @xmath .
If @xmath , then @xmath , which would contradict the choice of @xmath .
Thus @xmath and @xmath . A symmetric argument proves the statement for
left ideals. ∎

###### Definition 3.14.

n]torsgm@ @xmath Let @xmath be a cg subalgebra containing @xmath , and
let @xmath be a graded right @xmath -module. Put

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We call @xmath the @xmath - torsion submodule of @xmath . We say that
@xmath is @xmath - torsion if @xmath , and @xmath is @xmath -
torsionfree if @xmath .

###### Lemma 3.15.

Let @xmath be a cg subalgebra of @xmath containing @xmath . Let @xmath
be a graded right @xmath -module and set @xmath . Then @xmath is also a
graded right @xmath -module. Moreover the following are equivalent:

1.  @xmath ;

2.  @xmath ;

3.  @xmath is a @xmath -torsionfree @xmath -module.

###### Proof.

If @xmath then @xmath , and because @xmath is central, @xmath for all
@xmath . So @xmath is a right @xmath -module, clearly graded. Suppose
@xmath . If @xmath then for some @xmath , @xmath , and so @xmath . By
induction we get @xmath . The converse is even more obvious. (2) and (3)
basically have the same definition. ∎

###### Definition 3.16.

n]mr@ @xmath , @xmath Let @xmath be a cg subalgebra containing @xmath ,
and let @xmath be a graded right @xmath -module. We say @xmath is @xmath
-divisible if any, and hence all, of the equivalent conditions of Lemma
3.15 hold. The graded right @xmath -module

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is called the @xmath -divisible hull of @xmath . The ring @xmath is
@xmath -divisible if it is @xmath -divisible as a right (equivalently
left) module over itself.

As a general strategy we will be proving many properties in the factor
rings @xmath and @xmath , and be lifting these up to @xmath and @xmath .
The significance of the next lemma is therefore clear.

###### Lemma 3.17.

Let @xmath be a @xmath -divisible cg subalgebra of @xmath with @xmath .
Then @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath . Since @xmath , there exist nonzero homogenous @xmath such
that @xmath . By Lemma 3.6 (1) we may assume @xmath , say with @xmath .
Hence we see @xmath , and it follows @xmath . If @xmath we’re done, as
then @xmath would contain the generating set of @xmath . So suppose
@xmath . Write @xmath for some @xmath and @xmath ; as @xmath is @xmath
-divisible @xmath . Again by @xmath -divisibility @xmath , and so @xmath
. But this means @xmath with @xmath , and again @xmath contains the
generating set of @xmath . ∎

As demonstrated in the next result, @xmath -divisible rings are “nice”.

###### Proposition 3.18.

Let @xmath be a @xmath -divisible cg subalgebra of @xmath with @xmath .
Then @xmath is strongly noetherian (in particular noetherian) and
finitely generated as a @xmath -algebra.

###### Proof.

Since the generators of @xmath as a right (or left) ideal generate
@xmath as a @xmath -algebra, it is enough to only prove @xmath is
strongly noetherian. Now,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and moreover, @xmath by Lemma 3.17 . By Theorem 2.54 there exists @xmath
such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some ideal sheaf @xmath and @xmath -ample invertible sheaf @xmath .
In particular the ring @xmath is a subring of the twisted homogenous
coordinate ring @xmath . In which case @xmath is noetherian by
Proposition 2.55 . Clearly then @xmath is noetherian also. Since we have
@xmath , @xmath is strongly noetherian by [ 3 , Theorem 4.24] . Finally
@xmath is then strongly noetherian by [ 3 , Theorem  4.9(1)] . ∎

Next we provide a useful lemma about the structure of ideals in a @xmath
-divisible ring. Recall an algebra @xmath is called just infinite if for
every nonzero ideal @xmath of @xmath one has @xmath .

###### Lemma 3.19.

Let @xmath be a @xmath -divisible cg subalgebra of @xmath with @xmath .
Then:

1.   If @xmath is a nonzero @xmath -divisible ideal of @xmath , then
    @xmath .

2.   Conversely, if @xmath is an ideal of @xmath such that @xmath , then
    @xmath and @xmath .

3.   If @xmath is any ideal of @xmath , then @xmath for some @xmath and
    ideal @xmath satisfying @xmath .

4.   Suppose @xmath are graded subspaces of @xmath such that @xmath .
    Assume that @xmath is an ideal of @xmath . Then @xmath .

###### Proof.

(1). By Lemma 3.17 , @xmath . By Proposition 2.55 @xmath is just
infinite. Because @xmath is @xmath -divisible, @xmath and therefore
@xmath is a nonzero ideal of @xmath . Hence @xmath . Set @xmath . We
have @xmath , and since @xmath is @xmath -divisible, we also have @xmath
. Hence @xmath . It then follows that @xmath for all @xmath . Since
@xmath is @xmath -divisible, the element @xmath remains regular in
@xmath by Lemma 3.15 (3), in particular we get that @xmath for all
@xmath . This clearly implies @xmath .

(2). First note that if @xmath then, @xmath . By Theorem 2.54 , @xmath ,
and so @xmath by [ 20 , Proposition 5.1] . Thus @xmath . Therefore,
since @xmath is just infinite (Proposition 2.55 ), @xmath . Since @xmath
is noetherian by Proposition 3.18 , @xmath is a finitely generated as a
right @xmath -module, and so there exists @xmath such that @xmath . Let
@xmath is the largest right ideal such that @xmath and @xmath (it exists
by [ 20 , Proposition 5.1(f)] and the noetherianess of @xmath ). Then [
20 , Proposition 5.6] implies @xmath , and so @xmath . This shows @xmath
is an ideal of @xmath . Without loss of generality replace @xmath with
@xmath . Suppose we still have @xmath , say @xmath . Replacing @xmath
with @xmath where @xmath is maximal such that @xmath , we may assume
@xmath . In which case @xmath and so left multiplication by @xmath
defines a surjection @xmath . By maximality of @xmath , @xmath .
However, @xmath is finite dimensional; hence we have a contradiction.
Thus @xmath .

(3). Write @xmath with @xmath and @xmath maximal. It is easily checked
@xmath is an ideal of @xmath . Then since @xmath is maximal, @xmath . By
part (1), @xmath , and by part (2), @xmath . Hence @xmath follows.

(4). Since @xmath is completely prime, @xmath and so @xmath . Now apply
part (3). ∎

### 3.3 Modules, duals and endomorphism rings over @xmath-divisible
rings

For now we continue following [ 30 , Section 2] and investigate the
first properties of @xmath -divisible subrings rings of @xmath . Below
the proof Lemma 3.21 is copied from the proof of [ 30 , Lemma 2.13] .
The proof of Lemma 3.20 is also essentially that of [ 30 , Lemma 2.12] ,
however on this occasion there was a small hole which needed mending.

###### Lemma 3.20.

Let @xmath be a @xmath -divisible cg subalgebra of @xmath with @xmath .
Suppose @xmath are finitely generated nonzero right @xmath -modules.

1.   If @xmath , then @xmath .

2.   If @xmath is @xmath -divisible and @xmath (in particular this holds
    if @xmath is @xmath -divisible), then @xmath is also @xmath
    -divisible.

3.   If @xmath is @xmath -divisible, then @xmath is @xmath -divisible
    and noetherian, and @xmath is finitely generated left @xmath
    -module. Moreover @xmath .

###### Proof.

(1). Since @xmath , @xmath by Lemma 3.13 , hence using Notation 3.8 ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(2). By (1), @xmath . Take @xmath , say @xmath for some @xmath . Then
@xmath . Hence @xmath and @xmath .

(3). As @xmath is @xmath -divisible, clearly @xmath , and so @xmath by
part (1). By part (2) and Lemma 3.9 , @xmath is @xmath -divisible and
connected graded, hence it is noetherian by Proposition 3.18 . Since
@xmath is finitely generated and @xmath , there exists a nonzero
homogenous @xmath such that @xmath by Lemma 3.6 (2). So then @xmath .
Therefore, as a left @xmath -module @xmath is finitely generated.
Finally, as @xmath implies @xmath , we get @xmath . ∎

In the proof of [ 30 , Lemma 2.12(3)] (the @xmath -version of Lemma 3.20
) there was a small hole. Their proof required @xmath ; however it was
only guaranteed that @xmath . This can be repaired with an identical
proof to that of Lemma 3.20 (3) using Lemma 3.9 and a @xmath -version of
Lemma 3.18 .

###### Lemma 3.21.

Let @xmath be a cg subalgebra of @xmath with @xmath , and let @xmath be
a right @xmath -submodule of @xmath such that @xmath .

1.   For every @xmath , we have @xmath .

2.   If @xmath is @xmath -divisible and @xmath is finitely generated
    @xmath -module, then @xmath is also a finitely generated @xmath
    -module.

3.   If @xmath is @xmath -divisible, then @xmath and so @xmath .
    Similarly for the double dual @xmath . Moreover @xmath and @xmath .

###### Proof.

(1). Let @xmath , say @xmath , and so @xmath . Because @xmath , @xmath .
Conversely, let @xmath with @xmath . Then @xmath . Since @xmath is a
completely prime ideal and @xmath , we have @xmath . Thus @xmath for
some @xmath and @xmath . Therefore @xmath , showing @xmath and @xmath .

(2). By Lemma 3.6 (2), there exists a nonzero homogenous @xmath such
that @xmath . If @xmath for some @xmath , then @xmath , and so @xmath by
@xmath -divisibility of @xmath . So we may assume @xmath . Also, again
by @xmath -divisibility of @xmath , @xmath . Since @xmath is noetherian
by Proposition 3.18 , @xmath is a finitely generated right ideal of
@xmath . Using (1), we then have @xmath is a finitely generated right
@xmath -module.

(3). By Lemma 3.20 (2), @xmath and is @xmath -divisible. Clearly then
@xmath , and so symmetrically we can prove @xmath Now as @xmath ,
certainly @xmath . Conversely, if @xmath and @xmath , say @xmath , then
@xmath and so @xmath . Hence @xmath , proving @xmath . Taking the second
dual gives @xmath . ∎

###### Lemma 3.22.

Let @xmath be a @xmath -divisible cg subalgebra of @xmath . Let @xmath
be a finitely generated right @xmath -module. Then @xmath

###### Proof.

By Lemma 3.21 (2) @xmath is finitely generated, say @xmath . Each @xmath
, so there exists @xmath such that @xmath . Hence, if @xmath , then
@xmath . Set @xmath and @xmath . By Lemma 3.20 (3), @xmath is @xmath
-divisible, and hence to prove @xmath , it is enough to prove @xmath .
Let @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so @xmath . Since @xmath is @xmath -divisible @xmath . Therefore @xmath
, and then @xmath . Now take @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so certainly @xmath . Therefore @xmath and @xmath . ∎

Here we note some special properties of modules of GK-dimension less
than or equal to 1.

###### Lemma 3.23.

Let @xmath be a cg @xmath -divisible subalgebra of @xmath and @xmath be
finitely generated right @xmath -submodules of @xmath . Suppose that
@xmath is @xmath -divisible.

1.   If @xmath , then @xmath .

2.   If @xmath is also @xmath -divisible, then @xmath if and only if
    @xmath .

3.   If (2) is satisfied, then @xmath is finitely generated as a @xmath
    -module and has an eventually 3-periodic Hilbert series.

###### Proof.

Set @xmath and consider @xmath . We have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

whilst, because @xmath and @xmath is @xmath -divisible

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus we have

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.23.1)
  -- -------- -- ----------

(1). If @xmath , then @xmath by ( 3.23.1 ). It follows that the linear
map @xmath : @xmath is surjective for all @xmath . This forces @xmath
for all @xmath and thus @xmath .

(2). If @xmath is @xmath -divisible, then @xmath is @xmath -torsionfree.
It follows that if @xmath , then @xmath by [ 20 , Proposition 5.1(e)] .
Hence @xmath by ( 3.23.1 ).

(3). By ( 3.23.1 ), @xmath . Hence @xmath for all @xmath say. As @xmath
is @xmath -torsionfree, this shows @xmath for @xmath . To see @xmath is
finitely generated as a @xmath -module notice that @xmath . ∎

### 3.4 Orders in @xmath

With the ultimate aim to classify maximal orders in @xmath , we need a
few preliminary results to do with orders inside @xmath . Without a good
reference for maximal orders as defined in Definition 2.13 we need to
prove some standard lemmas. We start with a very easy but useful lemma.

###### Lemma 3.24.

Let @xmath and @xmath be two graded domains in the graded quotient ring
@xmath . Suppose @xmath for some nonzero @xmath . Then there exists
nonzero homogenous @xmath also satisfying @xmath .

###### Proof.

Write @xmath and @xmath with @xmath homogenous of degree @xmath . Choose
@xmath minimal such that @xmath . Let @xmath be homogenous, say @xmath ,
then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In particular, we must have @xmath . Thus @xmath and we may assume
@xmath and @xmath are homogenous. Since @xmath and are homogenous, there
exists homogenous @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath . In which case,
@xmath ∎

Typically Lemma 3.24 will be used without reference. Next we develop a
few standard techniques to conclude when two rings are in fact
equivalent orders.

###### Lemma 3.25.

Let @xmath be two cg domains with @xmath .

1.   If @xmath and both @xmath and @xmath are finitely generated, then
    @xmath and @xmath share a common ideal. More precisely, there exists
    a nonzero ideal of @xmath which is also an ideal of @xmath .

2.   If @xmath and @xmath is finitely generated then @xmath and @xmath
    are equivalent orders.

3.   If there exists a nonzero graded @xmath -bimodule @xmath that is
    finitely generated on both sides, then @xmath and @xmath are
    equivalent orders.

###### Proof.

(1). Set @xmath . By a left handed version of Lemma 3.6 (2) there exists
a nonzero @xmath such that @xmath . In which case, @xmath , showing
@xmath . Hence @xmath is a nonzero right ideal of @xmath , and since
@xmath , it is a left ideal of @xmath . Similarly @xmath is a nonzero
ideal of @xmath that is a right ideal of @xmath . Thus @xmath is an
ideal of both @xmath and @xmath . It is nonzero since @xmath is a
domain.

(2). This follows immediately from Lemma 3.6 (2).

(3). Since @xmath is finitely generated there exists a nonzero
homogenous @xmath such that @xmath . Given any nonzero @xmath , @xmath
and so @xmath . A symmetric argument finds nonzero @xmath such that
@xmath . ∎

We now turn to the first significant result on orders inside @xmath . It
is the @xmath -analogue of [ 30 , Proposition 2.16] . Indeed for
Proposition 3.27 we had no need to alter the proof given in [ 30 ] .

###### Lemma 3.26.

Suppose that @xmath and @xmath are two @xmath -divisible subalgebras of
@xmath with @xmath . If @xmath and @xmath are equivalent orders, then
@xmath and @xmath are equivalent orders in @xmath .

###### Proof.

By Lemma 3.17 , @xmath . Say we have @xmath with @xmath nonzero and
homogenous. Write @xmath with @xmath and @xmath . Then @xmath , and
hence @xmath because @xmath is @xmath -divisible. Replacing @xmath by
@xmath , we may assume @xmath . Similarly we can assume @xmath . Hence
@xmath and @xmath . ∎

###### Proposition 3.27.

Let @xmath and @xmath two be @xmath -divisible subalgebras of @xmath
such that @xmath . Assume that @xmath . Then @xmath and @xmath are
equivalent orders if and only if @xmath and @xmath are equivalent
orders.

###### Proof.

( @xmath ). This follows immediately from Lemma 3.26 .

( @xmath ). Suppose that @xmath with @xmath nonzero and homogenous. We
set @xmath . It is easily seen that @xmath is a ring, satisfying @xmath
and @xmath . By Proposition 2.55 , @xmath and all subalgebras of @xmath
, in particular @xmath and @xmath , are noetherian. Thus @xmath and
@xmath ensure that @xmath and @xmath are finitely generated.

Now, since @xmath is finitely generated, we can choose a finite
dimensional subspace @xmath such that @xmath . There is no harm to
assume @xmath . Put @xmath and @xmath . By Lemma 3.9 @xmath . Since
@xmath , @xmath , and so Lemma 3.20 (1) implies @xmath . By Lemma 3.20
(3), @xmath and @xmath is finitely generated. By Lemma 3.21 , @xmath is
finitely generated. It follows from Lemma 3.25 (3) that @xmath and
@xmath are equivalent orders.

Since @xmath , @xmath , and hence @xmath as @xmath is @xmath -divisible.
Because @xmath , @xmath . Hence @xmath and @xmath . Since @xmath and
@xmath are finitely generated, we can choose finite dimensional
subspaces @xmath with @xmath and @xmath . We then have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

forcing everything above to be an equality. In particular @xmath ,
proving that @xmath is finitely generated. By the Graded Nakayama’s
Lemma (Lemma 2.8 ) @xmath is a finite dimensional vector space over
@xmath . But since @xmath ; @xmath and @xmath . It follows,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus @xmath is a finite dimensional @xmath -vector space. The Graded
Nakayama Lemma then applies again to show @xmath is finitely generated.
By Lemma 3.25 (2), @xmath and @xmath are equivalent orders. Since @xmath
and @xmath are equivalent orders from earlier, we get that @xmath and
@xmath are equivalent orders. ∎

We finish this section by further studying orders in @xmath and in
@xmath . We make an extension of Notation 2.56 .

###### Notation 3.28.

n]emt@ @xmath n]t@ @xmath n]tau@ @xmath n]tg@ @xmath Let @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath and @xmath . Whence we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In [ 30 , Notation 2.5] the authors defined @xmath as the ring obtained
from @xmath by inverting all homogenous elements of @xmath . Clearly for
this definition @xmath . Conversely, if @xmath for @xmath homogenous and
@xmath , then @xmath is divisible by 3. Say @xmath for @xmath . Choosing
homogenous @xmath , we have @xmath , where @xmath . As @xmath is
completely prime, @xmath . This shows @xmath indeed equals @xmath as
defined in [ 30 , Notation 2.5] . A similar proof shows

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.28.1)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Recall that for a cg domain @xmath we can write @xmath as in Definition
2.12 . We warn that below, in Lemma 3.29 and Lemma 3.30 , we give @xmath
, @xmath and @xmath the grading induced from @xmath ; so for example
@xmath . This is in contrast with Lemma 3.36 and Proposition 3.37 later
where @xmath is regraded to have @xmath .

###### Lemma 3.29.

Let @xmath be a subalgebra containing @xmath and such that @xmath . Then
either @xmath or @xmath .

###### Proof.

Since @xmath , certainly @xmath . Furthermore, @xmath by ( 3.28.1 ).
Thus @xmath . If @xmath , then we can pick homogenous @xmath , with
@xmath coprime to 3. In which case there exists @xmath such that @xmath
, which forces @xmath . ∎

The next proposition shows maximal @xmath -orders are in fact maximal
orders. Recall from Notation 2.3 that for a cg subalgebra @xmath of
@xmath , the subalgebra of @xmath generated by @xmath and @xmath is
denoted by @xmath n]ag@ @xmath .

###### Lemma 3.30.

Let @xmath be a cg subalgebra of @xmath with @xmath . If @xmath are
equivalent orders for some cg subalgebra @xmath of @xmath , then @xmath
.

###### Proof.

For a contradiction assume that @xmath . Say that @xmath for nonzero
@xmath . By Lemma 3.24 we may assume that @xmath (in particular @xmath )
and are homogenous. Set @xmath and @xmath ; clearly @xmath whilst @xmath
. By Lemma 3.29 , there are two cases:

1.  @xmath ;

2.  @xmath .

(1). Take @xmath . Then certainly @xmath . Now note that @xmath equals
@xmath localised at the Ore set @xmath . So, cancelling @xmath ’s if
necessary, we can write @xmath for some @xmath and @xmath . Now write
@xmath and @xmath where @xmath and @xmath . Choose an integer @xmath
such that @xmath and consider @xmath . On the one hand @xmath , and
therefore @xmath , while on the other @xmath . Now @xmath , while also
@xmath as @xmath is a completely prime ideal of @xmath , Thus all of
@xmath . But then.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath , this is our desired contradiction.

(2) follows in the same way with @xmath in place of @xmath . ∎

The importance of Lemma 3.30 is that it allows us to concentrate on
rings inside @xmath where we are more comfortable.

### 3.5 Veronese rings of @xmath-divisible algebras

To help prove many results in @xmath , we will want to utilise the
results of [ 27 ] and [ 30 ] as much as possible. A clear strategy is
therefore to pass information between Veronese rings. We develop some
basic machinery for this here.

###### Lemma 3.31.

Let @xmath be a cg domain. Fix @xmath and write @xmath .

1.   Then @xmath is (strongly) noetherian if and only if @xmath is
    (strongly) noetherian.

2.   Suppose that @xmath is noetherian and let @xmath be a finitely
    generated right @xmath -module. Then as a right @xmath -module

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where @xmath are finitely generated right @xmath -modules. In
    particular @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are all finitely generated as
    right @xmath -modules.

###### Proof.

(1). The noetherian part is Lemma 2.17 . The strongly noetherian
statement is [ 3 , Proposition 4.9(2)(3)] .

(2). Write @xmath . Fix @xmath and write @xmath . If @xmath there is
nothing to prove so assume @xmath . By Lemma 3.3 both @xmath and @xmath
. Since @xmath is finitely generated there exists a homogenous @xmath
such that @xmath by Lemma 3.6 (2). Using Lemma 3.3 we can multiply
@xmath on the left with an element of @xmath with appropriate degree so
that we may assume @xmath . In which case @xmath , in particular @xmath
embeds into @xmath as a right ideal. Since @xmath is noetherian, @xmath
is also noetherian by part (1). Hence @xmath is finitely generated. The
module @xmath is then a direct sum of finitely generated modules, hence
itself is finitely generated. To see @xmath is finitely generated just
take @xmath in the above. ∎

###### Lemma 3.32.

Let @xmath and @xmath be two cg domains with @xmath . Assume that @xmath
and let @xmath . If @xmath and @xmath are equivalent orders, then @xmath
and @xmath are also equivalent orders with @xmath

###### Proof.

The fact that @xmath follows as in ( 3.28.1 ). Assume that @xmath , with
@xmath nonzero and homogenous. Say @xmath and @xmath . By Lemma 3.3 we
can find nonzero homogenous elements @xmath of degrees @xmath and @xmath
respectively satisfying @xmath and @xmath . Then @xmath , and still
satisfy @xmath . It then follows that @xmath . In a symmetric fashion we
can also find nonzero @xmath such that @xmath . ∎

Since @xmath , the property of @xmath -divisibility also makes sense in
the 3-Veronese @xmath . A trivial but useful result is the following.

###### Lemma 3.33.

Let @xmath be a cg subalgebra of @xmath containing @xmath and let @xmath
be a graded right @xmath -submodule of @xmath . If @xmath is @xmath
-divisible then @xmath is also @xmath -divisible. ∎

The next lemma is key to utilising the results of [ 27 ] and [ 30 ]
fully. It allows us to build appropriate ideals in @xmath out of ideals
from @xmath and vice versa.

Before Lemma 3.34 we recall Notation 2.9 for GK-dimension.

###### Lemma 3.34.

Let @xmath be a cg noetherian domain of finite GK-dimension. Fix @xmath
and let @xmath .

1.   For every homogenous ideal @xmath of @xmath , the homogenous ideal
    @xmath of @xmath satisfies @xmath .

2.   Let @xmath be a homogenous ideal of @xmath .

    1.   The ideal @xmath of @xmath satisfies @xmath . Furthermore,
        @xmath holds.

    2.   The ideal @xmath of @xmath also satisfies @xmath . In this case
        @xmath .

###### Proof.

In this proof @xmath is graded as a subset of @xmath , i.e. @xmath . We
also remark that by Lemma 3.31 we have that @xmath is noetherian, and
that @xmath is finitely generated on both sides as a right and left
@xmath -module. Finally, all modules below will always be finitely
generated; in particular the GK-dimension of a module is independent of
the ring it is being considered over by ( 2.9.2 ).

(1). One can easily check @xmath . Since @xmath is finitely generated on
both sides as an @xmath -module, we have that @xmath is finitely
generated on both sides as an @xmath -module. Thus by [ 20 ,
Proposition 5.5] , @xmath .

(2a). There is an isomorphism of right @xmath -modules @xmath .
Therefore, since @xmath is finitely generated as an @xmath -module on
both sides, we can apply [ 20 , Proposition 5.6] and deduce @xmath as
right @xmath -modules. Clearly @xmath , and so there is a surjection
@xmath . Hence by [ 20 , Proposition 5.1(b)] we have

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.34.1)
  -- -------- -- ----------

as right @xmath -modules. It is obvious that @xmath holds.

(2b). To deal with the ideal @xmath we first need

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.34.2)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We already have @xmath from ( 3.34.1 ). For the reverse inequality note
that because @xmath ; @xmath as right @xmath -modules. So @xmath follows
from [ 20 , Proposition 5.1(b)] . Hence ( 3.34.2 ) holds.

Now @xmath is finitely generated, therefore so is the left @xmath
-module @xmath , say that @xmath where @xmath for some homogenous @xmath
. It follows that @xmath where @xmath are right ideals of @xmath . Fix
@xmath , and say @xmath . By Lemma 3.3 we can choose a nonzero @xmath
such that @xmath . Then @xmath which shows @xmath . Because @xmath is an
intersection of finitely many nonzero right ideals in a noetherian
domain, @xmath must also be nonzero (see [ 15 , Exercise 4N] ). For
every @xmath , clearly @xmath and @xmath , thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

by [ 20 , Proposition  5.1(b)] and ( 3.34.2 ). But @xmath embeds into
@xmath in the obvious way, forcing @xmath Here we are using [ 20 ,
Proposition 5.1(a)(b)] . For the last line,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Remark 3.35.

Let @xmath be a cg @xmath -divisible subalgebra of @xmath with @xmath .
By Proposition 3.18 , @xmath is noetherian, and so Lemma 3.34 will apply
in this situation.

Our major result of this section partially answers [ 30 , Question 9.4]
: we will prove that a @xmath -divisible subalgebra @xmath is a maximal
order if and only its @xmath th Veronese subring @xmath is a maximal
order. Our results will be applicable in both @xmath and its 3-Veronese
@xmath .

###### Lemma 3.36.

Let @xmath and @xmath be a @xmath -divisible cg subalgebra of @xmath
such that @xmath .

1.   Suppose that @xmath and @xmath is coprime to 3. Set @xmath , then
    @xmath .

2.   Suppose that @xmath . Set @xmath , then @xmath .

###### Proof.

(1). Put @xmath . Since @xmath is @xmath -divisible, @xmath , and so
@xmath . Conversely let @xmath . Since @xmath is coprime to @xmath ,
there exists an integer @xmath such that @xmath . In which case @xmath .

(2). This is the same as (1) but with the phrase “ @xmath is coprime to
@xmath ” replaced with the phrase “ @xmath ”. ∎

###### Proposition 3.37.

Let @xmath and let @xmath be a @xmath -divisible cg subalgebra of @xmath
with @xmath .

1.   Suppose that @xmath and @xmath is coprime to 3, and let @xmath .
    Then:

    1.  @xmath is a maximal order if and only if @xmath is a maximal
        order;

    2.  @xmath is a maximal @xmath -order if and only if @xmath is a
        maximal @xmath -order.

2.   Suppose that @xmath , and let @xmath . Then:

    1.  @xmath is a maximal order if and only if @xmath is a maximal
        order;

    2.  @xmath is a maximal @xmath -order if and only if @xmath is a
        maximal @xmath -order.

###### Proof.

( @xmath ) ( @xmath ) Suppose that @xmath is a maximal order. Assume
that @xmath for some graded subalgebra @xmath of @xmath such that @xmath
for some nonzero homogenous @xmath . By Lemma 3.24 we may assume @xmath
,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.37.1)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Set @xmath . Since @xmath and @xmath , @xmath for all @xmath . Thus
@xmath . Now let @xmath , then @xmath for some @xmath , and hence @xmath
. Since @xmath , @xmath . Hence we get @xmath because @xmath is @xmath
-divisible. This shows @xmath . On the other hand, because @xmath ,
@xmath by Lemma 3.36 . By assumption @xmath is a maximal order and hence
@xmath . It then follows

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and so @xmath .

( @xmath ) Suppose now that @xmath is a maximal order, and assume that
@xmath are equivalent orders, for some graded subalgebra @xmath of
@xmath . By Lemma 3.30 , we know that in fact @xmath . By Lemma 3.32 ,
@xmath are equivalent orders, and so by hypothesis @xmath . By Lemma
3.36 , @xmath , and so it is enough to prove @xmath . Let @xmath . Note
that since @xmath , @xmath . Because @xmath and @xmath are coprime there
exists @xmath such that @xmath . Thus @xmath .

( @xmath ). This is proved in the same way as (1a). Here one replaces
uses of Lemma 3.30 (for example ( 3.37.1 )) with “ @xmath by
assumption”. Then replace all instances of @xmath with @xmath .

(2). This follows in the same as part (1) with “ @xmath is coprime to
@xmath ” replaced with “ @xmath ”. ∎

## 4 The noncommutative blowups @xmath

This chapter is dedicated to finding what subalgebras of @xmath should
be analogous to the blowup subalgebras @xmath as defined in Definition
2.57 . In other words, what are the blowup subalgebras of @xmath ? These
are the rings @xmath which were defined in Definition 1.3 . We will
prove that these rings are very closely related to the @xmath and
satisfy similar abstract properties. The work in this chapter is
absolutely crucial to be able to apply techniques from [ 27 , 30 , 29 ]
and obtain our main classification of maximal @xmath -orders.

Our noncommutative blowup subalgebras, the @xmath ’s, can be defined for
an effective divisor on @xmath of degree at most 2. We give a brief
explanation of why this should be true, for this reason was the main
factor that lead to Definition 1.3 . In short it is that we would expect
the 3-Veroneses of our blowups to coincide with those blowups of @xmath
from Definition 2.57 . More precisely, if @xmath is one of our blowups
we would expect

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.0.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

to hold. With this as a clue, we realise we should be “blowing up” at
effective divisors @xmath with @xmath . This being because blowups of
@xmath are at effective divisors of degree at most 8. So we must have
@xmath for ( 4.0.1 ) to make sense.

When @xmath , the ring @xmath was first studied in [ 27 , Section 12] ,
where the author proves it to be the only degree 1 generated maximal
order in @xmath . We recall the definition here.

###### Definition 4.1.

n]sp@ @xmath Let @xmath . We define the blowup of @xmath at @xmath as
the ring

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Rogalski proves strong results on @xmath .

###### Proposition 4.2.

[ 27 , Theorem 12.2] Let @xmath and @xmath . Then:

1.  @xmath , @xmath is @xmath -divisible with @xmath and has Hilbert
    series @xmath .

2.  @xmath is strongly noetherian. The ring @xmath satisfies @xmath on
    the left and right, has cohomological dimension 2 and (by [ 29 ,
    Proposition 2.4] ) @xmath has a balanced dualizing complex.

3.  @xmath is Auslander-Gorenstein and Cohen-Macaulay.

4.  @xmath is a maximal order in @xmath .∎

Proposition 4.2 (1) is enough to show that Definition 4.1 coincides the
definition of @xmath given in Definition 1.3 . We prefer Definition 4.1
as it emphasises that @xmath is generated in degree 1.

### 4.1 The two point blowup @xmath

When @xmath for some @xmath , understanding @xmath becomes much harder.
The main hinderance is that @xmath is no longer generated in a single
degree. We introduce some notation which will help us along the way.

###### Notation 4.3.

Let @xmath be an automorphism. Given @xmath , or more generally a
divisor @xmath of @xmath we will write @xmath n]psj@ @xmath and @xmath
n]xsj@ @xmath for @xmath .

Notation 4.3 will be typically applied with @xmath or @xmath . In
contrast Notation 4.4 is reserved for the automorphism @xmath unless
explicitly said otherwise.

###### Notation 4.4.

For @xmath , we put @xmath , while we define @xmath . n]xn@ @xmath

Notation 4.3 and Notation 4.4 , along with Notation 1.2 from the
introduction, will be applicable for the rest of this thesis. Using
Notation 4.3 and Notation 4.4 we recall the definition of @xmath .

###### Definition 4.5.

Let @xmath . Put

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We define the blowup of @xmath at @xmath to be the ring @xmath n]spq@
@xmath

Let @xmath and @xmath as in Definition 4.5 . It is clear that @xmath ,
and because @xmath , that @xmath . Hence by the Riemann-Roch Theorem
(specifically Corollary 2.33 ), @xmath . In which case @xmath . In
particular one sees @xmath cannot be generated in degree 1. In Example
7.18 we show that, at least for some choices of @xmath and @xmath ,
@xmath is not generated in degrees 1 and 2. For general @xmath and
@xmath , it is unknown if @xmath can be generated in degrees 1 and 2. We
include @xmath in Definition 4.5 to be sure that @xmath . It is implicit
in our proof of Theorem 4.8 that @xmath .

A lemma we will often use is the following simple geometric result which
comes from the definition of a Cartier divisor.

###### Lemma 4.6.

Let @xmath be divisors on @xmath . Consider the invertible sheaves
@xmath and @xmath corresponding to @xmath and @xmath via [ 16 ,
Proposition 6.13] . Then,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath , and @xmath , @xmath and @xmath be as in Definition 4.5 .
Set @xmath . One has

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Similarly @xmath , and in general

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.6.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

It is then clear from Definition 4.5 that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.6.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

An immediate consequence of Definition 4.5 and the above is that the
image of @xmath inside @xmath is easy to understand.

###### Lemma 4.7.

Let @xmath and @xmath . Then @xmath where @xmath . The Hilbert series of
@xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Set @xmath . By Lemma 4.6 and ( 4.6.1 ) we have that @xmath for all
@xmath . Hence @xmath for all @xmath , which shows that @xmath . By
definition, @xmath is the subring of @xmath generated by @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath ; while from ( 4.6.2 ) we have that @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath . But Theorem 2.50 (4) says that @xmath is generated in degrees 1
and 2. Thus @xmath .

For the Hilbert series, we note that @xmath for @xmath . So by the
Riemann-Roch Theorem (specifically Corollary 2.33 ), @xmath for @xmath ,
while @xmath . ∎

As sort of a disclaimer, we warn that future uses of Lemma 4.6 and Lemma
4.7 may come without reference. The next result we state is the key
result which allows us to understand @xmath . The majority of this
chapter will be dedicated to proving it.

###### Theorem 4.8.

Let @xmath . Then

1.  @xmath is @xmath -divisible with

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (4.8.1)
      -- -------- -- ---------

2.   The Hilbert series of @xmath is given by

      -- -------- -- ---------
         @xmath      (4.8.2)
      -- -------- -- ---------

The statement and proof of Theorem 4.8 should be compared with those of
Theorem 2.59 (in particular the sketch proof provided there). Here we
are made to work harder to compensate for @xmath not being generated in
degree one.

###### Lemma 4.9.

Parts (1) and (2) of Theorem 4.8 are equivalent.

###### Proof.

Fix @xmath and let @xmath . Using @xmath and that @xmath is a domain, we
have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.9.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We know the Hilbert series of @xmath from Lemma 4.7 . This and ( 4.9.1 )
gives

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.9.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Now, this is an equality if and only if there is equality in ( 4.9.1 ).
Since @xmath , this is true if and only if @xmath ; in other words, if
and only if @xmath is @xmath -divisible. The isomorphism ( 4.8.1 ) is a
consequence of @xmath being @xmath -divisible and Lemma 4.7 . ∎

###### Lemma 4.10.

Let @xmath and let @xmath , @xmath and @xmath be as in Definition 4.5 .
Then

1.  @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ;

2.  @xmath and @xmath .

###### Proof.

(1). From the definition we have @xmath for @xmath . Hence by the
Riemann-Roch (specifically Corollary 2.33 ), @xmath . Since @xmath , we
then have, for @xmath , that @xmath . Again from the definition @xmath .
Thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(2). Here we must show @xmath and @xmath . By Lemma 4.7 we have that
@xmath . Since @xmath , this implies @xmath . Set @xmath . Again by
Lemma 4.7 , @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As mentioned previously, we are adapting Rogalski’s proof of Theorem
2.59 to prove Theorem 4.8 . The main step where Rogalski uses generation
in degree 1 (which is something we do not have) is the semi-continuity
argument he uses. We are able to come up with our own semi-continuity
argument. For this we require the introduction of the Grassmannians.

We write @xmath n]grmv@ @xmath for the Grassmannian of @xmath
-dimensional subspaces of a fixed @xmath -dimensional @xmath -vector
space @xmath . More details on the Grassmannian can be found in the
appendix. The result on Grassmannians we need is Lemma 4.11 below. We
acknowledge that surely there exists a suitable reference somewhere for
it despite the author being unable to find such. Since at first sight it
did not appear obvious to the author why such a statement should be
true, a (rather long-winded) proof is included in an appendix.

###### Lemma 4.11.

Let @xmath and @xmath be a @xmath -dimensional and @xmath -dimensional
@xmath -vector space respectively, and set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.11.1)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Then @xmath and @xmath are Zariski open subsets of @xmath and @xmath
respectively; and the maps @xmath and @xmath , given by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.11.2)
  -- -------- -- ----------

are morphisms of varieties.

###### Proof.

See Lemma 8.1 . ∎

Another concept we require to prove Theorem 4.8 is the geometric
quotient of a variety @xmath by a group @xmath . Let @xmath be an
algebraic group and suppose that @xmath acts upon a variety @xmath . If
this action @xmath is a morphism of algebraic varieties, then @xmath is
called a @xmath -variety [ 43 , Definition 21.4.1] . Let @xmath be a
@xmath -variety; one may then define the geometric quotient of @xmath by
@xmath [ 43 , Definition 25.3.1] . The reader is referred to [ 43 ] for
the exact definition. Suppose that we have a surjective morphism of
varieties @xmath such that the fibers of @xmath are precisely the @xmath
-orbits of @xmath . Then it is the case that @xmath is the geometric
quotient of @xmath by @xmath provided @xmath is a normal variety [ 43 ,
Proposition 25.34] .

Finally, at a certain point in the proof of Theorem 4.8 we will need the
field we are working over to be uncountable. Clearly if @xmath is a
field extension, then @xmath is trivially flat as a @xmath -module. The
following lemma is then immediate.

###### Lemma 4.12.

Let @xmath be a field extension. Let @xmath a finite dimensional @xmath
-vector space and denote @xmath . Then @xmath . In particular, for a cg
@xmath -algebra @xmath and @xmath , we have the equality of Hilbert
series

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We are now ready to prove @xmath is a @xmath -divisible ring.

###### Proof of Theorem 4.8.

By Lemma 4.9 , we can prove both (1) and (2) in tandem. We break the
proof up into 3 steps.

Step 1 . For now, fix @xmath and let @xmath . For Step 1 we prove that
@xmath is @xmath -divisible with the additional assumption that @xmath
and @xmath are in distinct @xmath -orbits. We need to assume that @xmath
is uncountable to be sure such a situation exists; by Lemma 4.12 we lose
no generality in doing so.

Put @xmath . Since @xmath is a domain and, @xmath and @xmath are already
@xmath -divisible from Proposition 4.2 ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

That is, @xmath is @xmath -divisible. We claim that in fact @xmath .

To prove this fix @xmath . Clearly @xmath , thus @xmath by Lemma 4.6 .
Taking global sections gives @xmath , and hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath is generated by @xmath we have @xmath . Symmetrically we
get @xmath also, which forces @xmath

We now show @xmath . Fix @xmath . By Lemma 4.7 , @xmath , and so

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.12.1)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Now, the right hand side of ( 4.12.1 ) consists of global sections of
@xmath which vanish at both of the effective divisors @xmath and @xmath
. But we are assuming @xmath and @xmath are in distinct @xmath -orbits,
hence @xmath . Therefore, this is the same as saying it consists of
global sections of @xmath which vanish at the effective divisor @xmath ;
in other words the right hand side equals @xmath - the left hand side.
Thus ( 4.12.1 ) implies

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.12.2)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We complete Step 1 with induction. For @xmath , clearly @xmath because
@xmath . Thus @xmath follows from ( 4.12.2 ). Now fix @xmath , and
assume @xmath . Then, since @xmath is @xmath -divisible and @xmath , we
have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This certainly implies @xmath . We know @xmath from ( 4.12.2 ), and so
we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath already, this forces @xmath . This completes the proof
under the additional assumption that @xmath and @xmath are in distinct
@xmath -orbits.

Step 2 . Now fix @xmath and allow @xmath to vary. To get rid of the
additional assumption of Step 1 the strategy is to prove that the map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is lower semi-continuous for each @xmath . In other words, for every
@xmath , the set @xmath is Zariski-closed in @xmath . Fix @xmath . We
prove @xmath is lower semi-continuous in two further sub-steps.

1.  By Lemma 4.10 there is a map @xmath ,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    We claim @xmath is a morphism of varieties.

2.  For each @xmath consider @xmath ,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    We claim @xmath lower semi-continuous for every @xmath .

Assume for the moment that these claims are true. Since clearly @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath . If (2b) holds, then @xmath is closed. If also (2a) holds,
then @xmath is closed because then @xmath is continuous with respect to
the Zariski topology. This would prove @xmath is lower-semi-continuous
completing Step 2.

Proof of 2a . Below when we say “morphism” we mean “morphism of
varieties”. Write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

To contain notation we only prove @xmath is a morphism. The proof for
@xmath are similar. We construct @xmath as a composite of other
morphisms. First we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath is an automorphism, @xmath is certainly a morphism. Let
@xmath and @xmath ; by the Riemann-Roch Theorem (Corollary 2.33 ) @xmath
. Next, we have the map @xmath determined by a basis of sections for
@xmath (see [ 16 , Theorem II.7.1] ). This is the map @xmath . We remark
that for the use of [ 16 , Theorem II.7.1] above, we are identifying
@xmath with lines through the dual vector space, i.e. @xmath . We then
extend @xmath to obtain a morphism @xmath . Explicitly we are
post-composing @xmath with the morphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We then set

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Now we use Lemma 4.11 with @xmath . Recall @xmath and @xmath from (
4.11.1 ) and ( 4.11.2 ). By Lemma 4.11 we have the morphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We claim @xmath . Given @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath . By our main assumption, @xmath has infinite order, and so
there are no points of finite order. In particular @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath are all pairwise distinct. Now the argument used to prove (
4.12.2 ) can then be repeated to show

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.12.3)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Certainly @xmath . If @xmath for some @xmath , then there exists @xmath
and @xmath , such that @xmath for @xmath . But by the definition of each
@xmath , @xmath , hence @xmath . This shows @xmath . It then follows
from ( 4.12.3 ) that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath , we in fact have @xmath . By Lemma 4.10 , @xmath and
@xmath . In particular, @xmath and @xmath is defined with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus @xmath , as a composition of morphisms, is itself a morphism of
varieties. Similarly one can prove @xmath and @xmath are morphisms, and
hence @xmath is also a morphism of varieties.

Proof of 2b . Fix bases for @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . By
Proposition 4.2 (1), @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are respectively 2, 4
and 7 dimensional @xmath -vector spaces. We can identify a vector of
@xmath with its coordinates in @xmath . Let @xmath be the collection of
@xmath such that @xmath and both @xmath and @xmath are linearly
independent collections of vectors in @xmath and @xmath respectively.
Linear independence is an open condition, and so @xmath is open subset.
To ease notation put @xmath . We have a natural surjection @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We will show this is nothing but the geometric quotient (in the sense of
[ 43 , Definition 25.3.1] ) of @xmath by the natural action of @xmath
given by left multiplication. To this end, we remark that @xmath is
obviously a irreducible @xmath -variety (see [ 43 , Definition 21.4.1] )
and moreover, given @xmath , @xmath is a @xmath -orbit. By [ 43 ,
Proposition 25.3.5] , it is the case that @xmath is the desired quotient
provided @xmath is a normal variety. But this is obviously true as
@xmath is a product of Grassmannians, and hence has an open affine cover
@xmath with @xmath , @xmath and @xmath (see [ 17 , Lemma 11.15] ).

Fix @xmath . We now prove @xmath is lower semi-continuous. First we lift
the map @xmath to a map @xmath . Given @xmath set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and define @xmath We have the commuting diagram

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

To prove @xmath is lower semi-continuous we first show that @xmath is
lower semi-continuous.

Let @xmath be the spanning set of @xmath consisting of all degree @xmath
products of the original fixed bases of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .
Take @xmath and write @xmath for @xmath . Then @xmath is spanned by
elements of the form @xmath , where @xmath are polynomials in the
coordinates of @xmath . Take @xmath , then @xmath if and only if no
collection of @xmath of the @xmath are linearly independent. This in
turn is equivalent to the determinants of all @xmath matrix minors of
the matrix @xmath vanishing. Thus @xmath is closed, proving @xmath is
lower semi-continuous.

For @xmath , set @xmath , we must show @xmath is a closed subset of
@xmath . We know @xmath is a closed subset of @xmath - we have just
proved it. Because @xmath is the geometric quotient of @xmath by @xmath
, it indeed follows that @xmath is closed (see [ 43 , Lemma 25.3.2] ).
Thus @xmath is lower semi-continuous as claimed.

As an aside, before moving on to Step 3 we remark that the lower
semi-continuity of @xmath suggests that for generic @xmath , @xmath . We
however are only concerned about @xmath on the image of @xmath . In
Step 3 we will see this is exactly what we require.

Step 3 . Finally we complete the proof. By Lemma 4.12 we may assume
without loss of generality that @xmath is uncountable. In which case
@xmath has uncountably many points. By Step 1, @xmath has the correct
Hilbert series ( 4.8.2 ) when @xmath and @xmath are in different @xmath
-orbits, say @xmath for @xmath in different @xmath -orbits. By Step 2,
@xmath is a closed subset of @xmath . If @xmath , then because @xmath is
closed, @xmath would be finite. But @xmath contains the uncountable set
@xmath by Step 1. Hence @xmath . In other words, @xmath for all @xmath
and @xmath . Thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for any @xmath . The reverse inequality is ( 4.9.2 ). By Lemma 4.9 ,
this completes the proof. ∎

Now we know that the @xmath ’s are @xmath -divisible we will quickly
obtain a version of Proposition 4.2 for @xmath . Before stating the main
theorem of this section we prove the equality ( 4.0.1 ). We must
therefore recall Notation 2.56 and Definition 2.57 for the @xmath . In
the following the Veronese subring @xmath of @xmath is given the grading
induced from @xmath , that is @xmath .

###### Corollary 4.13.

Let @xmath . Then @xmath .

###### Proof.

Set @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Write @xmath where @xmath as in
Definition 4.5 . By Definition 2.57 , @xmath , and so we clearly have
@xmath . Since we already have this inclusion, to prove equality it is
enough to prove that we have an equality of Hilbert series. By Lemma 4.7
and [ 27 , Theorem 1.1(1)] , @xmath for each @xmath divisible by 3.
Thus, for @xmath to hold, it suffices to prove @xmath . But @xmath and
@xmath by Theorem 4.8 and [ 27 , Theorem 5.2] . By induction it is
therefore enough to prove @xmath , which is trivial. ∎

###### Corollary 4.14.

Let @xmath and @xmath . Then @xmath .

###### Proof.

Trivially @xmath . By Corollary 4.13 , @xmath , which has @xmath by [ 27
, Theorem 5.4(2)] . Thus @xmath . By Lemma 3.29 either @xmath or @xmath
. Since @xmath , it is must be that @xmath . ∎

We now present our main theorem of this chapter. For future referencing
purposes we incorporate Proposition 4.2 into Theorem 4.15 .

###### Theorem 4.15.

Let @xmath be an effective divisor on @xmath with degree @xmath . Set
@xmath . Then:

1.  @xmath is @xmath -divisible with @xmath and @xmath . The Hilbert
    series of @xmath is given by

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

2.  @xmath is Auslander-Gorenstein and Cohen-Macaulay.

3.  @xmath satisfies @xmath on the left and right, has cohomological
    dimension 2 and possesses a balanced dualizing complex.

4.  @xmath is a maximal order in @xmath .

###### Proof.

(1) follows from Proposition 4.2 , Corollary 4.13 , Corollary 4.14 and
Theorem 4.8 . The rest follows from part (1) and Proposition 2.62 . ∎

###### Remark 4.16.

Unsurprisingly, it is the connection between our subalgebras, @xmath of
@xmath , and the blowup subalgebras, @xmath of @xmath , that motivates
the name “blowup subalgebra of @xmath ”. In particular, @xmath , and
@xmath and @xmath satisfy very similar properties (compare Theorem 4.15
with Theorem 2.59 ). Beyond this, we will see in the coming chapters
that the @xmath play a similar role to that which the @xmath played in [
30 ] . Reasons for the @xmath being called “blowup subalgebras of @xmath
” can be found in Remark 2.58 .

As in [ 27 , Theorem 5.4(1)] , by examining Hilbert series of our
blowups @xmath we see can they have infinite global dimension.

###### Corollary 4.17.

Let @xmath be an effective divisor with @xmath and let @xmath . Then
@xmath has infinite global dimension.

###### Proof.

By Theorem 4.15 (1) either

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.17.1)
  -- -------- -- ----------

A standard argument, which examines a graded resolution of @xmath
considered as a right @xmath -module (see [ 10 , Chapter I, (2.E)] )
shows that if @xmath has finite global dimension, then @xmath for some
polynomial @xmath . It can be checked that neither of the Hilbert series
in ( 4.17.1 ) can be written so, and hence @xmath must have infinite
global dimension. ∎

## 5 Classifying @xmath-divisible maximal orders

In this chapter we aim to obtain a classification of @xmath -divisible
maximal @xmath -orders: Theorem 5.26 and Proposition 5.29 . We prove
that any @xmath -divisible maximal @xmath -order is obtain from a
virtual blowup in the sense of Definition 5.23 . Here we follow parts of
[ 30 , Sections 5, 6, 7] closely. A philosophy for this chapter is
wherever Rogalski, Sierra and Stafford had their effective blowups
@xmath , we (with a bit of work) are able to replace them with our rings
@xmath from Chapter 4 . A significant reason why this approach works is
Theorem 4.15 and Theorem 5.6 below.

### 5.1 Endomorphism rings over the @xmath

Our first aim, and key to rest of this chapter, is to come up with a
version of Rogalski, Sierra and Stafford’s [ 30 , Theorem 2.24] - a
result we presented earlier in Theorem 2.69 and Corollary 2.71 . In
other words, we need to prove that a @xmath -divisible maximal order
@xmath is an equivalent order to some @xmath (see Theorem 5.6 and
Corollary 5.8 ). To obtain their result, Rogalski, Sierra and Stafford
require a detailed and technical study of right ideals of @xmath and
@xmath given in [ 29 ] and [ 30 , 5.13-5.23] . A great strength of our
work is that we are able to bypass these technicalities. Before this, we
require a few results from [ 30 , Section 5] . The first is a
consequence of Theorem 2.54 .

###### Lemma 5.1.

[ 30 , Corollary 5.3] Let @xmath be a smooth elliptic curve, @xmath an
invertible sheaf on @xmath with @xmath , and @xmath an automorphism of
infinite order. Set @xmath . Suppose that @xmath is a cg subalgebra of
@xmath with @xmath . Then there exist divisors @xmath , @xmath on @xmath
with @xmath , and @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The next result we need is [ 30 , Proposition 5.7] . We in fact also
require the construction of the divisor @xmath appearing in this result.
We include this construction with the reader being referred to [ 30 ]
for a detailed proof.

###### Proposition 5.2.

[ 30 , Proposition 5.7] Retain the hypothesis for @xmath from Lemma 5.1
. There exists an effective divisor @xmath on @xmath supported at points
on distinct @xmath -orbits, with @xmath , and such that @xmath and
@xmath are equivalent orders. Moreover, there exists a @xmath , such
that for all @xmath

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.2.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

###### Construction of @xmath.

For this construction we use the notation @xmath as well as the more
compact notation @xmath for @xmath and @xmath .

By Lemma 5.1 there exist divisors @xmath with @xmath , and @xmath such
that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Fix an @xmath -orbit @xmath on @xmath , and (enlarging @xmath if
necessary) pick @xmath such that on @xmath we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.2.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

for some @xmath For this @xmath , we set

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.2.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In [ 30 ] an argument is proved showing that @xmath . We define the
effective divisor

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.2.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the sum is taken over one closed point @xmath for each @xmath
-orbit chosen as above. It is shown in [ 30 ] that, for this @xmath and
@xmath , ( 5.2.1 ) holds and that @xmath and @xmath are equivalent
orders. ∎

Rogalski, Sierra and Stafford gave names to some for the terms appearing
in Lemma 5.1 and Proposition 5.2 .

###### Definition 5.3.

[ 30 , Definition 5.12] Retain the hypothesis for @xmath from Lemma 5.1
.

1.  Let @xmath , @xmath and @xmath be given by Lemma 5.1 . We call the
    data @xmath geometric data for @xmath .

2.  We call the divisor @xmath constructed in Proposition 5.2 a @xmath
    -normalised divisor for @xmath . When no confusion can occur, we
    simply call @xmath a normalised divisor.

###### Remark 5.4.

Let @xmath be as in Definition 5.3 . Suppose that @xmath is a normalised
divisor for @xmath constructed out of geometric data @xmath for @xmath .
We make some observations about Definition 5.3 that follow from the
construction of @xmath .

-   The normalised divisor @xmath depends on the geometric data @xmath
    and not @xmath itself.

-   For every @xmath , the data @xmath is also geometric data for @xmath
    . Moreover, the normalised divisor @xmath is also a normalised
    divisor corresponding to the data @xmath .

-   For every @xmath , the divisor @xmath is also a normalised divisor
    for @xmath .

We now put these terms to use. Proposition 5.5 (2) is the analogue of
Proposition 2.70 . We in fact utilise Proposition 2.70 directly in the
proof. For this reason we must recall the notation for @xmath (Notation
2.56 ). The grading of @xmath we use here is @xmath .

###### Proposition 5.5.

Let @xmath be a @xmath -divisible cg subalgebra of @xmath with @xmath .
Suppose that @xmath is a @xmath -normalised divisor for @xmath
corresponding to geometric data @xmath of @xmath , as constructed in
Proposition 5.2 . Then

1.  @xmath and @xmath are equivalent orders and

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

2.  @xmath .

###### Proof.

(1). Since @xmath , @xmath by Lemma 3.17 . Moreover, as @xmath , we can
take @xmath in Lemma 5.1 and Proposition 5.2 . Part (1) is therefore
exactly Proposition 5.2 .

(2). Retain the notation of the construction of the @xmath -normalised
divisor @xmath from Proposition 5.2 with @xmath in place of @xmath . In
particular we use @xmath again. Set @xmath . The key here is to
understand @xmath so that we can apply Proposition 2.70 .

We claim that @xmath is a @xmath -normalised divisor for @xmath . Since
@xmath is geometric data for @xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By enlarging @xmath if necessary, we may assume @xmath is divisible by
3. It then follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We see @xmath is geometric data for @xmath ( @xmath also works but there
is no harm in taking the bigger @xmath ). Now, the @xmath -orbit @xmath
from ( 5.2.2 ) is the disjoint union of three @xmath -orbits, @xmath .
Here @xmath , where we are writing @xmath . Since @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and therefore:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Put @xmath as in ( 5.2.3 ). It follows that a @xmath -normalised divisor
for @xmath can be given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the sum ranges over the same points used to define @xmath in (
5.2.4 ). Note that indeed @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are on different
@xmath -orbits. On the other hand, by considering different @xmath
-orbits separately, it is not hard to see

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence @xmath is a @xmath -normalised divisor for @xmath as claimed.

By Proposition 2.70 and Theorem 4.15 (1) we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.5.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Since @xmath is @xmath -divisible, it is noetherian by Proposition 3.18
, and therefore @xmath is a finitely generated as a right @xmath -module
by Lemma 3.31 . By enlarging @xmath if necessary, we may assume @xmath
is generated in degrees less than @xmath . In which case, using ( 5.5.1
), we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since it is harmless to replace @xmath by @xmath , this proves (2). ∎

With Proposition 5.5 we are able to prove the crucial result that links
a general @xmath -divisible subalgebra of @xmath to one of the @xmath .
Theorem 5.6 is analogous to Theorem 2.69 . With Proposition 5.5 at hand
we can model our proof on that of Theorem 2.69 given in [ 30 ] .

###### Theorem 5.6.

Let @xmath be a @xmath -divisible cg subalgebra of @xmath with @xmath .
Then there exists an effective divisor @xmath on @xmath with @xmath ,
supported on points with distinct @xmath -orbits, and such that @xmath
and @xmath are equivalent orders.

In more detail, for this @xmath , the @xmath -bimodule @xmath is a
finitely generated @xmath -divisible right @xmath -module with @xmath .
If @xmath , then @xmath , @xmath is finitely generated and @xmath ,
@xmath , and @xmath are equivalent orders. The divisor @xmath is any
@xmath -normalised divisor constructed for @xmath .

###### Proof.

Choose @xmath and an effective divisor @xmath on @xmath , supported on
distinct orbits, satisfying the conclusion of Proposition 5.5 . In
particular we have @xmath , and it follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Write @xmath and @xmath . Now @xmath is noetherian and @xmath -divisible
by Theorem 4.15 (1), and @xmath is clearly a finitely generated right
@xmath -module. Thus @xmath is a finitely generated by Lemma 3.21 (2).
In particular, @xmath is a noetherian @xmath -module, and hence the
submodule @xmath is finitely generated too. Put @xmath ; as @xmath ,
@xmath . By Lemma 3.20 (3), @xmath is @xmath -divisible and @xmath is
finitely generated. By Lemma 3.25 (3), @xmath and @xmath are then
equivalent orders. It is easily checked that @xmath , and thus @xmath .

Now consider the @xmath -bimodule @xmath . This is nonzero as @xmath and
is finitely generated on both sides because @xmath is finitely generated
on both sides. Hence @xmath and @xmath are equivalent orders again by
Lemma 3.25 (3). By Proposition 5.5 , @xmath and @xmath are equivalent
orders, and therefore @xmath and @xmath are likewise. Since @xmath we
can now apply Proposition 3.27 to conclude @xmath and @xmath , and hence
also @xmath and @xmath , are equivalent orders. ∎

###### Remark 5.7.

Let @xmath be a noetherian domain with full quotient ring @xmath . If
@xmath is a finitely generated @xmath -submodule of @xmath , then [ 13 ,
Theorem 2.7] says that @xmath is the unique maximal order containing and
equivalent to @xmath . Moreover, it is easy to see @xmath , and so we
can replace @xmath with @xmath in the above statement. By Lemma 2.14
this observation also holds in the graded setting.

The above observation gave Rogalski, Sierra and Stafford (and hence us)
a clear strategy to get from their @xmath ’s to other maximal orders.

As a standard, all duals @xmath will be taken as @xmath -modules, where
@xmath . The definition of a maximal order and a maximal @xmath -order
can be found in Definition 2.13 .

###### Corollary 5.8.

Let @xmath be a @xmath -divisible connected graded maximal @xmath
-order.

1.   There exists an effective divisor @xmath on @xmath with @xmath ,
    and a @xmath -divisible @xmath -bimodule @xmath , such that @xmath .
    The bimodule @xmath is finitely generated on both sides and
    satisfies @xmath .

2.   Set @xmath . Then @xmath is the unique maximal order containing
    @xmath and @xmath .

###### Proof.

(1). By Theorem 5.6 , there is an effective divisor @xmath with @xmath
and such that @xmath , where @xmath is finitely generated on both sides
as a @xmath -bimodule. Clearly we have @xmath also. By Theorem 5.6
again, @xmath and @xmath are equivalent orders. Since @xmath is a
maximal @xmath -order and @xmath , @xmath .

(2) By Remark 5.7 , @xmath is the unique maximal order equivalent to and
containing @xmath . Let @xmath . Since @xmath , we have @xmath . If
@xmath are nonzero and such that @xmath , then clearly @xmath also. Thus
@xmath and @xmath are also equivalent orders. But @xmath is a maximal
@xmath -order; therefore @xmath . ∎

The next two results investigate the situation @xmath arising in
Corollary 5.8 . These results are our analogue of [ 30 ,
Proposition 6.4] . The proof given in [ 30 ] is in fact sufficiently
general to work in our case as well. For completeness we include the
proofs.

Recall GK-dimension is defined in Notation 2.9 . In particular, we
recall that we are writing @xmath for the GK-dimension a @xmath -algebra
@xmath and @xmath for the GK-dimension of a right (or left) @xmath
-module @xmath .

###### Proposition 5.9.

Let @xmath be an effective divisor with @xmath and let @xmath . Let
@xmath be a @xmath -divisible finitely generated graded right @xmath
-module such that @xmath . Put @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Then:

1.  @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are @xmath -divisible algebras with
    @xmath .

2.  @xmath is the unique maximal order containing and equivalent to
    @xmath , while @xmath is the unique maximal @xmath -order containing
    and equivalent to @xmath .

3.  @xmath .

###### Proof.

Since @xmath , also @xmath by Lemma 3.9 . By Lemma 3.20 (3), @xmath is
@xmath -divisible and noetherian, whilst @xmath is finitely generated.
Thus, by a left handed version of [ 30 , Lemma 6.3] , @xmath is a
finitely generated right @xmath -module. Moreover, since @xmath , @xmath
. So @xmath and @xmath are equivalent orders by Lemma 3.25 (2). Because
@xmath is a maximal order by Theorem 4.15 , @xmath .

Clearly @xmath embeds into @xmath as a right ideal via @xmath for any
nonzero @xmath ; in particular @xmath is a finitely generated right
@xmath -module. By Lemma 3.21 (3), @xmath is @xmath -divisible with
@xmath . Arguing as in the previous paragraph, with @xmath and @xmath in
place of @xmath and @xmath , shows @xmath is @xmath -divisible, @xmath
is finitely generated and @xmath . By Remark 5.7 , @xmath is the unique
maximal order containing and equivalent to @xmath . Because @xmath ,
@xmath ; and hence @xmath .

Let @xmath be an equivalent order to @xmath satisfying @xmath . If
@xmath is a maximal order containing @xmath , then it is a maximal order
containing @xmath . Therefore @xmath by the uniqueness of @xmath . It
then follows @xmath and @xmath is a maximal @xmath -order. Similarly, if
@xmath is another maximal @xmath -order containing and equivalent to
@xmath , and @xmath a maximal order containing @xmath , then @xmath and
@xmath by uniqueness of @xmath again. So @xmath is unique among maximal
@xmath -orders containing and equivalent to @xmath . ∎

From here the Cohen-Macaulay property, defined in Definition 2.15 and
satisfied by the @xmath ’s by Theorem 4.15 (2), becomes increasingly
important. It will often be used in tandem with [ 30 , Lemma 4.11] . We
state the lemma here considering the frequency which it is used. For
Lemma 5.10 (2) we also need concept of a pure module. Let @xmath be a
ring of finite GK-dimension and suppose that @xmath is a right @xmath
-module with @xmath . Then @xmath is called @xmath -pure if @xmath for
all nonzero submodules @xmath of @xmath .

###### Lemma 5.10.

[ 30 , Lemma 4.11] Let @xmath be a cg noetherian domain with @xmath and
@xmath . Assume that @xmath is Auslander-Gorenstein and Cohen-Macaulay.

1.   Let @xmath be a finitely generated right @xmath -module. Then
    @xmath is the unique largest @xmath -submodule of @xmath containing
    @xmath and satisfying @xmath . In particular, there is no @xmath
    -module @xmath such that @xmath .

2.   If @xmath is a proper reflexive right ideal of @xmath , then @xmath
    is @xmath -pure.∎

In Corollary 5.8 there is the possibility that @xmath . The next lemma
helps us to control this situation.

###### Lemma 5.11.

Retain the hypothesis of Proposition 5.9 . There exists an ideal @xmath
of @xmath , contained in @xmath (and hence @xmath ) such that @xmath .

###### Proof.

By Theorem 4.15 , @xmath is Auslander-Gorenstein and Cohen-Macaulay.
Therefore Lemma 5.10 (1) applies and shows that @xmath Since @xmath is
@xmath -divisible, @xmath is @xmath -torsionfree. By Lemma 3.23 (3) it
is then a finitely generated right @xmath -module. From here, the proof
goes exactly as in [ 30 , Proposition 6.4(3)] . We choose to omit the
rest. ∎

We give a definition for pairs of algebras satisfying the conclusions of
Proposition 5.9 and Lemma 5.11 .

###### Definition 5.12.

1.  A pair @xmath of connected graded subalgebras of @xmath are called a
    maximal order pair of @xmath if:

    1.  @xmath and @xmath are @xmath -divisible with @xmath and @xmath ;

    2.  @xmath is a maximal order in @xmath while @xmath is a maximal
        @xmath -order;

    3.  there exists an ideal @xmath of @xmath , contained in @xmath ,
        and such that @xmath .

2.  [ 30 , Definition 6.5] Recall @xmath and @xmath from Notation 3.28 .
    Interchanging @xmath and @xmath with @xmath and @xmath in (1), we
    get the definition of a maximal order pair of @xmath .

The “of @xmath ” from “maximal order pair of @xmath ” is there to
distinguish it from Definition 5.12 (2). When no ambiguity can arise it
will often be dropped. We will see later in Theorem 5.33 that if @xmath
is a maximal order pair of @xmath , then @xmath is a maximal order pair
of @xmath .

Definition 5.12 is hard to work with. We will often be using an
equivalent formulation given by the following consequence of Corollary
5.8 and Proposition 5.9 . We will be needing also a @xmath -version of
Lemma 5.13 which is implicit in [ 30 ] .

###### Lemma 5.13.

1.   Let @xmath be a cg subalgebra of @xmath and @xmath a cg subalgebra
    of @xmath . Then the following are equivalent:

    1.  @xmath is a maximal order pair of @xmath .

    2.   There exist an effective divisor @xmath with @xmath and a
        finitely generated @xmath -divisible right @xmath -module @xmath
        with @xmath and such that

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

2.   Recall @xmath and @xmath from Notation 3.28 . Let @xmath be a cg
    subalgebra of @xmath and @xmath a cg subalgebra of @xmath . Then the
    following are equivalent:

    1.  @xmath is a maximal order pair of @xmath

    2.   There exist an effective divisor @xmath with @xmath and a
        finitely generated @xmath -divisible right @xmath -module @xmath
        with @xmath and such that

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

###### Proof.

(1). Suppose that @xmath is a maximal order pair of @xmath . Then @xmath
is @xmath -divisible maximal @xmath -order. Now apply Corollary 5.8 to
@xmath . The reverse implication follows from Proposition 5.9 (2) and
Lemma 5.11 .

(2). This is essentially [ 30 , Corollary 6.6(1)] and [ 30 ,
Proposition 6.4] . ∎

Let @xmath be a maximal order pair. We now aim for an analogue of [ 30 ,
Proposition 6.7] : describing the images of @xmath and @xmath in @xmath
. We first need a few results. These are our analogues of [ 29 ,
Lemma 7.9] and [ 30 , Proposition 6.12] .

###### Lemma 5.14.

Let @xmath where @xmath is an effective divisor with @xmath . Let @xmath
be a @xmath -torsionfree right @xmath -module. Then as left @xmath
-modules

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

The proof of [ 29 , Lemma 7.9] uses [ 11 , Proposition VI.4.1.3, page
118] and [ 29 , Lemma 7.3] . The former is an abstract statement which
only requires a ring homomorphism @xmath ; the latter is a statement
that also applies to @xmath . In particular the proof presented there
also proves this lemma. ∎

For an @xmath -version of [ 30 , Proposition 6.12] we are again in a
position where the proof given by Rogalski, Sierra and Stafford can be
recycled for our purposes.

###### Lemma 5.15.

Let @xmath where @xmath is an effective divisor with @xmath .

1.   Let @xmath be a proper, @xmath -divisible left ideal of @xmath such
    that @xmath is @xmath -pure. Then @xmath is a @xmath -torsionfree,
    @xmath -pure right @xmath -module. Moreover @xmath and @xmath .

2.   If @xmath is a finitely generated @xmath -divisible right @xmath
    -module with @xmath , then @xmath and @xmath

###### Proof.

(1). First we note that both @xmath and @xmath are Auslander-Gorenstein
and Cohen-Macaulay by Theorem 4.15 (1)(2) and Theorem 2.50 (3). By Lemma
5.10 (1) we have that @xmath is @xmath -pure. By Lemma 3.20 , @xmath .
Moreover because @xmath is @xmath -divisible, both @xmath and @xmath are
@xmath -torsionfree right @xmath -modules.

It is now left to prove @xmath . The proof of the analogous part of [ 30
, Proposition 6.12(1)] relies upon @xmath and @xmath being
Auslander-Gorenstein and Cohen-Macaulay and [ 29 , Lemma 7.9] .
Replacing [ 29 , Lemma 7.9] with Lemma 5.14 and using the fact that
@xmath and @xmath are Auslander-Gorenstein and Cohen-Macaulay one may
follow that proof to obtain (1). The proof is quite technical and not
particularly enlightening. For these reasons we omit the details with
the interested reader being refer to [ 30 ] .

(2). Since @xmath is Cohen-Macaulay, @xmath by Lemma 5.10 (1). Since
@xmath is @xmath -divisible, @xmath is also @xmath -divisible by Lemma
3.21 (3). Lemma 3.23 (2) then gives @xmath . Since @xmath is
Cohen-Macaulay, @xmath by Lemma 5.10 (1). We hence have that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.15.1)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Now let @xmath . As @xmath , @xmath is a reflexive left ideal of @xmath
. Therefore, as @xmath is Cohen-Macaulay, the @xmath -module @xmath is
@xmath -pure by Lemma 5.10 (2). Part (1) then applies and shows @xmath .
Becasue @xmath is Cohen-Macaulay, we have that @xmath by Lemma 5.10 (1).
These with Lemma 3.10 (3) and ( 5.15.1 ) gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Finally we need [ 30 , Lemma 6.14] . This result is already general
enough for us.

###### Lemma 5.16.

[ 30 , Lemma 6.14] Let @xmath where @xmath is a smooth elliptic curve,
@xmath and @xmath is of infinite order. Let @xmath be a finitely
generated graded right @xmath -submodule of @xmath . Then @xmath for
some divisor @xmath . Set @xmath . Then:

1.  @xmath ;

2.  @xmath ;

3.  @xmath .∎

We are now able to describe the images of our maximal orders in @xmath .
Proposition 5.17 is our result corresponding to Rogalski, Sierra and
Stafford’s Theorem 2.72 . Again we are able to substitute in our
previous results and leave the proof largely unchanged.

###### Proposition 5.17.

Let @xmath be an effective divisor with @xmath , and let @xmath .
Suppose @xmath is a finitely generated @xmath -divisible right @xmath
-module with @xmath . Set @xmath and @xmath . Then there is an effective
divisor @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.17.1)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Moreover, if @xmath , then @xmath , and @xmath is a maximal order pair.

###### Proof.

We first check @xmath . By Lemma 3.20 (3), @xmath is @xmath -divisible,
and hence noetherian by Proposition 3.18 . By Lemma 5.11 , there exists
an ideal @xmath of @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath . Given @xmath ,
clearly @xmath ; it follows that @xmath is finitely generated. Thus as a
right @xmath -module, @xmath also. This then implies, @xmath . Set
@xmath ; one can check @xmath . Moreover, because @xmath is @xmath
-divisible, @xmath is @xmath -torsionfree. Therefore @xmath by [ 20 ,
Proposition 5.1(e)] ; or in other words @xmath .

Now by Lemma 5.15 , @xmath , and so @xmath by Lemma 3.5 . Moreover, by
Lemma 5.16 (2), @xmath . Because clearly @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

On the other hand, by Lemma 3.20 (3), @xmath . This forces

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.17.2)
  -- -------- -- ----------

By Corollary 2.31 , we can write @xmath for some divisor @xmath on
@xmath . Because @xmath , @xmath must be an effective divisor. Lemma
5.16 (1) then tells us that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which proves ( 5.17.1 ). The last statement follows from Lemma 5.13 . ∎

### 5.2 Blowups and virtual blowups

In Chapter 4 we defined the ring @xmath for an effective divisor with
@xmath . As mentioned in Remark 4.16 , @xmath should be thought of as
“the blowup of @xmath at @xmath ”. The algebra @xmath from Proposition
5.17 has many similar properties with the @xmath . Most notable is that
@xmath is equal in high degrees to a twisted homogenous coordinate ring.
We will be calling such @xmath virtual blowups (Definition 5.23 ).

We now investigate precisely what divisors @xmath arise in Proposition
5.17 . These will be the divisors at which we can “blow up”.

###### Definition 5.18.

[ 30 , Definition 7.1] . Let @xmath be an automorphism of infinite
order. A divisor @xmath on @xmath with @xmath is called @xmath
-virtually effective if there exists @xmath such that @xmath is an
effective divisor on @xmath .

When the automorphism @xmath is clear from context, we often drop the
@xmath from @xmath -virtually effective.

###### Example 5.19.

An effective divisor on @xmath is trivially virtually effective. In the
other direction, the divisor @xmath gives an example of a noneffective
@xmath -virtually effective divisor.

###### Lemma 5.20.

The divisor @xmath in ( 5.17.1 ) is @xmath -virtually effective.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath , @xmath , @xmath be as in Proposition 5.17 . Put @xmath
where @xmath . By Proposition 5.17 , @xmath . Let @xmath be such that
@xmath . Then because @xmath , we have that @xmath . Enlarging @xmath if
necessary, we can assume both @xmath and @xmath . Then [ 16 ,
Corollary IV.3.2] implies @xmath and @xmath are generated by their
global sections. Therefore we have @xmath , and hence @xmath is
effective by Lemma 4.6 . ∎

Our definition of a virtually effective divisor is different from
Rogalski, Sierra and Stafford’s [ 30 , Definition 7.1] . These are
equivalent notions by the next result. We prefer Definition 5.18 for it
is simpler to state and better motivates the name “virtually effective”.
We also include [ 30 , Proposition 7.3(2)] into Lemma 5.21 which gives a
very useful characterisation of virtually effective divisors.

###### Lemma 5.21.

[ 30 , Proposition 7.3(2)] . Let @xmath be an automorphism of infinite
order and @xmath be a divisor on @xmath . The following are equivalent:

1.  @xmath is @xmath -virtually effective;

2.   For each @xmath -orbit @xmath in @xmath , pick @xmath such that
    @xmath . For each @xmath , @xmath satisfies

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

3.  @xmath can be written as @xmath where @xmath is an effective divisor
    supported on distinct @xmath -orbits, and @xmath is an effective
    divisor such that @xmath for some @xmath .

###### Proof.

For this proof we use Notation 4.4 with @xmath in place of @xmath . That
is, we write @xmath . We also introduce the temporary notation @xmath
for @xmath and @xmath .

@xmath . Fix a @xmath -orbit @xmath of @xmath and choose @xmath such
that @xmath for some @xmath and @xmath . It clearly suffices to prove
(2) on the @xmath -orbit @xmath . Hence without loss of generality we
assume @xmath . Given @xmath , we calculate

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Furthermore, if @xmath we get

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.21.1)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Now suppose that @xmath is effective for some @xmath . By enlarging
@xmath if necessary we can assume that @xmath . In which case the
coefficient of each @xmath in equation ( 5.21.1 ) must be positive. In
other words,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath . This is one direction of [ 30 , Proposition 7.3(2)] .

@xmath . Suppose that @xmath as in (3), with say @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is clearly effective. ∎

To avoid confusion, we now reserve the notation @xmath from Notation 4.4
for the automorphism @xmath from Hypothesis 3.1 . This is particularly
relevant in the next lemma.

###### Lemma 5.22.

Let @xmath be a @xmath -virtually effective divisor. Then @xmath is
@xmath -virtually effective, where @xmath .

###### Proof.

Suppose that @xmath is effective. If necessary, enlarge @xmath so that
@xmath is divisible by 3, say @xmath . We then have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This is effective by assumption; hence @xmath is @xmath -virtually
effective. ∎

We now turn our attention away from divisors and back to subalgebras of
@xmath . We start with the definition of a virtual blowup. Below we also
recall the definition of a virtual blowup of @xmath .

###### Definition 5.23.

1.  Let @xmath be a @xmath -virtually effective divisor on @xmath with
    @xmath . We say that a cg subalgebra @xmath of @xmath with @xmath is
    a virtual blowup of @xmath at @xmath if:

    1.  @xmath is a part of a maximal order pair @xmath of @xmath .

    2.  @xmath .

2.  [ 30 , Definition 6.9 and Definition 7.1] . Retain Notation 3.28 for
    @xmath . Let @xmath be a @xmath -virtually effective divisor on
    @xmath such that @xmath . We say that a cg subalgebra @xmath of
    @xmath with @xmath is a virtual blowup of @xmath at @xmath if:

    1.  @xmath is a part of a maximal order pair @xmath of @xmath .

    2.  @xmath .

In Definition 2.73 we gave a different definition of a virtual blowup of
@xmath . Lemma 5.13 shows that it is an equivalent to Definition 5.23
(2).

###### Example 5.24.

If @xmath is an effective divisor on @xmath with @xmath , then by
Theorem 4.15 , @xmath indeed satisfies Definition 5.23 .

For an explicit example of a blowup at the virtually effective divisor
@xmath see Theorem 7.1 .

###### Remark 5.25.

Like with the @xmath , our main motivation for the name “virtual blowup”
is by analogy with [ 30 ] . On top of this we will also prove in Theorem
5.33 that if @xmath is a virtual blowup of @xmath , then @xmath is a
virtual blowup of @xmath . Justification for their case is given in [ 30
, Remark 7.5] .

With our new language we can give our main result of this chapter.

###### Theorem 5.26.

1.   Let @xmath be a @xmath -divisible cg maximal @xmath -order. Then:

    1.   there is a maximal order @xmath such that @xmath is a maximal
        order pair;

    2.  @xmath is a virtual blowup of @xmath at a virtually effective
        divisor @xmath with @xmath ;

    3.  @xmath .

2.   If @xmath is any @xmath -divisible cg subalgebra with @xmath , then
    there exists a maximal order pair @xmath as in (1), such that @xmath
    is contained in, and equivalent, to @xmath and @xmath .

###### Proof.

(1). By definition @xmath . By Corollary 5.8 (2) and Lemma 5.13 , @xmath
is part of a maximal order pair @xmath . This proves part (a). By Lemma
5.13 , @xmath for some effective divisor @xmath with @xmath , and a
finitely generated @xmath -divisible right @xmath -module @xmath
satisfying @xmath . By Proposition 5.17 and Lemma 5.20 , @xmath is a
virtual blowup of @xmath at a virtually effective divisor @xmath . Part
( @xmath ) follows directly from part ( @xmath ).

(2). By Theorem 5.6 , @xmath is contained in and equivalent to some
@xmath , where @xmath is an effective divisor of @xmath and @xmath .
Clearly @xmath and so we can apply Proposition 5.9 . ∎

In addition to a complete description of @xmath -divisible maximal
@xmath -orders, we are able to obtain a description of any @xmath
-divisible subalgebra. We recall that the idealiser of a right ideal
@xmath of a ring @xmath is defined as @xmath .n]ia@ @xmath In other
words, it is the largest subalgebra of @xmath in which @xmath is a
two-sided ideal. Similarly, we can define an idealiser for a left ideal
of @xmath .

###### Corollary 5.27.

Let @xmath be a @xmath -divisible subalgebra with @xmath . Then @xmath
is an iterated sub-idealiser inside a virtual blowup of @xmath . More
precisely the following holds.

1.   There exists a virtually effective divisor @xmath with @xmath , and
    a blowup @xmath of @xmath at @xmath , such that @xmath contains, and
    is equivalent to, @xmath . The pair @xmath is a maximal order pair.

2.   There is a @xmath -divisible algebra @xmath with @xmath and such
    that @xmath is a right sub-idealiser inside @xmath , and @xmath is a
    left sub-idealiser inside @xmath . In more detail:

    1.   There exists a @xmath -divisible left ideal @xmath of @xmath
        such that either @xmath or @xmath is @xmath -pure. There exists
        a @xmath -divisible ideal @xmath of @xmath such that @xmath and
        @xmath .

    2.  @xmath is a finitely generated left @xmath -module, while @xmath
        is a finitely generated @xmath -module. In particular @xmath is
        finitely generated over @xmath on both sides;

    3.   The properties given for @xmath also hold true for the pair
        @xmath with left and right interchanged.

###### Proof.

(1). This is just Theorem 5.26 (2).

(2). The proof of [ 30 , Corollary 7.6] carries though here. One just
needs to replace the references to [ 30 , Section 2] with the
appropriate results from our Chapter 3 . ∎

Theorem 5.26 shows any @xmath -divisible maximal @xmath -order is a
virtual blowup at some virtually effective divisor. Conversely, we now
show that given any virtually effective divisor @xmath with @xmath ,
there exists a virtual blowup @xmath of @xmath at @xmath , where @xmath
is necessarily a maximal @xmath -order. This completes the
classification of @xmath -divisible maximal @xmath -orders.

For the proof we need to recall the rings @xmath from Definition 2.57 .
In Lemma 5.28 , @xmath is graded via @xmath .

###### Lemma 5.28.

Let @xmath and @xmath be effective divisors on @xmath such that @xmath
and @xmath for some @xmath . Then there exists a @xmath -divisible right
@xmath -module @xmath with @xmath and such that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.28.1)
  -- -------- -- ----------

###### Proof.

By Theorem 4.15 (1) with @xmath we have @xmath . By [ 29 , Lemma 5.10]
(the @xmath -version of Lemma 5.28 ) there exists a @xmath -divisible
right @xmath -module @xmath with @xmath and such that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.28.2)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Set @xmath and @xmath . Then @xmath is a @xmath -divisible right @xmath
-module. As @xmath is a finitely generated right @xmath -module, @xmath
is a finitely generated right @xmath -module. By Lemma 3.21 (2), @xmath
is then finitely generated also. Further, as @xmath , we have @xmath .
This leaves ( 5.28.1 ) to be proven.

Now because @xmath is @xmath -divisible and clearly @xmath , it is easy
to see @xmath . On the other hand, since @xmath , the Noncommutative
Serre’s Theorem (Corollary 2.31 ) says that the @xmath -module @xmath
satisfies,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Equation ( 5.28.2 ) and @xmath then implies

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.28.3)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Enlarging @xmath if necessary, we can assume @xmath and @xmath are
generated by their global sections. Thus ( 5.28.3 ) implies that @xmath
. Hence we get @xmath , proving ( 5.28.1 ). ∎

###### Proposition 5.29.

Let @xmath be a @xmath -virtually effective divisor with @xmath . Then
there exists a blowup @xmath of @xmath at @xmath .

###### Proof.

Using Lemma 5.21 , write @xmath where @xmath and @xmath are effective
and such that @xmath for some @xmath . By Lemma 5.28 there exists a
@xmath -divisible right @xmath -module @xmath with @xmath and such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Put @xmath and @xmath . By equation ( 5.17.2 ) and Lemma 5.16 ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By Lemma 5.13 (1), @xmath is a maximal order pair. ∎

### 5.3 Further study of virtual blowups

We end this Chapter with a further study of virtual blowups. The most
important of the results here, and our first aim, is to show that the
3-Veroneses of our virtual blowups are virtual blowups of @xmath .

###### Lemma 5.30.

Let @xmath for some invertible sheaf @xmath on @xmath with @xmath . Let
@xmath be two finitely generated right @xmath -submodules of @xmath . If
@xmath for some @xmath , then @xmath .

###### Proof.

By Corollary 2.31 , there exists divisors @xmath and @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.30.1)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Let @xmath . By assumption @xmath , thus @xmath . By enlarging @xmath if
necessary, we can assume that both @xmath and @xmath . In which case
both sheaves are generated by their global sections by [ 16 , Corollary
IV.3.2] . Hence @xmath . It follows @xmath in ( 5.30.1 ), and then
@xmath . ∎

###### Lemma 5.31.

Let @xmath for some effective divisor of @xmath , and @xmath be a
finitely generated @xmath -divisible right @xmath -module. Let @xmath
and write @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Now since @xmath , @xmath . So by Lemma 5.30 , @xmath . Since @xmath is
@xmath -divisible and clearly @xmath , Lemma 3.23 (1) applies and shows
@xmath . By Theorem 4.15 (2), @xmath is Cohen-Macaulay. Therefore, as
@xmath , we have @xmath by Lemma 5.10 (1). It then follows @xmath .
Since @xmath , we also have the reverse inclusion @xmath . ∎

###### Lemma 5.32.

Let @xmath be an effective divisor with @xmath and let @xmath . Suppose
that @xmath is a finitely generated @xmath -divisible right @xmath
-module. Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Let @xmath and @xmath . By Theorem 4.15 (2), @xmath is
Auslander-Gorenstein and Cohen-Macaulay. Hence by Lemma 5.10 (1), @xmath
. Lemma 3.31 (2) implies that @xmath is finitely generated as a right
@xmath -module. Hence by ( 2.9.2 ), @xmath . As right @xmath -modules
clearly

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and so we have that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.32.1)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Now @xmath by Theorem 4.15 (1), so @xmath is Auslander-Gorenstein and
Cohen-Macaulay by Theorem 2.59 (3). Hence by Lemma 5.10 (1) applied to
@xmath , @xmath , and by ( 5.32.1 ), @xmath .

Conversely, consider @xmath as a right @xmath -module. Clearly @xmath is
finitely generated and is a homomorphic image of @xmath . We therefore
have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the second inequality follows from [ 20 , Proposition 5.6] , and
the third from Lemma 5.10 (1). By Lemma 5.10 (1) applied to @xmath and
@xmath , and by Lemma 5.31

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.32.2)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Taking the 3rd Veronese in ( 5.32.2 ) gives the reverse inclusion @xmath
. ∎

For the next theorem we recall Notation 3.28 for @xmath .

###### Theorem 5.33.

Let @xmath be a virtual blowup of @xmath at a @xmath -virtually
effective divisor @xmath and set @xmath . Then @xmath is a virtual
blowup of @xmath at the @xmath -virtually effective divisor @xmath .

###### Proof.

First we note that @xmath indeed exists by Proposition 5.29 , while
@xmath is @xmath -virtually effective by Corollary 5.22 .

On one hand @xmath by definition; while on the other,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath . Thus @xmath . It is hence left to prove that @xmath is
a maximal order pair of @xmath .

Apply Lemma 5.13 (1) to the maximal order pair @xmath of @xmath . We get
an effective divisor @xmath with @xmath , and a finitely generated
@xmath -divisible right @xmath -module @xmath such that @xmath and
@xmath . Let @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Since @xmath is @xmath
-divisible and finitely generated, @xmath is also by Lemma 3.33 and
Lemma 3.31 (2). In addition, @xmath easily follows from @xmath . By
Theorem 4.15 (1) we know that @xmath where @xmath has @xmath . We claim
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath satisfies Lemma 5.13 (2b). For this it remains
to prove @xmath .

Let @xmath . Note that since @xmath by Lemma 5.32 ,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.33.1)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Hence @xmath . Now consider @xmath and @xmath . Similar to ( 5.33.1 )
(with @xmath in place of @xmath ) one can show @xmath . Clearly also
@xmath . This shows @xmath , and hence @xmath . Now by Remark 5.7 ,
@xmath is the unique maximal order equivalent to and containing @xmath .
But by Lemma 5.32 and Lemma 5.31 (with @xmath and @xmath replaced by
@xmath ),

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So we have @xmath , and thus @xmath . So @xmath and, by Lemma 5.13 (2),
@xmath is a maximal order pair of @xmath . ∎

Next we investigate when two virtual blowups are equivalent orders to
each other. The following definition is from [ 30 , Section 5] .

###### Definition 5.34.

Two divisors @xmath and @xmath on @xmath are called @xmath -equivalent
if on every @xmath -orbit @xmath of @xmath , we have @xmath .

###### Proposition 5.35.

Let @xmath and @xmath be two virtually effective divisors on @xmath ,
and let @xmath and @xmath be two virtual blowups at @xmath and @xmath
respectively. Then @xmath and @xmath are equivalent orders if and only
if @xmath and @xmath are @xmath -equivalent.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath and @xmath be the corresponding maximal @xmath -orders. By
definition @xmath and @xmath are equivalent orders to @xmath and @xmath
respectively. Hence it is enough to prove the statement with @xmath and
@xmath in place of @xmath and @xmath .

( @xmath ). The key to this proof is the construction of a normalised
divisor in Proposition 5.2 and the observations of Remark 5.4 . Fix a
@xmath -orbit @xmath and choose a @xmath such that both @xmath and
@xmath are supported on @xmath . Since @xmath and @xmath are @xmath
-equivalent, @xmath say. Put @xmath , where the sum ranges over every
@xmath -orbit of @xmath , and for each @xmath -orbit @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath are chosen as above. Then @xmath is a normalised divisor for both
@xmath and @xmath . By Theorem 5.6 , @xmath and @xmath are both
equivalent orders to @xmath , and therefore also to each other.

( @xmath ). Now let @xmath and @xmath be normalised divisors for @xmath
and @xmath respectively. By Theorem 5.6 , @xmath and @xmath are
equivalent orders to @xmath and @xmath respectively. Hence, if @xmath
and @xmath are equivalent orders so are @xmath and @xmath . By Lemma
3.26 , @xmath and @xmath are then equivalent orders. It then follows
from [ 23 , Proposition 3.1.14] that there exists an @xmath -bimodule
@xmath . By the same result, the bimodule @xmath is finitely generated
on both sides because both @xmath and @xmath are noetherian. By [ 30 ,
Lemma 5.1] @xmath and @xmath are then @xmath -equivalent. By
construction a divisor is @xmath -equivalent to any of its normalised
divisors; in particular @xmath and @xmath are @xmath -equivalent to
@xmath and @xmath respectively. Thus @xmath and @xmath are @xmath
-equivalent also. ∎

###### Remark 5.36.

The proof of Proposition 5.35 can be repeated to obtain the analogous
statement for subalgebras of @xmath . This would be a generalisation of
[ 30 , Corollary 5.26] .

In Example 5.24 we noted that, given an effective divisor @xmath with
@xmath , the blowup @xmath is a virtual blowup at @xmath . Suppose
@xmath is any other virtual blowup at @xmath . By Proposition 5.35 we
know @xmath and @xmath are equivalent orders.

###### Question 5.37.

1.  Let @xmath be an effective divisor with @xmath . Is @xmath the
    unique virtual blowup (in the sense of Definition 5.23 ) of @xmath
    at @xmath ?

2.  More generally, let @xmath be a virtually effective divisor with
    @xmath . By Proposition 5.29 a virtual blowup @xmath of @xmath at
    @xmath exists. Is @xmath the unique blowup of @xmath at @xmath ?

The author feels that the Cohen-Macaulay property, satisfied by @xmath ,
should be enough to give a positive answer to the Question 5.37 (1). On
the other hand, in general, a virtual blowup will not be Cohen-Macaulay
(see Corollary 7.17 ). Question 5.37 (2) then feels false since there
should many different modules @xmath appearing in Lemma 5.28 , and so
many different virtual blowups @xmath arising in Proposition 5.29 .
However, constructing such an example in @xmath proves difficult. This
is something that was achieved for virtual blowups of @xmath as alluded
to in [ 30 , Remark 10.7] . An analogous question to Question 5.37 (1)
in @xmath was left unasked. The best we are able to do in the direction
of Question 5.37 (1) is the following proposition.

###### Proposition 5.38.

Let @xmath be a virtual blowup of @xmath at an effective divisor @xmath
with @xmath . Suppose that the divisor @xmath is supported on points
with distinct @xmath -orbits. Then @xmath . In other words @xmath is the
unique blowup of @xmath at @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath . Apply Theorem 5.6 to @xmath . We find an effective divisor
@xmath with @xmath that is supported at points with distinct @xmath
-orbits, and such that @xmath is finitely generated as a right @xmath
-module. The divisor @xmath is constructed in Proposition 5.2 and can be
any normalised divisor for @xmath . If one looks into this construction,
one sees that because @xmath is supported on points with distinct @xmath
-orbits, we can take @xmath .

Set @xmath and @xmath , and note that @xmath is finitely generated by
Theorem 5.6 . Then @xmath (which is clearly nonzero) is also finitely
generated. Hence by the Noncommutative Serre’s Theorem (specifically
Corollary 2.31 )

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.38.1)
  -- -------- -- ----------

By Theorem 5.6 , @xmath , and, @xmath and @xmath are equivalent orders.
Since @xmath is a maximal @xmath -order, @xmath . Hence by equation (
5.17.2 ) and Lemma 5.16

  -- -- -- ----------
           (5.38.2)
  -- -- -- ----------

But by definition of a virtual blowup at @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (5.38.3)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Take @xmath . Then both @xmath and @xmath are generated by their global
sections [ 16 , Corollary IV.3.2] . Hence equations ( 5.38.2 ) and (
5.38.3 ) imply that @xmath . So we have @xmath . Since @xmath has no
fixed points (see Remark 2.53 ) we must have @xmath . But then ( 5.38.1
) reads @xmath . Clearly @xmath , and so @xmath by Lemma 3.23 (2). But
@xmath is Cohen-Macaulay by Theorem 4.15 (2), therefore Lemma 5.10 (1)
implies @xmath . It then follows @xmath .

Now @xmath and @xmath are equivalent orders (by Proposition 5.35 for
example). So as @xmath is a maximal @xmath -order and @xmath , @xmath .
Furthermore, @xmath is an equivalent order with @xmath , hence @xmath
because @xmath is a maximal order. ∎

###### Remark 5.39.

As in Remark 5.36 , we note that the proof of Proposition 5.38 also
works for an analogous statement for virtual blowups of @xmath .

Our final result of this chapter gives sufficient conditions for a
virtual blowup to be contained in @xmath . This is our analogue of [ 30
, Corollary 6.6(3)] .

###### Proposition 5.40.

Let @xmath be a virtual blowup of @xmath . Let @xmath and @xmath be
given by Lemma 5.13 (1) so that @xmath . Suppose that every ideal @xmath
of @xmath with @xmath satisfies @xmath (in particular, this holds if
@xmath has no such ideals). Then @xmath is a maximal order contained in
@xmath .

###### Proof.

One may copy the proof given for [ 30 , Corollary 6.6(3)] with the
relevant notation interchanged. In doing so, one replaces the fact that
@xmath is Cohen-Macaulay by Theorem 2.59 , with the fact that @xmath is
Cohen-Macaulay by Theorem 4.15 . ∎

###### Remark 5.41.

Evidence from [ 29 , Section 9] suggests that generically the rings
@xmath will have no ideals with co-GK-dimension 1. By Theorem 4.15 (1)
and Lemma 3.34 , this would pass to the @xmath ’s. Proposition 5.40 then
would tells us that generically, a virtual blowup is contained in @xmath
. In other words, generically a maximal @xmath -order is a maximal
order. In [ 30 , Proposition 10.3] the authors construct a virtual
blowup @xmath of @xmath such that @xmath . Such an example in @xmath
proves difficult to construct.

## 6 Classifying arbitrary maximal orders

In this chapter we will present our main classification of maximal
@xmath -orders (Theorem 6.10 ). In fact, it will turn out we already
know of all the maximal @xmath -orders @xmath (such that @xmath ). We
will show that they are all @xmath -divisible, and hence fit into our
classification of @xmath -divisible maximal @xmath -orders (Theorem 5.26
). The conclusions of Theorem 6.10 are therefore similar to Theorem 5.26
. We hence must weaken the @xmath -divisibility assumption of Theorem
5.26 to the assumption that @xmath .

The assumption @xmath is annoying yet necessary. We give a “silly”
example of a maximal order @xmath such that @xmath in Example 7.19 . The
last part of this chapter studies a way of getting around the assumption
@xmath . For this one must be willing to take higher Veronese subrings
and semi-graded isomorphisms.

### 6.1 The main classification

To obtain our main classification of maximal @xmath -orders, we must
show that any cg subalgebra @xmath (satisfying @xmath ) is contained in,
and equivalent to, a @xmath -divisible ring. Our strategy for this,
first applied in [ 27 , Section 7] , is via two steps. First we show a
subalgebra @xmath of @xmath is equivalent to the ring obtained by
adjoining @xmath , namely @xmath . Second we show @xmath is an
equivalent order with its @xmath -divisible hull. It is the latter which
we tackle first. Before we come to this, we need a result from [ 30 ] .

###### Lemma 6.1.

[ 30 , Lemma 8.6] Let @xmath for some smooth elliptic curve @xmath ,
invertible sheaf @xmath with @xmath , and automorphism, @xmath of @xmath
, with infinite order. Then for any nonzero @xmath , we have @xmath for
all @xmath . In particular, if @xmath is a graded subalgebra of @xmath
such that @xmath , then @xmath is noetherian @xmath -bimodule. ∎

The proof of the next result is identical to that of [ 30 ,
Proposition 8.7] . It is included for the convenience of the reader.

###### Proposition 6.2.

Let @xmath be a cg subalgebra of @xmath satisfying @xmath and @xmath .
Suppose that @xmath . Then for all @xmath , @xmath .

If @xmath is noetherian, then @xmath is also finitely generated on both
sides as a @xmath -module.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath . Certainly @xmath because @xmath is @xmath -divisible. For
@xmath we define @xmath . Clearly eack @xmath is a @xmath -bimodule.
Moreover, both @xmath and @xmath hold. Inside @xmath we then have the
chain of @xmath -bimodules

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By Lemma 6.1 , @xmath is a noetherian @xmath -bimodule, and hence @xmath
for some @xmath .

We claim @xmath for all @xmath . Suppose for a contradiction that @xmath
for some @xmath . Choose @xmath and @xmath such that @xmath is minimal.
Now @xmath , and thus @xmath for some @xmath and @xmath . But then,
@xmath . Because @xmath , the minimality of @xmath implies @xmath . But
this forces @xmath . Thus @xmath which gives the desired contradiction.
Hence indeed @xmath for all @xmath .

If @xmath is noetherian, then @xmath ( @xmath ) is finitely generated
because then @xmath is isomorphic to a right (left) ideal of @xmath via
@xmath . ∎

As mentioned already, the assumption “ @xmath ” appearing in Proposition
6.2 will be the assumption that replaces “ @xmath -divisible” in our
classification of maximal @xmath -orders.

Clearly Proposition 6.2 proves that @xmath and @xmath are equivalent
orders. We now aim to prove @xmath and @xmath are equivalent orders. Key
to this are sporadic and minimal sporadic ideals.

###### Definition 6.3.

Let @xmath be a cg @xmath -subalgebra of @xmath .

1.  A homogenous ideal @xmath of @xmath will be called sporadic if
    @xmath .

2.  A sporadic ideal @xmath of @xmath is called minimal sporadic if for
    all sporadic ideals @xmath of @xmath , there exists an @xmath such
    that @xmath .

We warn that Definition 6.3 (1) does not completely agree with the
definition given in [ 30 ] . There, an ideal @xmath of @xmath was called
sporadic when @xmath . It is Definition 6.3 (1) that is most convenient
for us.

###### Remark 6.4.

In [ 30 , Section 8] Rogalski, Sierra and Stafford work under increased
assumptions designed ensure the existence of minimal sporadic ideals [
30 , Assumption 8.2] . It is not immediately obvious that @xmath
satisfies these assumptions: this follows from [ 29 , Theorem 8.8 and
Proposition 8.7] .

The coming few results show that the algebras we consider do indeed have
minimal sporadic ideals.

###### Proposition 6.5.

Let @xmath be a cg @xmath -divisible subalgebra of @xmath with @xmath .
Then @xmath has a minimal sporadic ideal.

###### Proof.

Set @xmath . By Lemma 3.33 , @xmath is @xmath -divisible subalgebra of
@xmath . By [ 30 , Proposition 8.4] , @xmath has a minimal sporadic
ideal, @xmath say. Set @xmath . Since @xmath is noetherian by
Proposition 3.18 , Lemma 3.34 (2) applies and shows that @xmath . We
claim that @xmath is in fact a minimal sporadic ideal of @xmath .

Suppose that @xmath is any other sporadic ideal of @xmath . Then by
Lemma 3.34 (1), @xmath is a sporadic ideal of @xmath . Since @xmath is a
minimal sporadic ideal of @xmath , there exists @xmath such that @xmath
. We then have @xmath . By Lemma 3.5 , @xmath . Hence there exists
@xmath such that @xmath as required. ∎

###### Corollary 6.6.

The following rings have a minimal sporadic ideal:

1.  @xmath for an effective divisor @xmath on @xmath with @xmath ;

2.   Both @xmath and @xmath from a maximal order pair @xmath . In
    particular, virtual blowups have minimal sporadic ideals.

###### Proof.

(1). By Theorem 4.15 (1) @xmath is @xmath -divisible and so Proposition
6.5 applies.

(2). By definition of a maximal order pair (Definition 5.12 ) @xmath is
a @xmath -divisible subalgebra of @xmath . It hence has a minimal
sporadic ideal by Proposition 6.5 , call it @xmath . By Definition 5.12
again, @xmath has an ideal @xmath contained in @xmath and such that (as
a @xmath -algebra) @xmath . Set @xmath , then @xmath is an ideal of
@xmath contained in @xmath . By Lemma 3.19 (2)(4) it is sporadic. Let
@xmath be any other sporadic ideal of @xmath . Then @xmath is another
sporadic ideal of @xmath by Lemma 3.19 (2)(4) again. Moreover @xmath
holds; in particular it is an ideal of @xmath also. Since @xmath is
finitely generated, @xmath equals the GK-dimension of @xmath considered
as a right @xmath -module, @xmath (see [ 20 , Corollary 5.4] ). Thus we
have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

showing @xmath is a sporadic ideal of @xmath . Since @xmath is minimal
sporadic, there exists @xmath such that @xmath . It follows that @xmath
. ∎

We would expect that algebras containing @xmath would always have
minimal sporadic ideals, the best we can do is the following. The result
is analogous to [ 30 , Corollary 8.8] . With Proposition 6.5 in place we
are able to use the same proof.

###### Corollary 6.7.

Let @xmath be a cg subalgebra of @xmath with @xmath . Assume that @xmath
and that @xmath . By Proposition 6.5 , @xmath has a minimal sporadic
ideal @xmath . Then @xmath is sporadic ideal minimal among sporadic
ideals @xmath such that @xmath is @xmath -torsionfree.

###### Proof.

We first note that @xmath is noetherian by Proposition 3.18 , and it
indeed has a minimal sporadic ideal @xmath by Proposition 6.5 . By Lemma
3.19 (2), @xmath is also a minimal sporadic ideal of @xmath . By
replacing @xmath with @xmath we can assume @xmath is @xmath -divisible,
or equivalently, that @xmath is @xmath -torsionfree.

Let @xmath be any sporadic ideal @xmath such that @xmath is @xmath
-torsionfree. Set @xmath . We first show @xmath . By Proposition 6.2 ,
there exists an @xmath such that @xmath . It follows that @xmath . Put
@xmath . By Lemma 3.19 (2)(4), @xmath is a sporadic ideal. As @xmath is
a minimal sporadic ideal of @xmath , @xmath for some @xmath . We clearly
also have @xmath . Combining the above,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Pick @xmath minimal such that @xmath . If @xmath we’re done, so suppose
@xmath . In which case, by the minimality of @xmath , the ideal @xmath
of @xmath is @xmath -torsion. But by assumption, @xmath is @xmath
-torsionfree. This means that this ideal must be zero. Thus @xmath after
all.

It remains to prove @xmath . As @xmath is @xmath -divisible with @xmath
, Lemma 3.23 (3) implies @xmath is a finitely generated @xmath -module.
In which case, the submodule @xmath is also a finitely generated @xmath
-module. Therefore, using [ 20 , Corollary 5.4] , @xmath ∎

Again we want an @xmath -version of a result in [ 30 ] - in this case [
30 , Lemma 8.9] . Again the proof provided in [ 30 ] does the job for
us.

###### Lemma 6.8.

Let @xmath be a cg graded subalgebra of @xmath with @xmath . Suppose
that @xmath and that @xmath . Then @xmath is finitely generated as a
@xmath -algebra.

###### Proof.

We prove the equivalent notion that @xmath is a finitely generated right
ideal of @xmath . We first claim that @xmath is a finitely generated
@xmath -algebra for all @xmath . The result holds for @xmath by
Proposition 2.55 . Proceeding by induction, assume that we can find
@xmath whose images generate @xmath . Set @xmath . Then, as @xmath
-bimodules (and up to shifts),

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence, by Lemma 6.1 , @xmath is a finitely generated @xmath -bimodule.
Say that @xmath is generated by the images of @xmath . It follows that
@xmath generate @xmath .

Now by Proposition 6.2 , there exists @xmath such that @xmath for all
@xmath . By the claim, @xmath is finitely generated as a @xmath
-algebra. Choose @xmath such that their images generate @xmath as a
@xmath -algebra. Then, for @xmath , there exists an @xmath such that
@xmath . Thus @xmath . That is, @xmath is generated by @xmath . ∎

Finally we give the key result that shows that @xmath and @xmath are
equivalent orders. The proof of Proposition 6.9 is an @xmath -version of
the proof of [ 30 , Proposition 8.10] .

###### Proposition 6.9.

Let @xmath be a cg subalgebra of @xmath with @xmath and @xmath . Then
there exists a nonzero ideal of @xmath that is finitely generated both
as a right and left @xmath -module.

###### Proof.

By Lemma 3.29 either @xmath or @xmath . The case @xmath , then this is
exactly [ 30 , Proposition 8.10] . So we assume that @xmath . By Lemma
6.8 , @xmath is finitely generated, say by @xmath . For each @xmath , we
can write @xmath for some @xmath . Let @xmath be the subalgebra of
@xmath generated by the @xmath . Then @xmath is a finitely generated
subalgebra of @xmath such that @xmath .

Given @xmath , we have @xmath as @xmath is central. Therefore @xmath is
an ideal of @xmath . In addition, @xmath is the homomorphic image of the
polynomial ring @xmath . It follows that the Hilbert series of @xmath is
at most as large as @xmath , where @xmath is a polynomial. In
particular, @xmath . Moreover, we claim that the @xmath -torsion
submodule @xmath is finite dimensional. To see this, note that since
@xmath is clearly noetherian, @xmath is also. This shows @xmath is
finitely generated. Suppose that @xmath with, say @xmath for all @xmath
, Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The right hand side is clearly finite dimensional which proves the the
claim.

For @xmath , we put @xmath . Then for every @xmath , @xmath is finite
dimensional, and so,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.9.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Furthermore, @xmath and @xmath is @xmath -torsionfree. Now let @xmath be
a minimal sporadic ideal of @xmath given by Lemma 6.5 . By Lemma 3.19
(2), @xmath is also a minimal sporadic ideal of @xmath . Thus by
replacing @xmath with @xmath , we may assume @xmath is @xmath
-torsionfree. In which case, @xmath is a sporadic ideal of @xmath
minimal among co- @xmath -torsionfree sporadic ideals by Corollary 6.7 .
In particular, @xmath for all @xmath .

Now, @xmath , and @xmath has an eventually periodic Hilbert series by
Lemma 3.23 (1). It follows that there exists @xmath such that @xmath for
all @xmath . As @xmath , @xmath for all @xmath . Fix @xmath and let
@xmath be the integer given in ( 6.9.1 ). Then for all @xmath we have
@xmath , and also @xmath because @xmath . It follows that @xmath for all
@xmath , say for all @xmath . Thus

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.9.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Finally, if @xmath is generated as a @xmath -algebra by elements of
degree at most @xmath , then @xmath . By ( 6.9.2 ), @xmath , and
therefore @xmath as well. By the Graded Nakayama’s Lemma, @xmath is then
a finitely generated right @xmath -module. Since @xmath , it is also
finitely generated as a right @xmath -module. A symmetrical argument
proves the statement on the left. ∎

Proposition 6.9 shows that @xmath and @xmath are equivalent orders; the
details can be found in the proof of the next theorem. We are now ready
to state and prove our main result. Theorem 6.10 (2) below is [ 30 ,
Theorem 8.11] and uses Notation 3.28 for @xmath . In the coming results,
@xmath is regraded so that @xmath .

###### Theorem 6.10.

Let @xmath , and suppose that @xmath is a cg maximal @xmath -order
satisfying @xmath .

1.   If @xmath is coprime to 3, then there exists a @xmath -virtually
    effective divisor @xmath satisfying @xmath , and a virtual blowup
    @xmath of @xmath at @xmath , such that @xmath .

2.   If @xmath is divisible by @xmath , say @xmath , then exists a
    @xmath -virtually effective divisor @xmath with @xmath , and a
    virtual blowup @xmath of @xmath at @xmath , such that @xmath .

###### Proof.

(1). By definition, @xmath , and so @xmath . Hence Proposition 6.9
applies, and we get an ideal @xmath of @xmath that is finitely generated
on both sides as a @xmath -module. Now, as both a right and left @xmath
-module,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath . Because @xmath is a direct summand of @xmath , it is also
finitely generated on both sides as a @xmath -module. Clearly @xmath is
also an ideal of @xmath .

Set @xmath , then @xmath is finitely generated on both sides as a @xmath
-module. Hence, by Lemma 3.25 (1), @xmath and @xmath share a common
ideal, @xmath say. Clearly @xmath and @xmath have the common ideal
@xmath , so @xmath and @xmath have the common ideal @xmath . In
particular, @xmath and @xmath are equivalent orders.

Now consider @xmath . By Lemma 3.29 either @xmath or @xmath . In fact
@xmath is impossible because @xmath and @xmath is coprime to 3, thus
@xmath . By Proposition 6.2 , @xmath and @xmath have a common ideal. By
Theorem 5.26 (2), @xmath is contained in, and an equivalent order to,
some virtual blowup @xmath at a virtually effective divisor @xmath with
@xmath . Hence @xmath is a maximal @xmath -order containing and
equivalent to @xmath . By Lemma 3.32 , @xmath (and hence @xmath ) is
contained in and equivalent to @xmath and @xmath . As @xmath is a
maximal @xmath -order we have @xmath .

(2). This is [ 30 , Theorem 8.11] with [ 29 , Theorem 8.8 and
Proposition 8.7] proving that @xmath indeed satisfies the hypotheses of
those results. ∎

In the other direction we obtain Theorem 6.11 . We note that Theorem
6.11 (2)(a-c) is an improvement on [ 30 ] .

###### Theorem 6.11.

Let @xmath and @xmath a divisor on @xmath .

1.   If @xmath is coprime to 3 and @xmath is @xmath -virtually effective
    with @xmath , then there exists a blowup @xmath of @xmath at @xmath
    . Moreover:

    1.  @xmath is a maximal order with @xmath ;

    2.  @xmath is a maximal @xmath -order;

    3.   there exists an ideal @xmath of @xmath , contained in @xmath ,
        such that @xmath .

2.   If @xmath is @xmath -virtually effective with @xmath , then there
    exists a blowup @xmath of @xmath at @xmath . Moreover:

    1.  @xmath is a maximal order with @xmath ;

    2.  @xmath is a maximal @xmath -order;

    3.   there exists an ideal @xmath of @xmath , contained in @xmath ,
        such that @xmath .

###### Proof.

(1). By Proposition 5.29 , a blowup @xmath of @xmath at @xmath exists.
In particular @xmath , where @xmath , is a maximal order pair of @xmath
. Since @xmath must be @xmath -divisible, Proposition 3.37 (1a) implies
@xmath is a maximal order in @xmath . Similarly @xmath is a maximal
@xmath -order by Proposition 3.37 (1b). By definition of a maximal order
pair (Definition 5.12 ), there exists an ideal @xmath of @xmath
contained in @xmath , and such that @xmath . By Lemma 3.34 (1), @xmath
is an ideal of @xmath with @xmath . Clearly @xmath also holds.

(2). By [ 30 , Theorem 7.4(3)] a blowup @xmath of @xmath at @xmath
exists. The rest of the proof is the same with the relevant definitions
in @xmath replaced by those in @xmath , and Proposition 3.37 (2) used
instead of Proposition 3.37 (1). ∎

Theorem 6.10 and Theorem 6.11 answers [ 30 , Question 9.4] with the
additional assumption of @xmath . It is worth emphasising that we allow
@xmath to be divisible by 3 in Corollary 6.12 . Again we remark that
@xmath and @xmath are graded differently below with @xmath holding.

###### Corollary 6.12.

Let @xmath be a cg graded subalgebra of @xmath with @xmath for some
@xmath and such that @xmath . Let @xmath and set @xmath .

1.   If @xmath is a maximal @xmath -order then @xmath is a maximal
    @xmath -order.

2.   If @xmath is a maximal order then @xmath is a maximal order.

###### Proof.

(1). Suppose first that @xmath is divisible by 3, say @xmath . Then by
Theorem 6.10 (2), @xmath where @xmath for some virtual blowup @xmath of
@xmath . By Theorem 6.11 (2b), @xmath is a maximal @xmath -order.

Now suppose that @xmath is coprime to 3. By Theorem 6.10 (1), @xmath
where @xmath for some virtual blowup @xmath of @xmath . If @xmath is
coprime to 3, then @xmath is a maximal @xmath -order by Theorem 6.11
(1b). Finally assume that @xmath for some @xmath . By Theorem 5.33 ,
@xmath is a virtual blowup of @xmath . Set @xmath . By Theorem 6.11 (2)
again, @xmath is a maximal @xmath -order.

(2). Since @xmath , if it is a maximal order it is certainly a maximal
@xmath -order. Hence by Theorem 6.10 , @xmath where @xmath for some
virtual blowup @xmath (of either @xmath or @xmath ) where either @xmath
or @xmath . In either case @xmath and @xmath are equivalent orders by
definition, and hence by Lemma 3.32 @xmath and @xmath are equivalent
orders. But @xmath is a maximal order, so @xmath . The proof now follows
that of part (1) with @xmath in place of @xmath , and with Theorem 6.11
(1a) and Theorem 6.11 (2a) in place of Theorem 6.11 (1b) and Theorem
6.11 (2b). ∎

As immediate corollaries to this classification, we are able to satisfy
the intuition that maximal orders are “nice” rings. A particularly
notably example of this is that maximal orders are automatically
noetherian.

###### Corollary 6.13.

Let @xmath , and let @xmath be a cg maximal @xmath -order such that
@xmath . Equivalently, let @xmath be a virtual blowup of @xmath at
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Then @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are all
strongly noetherian; in particular noetherian and finitely generated as
a @xmath -algebra.

###### Proof.

Since @xmath and @xmath are @xmath -divisible cg subalgebras of @xmath ,
they are strongly noetherian by Proposition 3.18 . By [ 3 ,
Proposition 4.9(2)(3)] , @xmath is then strongly noetherian ∎

Next we complete the proof of Theorem 1.8 . Comments on the terms below
can be found in Remark 2.60 .

###### Corollary 6.14.

[ 30 , Corollary 8.12] . Let @xmath be coprime to 3, and let @xmath be a
cg maximal @xmath -order satisfying @xmath . Equivalently, let @xmath be
a virtual blowup of @xmath at @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Then @xmath
have cohomological dimension at most 2, they have balanced dualizing
complexes and all satisfy the Artin-Zhang @xmath -conditions.

###### Proof.

By Theorem 5.17 , @xmath and @xmath are equal in high degrees to a
twisted homogenous coordinate ring. By [ 27 , Lemma 2.2] and [ 8 ,
Lemma 8.2(5)] , @xmath and @xmath has cohomological dimension 1 and,
@xmath and @xmath satisfy @xmath . The fact that @xmath and @xmath
satisfy @xmath and have cohomological dimension at most 2 follows from [
8 , Theorem 8.8] . Since @xmath and @xmath are noetherian by Corollary
6.13 , @xmath is a noetherian @xmath -module. Then @xmath then also has
these properties by [ 8 , Proposition 8.7(2)] . Finally, @xmath and
@xmath have balanced dualizing complexes by the above and [ 44 ,
Theorem 6.3] . ∎

Missing from the above corollaries are the properties
Auslander-Gorenstein and Cohen-Macaulay. Corollary 7.17 shows that these
conditions do not hold in general.

Like [ 30 ] with maximal @xmath -orders, we are able to determine the
simple objects of @xmath for a maximal @xmath -order @xmath . The “
@xmath -torsion” half of the proof of Corollary 6.15 follows the proof
of [ 30 , Corollary 8.13] .

###### Corollary 6.15.

Let @xmath be a cg maximal @xmath -order with @xmath . The isomorphism
classes of the simple objects of @xmath are in 1-1 correspondence with
the closed points of the elliptic curve @xmath together with a (possibly
empty) finite set.

###### Proof.

By Theorem 6.10 , @xmath for a virtual blowup @xmath . Write @xmath for
the natural functor defining @xmath and let @xmath be a simple object of
@xmath . Then @xmath is a finitely generated right @xmath -module such
that @xmath for all nonzero submodules @xmath of @xmath . If @xmath then
@xmath by assumption. It would then follow that @xmath . Thus either
@xmath is @xmath -torsion or @xmath is @xmath -torsionfree.

Assume first that @xmath is @xmath -torsion. Since @xmath is finitely
generated, there exists an @xmath such that @xmath . By [ 30 ,
Lemma 3.8] , @xmath is a prime ideal of @xmath , and hence @xmath . Now
let @xmath be such that @xmath , as in Definition 5.23 . Under the
equivalence @xmath from Theorem 2.30 , the simple objects of @xmath are
in 1-1 correspondence with closed points of @xmath . Thus the
isomorphism classes of simples @xmath of @xmath such that @xmath is
@xmath -torsion are in 1-1 correspondence with @xmath .

Now suppose @xmath is @xmath -torsionfree. Write @xmath . As a @xmath
-module we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath are finitely generated @xmath -torsionfree right @xmath
-module. Fix @xmath and let @xmath . Because @xmath is simple, @xmath
holds. Similarly, if @xmath is a nonzero @xmath -submodule of @xmath ,
then @xmath . It follows that @xmath , and so @xmath is simple in @xmath
(we are abusing notation and using @xmath for @xmath also). Thus we have
@xmath for some @xmath -torsionfree right @xmath -module @xmath such
that @xmath is simple in @xmath .

On the other hand, @xmath for some virtual blowup @xmath of @xmath by
Theorem 6.10 . By Theorem 5.33 , @xmath is a virtual blowup of @xmath ,
and so @xmath is a maximal @xmath -order. By [ 30 , Corollary 8.3] and
its proof, there are finitely many (possible zero) isomorphism classes
of the simple objects @xmath of the form @xmath where @xmath is a
finitely generated @xmath -torsionfree right @xmath -modules. From the
previous paragraph, @xmath for such a @xmath -module @xmath . Thus (up
to isomorphism) there can only be finitely many possibilities for @xmath
. ∎

### 6.2 Rings contained in @xmath

The assumption @xmath of Theorem 6.10 is annoying yet, as shown in
Example 7.19 , is necessary. In [ 30 , Section 9] , Rogalski, Sierra and
Stafford present a trick that allowed them to bypass this assumption, at
least up to semi-graded isomorphism (defined below) and taking a
Veroneses subring. Here we present the results we are able to obtain
using similar techniques.

###### Definition 6.16.

Let @xmath and @xmath be @xmath -graded algebras. A homomorphism @xmath
is called graded of degree @xmath if @xmath for all @xmath . The map
@xmath is called semi-graded if it is graded in degree @xmath for some
@xmath .

###### Proposition 6.17.

Let @xmath , and let @xmath be a cg maximal @xmath -order generated in
the single degree @xmath . Then there exists @xmath and a virtual blowup
@xmath of @xmath or @xmath such that up to semi-graded isomorphism
@xmath .

###### Proof.

This proof is based on that of [ 30 , Corollary 9.3] . Veronese rings
are given the grading induced from @xmath . That is, for a cg subalgebra
@xmath of @xmath , @xmath .

Pick @xmath maximal such that @xmath . Since @xmath and @xmath , we
necessarily have that @xmath . Define @xmath via @xmath for @xmath .
Clearly @xmath is an injective ring homomorphism. Set @xmath . Then for
@xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (6.17.1)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which shows @xmath is graded of degree @xmath (if one grades @xmath via
@xmath , then @xmath is graded in degree @xmath . However the current
grading is more convenient for the proof).

Set @xmath , then @xmath is a cg subalgebra of @xmath generated by
@xmath . By choice of @xmath , @xmath . It is left to prove @xmath
remains a maximal @xmath -order. Certainly @xmath holds, and hence
@xmath . Suppose that @xmath is an equivalent order with some @xmath
such that @xmath ; say with @xmath and @xmath . Define @xmath , via
@xmath for @xmath . A like argument to that of ( 6.17.1 ) shows that
@xmath is also an injective semi-graded homomorphism. Moreover, it is
clear that @xmath . We then have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath is a maximal @xmath -order, it follows @xmath and @xmath .
This proves that @xmath is a maximal @xmath -order. Since @xmath we can
now apply Theorem 6.10 . ∎

To understand a cg algebra @xmath that is not generated in a single
degree, we must also take a Veronese subring on top of the semi-graded
homomorphism appearing in Proposition 6.17 . Since we are allowing the
taking of higher Veronese subrings, for the next two results we can
essentially just take the 3-Veronese of our rings and apply the results
from [ 30 , Section 9] . We recall that we are writing @xmath .

###### Lemma 6.18.

Let @xmath be a noetherian cg subalgebra of @xmath such that @xmath .
Then there exists @xmath , and an injective homomorphism @xmath with
@xmath for all @xmath . Moreover, @xmath satisfies @xmath and @xmath .

###### Proof.

Set @xmath . Suppose that @xmath , say @xmath with @xmath minimal. Then
@xmath , and hence, @xmath as @xmath is completely prime. It follows
that @xmath , which shows @xmath . By Lemma 3.31 (1), @xmath is
noetherian. Applying [ 30 , Proposition 9.1] to @xmath we can find
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath such that @xmath for all @xmath , and such
that @xmath . Set @xmath and @xmath , then @xmath for all @xmath , and
@xmath . From [ 30 , Proposition 9.1] again,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Corollary 6.19.

Let @xmath be a noetherian cg subalgebra of @xmath with @xmath .

1.   There is an @xmath and a semi-graded isomorphism @xmath such that
    @xmath is a noetherian algebra satisfying @xmath and @xmath .

2.   If @xmath and @xmath , then @xmath is finitely generated on both
    sides as a @xmath -module. The algebra @xmath is described by
    Corollary 5.27 .

###### Proof.

Part (1) easily follows from Lemma 6.18 .

(2). By the proof of Proposition 6.18 , @xmath so we could just apply [
30 , Corollary 8.14] . However a direct proof is short and so we
included it.

By Proposition 6.9 , there is an ideal @xmath of @xmath that is finitely
generated on both sides as a @xmath -module. By Lemma 3.6 (2), there
exists a @xmath such that @xmath . Thus for any @xmath , @xmath .
Because @xmath is noetherian, this shows @xmath is finitely generated.
By Proposition 6.2 , @xmath is finitely generated. Hence it follows that
@xmath is finitely generated. Symmetrically @xmath is also finitely
generated. Since @xmath is @xmath -divisible it satisfies the hypothesis
of Corollary 5.27 . ∎

## 7 Examples

In our final chapter we compute some examples demonstrating some
subtleties of the theory. The standout example is Theorem 7.1 where we
construct an explicit example of a virtual blowup. Also notable are
Example 7.15 and Example 7.18 where we explore the delicacy required
when defining an algebra by its generators. Example 7.19 gives an
example of a maximal order @xmath satisfying @xmath .

### 7.1 A virtual blowup example

Here we study in detail a particular example of what will be prove to be
a virtual blowup. We are able to give algebra generators of a virtual
blowup (notoriously a hard problem in noncommutative algebra) as well as
realising it as an endomorphism ring.

###### Theorem 7.1 (Proposition 7.14, Lemma 7.12 and Corollary 7.17).

Let @xmath and @xmath . We set

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

Put @xmath . Then @xmath is a virtual blowup of @xmath at the virtually
effective divisor @xmath . In particular

1.  @xmath is maximal order contained in @xmath .

2.  @xmath is noetherian and Corollaries 6.13 and 6.14 hold.

3.  @xmath is neither Auslander-Gorenstein nor AS-Gorenstein nor
    Cohen-Macaulay. Moreover, @xmath has infinite injective dimension.

4.   Set @xmath and @xmath considered as a right @xmath -module. Then
    @xmath .

A priori, we do not know that @xmath and @xmath are respectively the
homogenous elements of @xmath of degree 2 and 3 - this is proven in (
7.7.6 ).

What’s curious about @xmath from Theorem 7.1 is the summand @xmath . It
would be more natural to take @xmath where @xmath , and hence @xmath - a
definition more in keeping with the definition of @xmath (Definition 1.3
). Example 7.15 studies this second ring and shows it is far from being
a maximal order. This suggest that finding algebra generators for an
arbitrary virtual blowup would be more difficult than Theorem 7.1 above.

Before proceeding with the proof of Theorem 7.1 , we require a few
computational lemmas to help us. The first of these is [ 27 , Lemma 3.1]
.

###### Lemma 7.2.

[ 27 , Lemma 3.1] Let @xmath and @xmath be invertible sheaves on @xmath
with both @xmath and @xmath . Consider the natural map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The map is surjective unless @xmath and @xmath , in which case the image
is a 3 dimensional vector space. ∎

For the next lemma we recall from Definition 4.1 that for @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In particular we will be writing

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We will also be using Notation 4.3 and Notation 4.4 frequently for the
rest of this chapter.

###### Lemma 7.3.

Let @xmath . Then

1.   For @xmath , if @xmath then @xmath .

2.   Let @xmath and @xmath . Suppose that @xmath . Then

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

###### Proof.

(1). This is almost what is in [ 27 , Lemma 4.1(2)] . Since our
statement is different we include a proof but note that it is
essentially Rogalski’s proof.

By definition @xmath and @xmath . Their product is the image inside
@xmath of the natural map

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.3.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Since @xmath , the map @xmath in ( 7.3.1 ) is surjective as long as
@xmath by Lemma 7.2 . Write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By Abel’s Theorem [ 24 , Corollary 4, page 5] , @xmath . Thus @xmath if
and only if @xmath . Since @xmath is invertible and @xmath , this
happens if and only if @xmath . Therefore by [ 16 , Proposition II6.13]
, @xmath if and only if @xmath in the sense of [ 16 , Section II6] .
Since @xmath is a translation by a point of infinite order, say @xmath ,
this is equivalent to @xmath . That is @xmath , or equivalently @xmath .

(2). The @xmath case is part (1). We do the case @xmath , with the
general case following by induction. From part (1) we have @xmath .
Since @xmath , Lemma 7.2 implies the multiplication map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is surjective. But the image is exactly @xmath . ∎

Another lemma which we will be using regularly in the following
calculations is [ 27 , Lemma 4.1] . We state and prove an extension of
it here which is implicit in [ 27 ] .

###### Lemma 7.4.

Let @xmath . Then

1.  @xmath with @xmath ;

2.  @xmath if and only if @xmath , while @xmath ;

3.  @xmath if and only if @xmath ; whilst,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

###### Proof.

(1) and (2) make up [ 27 , Lemma 4.1] with the exception of showing that
@xmath . By definition @xmath is the image of the multiplication map

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.4.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Since @xmath , @xmath . By Lemma 7.2 , the map in ( 7.4.1 ) is then
surjective.

(3). Since @xmath , we can identify @xmath and @xmath and prove the
statements in @xmath instead. Let @xmath . As in ( 7.4.1 ), @xmath is
the image of the natural map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now on the right hand side @xmath . Moveover, by the Riemann-Roch
theorem (Corollary 2.33 ), @xmath . By (2), @xmath if and only if @xmath
. That is, @xmath if and only if @xmath . Similarly @xmath is the image
of the natural map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This time @xmath if and only if @xmath (or equivalently @xmath ) again
by (2). So if @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath , then @xmath and @xmath . Hence

  -- -- -- ---------
           (7.4.2)
  -- -- -- ---------

Making the substitution @xmath in ( 7.4.2 ) does the @xmath case. ∎

Our first lemma on the ring @xmath from Theorem 7.1 , specifically the
divisor @xmath , is a routine computation.

###### Lemma 7.5.

Let @xmath , as in Theorem 7.1 . Then @xmath is @xmath -virtually
effective. Moreover, for all @xmath , @xmath is effective with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In particular @xmath and @xmath are effective. ∎

###### Notation 7.6.

On top of the current notation, we will be using the more compact @xmath
for @xmath , for the coming calculations.

In the next lemma we will be regularly applying Lemma 7.4 (3) to two
points in the same @xmath -orbit. In our new notation this reads

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Lemma 7.7.

Let @xmath and @xmath be as in Theorem 7.1 . Set @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Write @xmath . By definition @xmath , and clearly @xmath . Since @xmath
, it is easy to prove @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.7.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which shows @xmath . By Lemma 7.5 , @xmath is effective, and so @xmath .
It is then obvious from the definition that @xmath . Since @xmath we
have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.7.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

It follows @xmath Since @xmath is generated in degrees less than or
equal to 3, we have also proved @xmath .

Now using Lemma 7.4 (3) for equality 1 below, Lemma 7.3 (2) for 2, and
Lemma 7.5 for 3, we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.7.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Also, using Lemma 7.3 (2), we can write

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.7.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

So a similar calculation using Lemma 7.4 (3), Lemma 7.3 (2) and Lemma
7.5 obtains

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.7.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Now for @xmath , it is easily seen that we can write @xmath with @xmath
nonnegative integers. In which case

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

by equations ( 7.7.3 ), ( 7.7.4 ) and ( 7.7.5 ), Lemma 7.3 (2) and Lemma
7.5 . ∎

At this point we note that ( 7.7.1 ) can be lifted to @xmath since
@xmath . Similarly, as @xmath , ( 7.7.2 ) can also be lifted to @xmath .
This proves that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.7.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

as was alluded to after Theorem 7.1 .

Next we look to realise @xmath as an endomorphism ring.

###### Notation 7.8.

Let @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . We also put @xmath and @xmath .

###### Lemma 7.9.

Retain the notation of Theorem 7.1 and Notation 7.8 . Then @xmath

###### Proof.

Here we again use Notation 7.6 . We warn that because @xmath , we can
and will regularly identify @xmath . Since @xmath is generated by @xmath
we need to show @xmath . As @xmath , we must prove @xmath for each
@xmath .

Proof of @xmath . Since @xmath , we clearly have @xmath . So it is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.9.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

that we need to prove. First we show that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For this, we have @xmath , and @xmath by Lemma 7.4 (1). Thus @xmath is
the image of the natural map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Further, @xmath . Hence indeed @xmath . This implies @xmath . But @xmath
, and so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence @xmath and ( 7.9.1 ) follows.

Proof of @xmath . First, clearly

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.9.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Next, using Lemma 7.4 (1) for equality 1 and Lemma 7.4 (3) for equality
2, we also have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.9.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Equations ( 7.9.2 ) and ( 7.9.3 ) together show @xmath .

Proof of @xmath . From ( 7.7.4 ) we have @xmath . Since @xmath and
@xmath , this implies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(in fact one can prove @xmath but this is not necessary for us). As
@xmath and is central, we clearly we have @xmath . Therefore what we
need to prove is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.9.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

First, using Lemma 7.4 (1) for equality 1 below, we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.9.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Secondly, with multiple uses of Lemma 7.4 ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (7.9.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Equations ( 7.9.5 ) and ( 7.9.6 ) together give ( 7.9.4 ). ∎

###### Lemma 7.10.

Retain the notation of Theorem 7.1 and Notation 7.8 . Then

1.  @xmath

2.  @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath . As @xmath is generated in degree 1, @xmath , and so @xmath
. By Lemma 7.4 (1), @xmath . Hence @xmath is the image of the map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

On the right hand side

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So provided @xmath , the map @xmath is surjective by Lemma 7.2 .

(2). By Lemma 7.9 and Lemma 3.20 (3) @xmath . On the other hand @xmath
by part (1) and Lemma 5.16 (1). Then by Lemma 7.7 @xmath . ∎

Now we study the 3-Veronese of @xmath . For the next proposition we must
recall Notation 2.56 and Definition 2.57 for the blowup subalgebras
@xmath of @xmath .

###### Proposition 7.11.

Retain the notation of Theorem 7.1 and Notation 7.8 . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the blowup of @xmath from Definition 2.57 . In
particular, @xmath is a maximal order.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath . By Lemma 7.5 , @xmath . So by definition, @xmath . In
particular, with Lemma 7.9 , we already have

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.11.1)
  -- -------- -- ----------

It is hence enough to prove @xmath . We do this by showing they are
equivalent orders.

Since @xmath is finitely generated, Lemma 3.6 (2) finds a nonzero @xmath
such that @xmath . Choose any nonzero @xmath , then clearly @xmath . Now
notice @xmath , meaning @xmath also. As @xmath , we then have @xmath .
So @xmath and @xmath are equivalent orders. By Lemma 3.32 @xmath and
@xmath are equivalent orders. Now @xmath by Theorem 4.15 (1) and is an
equivalent order with @xmath by [ 30 , Corollary 5.27] . Thus @xmath and
@xmath are equivalent orders. However @xmath is a maximal order by [ 27
, Theorem 1.1] , so ( 7.11.1 ) forces @xmath . ∎

###### Lemma 7.12.

Let @xmath , @xmath and @xmath be as in Notation 7.8 and Theorem 7.1 .
Then @xmath is a blowup of @xmath at @xmath . In other words,

1.  @xmath is a maximal order pair of @xmath in the sense of Definition
    5.12 .

2.  @xmath .

Moreover,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.12.1)
  -- -------- -- ----------

###### Proof.

By Lemma 3.22 , @xmath , while @xmath by Lemma 3.21 (3). By Proposition
5.9 , @xmath is then the unique maximal order pair containing and
equivalent to @xmath . This and Lemma 7.9 show ( 7.12.1 ). By
Proposition 5.17 , @xmath for some @xmath -virtually effective @xmath .
We must prove @xmath .

Now by Proposition 6.2 , @xmath is an equivalent order with @xmath , and
hence @xmath is contained in and equivalent to @xmath as well. By Lemma
3.32 , @xmath is then contained in and equivalent to @xmath . But @xmath
by Proposition 7.11 ; and furthermore @xmath by Lemma 7.5 . Now @xmath
is a maximal order by [ 27 , Theorem 1.1] , and thus @xmath . In
particular @xmath . On the other hand @xmath ; therefore for @xmath we
have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since for @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are generated by their global
sections [ 16 , Corollary IV.3.2] , it follows that @xmath . It should
be obvious that this implies @xmath but we spell out the details anyway.

Take @xmath , then @xmath , and so @xmath . If we denote @xmath , then
clearly we must have @xmath . Thus we can write @xmath for some @xmath
with all but finitely many zero. From @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Looking at coefficients of each @xmath , this forces

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath for some @xmath , then as @xmath at least one of @xmath or
@xmath . Inductively we get an infinite number of @xmath . Thus @xmath
for all @xmath . Similarly @xmath for all @xmath . We are reduced to the
following system of equations:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

from which it is obvious @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . That is @xmath . ∎

We now look to improve inequalities to equalities in ( 7.12.1 ). This is
first achieved in @xmath .

###### Lemma 7.13.

Retain the notation from Theorem 7.1 and Notation 7.8 . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Set @xmath considered as a subalgebra of @xmath . By Lemma 7.12 , @xmath
. Since @xmath is Auslander-Gorenstein and Cohen-Macaulay by Theorem
2.50 (3) we have @xmath by Lemma 3.10 (2). Thus, with Lemma 7.12 ,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.13.1)
  -- -------- -- ----------

So proving @xmath is enough. By ( 7.13.1 ) and Lemma 7.7 , @xmath .

To prove @xmath assume otherwise that @xmath . Because @xmath , we can
and will identify @xmath . Also we note that since @xmath is effective,
@xmath . Now, by the Riemann-Roch Theorem (specifically Corollary 2.33 )
@xmath , whilst @xmath by Lemma 7.4 and ( 7.7.6 ). Thus by ( 7.13.1 ),
it must be the case that @xmath . In other words, @xmath . In which case
@xmath contains the ring @xmath . But this is exactly @xmath from
Example 7.15 . Since @xmath is @xmath -divisible we would then have
@xmath . However, in Example 7.15 (2) we will show that @xmath . This
would mean @xmath , which certainly contradicts Lemma 7.12 (2). Thus we
must have @xmath , or equivalently @xmath .

Finally we show @xmath . Again, since @xmath and @xmath , if @xmath ,
then @xmath . But in this case, @xmath by Theorem 2.50 (4). This would
contradict @xmath , hence @xmath . ∎

Finally we can conclude @xmath is a virtual blowup.

###### Proposition 7.14.

Let @xmath and @xmath be as in Theorem 7.1 . Then @xmath is a virtual
blowup of @xmath at @xmath . More specifically, retaining notation from
Notation 7.8 ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

By Lemma 7.12 , @xmath . So we need to show @xmath . We first prove
@xmath is @xmath -divisible. Set @xmath . Since @xmath and @xmath is
@xmath -divisible by Lemma 7.12 , @xmath . Therefore @xmath by Lemma
7.13 . As @xmath , this shows @xmath . Proceeding by induction, let
@xmath and assume @xmath . Let @xmath , say with @xmath . Since @xmath ,
certainly @xmath , and so there exists @xmath and @xmath such that
@xmath . We then have @xmath , and so @xmath also. Hence @xmath .
Moreover, since @xmath , we have @xmath . By induction, @xmath .
Therefore @xmath also, which proves @xmath .

Now we have two @xmath -divisible rings @xmath , with @xmath . Comparing
Hilbert series we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath , this forces @xmath . ∎

As mentioned after Theorem 7.1 , the definition of @xmath is surprising.
Indeed the author had initially thought that we should have @xmath ,
where this time @xmath . We now study this second ring. We also note
that Example 7.15 completes the missing step in Lemma 7.13 .

###### Example 7.15.

Let @xmath and @xmath be as in Theorem 7.1 . Set @xmath , where @xmath
for @xmath . Then

1.  @xmath ;

2.  @xmath ;

3.  @xmath is neither left nor right noetherian.

###### Proof.

(1). This is obvious from the definitions of @xmath and @xmath .

(2). Here we use Notation 7.6 . Identifying @xmath and @xmath ; @xmath
by Lemma 7.3 (1), and is a 4-dimensional @xmath -vector space by the
Riemann-Roch Theorem (Corollary 2.33 ). We first prove that @xmath , and
so that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.15.1)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Let @xmath . Write @xmath . Then @xmath , and therefore

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.15.2)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Now, applying [ 27 , Lemma 4.2] with @xmath , we can choose a basis of
@xmath such that @xmath and @xmath . In which case

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.15.3)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In particular @xmath . We compute @xmath which, as @xmath , can be
identified with @xmath . Take a section @xmath , say @xmath vanishes at
the effective divisor @xmath . Then @xmath will consist of global
sections of @xmath vanishing at @xmath . On the other hand @xmath
consists of global section of @xmath vanishing at @xmath by Lemma 7.3
(1). In which case @xmath if and only if @xmath consists of global
sections of @xmath vanishing at @xmath ; that is, if and only if @xmath
; or equivalently @xmath . Thus @xmath . In particular, @xmath by
Riemann-Roch (Corollary 2.33 ). This means @xmath by ( 7.15.2 ) and
Lemma 7.4 . On the other hand @xmath , which is 6 dimensional by the
Riemann-Roch Theorem. We hence must have @xmath . This shows ( 7.15.1 ).

We similarly show @xmath . The same argument used to show ( 7.15.2 ) and
( 7.15.3 ) gives

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.15.4)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where this time @xmath and @xmath . As before we compute @xmath . By
Lemma 7.3 (1), @xmath , whereas from the definition @xmath . Thus @xmath
if and only if @xmath vanishes at @xmath ; that is, if and only if
@xmath . Therefore @xmath ; this is 1-dimensional by the Riemann-Roch
Theorem. On the other hand @xmath , by Lemma 7.4 (2), and hence @xmath
from ( 7.15.4 ). Since @xmath by Lemma 7.3 (2) and the Riemann-Roch, we
are forced to have @xmath . In particular @xmath . Hence, with ( 7.15.1
),

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It follows that @xmath . But @xmath ; hence @xmath .

(3). By (2) and Proposition 6.2 , there exists an @xmath such that
@xmath . Hence, if @xmath is right noetherian, then @xmath would be
finitely generated. In which case, @xmath would also be finitely
generated. Put @xmath , by part (1) and Lemma 7.7 we have @xmath Hence
also @xmath . Thus by Corollary 2.31 if @xmath , then @xmath for some
divisor @xmath and for all @xmath . It would then follow from the
Riemann-Roch Theorem (Corollary 2.33 ) that @xmath . However @xmath ,
and hence @xmath for all @xmath . This would give a contradiction, and
therefore @xmath cannot be right noetherian. A symmetric argument shows
@xmath is not left noetherian. ∎

Next, we show that we cannot expect nice homological properties to hold
for virtual blowups. The following lemma is proved within the proof of [
30 , Example 10.4] .

###### Lemma 7.16.

Let @xmath be a cg domain with @xmath . Suppose that @xmath is
Auslander-Gorenstein and Cohen-Macaulay. Let @xmath is be a graded
subalgebra of @xmath such that @xmath . Then

1.  @xmath

2.  @xmath is neither Auslander-Gorenstein nor AS-Gorenstein nor
    Cohen-Macaulay.∎

The proof of Corollary 7.17 (1) also essentially comes from the proof of
[ 30 , Example 10.4] . This time we include the proof.

###### Corollary 7.17.

Let @xmath and @xmath be as in Theorem 7.1 .

1.  @xmath is neither Auslander-Gorenstein nor AS Gorenstein nor
    Cohen-Macaulay;

2.  @xmath has infinite injective dimension.

###### Proof.

(1). Let @xmath and @xmath . Note that by Theorem 2.50 (3), @xmath is
Auslander-Gorenstein and Cohen-Macaulay. By Theorem 7.1 , @xmath is a
virtual blowup at @xmath . Hence @xmath ; while @xmath by Lemma 3.10
(2). We claim @xmath . Since @xmath , it is enough to prove @xmath . Now
because @xmath and @xmath , both @xmath and @xmath are very ample by [
16 , Corollary IV.3.2] . Therefore both @xmath and @xmath are generated
by their respective global sections. Therefore, if @xmath (i.e. @xmath )
were true, then @xmath . Because @xmath is not effective this is
impossible. Thus we have

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.17.1)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Now @xmath is @xmath -divisible by Proposition 7.14 . Therefore by [ 22
, Theorem 5.10] , @xmath is Auslander-Gorenstein if and only if @xmath
is Auslander-Gorenstein; with the same statement holding with either
AS-Gorenstein or Cohen-Macaulay replacing Auslander-Gorenstein. Since
@xmath is Auslander-Gorenstein and Cohen-Macaulay, Lemma 7.16 (2)
applies. This shows @xmath , and thus @xmath , is neither
Auslander-Gorenstein nor AS Gorenstein nor Cohen-Macaulay.

(2). It is enough to prove @xmath for infinitely many @xmath . Since
@xmath is @xmath -divisible by Proposition 7.14 , the Rees-Lemma (for a
precise statement see [ 22 , Proposition 3.4(b)] ) says @xmath where
@xmath . It hence is suffices to prove @xmath for infinitely many @xmath
.

Set @xmath . From ( 7.17.1 ) we have @xmath and @xmath . We first claim
@xmath for all @xmath . Applying [ 34 , Corollary 10.65] , with their
@xmath replaced with our @xmath , we get

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.17.2)
  -- -------- -- ----------

As @xmath is obviously projective, @xmath for all @xmath . Thus ( 7.17.2
) proves the claim.

Set @xmath , then @xmath is nonzero and finite dimensional. Consider the
following short exact sequence of right @xmath -modules, @xmath . Apply
@xmath and look at the long exact sequence. Using the claim, one sees
that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.17.3)
  -- -------- -- ----------

By Lemma 7.13 and its proof, @xmath . Hence, if @xmath is homogenous of
maximal degree, then @xmath . We therefore have an exact sequence @xmath
. Applying @xmath again and looking at the long exact sequence we get

  -- -- -- ----------
           (7.17.4)
  -- -- -- ----------

Thus @xmath . Now from Lemma 7.16 (1) we already have that @xmath ,
hence @xmath also. Looking further along the long exact sequence (
7.17.4 ) and applying induction, we obtain @xmath for all @xmath . ∎

### 7.2 Other examples

Let @xmath . Recall from Definition 4.5 that we define @xmath to be
generated by elements from degrees 1, 2 and 3. After Definition 4.5 it
is remarked that we do not know whether the elements from degree 3 are
necessary. That is, can @xmath ever be generated in degrees 1 and 2? The
answer to this is currently unknown. The following example shows that
for at least some choices of @xmath and @xmath , degrees 1, 2 and 3 are
all necessary.

###### Example 7.18.

Let @xmath and consider @xmath . Write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as in Definition 4.5 . Then @xmath is generated in degrees 1, 2 and 3
and no fewer.

###### Proof.

For this proof Notation 7.6 is in force and we identify @xmath . Also we
note that from definition we have

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.18.1)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Finally note that @xmath for @xmath by Lemma 4.10 .

It is obvious that @xmath can be generated in degrees 1, 2 and 3. Since
@xmath and @xmath by the Riemann-Roch (Corollary 2.33 ), @xmath . So
certainly @xmath cannot be generated in degree 1. To show @xmath is not
generated in degrees 1 and 2 we must show

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (7.18.2)
  -- -------- -- ----------

What we first show is @xmath . Now by ( 7.18.1 ) and Lemma 7.4 (1),
@xmath . Hence @xmath . Since clearly @xmath , it follows that @xmath .
By Lemma 7.4 (1), @xmath also. We can similarly show @xmath and @xmath .
This gives @xmath , and then @xmath follows. By [ 27 , Lemma 4.6(1)] ,
@xmath and thus (since @xmath by definition) @xmath . Finally, it is
clear that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence @xmath , and @xmath . Thus ( 7.18.2 ) holds. ∎

Our final example shows that the assumption @xmath in our classification
of maximal @xmath -orders is necessary. In [ 30 , Example 10.8] ,
Rogalski, Sierra and Stafford show that when @xmath silly examples can
occur. Their example can be modified to work for orders in @xmath .

For this example, we recall the notion of a semi-graded homomorphism
from Definition 6.16 .

###### Example 7.19.

Choose @xmath that generate @xmath as an @xmath -algebra. Define the
subalgebra @xmath of @xmath and set @xmath . Then:

1.  @xmath ;

2.  There are semi-graded isomorphisms @xmath and @xmath . Also @xmath
    holds;

3.  @xmath is noetherian and @xmath is a completely prime ideal of
    @xmath such that, up to semi-graded isomorphism, @xmath ;

4.  @xmath , but @xmath is not finitely generated on either side as a
    @xmath -module;

5.  @xmath is a maximal order with @xmath .

###### Proof.

(1). This is obvious.

(2). The semi-graded homomorphism @xmath , @xmath for @xmath clearly has
image @xmath . It is injective as @xmath is a domain. Define @xmath
defined by @xmath for @xmath and @xmath . Then @xmath has @xmath and
@xmath . One may view @xmath as graded of degree @xmath if one is
willing to accept @xmath as @xmath -graded and @xmath . To see @xmath ,
note that clearly @xmath . Moreover, since @xmath and @xmath are coprime
we have @xmath .

(3). The fact the @xmath is noetherian follows directly from @xmath . In
this isomorphism @xmath gets identified with @xmath , we therefore have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(4). If @xmath , then @xmath , and so @xmath . Hence @xmath . If @xmath
(or @xmath ) was finitely generated then @xmath (respectively @xmath )
would be finitely generated. This is impossible because @xmath .

(5). Since @xmath , we have that @xmath ; similarly the other two
generators of @xmath , @xmath . Thus indeed @xmath .

Identify @xmath . We shift the grading given in part (2) so that @xmath
and @xmath . With this new grading we have that @xmath is a maximal
order. Suppose @xmath is an equivalent order containing @xmath . By
Lemma 3.32 , @xmath and @xmath are equivalent orders. By (2), @xmath is
a maximal order, and hence @xmath . Take a homogenous element @xmath ,
say @xmath . If 4 divides @xmath , then we already know @xmath , so
suppose @xmath does not divide @xmath . As 3 and 4 are coprime, we can
choose @xmath with @xmath and such that @xmath is divisible by 4. In
which case, @xmath . Hence we can write @xmath for some @xmath . Also we
have @xmath . This implies @xmath . But @xmath is a completely prime
ideal, hence @xmath ; say @xmath for some @xmath . Putting these
together, @xmath . But since @xmath , we have @xmath . Thus @xmath , and
thus @xmath is a maximal order. ∎

## 8 Proof of Lemma 4.11

In this Appendix we present the proof of Lemma 4.11 which was omitted.
We certainly do not claim originality of the statement and proof,
however we were unable to find an appropriate reference.

Recall that we are writing @xmath n]grmv@ @xmath for the grassmannian of
@xmath -dimensional subspaces of a fixed @xmath -dimensional @xmath
-vector space @xmath . It is well know that @xmath is a projective
variety and has a standard open cover of copies of @xmath (see for
example [ 17 , Chapters 11.3, 11.5] ). The standard affine cover is
given as follows. First fix a basis of @xmath and let @xmath be an
@xmath dimensional subspace. Then form an @xmath matrix @xmath which has
as rows the coordinates of a basis @xmath . Next one row reduces @xmath
into a matrix which has the @xmath columns @xmath , …, @xmath in
positions @xmath respectively. Finally one identifies the remaining
matrix entries with @xmath .

###### Lemma 8.1 (Lemma 4.11).

Let @xmath and @xmath be a @xmath -dimensional and @xmath -dimensional
@xmath -vector space respectively, and set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then @xmath and @xmath are Zariski open subsets of @xmath and @xmath
respectively; and the maps @xmath and @xmath , given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

are morphisms of varieties.

###### Proof.

Since @xmath , where @xmath is the diagonal of @xmath , @xmath is open.
We will not prove @xmath is a morphism since the proof is both similar
to, and easier than, that of the corresponding proof for @xmath . Thus
from here we concentrate on @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

Fix a basis of @xmath and consider the image @xmath of @xmath under the
isomorphism taking @xmath to the dual @xmath (see [ 17 ,
Proposition 11.18] ). Under this identification

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

To see @xmath is open we identify @xmath . Write @xmath . Then @xmath
(i.e. @xmath are linearly dependent) if and only if the determinants of
all @xmath minors of the matrix @xmath vanish. In other words, an
element is not in @xmath if and only it is a zero of a finite set of
homogenous equations. So @xmath is open and therefore @xmath is also
open.

To prove @xmath is a morphism we first observe @xmath commutes with
taking the dual, that is, the following diagram commutes.

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

where the isomorphisms in the dual maps @xmath and @xmath , and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence to prove @xmath is a morphism, it is enough to prove @xmath is a
morphism. Identify @xmath and let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As @xmath , the rows are linearly independent, therefore we can choose
linearly independent columns: @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , with @xmath .
Put @xmath then also,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which realises @xmath inside one of the standard @xmath covering @xmath
. Explicitly, for a fixed @xmath as above, and @xmath with @xmath , the
rational map @xmath is given by the rows of the matrix

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Each element of this matrix is of the form @xmath , where @xmath and
@xmath are homogenous polynomials in the @xmath of degree @xmath . Hence
this does define a rational map on @xmath . The domain of definition of
this rational map is the open set @xmath of @xmath consisting of the
points where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are linearly independent.
Varying @xmath , these open sets cover @xmath and the maps @xmath all
glue because they are globally defined. Thus we get @xmath as a well
defined morphism of varieties. As noted earlier this implies @xmath is a
morphism of varieties. ∎

The proof of Lemma 4.11 certainly works for the general statement with
arbitrary dimensions of @xmath and @xmath . For sake of notation we only
proved the statement we required.

\printindex

[n] \printindex
