In this thesis we focus on the theoretical subtleties of the top-quark
mass ( @xmath ) determination, issue which persists in being highly
controversial.

Typically, in order to infer the top mass, theoretical predictions
dependent on @xmath are employed. The parameter @xmath is the physical
mass, that is connected with the bare mass though a renormalization
procedure. Several renormalization schemes are possible and the most
natural seems to be the pole-mass one. However, the pole mass is not
very well defined for a coloured object like the top quark. The pole
mass is indeed affected by the presence of infrared renormalons. They
manifest as factorially growing coefficients that spoil the convergence
of the perturbative series, leading to ambiguities of order of @xmath .
On the other hand, short-distance mass schemes, like the @xmath , are
known to be free from such renormalons. Luckily, the renormalon
ambiguity seems to be safely below the quoted systematic errors on the
pole-mass determinations, so these measurements are still valuable. In
the first part of the thesis, we investigate the presence of linear
renormalons in observables that can be employed to determine the top
mass. We considered a simplified toy model to describe @xmath . The
computation is carried out in the limit of a large number of flavours (
@xmath ), using a new method that allows to easily evaluate any infrared
safe observable at order @xmath for any @xmath . The observables we
consider are, in general, affected by two sources of renormalons: the
pole-mass definition and the jet requirements. We compare and discuss
the predictions obtained in the usual pole scheme with those computed in
the @xmath one. We find that the total cross section without cuts, when
expressed in terms of the @xmath mass, does not exhibit linear
renormalons, but, as soon as selection cuts are introduced, jet-related
linear renormalons arise in any mass scheme. In addition, we show that
the reconstructed mass is affected by linear renormalons in any scheme.
The average energy of the @xmath boson (that we consider as a simplified
example of leptonic observable) has a renormalon in the narrow-width
limit in any mass scheme, that is however screened at large orders for
finite top widths, provided the top mass is in the @xmath scheme.

The most precise determinations of the top mass are the direct ones,
i.e. those that rely upon the reconstruction of the kinematics of the
top-decay products. Direct determinations are heavily based on the use
of Monte Carlo event generators. The generators employed must be as much
accurate as possible, in order not to introduce biases in the
measurements. To this purpose, the second part of the thesis is devoted
to the comparison of several NLO generators, implemented in the POWHEG
BOX framework, that differ by the level of accuracy employed to describe
the top decay. The impact of the shower Monte Carlo programs, used to
complete the NLO events generated by POWHEG BOX , is also studied. In
particular, we discuss the two most widely used shower Monte Carlo
programs, i.e. Pythia8.2 and Herwig7.1 , and we present a method to
interface them with processes that contain decayed emitting resonances.
The comparison of several Monte Carlo programs that have formally the
same level of accuracy is, indeed, a mandatory step towards a sound
estimate of the uncertainty associated with @xmath .
