### Introduction

The top quark is the heaviest elementary particle in the Standard
Model (SM) that has been observed so far. It thus appears clear that its
phenomenology is driven by the large value of its mass @xmath . Indeed,
the top is the only quark that decays before hadronizing. This provides
us the unique occasion to study the properties of a “bare” quark. For
these reasons an accurate determination of @xmath is part of the Large
Hadron Collider (LHC) physics program.

Through radiative corrections, the top-quark mass has a non-negligible
impact on many parameters of the Standard Model, like the masses of the
electroweak bosons and the Higgs self-coupling. Thus, the value of the
@xmath (or the @xmath ) mass is sensitive to the value of the top-quark
one. For this reason, the electroweak data enable us to have a
simultaneous determination of the top and of the @xmath -boson masses
and the strong coupling @xmath . The extracted value of @xmath is @xmath
GeV [ 1 ] , which is in slight tension with the value of @xmath GeV,
i.e. the latest Tevatron and the LHC combined results [ 2 ] . In
addition the top-quark mass is one key ingredient to address the issue
of vacuum stability [ 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 ] . Under the assumption that there
is no new physics up to the Planck scale, the Higgs self coupling @xmath
is always positive during its renormalization-group flow for each scale
@xmath adopted, if @xmath GeV. If instead @xmath GeV, we are in the
metastability region, since @xmath becomes negative only at scales of
the order of the Planck scale. Thus, there is no indication of new
physics below the Planck scale coming from the requirement of vacuum
stability.

The most precise determinations of @xmath are the so called “direct
measurements”, which rely upon the full or partial reconstruction of the
top momentum out of its decay products. Kinematic distributions
sensitive to the top-quark mass are compared to Monte Carlo predictions
and the @xmath value that fits the data the best is the extracted
top-quark mass. The ATLAS and CMS measurements of Refs. [ 7 ] and [ 8 ]
, yielding the values @xmath (syst) GeV and @xmath (syst) GeV
respectively, fall into this broad category. Of course this kind of
determinations is affected by theoretical errors that must be carefully
assessed. If the Monte Carlo used to simulate the distributions is not
accurate enough, it introduces a bias in the determination of @xmath .
For this reason, many efforts have been done in order to implement
next-to-leading-order (NLO) generators capable to handle processes
containing a decayed emitting resonance, like the top quark is. We will
discuss this issue in the second part of the thesis.

However, in contrast with the increasing experimental precision of the
top-mass measurements at the LHC, the theoretical interpretation is
still matter of debate. In Ref. [ 9 ] it was argued that the Monte Carlo
mass parameter does not coincide with the top-pole mass and their
difference is unavoidable due to the intrinsic ambiguity of the
pole-mass definition. Indeed, since the top is quark is always
colour-connected with another particle, an isolated top-quark cannot
exist. This leads to a renormalon in the relation of the pole to the
@xmath mass [ 10 , 11 ] . Nevertheless, the renormalon ambiguity does
not seem severe for the specific case of the top quark, since recent
studies [ 12 , 13 ] have shown that it is in fact well below the current
experimental error. In any case non-perturbative corrections to top-mass
observables (not necessarily related to the mass renormalon) are present
and must be carefully assessed. The top-quark mass renormalon and its
interplay with the renormalon arising from the use of jets [ 14 ] is
discussed in the first part of the thesis.

## Part I Renormalons and all-orders behaviour in top-mass sensitive
observables

### Chapter 1 Introduction

The top mass is measured quite precisely at the LHC by both the ATLAS [
15 ] and the CMS [ 16 ] Collaborations. Up to now, the methods that
yield the most accurate results are the so called “direct” methods,
where kinematic distribution obtained reconstructing fully or partially
the top decay products are compared to templates produced with Monte
Carlo event generators.

Current uncertainties are now near 500 MeV [ 7 , 8 ] , so that one can
worry whether QCD non-perturbative effects may substantially affect the
result. In fact, the experimental collaborations estimate these and
other effects by varying parameters in the generators, and eventually
comparing different generators. This method has been traditionally used
in collider physics to estimate theoretical uncertainties due to the
modelling of hadronization and underlying events, and also to estimate
uncertainties related to higher perturbative orders, as produced by the
shower algorithms. We perform a similar study in the second part of the
thesis. This is a valuable strategy, as long as all the generators under
comparison can reproduce faithfully the data. ¹ ¹ 1 If such a statement
fails to be true, the bad-behaved generator must be discarded from the
comparison, as discussed in the second part of the thesis. However, it
should not be forgotten that it may only provide a lower bound on the
associated errors. However, it should not be forgotten that this
statement is true only if all the generators under comparison. It is
thus important, at the same time, to investigate the associated
uncertainties from a purely theoretical point of view. In consideration
of our poor knowledge of non-perturbative QCD, these investigations can
at most have a qualitative value, but may help us to understand sources
of uncertainties that we might have missed. One such work is presented
in Ref. [ 17 ] , where the authors attempt to relate a theoretically
well-defined mass parameter with a corresponding shower Monte Carlo one,
using as observable the jet mass of a highly boosted top.

We consider the interplay of non-perturbative effects with the behaviour
of perturbative QCD at large orders in the coupling constant, focusing
in particular upon observables that, although quite simple, may be
considered of the kind used in “direct measurements”.

It is known that, in renormalizable field theories, the renormalization
group flow of the couplings leads to the so called renormalons, i.e. to
the factorial growth of the coefficients of the perturbative expansion
as a function of the order [ 18 , 19 , 20 , 21 , 22 , 23 , 24 , 25 ] .
Renormalons lead to a divergence of the perturbative expansion, that
thus becomes asymptotic. In particular, in the case of infrared
renormalons in asymptotically-free field theories, the ambiguity in the
summation of the series corresponds to a power suppressed effect.

Renormalons were originally found in two-point function diagrams [ 18 ,
19 , 26 ] . These contributions are sometimes identified with
renormalons in the so-called large (and negative) number of flavour
@xmath limit. We consider a fictitious process @xmath , where the @xmath
boson has only a vector coupling to quarks, and examine the behaviour of
the cross section, of the reconstructed-top mass and of the energy of
the @xmath boson, order by order in the strong coupling expansion,
taking the large- @xmath limit. We consider up to one gluon exchange, or
emission, and dress this gluon with an arbitrary number of fermion
vacuum-polarization insertions. Furthermore, we also consider final
states where the gluon has undergone a splitting into a
fermion-antifermion pair, corresponding to a cut vacuum polarization
diagram. We assume a finite width for the top quark.

We have devised a method that allowed us to compute in principle any
observable in our process, without further approximations, making use of
simple numerical techniques. We can thus compute the perturbative
expansion at any finite order and infer its asymptotic nature for any
observable, with the only limitation of the numerical precision.

We focus for simplicity upon simple top-mass observables, such as the
production cross section with or without cuts, the reconstructed-top
mass, defined as the mass of a system comprising the @xmath and a @xmath
(not @xmath ) jet, and, as a simplified example of leptonic observable,
the average value of the energy of the final-state @xmath boson. As
discussed earlier, we consider our reconstructed-top mass as an
oversimplified representation of observables of the kind used in the so
called“direct” measurements. We also stress that we consider the
kinematic region where the top energy is not much larger than its mass,
that is the region typically used in direct measurements.

We know that there are renormalons arising in the computation of the
position of the pole in the top propagators, and we also know that there
must be renormalons associated to jets requirements. Since in our
framework we can compute the perturbative expansion order by order in
perturbation theory, we are in the position to determine explicitly the
effects of renormalons in the perturbative expansion.

Our results can be given in terms of the top mass expressed either in
the pole or in the @xmath mass scheme. We know that the expression of
the pole mass in terms of the @xmath mass has a linear renormalon. If
the @xmath mass is considered a fundamental parameter of the theory,
this is to be interpreted as an uncertainty of the order of a typical
hadronic scale associated to the position of the pole in the top
propagator. One may wonder whether the pole mass could instead be used
as a fundamental parameter of the theory, which would imply that the
@xmath mass has an uncertainty of the order of a hadronic scale. In
fact, it is well known and clear (but nevertheless we wish to stress it
again) that this last point of view is incorrect. QCD is characterized
by a short distance Lagrangian, and its defining parameters are short
distance parameters. Thus, if we compute an observable in terms of the
@xmath mass, and we find that it has no linear renormalons, we can
conclude that the observable has no physical linear renormalons, since
its perturbative expansion in terms of the parameters of the short
distance Lagrangian has no linear renormalons. On the other end, in the
opposite case of an observable that has no linear renormalons if
expressed in terms of the pole mass, we must conclude that this
observable has a physical renormalon, that is precisely the one that is
contained in the pole mass. We also stress that it is the @xmath mass
that should enter more naturally in the electroweak fits [ 1 , 27 , 28 ]
and in the calculations relative to the stability of the vacuum [ 3 , 4
, 5 , 6 ] , although in practice the pole mass is often used also in
these contexts.

The outline of the first part of the thesis is the following. In Chap. 2
we describe some notions strictly connected with the renormalon issues.
In particular we present the physical argument given by Dyson to show
that perturbation expansions are not convergent in quantum field theory.
We then give a formal definition of asymptotic series and of the Borel
transform. In Chap. 3 we discuss the large- @xmath limit, where higher
order corrections are accessible up to all orders in the coupling. As
first application, we illustrate the computation of the relation between
the pole and the @xmath mass scheme. We also present a possible solution
to move from the large- @xmath limit, that portrays QCD as an Abelian
theory, to a more realistic large- @xmath limit, where @xmath is the
first coefficient of the full QCD @xmath function, in order to recover
the asymptotic freedom behaviour of the theory. In Chap. 4 we explicitly
illustrate the steps for the computation of the fictitious process
@xmath in the large number of flavours limit, using the complex pole
mass scheme [ 29 , 30 ] for the normalization of the top mass. We also
show how to rearrange the expression in terms of the @xmath mass, that
can be considered as a proxy for all short-distances mass schemes. In
Chap. 5 we discuss the presence of infrared linear renormalons in the
inclusive cross section, the reconstructed top-mass and the energy of
the final-state @xmath boson. We also compare the small-momentum
behaviour of such observables computed in the pole scheme with the
behaviour achieved by expressing them in terms of a short-distance mass.
In Chap. 6 we present the coefficients of the perturbative expansion in
@xmath of the above-mentioned observables. Finally, we draw our
conclusions in Chap. 7 . Some technical details are discussed in
Appendices.

The results we present in this first part of the thesis can be found
also in Ref. [ 31 ] .

### Chapter 2 Generalities on divergent series and on the renormalon
concept

We now illustrate some basic concepts relative to the physics of
infrared renormalons.

#### 2.1 Dyson’s argument

Dyson in 1952 showed, with a simple and intuitive physical argument,
that perturbative expansions cannot converge in quantum field theory [
32 ] .

We can consider, for example,a generic observable in QED given by a
perturbation expansion in @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

The expansion is performed around the value @xmath . If the series
converges, then there would be a radius of convergence around @xmath .
This implies a convergent result also for small and negative values of
@xmath . Negative values of @xmath would correspond to a force that is
repulsive for opposite charges and attractive for equal charges. “By
creating a large number @xmath of electron-positron pairs, bringing the
electrons together in one region of space and the positrons in another
separate region, it is easy to construct a “pathological” state in which
the negative potential energy of the Coulomb forces is much greater than
the total rest energy and kinetic energy of the particles” [ 32 ] . This
corresponds to a state with unbounded negative energy, that implies the
absence of a stable vacuum.

We thus conclude that, since a convergence for negative @xmath is
impossible because the corresponding theory is meaningless, the radius
of convergences of the series is zero.

#### 2.2 Divergent series

As we have seen in Sec. 2.1 , perturbative series are divergent in
quantum field theory. In particular, one may ask whether is possible to
assign a “sum” to the series. We consider an observable @xmath written
in powers of @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

We interpret the series as an asymptotic series in a region @xmath of
the complex @xmath -plane if for each order @xmath there are numbers
@xmath that satisfy

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

for all @xmath in @xmath . Let us consider a factorially divergent
series

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath , @xmath and @xmath constant. When small values of @xmath
are concerned, the terms @xmath decrease for increasing @xmath .
However, for large values of @xmath the coefficients @xmath behaves as
in ( 2.4 ). When a large value @xmath is reached such that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

i.e. for

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

the series of @xmath reaches its minimum and then starts growing. The
best approximation of the sum of the series is provided when the
truncation error is minimum, i.e.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.7)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

To improve this approximation, we can employ the Borel summation
technique. Given the series in eq. ( 2.2 ) with @xmath , its Borel
transform is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the Borel integral is defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

It can be shown that the Borel integral has the same @xmath -expansion
of ( 2.2 ) and thus, if @xmath exists, it can be interpreted as the sum
of the divergent series. This is particularly useful for alternate sign
factorially growing series. We consider the following series and its
Borel integral:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have assumed non negative @xmath values. The integral is well
defined if @xmath , i.e. for an alternated-sign series. For positive
@xmath values there is a pole on the integration path at @xmath . We
stress that the location of the pole is independent from the value of
@xmath . We can give a meaning to the integral by deforming the
integration path above or below the pole, that thus acquires an
imaginary part equal to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the sign depends on whether the integration is taken in the upper
or lower complex plane. The ambiguity can be estimated as @xmath times
the difference between the two imaginary parts, i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

By comparing eqs. ( 2.12 ) and ( 2.7 ) we notice that, in case of same
sign factorially divergent series, a small ambiguity proportional to
@xmath is unavoidable.

#### 2.3 QCD infrared renormalons

Infrared renormalons [ 20 , 21 ] provide a connection between the
behaviour of the perturbative expansion at large orders in the coupling
constant and non-perturbative effects. They arise when the last loop
integration in the @xmath -loop order of the the perturbative expansion
acquires the form (see e.g. [ 24 , 25 ] )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the typical scale involved in the process and @xmath is
the first coefficient of the QCD beta function

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

The coefficient @xmath arises because the running coupling is the source
of the logarithms in eq. ( 2.13 ). A naive justification of the
behaviour illustrated in eq. ( 2.13 ) can be given by considering the
calculation of an arbitrary dimensionless observable, characterized by a
scale @xmath , including the effect of the exchange or emission of a
single gluon with momentum @xmath , leading to a correction that, for
small @xmath , takes the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is an integer greater than zero for the result to be
infrared-finite. Assuming that higher order corrections will lead to the
replacement of @xmath with the running coupling evaluated at the scale
@xmath , given by the geometric expansion

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

substituting eq. ( 2.16 ) into eq. ( 2.15 ), we obtain the behaviour of
eq. ( 2.13 ).

The coefficients of the perturbative expansion displays a factorial
growth. The series then is not convergent and can at most be interpreted
as an asymptotic series. As anticipated in Sec. 2.2 , the terms of the
series are smaller and smaller for low values of @xmath , until they
reach a minimum and then they start to diverge with the order. The
minimum is reached when

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

that correspond to @xmath , and the size of the minimal term is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.18)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

If we resum the series whose terms are given in ( 2.16 ) using the Borel
summation, we will get an ambiguity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have used eq. ( 2.12 ) with @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . The
value of @xmath depends upon the process under consideration. In this
paper, we are interested in linear IR renormalons, corresponding to
@xmath , that can lead to ambiguities in the measured mass of the top
quark of relative order @xmath , i.e. ambiguities of order @xmath in the
top mass. Larger values of @xmath lead to corrections of relative order
@xmath , that are totally negligible.

We will see in Sec. 3 that the behaviour of the perturbative series in
eq. ( 2.13 ) arises when considering the large number of flavours limit.
However, if we include more refinements, the expected behaviour [ 24 ,
25 ] becomes more complicate:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

being @xmath a positive number. As we have seen in Sec. 2.2 , this does
not change the location of the singularity in the Borel plane and still
leads to an ambiguity of the resummed series proportional to @xmath .
Thus our reasoning is not modified.

### Chapter 3 The large-@xmath limit

The full renormalon structure of QCD is not known. There is however a
fully consistent simplified model where higher order corrections are
accessible up to all orders in the coupling, namely the large number of
flavours, @xmath , limit of QCD. In this limit, the only higer-order
contributions that must be considered are the insertion of fermion loops
in a gluon propagator, since they involve powers of @xmath . Examples of
computations performed in this limit can be found in Refs. [ 33 , 34 ] .

Unfortunately, the large- @xmath limit of QCD does not yield to an
asymptotically free theory, since the first coefficient of the @xmath
function would be positive if we neglect self-gauge interactions.

However, it is believed that tracing the fermionic contribution to the
@xmath function, and, at the end of the computation, making the
replacement

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath is the number of light flavours, one
recovers the correct results. In this way, the first coefficient of the
@xmath function computed in the large- @xmath , @xmath , is matched with
its full expression:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath . Since there is no formal proof of this statement, this is
just a working hypothesis. Our strategy to retain the full QCD @xmath
function is slightly different from the one above mentioned and it is
described in Sec. 3.3 .

#### 3.1 The dressed gluon propagator

In this section we address more technical details about the dressed
gluon propagator to all orders in the large- @xmath limit.

The insertion of an infinite number of self-energy corrections

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a small imaginary part coming from the Feynman
prescription to integrate around the poles, along a gluon propagator of
momentum @xmath , gives rise to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we have dropped all the longitudinal terms. The derivation of the
exact @xmath -dimensional expression of @xmath can be found e.g. in Ref.
[ 35 ] . In the limit of large number of flavours, i.e. considering only
light-quark loops, @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.5)
              @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath is the Euler-Mascheroni constant and we implicitly
assume @xmath . Eq. ( 3.5 ) can be obtained replacing

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

in eq. (4.21) of Ref. [ 35 ] , according to the @xmath prescription.

If @xmath , we must replace @xmath , where @xmath is a small imaginary
part coming from the Feynman prescription. As a consequence, @xmath
develops an imaginary part equal to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The replacement in eq. ( 3.7 ) is particularly convenient since it
enables us to absorb in the counterterm only the (UV) divergent part of
@xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

The renormalized gluon propagator dressed with the sum of all quark-loop
insertion is then given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.11)
              @xmath   @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and we have defined

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath .

Sometimes it is useful to introduce a fictitious light quark mass @xmath
to regulate the behaviour of @xmath . The @xmath -renormalized vacuum
polarization with a massive quark reads

  -- -- -------- -- --------
        @xmath      (3.14)
        @xmath      
  -- -- -------- -- --------

where we have defined

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

It develops an imaginary part for @xmath equal to

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.16)
  -- -- -- --------

#### 3.2 Pole-@xmath conversion

As first example, we compute the difference between the pole mass @xmath
and the @xmath mass @xmath at all orders in @xmath . The coupling @xmath
is always meant to be evaluated at the scale @xmath .

At @xmath , the self-energy correction evaluated for the eigenvalue of
@xmath equal to @xmath takes the form

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.17)
  -- -- -- --------

being @xmath the gluon momentum. The details of computation of @xmath
can be found in Appendix A.2.2 and the result is given by eq. ( A.36 ).
The mass counterterms defined in the pole and in the @xmath schemes (see
Sec. A ) are given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.18)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.19)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

respectively, where (d) denotes the divergent part according to the
@xmath definition. Neglecting terms of the order @xmath , the mass
difference is given by the finite part of @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

According to Sec. A , to evaluate @xmath beyond NLO, we need to compute

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.21)
  -- -- -- --------

being @xmath the bare mass. Since up to @xmath corrections

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath already contains a factor @xmath , in the large- @xmath limit
we can just calculate

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

Indeed, if we replace @xmath with @xmath or @xmath in contributions that
are @xmath , we produce variations of the order @xmath , that are
totally negligible in our context.

The all-orders expression of @xmath is obtained by replacing the free
gluon propagator of eq. ( 3.17 ) with the dressed one, as shown in eq. (
3.4 ). We thus obtain

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.24)
  -- -- -- --------

By using eq. ( B.10 ), we can write

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where we set @xmath since IR divergences are absent. The expression in
the curly brackets of eq. ( 3.25 ) is the one-loop self-energy of a
quark of mass @xmath , computed with a gluon of mass @xmath , that we
denote by @xmath , whose @xmath expression is given in eq. ( A.28 ). For
ease of notation we introduce

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.26)
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.27)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.28)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where the function @xmath is defined in eq. ( A.25 ) and we have used
the expressions of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath given by eqs ( A.28 ), (
A.35 ) and ( A.46 ). The parametric dependence on @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath of the integrand functions @xmath , @xmath and @xmath is kept
implicit for ease of notation. We thus have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath contains a single pole in @xmath and does not vanish for
large @xmath , we need to evaluate the integrand in @xmath dimensions,
in order to extract its finite part. We can express @xmath as the sum of
the following two terms

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.30)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We dropped the @xmath dependence in @xmath since we can safely perform
the @xmath limit, indeed it does not contain any UV @xmath -pole and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.32)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.33)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

so that we can write

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.34)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

We thus rewrite eq. ( 3.29 ) as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.35)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.36)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.37)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where we have made explicit the dependence on @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
of the terms @xmath and @xmath .

We manipulate @xmath as follows. The lower boundary can be moved from
@xmath to @xmath , since @xmath . We also have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.39)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

that can be evaluated numerically. We notice that @xmath contains a
linear infrared renormalon since the behaviour of @xmath for small
@xmath is given by eq. 3.33 .

As far as the integral in eq. ( 3.37 ) is concerned, we can split it
into two terms, according to eq. ( 3.30 ),

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.40)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.41)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.42)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Since the integrand function in @xmath vanishes for large @xmath , the
integral of the imaginary part can be replaced with the closed path
integral depicted in Fig. B.1 . Applying the residue theorem, we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order to deal with the integral in @xmath , we need to expose the
@xmath dependence of the integrand. From eq. ( 3.28 ), we can write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath depends only on @xmath and no longer on @xmath . Similarly,
using eq. ( 3.5 ), we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.45)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

and performing a Taylor expansion we can write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

By computing the imaginary part of the @xmath -th power of the term in
the square brackets, we are let to evaluate integrals of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a real number, so that @xmath can be straightforwardly
evaluated by computer algebraic means at any fixed order in @xmath . We
emphasize that @xmath has no linear renormalon. Indeed if we perform an
@xmath expansion and we consider the small- @xmath contribution, by
writing @xmath , we notice that the integrand behaves as @xmath . This
signals the absence of linear renormalons, that come from terms of the
type @xmath , without any power of @xmath in front.

As a check, we observe that, at @xmath , @xmath and @xmath do not
contribute and we recover the correct NLO result

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

From eqs. ( A.3 ) and ( A.14 ), and neglecting @xmath contributions, we
have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.49)
     @xmath      (3.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the superscript (d) denotes the divergent part according to the
@xmath scheme. Thus

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

with (f) denoting the finite part. We can expand the result of eq. (
3.51 ) in series of @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.52)
     @xmath      (3.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

This expression can be employed to evaluate the difference @xmath for an
arbitrary real value of @xmath . Furthermore, it can be used both for a
complex or a real pole mass.

The authors of Ref. [ 36 ] performed the same computation, with a
slightly different strategy, for the case of @xmath real and @xmath .
They define ¹ ¹ 1 The definition of @xmath in [ 36 ] corresponds to
@xmath .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

We rearrange eq. ( 3.53 ) to put it into a form similar to eq. ( 3.54 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.55)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Thus the coefficients @xmath in eq. ( 3.54 ) are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

Given our choice @xmath , the coefficients @xmath and @xmath are
independent from the value of @xmath . We checked numerically that our
results reproduce exactly the coefficients @xmath reported in the first
column of Tab. 2 of Ref. [ 36 ] .

#### 3.3 Realistic large-@xmath approximation

In order to recover the full QCD one loop @xmath function, we will add
to eq. ( 3.5 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is an arbitrary constant. Thus we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.58)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where we have restored the correct number of light flavour @xmath . In
order to cancel the @xmath pole of @xmath , the counterterm must be
given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

that allows us to write, adding an infinitesimal positive imaginary part
to @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.60)
              @xmath   @xmath      (3.61)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this way, we also get that, for positive @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

If we choose

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

the constant @xmath becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

Our choice is rather arbitrary and motivated by the fact that the final
expression for the total cross section (or for any infrared safe
obsarvable) computed in the large- @xmath limit, that we will derive in
Chap. 4 , contains a factor

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

where MC denotes the Monte Carlo scheme, also known as the CMW scheme,
introduced in Ref. [ 37 ] . Thus, with our choice of @xmath , our
formula becomes appropriate to describe a QCD effective coupling.

Furthermore, one can in principle replace the term @xmath with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

As we will discuss in Sec. 4 , the additional terms would not contribute
to the all-orders amplitude computed in the pole scheme, since there are
no UV divergences once the counterterm @xmath is introduced, and thus we
are in position to perform the @xmath limit. On the other hand, as we
have seen in Sec. 3.2 , to evaluate the @xmath difference we need the
exact @xmath dependence of @xmath . However, the leading contribution to
this difference, namely @xmath of eq. ( 3.2 ), is computed in @xmath
dimensions, so that terms @xmath are dropped. These terms are instead
contained in @xmath of eq. ( 3.37 ), but this contribution is
subleading, since it does not involve any infrared renormalon.

### Chapter 4 Description of the calculation

We want to compute the process @xmath , where the @xmath boson has only
a vector coupling to the quarks, at all orders in the
large-number-of-flavour limit. The parameters we choose are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.2)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.3)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.4)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.5)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

A sample of Feynman diagrams contributing to this process is depicted in
Fig. 4.1 . The dashed blob represents the summation of all self-energy
insertion in the large- @xmath limit.

We now describe how we compute the total cross section. We use the
complex pole scheme definition for the top mass. We assume the eventual
presence of a set of cuts @xmath , function of the final state
kinematics @xmath . The integrated cross section reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.7)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where first term represents the Born contribution, the second the
virtual one, the third term represents the contribution due to the
emission of a real gluon and the fourth term represents the contribution
with the real production of @xmath @xmath pairs. The last three
contributions are potentially divergent. Equation ( 4.7 ) implicitly
defines our notation for the different phase space integration volumes.

We always imply that the gluon propagators, in the last three
contributions, include the sum of all vacuum polarization insertions of
light quark loops.

We rewrite the total cross section as sum of four contributions:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.8)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.9)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.10)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.11)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where the selection cuts @xmath are evaluated with the same kinematics
of the @xmath events but with the @xmath pair clustered in a single
jet ( @xmath ).

#### 4.1 The @xmath contribution

In this section we illustrate how to calculate the term @xmath of eq. (
4.8 ). @xmath receives contributions only from the real graphs with a
final state @xmath , where @xmath is a pair of light quarks, as depicted
in Fig. 4.1 (d).

Starting from the @xmath tree-level cross section for the process @xmath
, that we indicate as @xmath , with no vacuum polarization insertions in
the gluon propagator, we obtain the differential cross section @xmath
with the insertion of all the light-quark bubbles by simply replacing
the bare gluon propagator with the dressed one of eq. ( 3.10 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the virtuality of the @xmath pair arising after the
gluon splitting. In order to compute @xmath , we insert this equation
into ( 4.12 ), and we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have added the dummy integration @xmath . We remark that,
thanks to the subtraction in the square parenthesis in eq. ( 4.14 ),
@xmath is finite as @xmath . In fact, if @xmath in the collinear sense,
the first clustering of the jet algorithm is the one of the @xmath pair
into a @xmath (since @xmath ), unless the gluon three-momentum just
happens to lay on the jet cone. But, in this case, the direction of the
pair must be closer to the cone than the pair aperture, and this leads
to a suppression of the cross section of the order of the pair
separation. The finiteness in the case of soft @xmath is obvious, since
the reconstructed mass is insensitive to soft particles. Notice that the
integral is finite in the sense that the integrand goes like @xmath ,
and it is integrated in @xmath . For large @xmath , the integrand is
zero for kinematic constraints, thus the integral is finite.

In order to make contact to other contributions we are going to compute,
we write the absolute square of the dressed propagator in terms of the
derivative of an imaginary part. We can perform the following
manipulation

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.15)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

since this factor multiplies an expression that is regular for @xmath ,
and thus the @xmath arising from the imaginary part (see eq. ( B.9 ))
does not contribute. Using eq. ( 3.38 ) we are lead to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Equation ( 4.14 ) becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.17)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Defining

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.18)
  -- -- -- --------

and integrating by parts eq. ( 4.17 ), we are lead to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the integrand function is identically 0 for @xmath . We remind the
reader that the cross section @xmath and @xmath are both proportional to
@xmath , that thus cancels in the definition of @xmath , so when we will
move from the large- @xmath to the large- @xmath limit, @xmath will not
change.

#### 4.2 The @xmath contribution

The @xmath term of eq. ( 4.11 ) receives contributions from final states
with both a single real gluon or a @xmath pair. Both these contributions
have collinear divergences related to the @xmath splitting that cancel
when integrating the latter over @xmath and summing them up.

##### 4.2.1 The gluon contribution

The first contribution of eq. ( 4.11 ) can be computed starting from
@xmath , the tree-level cross section for the emission of a single
gluon. The sum over all the polarization insertions gives rise to the
the following identity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath is not well-defined, it is convenient to assign to the
quarks in the polarization bubbles a small mass @xmath . We indicate the
self-energy correction with a massive quark with @xmath . Indeed it can
be easily shown that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

that is well defined and real. The analytic expression of @xmath for an
arbitrary @xmath value is given in eq. ( 3.14 ). We can then write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### 4.2.2 The @xmath contribution

In order to treat the second term of eq. ( 4.11 ), we first discuss the
relation between @xmath , the cross section for the production of @xmath
@xmath pairs with invariant mass @xmath , and @xmath , the cross section
for the production of a massive gluon whose four-momentum @xmath is
equal to the sum of the @xmath and @xmath momenta. We have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.23)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath is the flux factor and @xmath is the amplitude for the
production of a massive gluon @xmath of momentum @xmath , not contracted
with its polarization vector @xmath . The real phase space @xmath can be
written as the product of the phase space for the production of a gluon
with virtuality @xmath , that we call @xmath , and its decay into a
@xmath pair, @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Applying the optical theorem we have

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.25)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where the imaginary part vanishes for @xmath . Using eqs. ( 4.14 ) and (
4.25 ) enables us to rewrite the @xmath splitting term as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### 4.2.3 Combination of the gluon and @xmath contributions

Defining

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

we can combine eq. ( 4.22 ) and ( 4.2.2 ) and get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

With the notation @xmath we remind the reader that for @xmath there are
infrared divergences in @xmath that are regulated in dimensional
regularization.

#### 4.3 The @xmath contribution

The NLO differential virtual cross-section can be represented as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the loop momentum and @xmath . By replacing the free
gluon propagator with the dressed one, we obtain the all-orders
expression @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

If we use eq. ( B.8 ), we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.31)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath is the light quark mass that has been introduced to
regulate the bad behaviour of @xmath . We define

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the differential virtual cross section computed with a
gluon of mass @xmath . The @xmath of eq. ( 4.10 ) can be finally
rewritten as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the notation @xmath signals the presence of the leftover IR
divergences for @xmath , that are handled in dimensional regularization.
If a finite gluon mass @xmath is employed, IR singularities are
regulated by single and double logarithms of @xmath . If we choose the
pole mass scheme, @xmath for large @xmath . Furthermore, @xmath does not
depend on @xmath . This signals that there are no UV divergences. Thus
@xmath , with @xmath , can be evaluated performing the @xmath limit
since the integral in eq. ( 4.33 ) is finite.

#### 4.4 Combining the virtual and the real contributions

We define

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath and @xmath given by eqs. ( 4.27 ) and ( 4.32 ) respectively.
As long as @xmath is not zero, @xmath and @xmath are separately well
defined in @xmath dimensions, but they are IR divergent for @xmath .
However, as required by the KLN theorem, their sum @xmath is finite in
that limit, indeed

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

being @xmath the integrated NLO cross section. Thus, summing eqs. ( 4.33
) and ( 4.28 ), we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.36)
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where in the last line we have used eq. ( B.9 ) and the fact that the
limit @xmath is well defined for @xmath , while this was not the case
for @xmath and @xmath separately. We can check that at @xmath we recover
the NLO result

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

We now illustrate a procedure to safety take the limit @xmath in eq. (
4.36 ). We can write eq. ( 4.36 ) by adding and subtracting the same
term

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.38)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a real positive number. The first integral is regular
for @xmath also if @xmath , since the term in the square brackets is
@xmath in this limit. This also enables us to move the lower bound from
@xmath to @xmath . Using the identity already employed in eq. ( 3.38 ),
we are left to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
              
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the boundary terms vanish, since @xmath vanishes for large @xmath
(if the pole scheme is adopted), and the difference in the square
brackets is zero for @xmath .

The second integral can be extended below from @xmath to @xmath , since
the imaginary part is zero for @xmath . We can rewrite

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the contour is depicted in Fig. 4.2 .

The integral in the last line is equal to the residue at @xmath , that
is well-defined also for @xmath . This allows us to safely take the
limit @xmath . By using eq. ( 3.38 ), and integrating by parts, we are
lead to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

If we set to infinity the larger radius of the boundary in Fig. 4.2 ,
its contribution vanishes. The same holds if the radius around @xmath
becomes infinitesimal. We are thus left with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

where in the last step we used the fact that the the imaginary part
vanishes for negative values of @xmath . Using the results of eqs. ( 4.4
) and ( 4.42 ), we can write eq. ( 4.4 ) as

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.43)
  -- -- -- --------

#### 4.5 Calculation summary

Here we summarize our findings. If we combine eqs. ( 4.43 ) and ( 4.19
), we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                       @xmath      
              @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath   @xmath      (4.45)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.46)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.47)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.48)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.49)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.50)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

To obtain the final expression in eq. ( 4.45 ) we have employed the
following identity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

where in the right-hand side we have neglected the contribution

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

We stress that the perturbative expansion in @xmath of formula ( 4.45 )
is an asymptotic one, and only its coefficients are unambiguously
defined, and are the subject of the present work. Thus, for our
purposes, eq. ( 4.45 ) is defined up to corrections that have a
vanishing perturbative expansion in @xmath , as are, for instance, the
exponentials of the negative inverse of @xmath . For this reason, the
contribution in eq. ( 4.52 ) can be neglected and eq. ( 4.51 ) becomes
exact, since the left and the right-hand side have the same perturbative
expansion in @xmath . In ref. [ 36 ] , eqs. (2.24) and (2.25), the form
of the resummed expression for typical euclidean quantities is given by
taking the inverse Borel transform of the Borel transform of the
perturbatve expansion, with the prescription that the singularities in
the Borel integration should be bypassed above the positive real axis.
The form of their result is simlar to ours, except for corrections that
yield powers of @xmath .

Eq. ( 4.45 ) can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

From this expression it is evident that the resummed result does not
depend on @xmath , since the factor @xmath cancels in the expression in
the squared brackets.

In order to evaluate numerically @xmath we performed the following
steps. We computed separately @xmath , @xmath and @xmath for several
values of @xmath , using the POWHEG BOX RES framework [ 38 ] , to
integrate over the phase space. Indeed, as long as @xmath , these
contributions are finite. The @xmath point is also computed in the
POWHEG BOX RES , that automatically implements the subtraction of
infrared singularities in the real cross section. The scalar integrals
appearing in the virtual amplitude are evaluated using the COLLIER [ 39
] library. The calculation of the top pole-mass counterterm and of the
bottom field normalization constant in presence of a finite gluon mass
is detailed in Appendix A .

In order to obtain the analytic expression of @xmath , we performed a
polynomial fit for small- @xmath values, specifically for @xmath GeV,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

while we adopted a cubic spline interpolation for larger values of
@xmath , imposing that both @xmath and its derivative are continuous for
@xmath GeV. The fitting functions that we find are seen to represent
sufficiently well the numerical results for @xmath , with the only
caveat that, for small @xmath , these have non-negligible errors. These
errors strongly affect the coefficient @xmath , and have negligible
effects on the other coefficients. In fact, @xmath is computed directly
for massless gluons, and has a totally negligible error. The @xmath and
higher order coefficients are controlled by the larger values of @xmath
, where our computation has a smaller error. Furthermore, only @xmath is
responsible for the presence of linear renormalons, thus, at
higher-orders, it dominates the value of the integral in ( 4.45 ). We
thus propagated only the error on the @xmath coefficient to the
calculation of the coefficients of the perturbative expansion.

#### 4.6 Infrared-safe observables

We are also interested in evaluating the average value of a generic
infrared-safe observable, function of the phase space kinematics, @xmath
:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.55)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath is a normalization factor whose expression is given by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.57)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The factor @xmath that multiplies the virtual, the real and the @xmath
contributions is in fact simply the inverse of the Born cross section,
since the quantities it multiplies are already at NLO level. Thus, in
these cases,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

The factor of @xmath in front of the Born term, on the other hand, must
be expanded in series

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.59)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

This gives rise to a constant Born term of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

plus an NLO correction equal to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

In summary, eq. ( 4.6 ) becomes

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
                          (4.62)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

We notice that eqs. ( 4.6 ) and ( 4.5 ) are similar: the expression of
the higher order corrections of @xmath can obtained from the the
expression of the higher order corrections of the total cross section by
replacing

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus, starting from eqs. ( 4.45 )–( 4.50 ), we can write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.65)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.66)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.67)
     @xmath   @xmath                     (4.68)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.69)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

We notice that when computing inclusive quantities or quantities that do
not depend upon the jet kinematics, the @xmath and @xmath terms of
eqs. ( 4.69 ) and ( 4.50 ) are zero. In these cases, our results can
just be expressed as functions of the NLO differential cross sections,
computed with a non-zero gluon mass. In general, however, the @xmath and
@xmath contributions cannot be neglected, since observables built with
the full kinematics may differ from those obtained by clustering the
@xmath pair into a massive gluon. This was first discussed in Ref. [ 34
] , in the context of @xmath annihilation into jets. ¹ ¹ 1 In Refs. [ 40
, 41 ] it was shown that, for a large set of jet-shape observables, in
order to account for the effect of the @xmath terms, the naive
predictions computed considering only the @xmath contributions must be
rescaled by a factor, dubbed the “Milan factor”, to get the correct
coefficient for the @xmath non-perturbative effects.

The strategy we adopted to extract the analytic expression of @xmath is
the same we employed for @xmath .

#### 4.7 Changing the mass scheme

The relation between the pole mass @xmath and the @xmath mass @xmath is
given by the formula (see Sec. 3.2 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are defined in eqs. ( 3.35 ) and ( 3.37 )
respectively and (f) denotes the finite part according to the @xmath
prescription. The @xmath term can be manipulated as in eq. ( 3.2 ), that
we report here for ease of reading,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

where (see eq. ( 3.33 ))

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

As stressed in App. 3.2 , the linear dependence of @xmath from @xmath is
responsible for the presence of a linear renormalon in the expression of
the pole mass in terms of the @xmath mass, while @xmath is free from
linear renormalons. ² ² 2 The relation between the pole and the @xmath
mass in the large- @xmath limit is well-known (see e.g. [ 42 , 33 , 11 ]
). Here we have re-derived it so as to put it in a form similar to
eqs. ( 4.64 ) and ( 4.45 ).

In the present work we deal with the finite width of the top by using
the complex mass scheme [ 29 , 30 ] . Thus, in our mass relation, both
@xmath and @xmath are complex, and also @xmath and @xmath .

Given a result for a quantity @xmath expressed in terms of the pole
mass, in order to find its expression in terms of the @xmath mass we
need to Taylor-expand its mass dependence in its leading order
expression, and multiply it by the appropriate mass correction. In order
to do so, we express @xmath in terms of the pole mass and its complex
conjugate, as if they were independent variables (one can think of
@xmath appearing in the amplitude, and @xmath appearing in its complex
conjugate). Denoting with @xmath the LO prediction, we can write

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath               (4.73)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where cc means complex conjugate. If @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

that corresponds to the coefficient of the pole-mass counterterm of the
interference between the virtual and Born amplitude (before taking two
times the real part).

If @xmath and we explicit the @xmath dependence of the normalization
factor @xmath , we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.75)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

that, again, corresponds to the pole mass counterterm coefficient.
Notice that we could have obtained eq. ( 4.75 ) from eq. ( 4.74 ) by
applying the replacement in eq. ( 4.63 ). Thus the term

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

in eq. ( 4.7 ) tells us to subtract the contribution arising from the
insertion of the mass counterterm defined in the pole scheme and add the
one computed using the @xmath definition of the counterterm.

Notice that, for the term linear in @xmath , we get the simplified form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.77)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Furthermore, we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus, when going from the pole to the @xmath mass scheme, the
definitions for @xmath and @xmath are modified for small @xmath into

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.79)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.80)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We stress that eqs. ( 4.80 ) and ( 4.79 ) also apply to any so called
“short distance” mass schemes [ 43 , 44 , 45 , 46 , 47 , 48 , 49 ] .
These schemes are such that no mass renormalon affects their definition,
and of course in order for this to be the case, their small- @xmath
behaviour should be the same one of the @xmath scheme.

### Chapter 5 Evaluation of the linear sensitivity in top-mass dependent
observables

As we have seen from eq. ( 4.45 ), in order to compute the all-orders
total cross section we need to evaluate

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we have performed the adjustments described in Sec. 3.3 to obtain
a semi-realistic large- @xmath expansion. The small- @xmath the
contribution to the integral is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we have neglected subleading powers of @xmath . The Borel
transform of the series in eq. ( 5.2 ) is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

and eq. ( 5.2 ) can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The integrand function has a pole located at @xmath whose residue is
proportional to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Thus, if @xmath is non zero, we have infrared linear renormalons. A very
similar situation appears if we investigate an infrared safe observable,
where @xmath is replaced by @xmath .

If the quantity @xmath is computed in the pole-mass scheme, to obtain
the linear sensitivity in the @xmath -mass scheme we need to add to
@xmath (or to @xmath ) the term

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

being @xmath the leading order prediction, as it is discussed in Sec.
4.7 .

We now investigate the presence of linear terms in the expression of
@xmath for the total cross section, for the reconstructed-mass and for
the energy of the final-state @xmath boson, expressed in terms of the
pole mass and in terms of the @xmath one.

#### 5.1 Inclusive cross section

The formula for the total cross section is given in eq. ( 4.45 ). We now
study the presence of linear @xmath terms in the expression of @xmath in
eq. ( 4.47 ), both for the inclusive process or in presence of selection
cuts.

##### 5.1.1 Selection cuts

In order to mimic the experimental selections adopted at hadron
colliders, at times we introduce selection cuts for our cross sections,
requiring the presence of a @xmath jet and a (separated) @xmath jet,
both having energy greater than 30 GeV. Jets are reconstructed using the
Fastjet [ 50 ] implementation of the anti- @xmath algorithm [ 51 ] for
@xmath collisions, with a variable @xmath parameter.

##### 5.1.2 Total cross section without cuts

In the absence of cuts, the expression for @xmath in eq. ( 4.47 )
simplifies, since @xmath , given by eq. ( 4.50 ) is identically zero.
Its small- @xmath behaviour is shown in Fig. 5.1 .

As discussed in Sec. 4.7 , the same calculation performed in the @xmath
mass scheme would yield, for the total cross section, to the replacement
given in eq. ( 4.79 )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

So, in the same figure, we also plot (in red) the expression

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is then clear that the @xmath result would have no linear term in
@xmath for small @xmath , and thus that there is no linear renormalon in
this scheme. From the figure it is also clear that this holds for both
@xmath and for @xmath , where @xmath is the top width. The @xmath
behaviour is justified by the fact that, because of the finite width,
phase-space points where the top is on shell are never reached (see
Appendix D ). Thus, no linear renormalon is present unless one uses the
pole-mass scheme, that has a linear renormalon in the counterterm.

As far as the @xmath limit, we notice that the @xmath behaviour should
be the same as that of the narrow-width approximation (NWA), where the
cross section factorizes in terms of the on-shell top-production cross
section, and its decay partial width:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

The behaviour of @xmath , computed either exactly or in the NWA, is
shown in Fig. 5.2 .

The factor @xmath is clearly free of linear renormalons, since it a
totally inclusive decay of a colour-neutral system. Although less
obvious, this is also the case for the factor @xmath (see [ 10 , 52 , 33
] ).

The computation of @xmath using the NWA is discussed in Appendix ( C ),
where we show in Figs. C.1 and C.2 that the linear @xmath behaviour is
due to the choice of the pole-mass scheme.

##### 5.1.3 Total cross section with cuts

When the selection cuts discussed earlier are imposed, the cross section
depends explicitly upon the jet radius @xmath . We expect jets
requirement to induce the presence of linear renormalons, and thus
linear small- @xmath behaviour of @xmath , with a slope that goes like
@xmath for small @xmath [ 53 , 14 ] .

In Fig. 5.3 we display the small- @xmath behaviour for @xmath for the
total cross section with cuts, for several jet radii. Together with the
results of our simulation, we plot also, for each value of @xmath , a
polynomial fit to the data.

When changing from the pole to the @xmath -mass scheme, we only expect a
mild @xmath dependent correction to the slope of @xmath at @xmath ¹ ¹ 1
The change of scheme is governed by formula ( 4.79 ), where the only
radius dependence comes from the derivative of the LO value of the
observable, and this is mild for small @xmath . , and thus we cannot
expect the same benefit that we observed for the cross section without
cuts.

This is illustrated in Fig. 5.4 for several jet radii. The @xmath
behaviour is clearly visible. In addition, for relatively large- @xmath
values, the use of the @xmath scheme brings about some reduction to the
slope of the linear term. This may be due to the fact that the cross
section with cuts captures a good part of the cross section without
cuts, and thus it partially inherits its benefits when changing scheme.
However, it is also clear that linear non-perturbative ambiguities
remain important also in the @xmath scheme when cuts are involved.

#### 5.2 Reconstructed-top mass

In this section we consider the average value @xmath , where @xmath is
the mass of the system comprising the @xmath boson and the @xmath jet.
Such an observable is closely related to the top mass, and, on the other
hand, is simple enough to be easily computed in our framework. We use
the same selection cuts described previously.

We computed @xmath also in the narrow width limit, by simply setting the
top width to 0.001 GeV. In this limit, top production and decay
factorize, so that we have an unambiguous assignment of the final state
partons to the top decay products. We first compute @xmath in the narrow
width limit, using only the top decay products, and without applying any
cuts. We then compute it again, still using only the top decay products,
but introducing our standard cuts. Finally we compute it again using all
decay products and our standard cuts.

The results of these calculations are reported in Fig. 5.5 , where the
slope at @xmath of @xmath for our observable is plotted as a function of
the jet radius @xmath . As expected we see the shape proportional to
@xmath for small @xmath [ 53 , 14 ] .

In the case of the calculation of @xmath performed using only the top
decay products, and without any cuts, we expect that, for large values
of @xmath , the average value of @xmath should get closer and closer to
the input top pole mass, irrespective of the value of @xmath . Thus, the
slope of @xmath for @xmath should become smaller and smaller. We find in
this case that, for the largest value of @xmath we are using ( @xmath ),
the slope has a value around 0.09. When cuts are introduced this value
becomes even smaller, around 0.04. This curve is fairly close to the one
obtained using all final-state particles and including cuts. The large-
@xmath value in this case is @xmath .

If we change scheme from the pole mass to the @xmath one, the
corresponding change of @xmath is given by eq. ( 4.80 ), and for the
observable at hand the derivative term it is very near 1. The change in
slope when going to the @xmath scheme is roughly @xmath . Thus, if we
insisted in using the @xmath mass for the present observable, for large
jet-radius parameters, we would get an ambiguity larger than if we used
the pole mass scheme. The same holds even if we employ a finite top
width. The @xmath dependence of the @xmath slope for @xmath GeV is shown
in Fig. 5.6 .

We notice that, in the present case, for values of @xmath below 1, the
@xmath scheme seems to be better, because of a cancellation of the
@xmath dependent renormalon and the mass one. From our study, however,
it clearly emerges that such cancellation is accidental, and one should
not rely upon it to claim an increase in accuracy.

In the left pane of Fig. 5.7 we plot the small- @xmath behaviour of
@xmath for the reconstructed-top mass, computed with the finite top
width, for several values of the jet radius @xmath . It is clear that
our observable is strongly affected by the jet renormalon. The same plot
for only the three largest values of @xmath is shown in the right pane.
The figure shows clearly that the @xmath slope computed with @xmath GeV
changes when @xmath goes below @xmath GeV, that is to say, when it goes
below the top width. This behaviour is expected, since the top width act
as a cutoff on soft radiation. In the figure we also report the @xmath
behaviour in the narrow-width approximation. It is evident that the
slopes computed in this limit are similar to the slopes with @xmath GeV,
for values of @xmath larger than the top width. It is also clear that
the slopes that we find here for the largest @xmath value are
considerably smaller than the slope change induced by a change to a
short distance mass scheme, that amounts to @xmath . In other words, the
pole mass scheme is more appropriate for this observable, irrespective
of finite width effects.

#### 5.3 @xmath boson energy

In this section we study the behaviour of the average value of the
@xmath energy, @xmath , since this is another top-mass sensitive
observable. This observable is chosen since it is a case of an
observable that does not depend upon the jet definition. It can thus be
considered to be a representative of pure “leptonic” observables in
top-mass measurements. In this study, we do not apply any cut, in order
to avoid all possible jet or hadronic biases. Our goal is to see if this
observable is free of renormalons in some mass scheme.

In order to change scheme, according to eq. ( 4.80 ), we need the
derivative of the Born value of the observable with respect to the real
part of the top mass. We have computed numerically this term and its
value is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

The small- @xmath dependence of the corresponding @xmath function is
shown in Fig. 5.8 : for values of @xmath much larger than the width, the
slope of the curve is roughly 0.45. Thus, under these conditions, a
renormalon is clearly present whether we use the pole or the @xmath
scheme, since the correction in slope due to the use of the latter would
be @xmath .

For @xmath below the top width we see a reduction in slope, that is too
difficult to estimate because of the lack of statistics. Since the
change in slope is clearly related to the top finite width, we carried
out the following tests: we run the program with a reduced @xmath ,
expecting to see a constant slope extending down to smaller values of
@xmath . This is illustrated in Fig. 5.9 . We clearly see that, as
@xmath becomes smaller, the slope of the @xmath dependence remains
constant, near the value @xmath found before, down to smaller values of
@xmath . Since we have that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.11)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.12)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

it is clear that, for a vanishing top width, the @xmath scheme, as well
as the pole scheme, is still affected by the presence of a linear
renormalon.

We also performed a run with @xmath GeV and @xmath GeV, in order to
estimate more accurately the value of the slope for @xmath . The result
is shown in Fig. 5.10 . In Tab. 5.1 we illustrate the slopes of @xmath
for small @xmath , obtained from the polynomial interpolation displayed
in Fig. 5.10 , and the corresponding value in the @xmath scheme,
obtained by adding @xmath to the fitted slope. This shows that the
linear sensitivity largely cancels in the @xmath scheme.

One may now wonder if the cancellation of the linear sensitivity in the
@xmath scheme is exact, or just accidental. In fact, we show in App. D
that the cancellation is exact.

### Chapter 6 All-order expansions in @xmath

We will now consider the all-order expansion of various quantities, in
order to see how the infrared renormalon affects the large-order
behaviour, both in the pole mass scheme and in the @xmath scheme.

One may think that in our framework we may even compare quantities
computed in different mass schemes, and thus assess the reliability of
the methods used to estimate the resummation of divergent series, and
the corresponding ambiguity. In fact, within our large- @xmath
approximation, if the method adopted to resum the perturbative expansion
is linear, as is the case of the Borel transform method, we should find
identical results (always in the large @xmath sense) in the @xmath and
the pole-mass schemes. This is shown as follows. The relation between
the pole and @xmath scheme for a generic observable is given by,
following eq. ( 4.7 ),

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath               
              @xmath      (6.1)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Neglecting subleading terms, this is an identity, since the expansion of
@xmath in the mass difference stops at the first order in the large-
@xmath limit. When performing the calculation in the pole mass scheme,
we need to resum the expansion of @xmath , while if we perform the
calculation in the @xmath scheme, we are resumming the expansion of the
sum of terms in the curly bracket. If the resummation method is linear
this last resummation can be performed on the individual terms inside
the curly bracket. This is exactly what we would do on the left-hand
side if, after the resummation, we wanted to express the same result in
the @xmath scheme. In other words, if one uses the Borel method to
perform the resummation, and defines the pole mass to be the sum of the
mass relation formula eq. ( 4.70 ), all results obtained in the @xmath
scheme would be identical to those obtained in the pole mass scheme up
to terms of relative order @xmath or @xmath , provided the same Borel
sum method is used also for the observables.

In the following we will try to estimate the terms of the perturbative
expansion using our large- @xmath results. In order to do this, we will
perform the replacement @xmath accompanied by some other minor
adjustments, as described in Sec. 3.3 . Needless to say, with these
realistic values, the large- @xmath approximation breaks down, and terms
of relative order @xmath or @xmath may be sizeable. We thus expect that
by changing scheme we will generate difference of relative orders @xmath
or @xmath , that are not negligible. These differences should not
therefore be interpreted as due to large ambiguities related to the
choice of mass scheme, but rather to the large- @xmath approximation.

The procedure we adopt in order to compute the terms of the perturbative
expansion follows from eq. ( 4.64 ). We fit numerically the @xmath
dependence of the appropriate @xmath or @xmath function, and we take the
derivative of the fit. The arctangent factor is instead expanded
analytically, and the integration is performed numerically for each
perturbative order. In order to have a semi-realistic result for the
perturbative coefficients we perform the following replacement

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (6.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is given in eq. ( 3.64 ). As a consequence, in eqs. ( 4.64
), ( 4.45 ), and ( 3.2 ) the constant @xmath , introduced in eq. ( 3.12
), is replaced with eq. ( 3.65 ) and the overall @xmath factor with
@xmath . For the computation of our observables no further modification
is required, since the factors @xmath of eq. ( 4.69 ) and @xmath of
eq. ( 4.69 ) do not depend on @xmath , that cancels in the ratio @xmath
.

However, given the fact that the pole- @xmath mass relation involves
ultraviolet divergent quantities, it must be carried out in @xmath
dimension. For this reason, in this case, we cannot simply use the
@xmath expansion of @xmath given in eq. ( 6.2 ) to evaluate eqs. ( 3.43
) and ( 3.46 ), but we need to use eqs. ( 3.58 ) and ( 3.59 ). We remark
that these contributions do not contain any infrared renormalon,
conversely to @xmath , that can be computed in @xmath dimensions. For
this reason, as already discussed in Sec. 3.3 , the presence of a second
term @xmath , that accompanies @xmath in eq. ( 3.58 ), is totally
negligible for the estimate of the leading linear renormalons.

#### 6.1 Mass-conversion formula

The procedure for the calculation of the mass-conversion formula is
described in Sec. 3.2 . Here we switch to the realistic @xmath and
@xmath values as discussed in the previous section. The expansion of the
mass conversion formula reads

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the @xmath coefficients are tabulated in Tab. 6.1 , with @xmath ,
where @xmath is given in eq. ( 4.1 ).

Since we are using the complex mass scheme, they are complex, with a
small imaginary part, and they have a slight dependence upon the ratio
@xmath . For small @xmath they become independent on @xmath and @xmath ,
and their imaginary part vanishes.

The value of the @xmath mass we adopt in the following is found by
truncating the series in eq. 6.3 at the smallest term before the series
starts diverging, that corresponds to @xmath , as shown in Tab. 6.1 . We
thus find that for a complex pole mass

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

the value of the corresponding @xmath complex mass is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath .

#### 6.2 The total cross section

In this section we deal with the perturbative expansion of the total
cross section, first without cuts, and then with cuts.

##### 6.2.1 Total cross section without cuts

As discussed in Sec. 5.1.2 , @xmath ( 4.47 ) for the total cross section
does not have any term linear in @xmath , if expressed in terms of the
@xmath mass. It follows that the total cross section computed in the
@xmath scheme should not have any @xmath renormalon and should display a
better behavior at large orders.

The coefficients @xmath of the expansion of eq. ( 4.45 ) in terms of
@xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

are collected in Tab. 6.2 , in the pole (left) and in the @xmath (right)
schemes. At large orders, the @xmath total cross section receives much
smaller contributions. On the other hand we see that the @xmath
contribution to @xmath is already affected by a factorial growth. The
minimum of the series is reached for @xmath (that corresponds to an
@xmath correction), and it is two orders of magnitude larger than the
corresponding contribution computed in the @xmath scheme. We also notice
that the @xmath result has an NLO correction larger than the pole mass
result, an NNLO correction that is similar, and smaller N @xmath LO and
higher order corrections. We also expect that the apparent convergence
of the expansion for the first few orders should depend upon the
available phase space for radiation.

##### 6.2.2 Total cross section with cuts

As we have seen in Sec. 5.1.3 , the presence of selection cuts
introduces a renormalon in the total cross section whose magnitude goes
like @xmath .

In Tab. 6.3 we present the results for the total cross section, in the
pole and in the @xmath -mass scheme, for a small jet radius, @xmath ,
and a more realistic value, @xmath . For small radii, the perturbative
expansion displays roughly the same bad behaviour, either when we use
the pole or the @xmath scheme. For larger values of @xmath , the size of
the coefficients are typically smaller than the corresponding ones with
smaller values or @xmath . In particular if we compare the coefficients
for @xmath and @xmath , the second ones are one order of magnitude
smaller than the first ones. Furthermore, for @xmath , the coefficients
computed in the @xmath -mass scheme are roughly half of the ones
computed in the pole-mass scheme. As remarked earlier, this reduction is
due to an accidental cancellation of the pole-mass associated renormalon
and the @xmath , jet related one, and cannot be used to imply that the
@xmath scheme should be favoured in this case.

#### 6.3 Reconstructed-top mass

In this section, we discuss the terms of the perturbative expansion for
the average reconstructed mass @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

for three values of the @xmath parameter. We apply the cuts described in
Sec. 5.1 and the results are collected in Tab. 6.4 .

From the table we can see that, for very small jet radii, the asymptotic
character of the perturbative expansion is manifest in both the pole and
@xmath scheme. For the realistic value @xmath , the @xmath scheme seems
to behave slightly better. In fact, this is only a consequence of the
fact that the jet-renormalon and the mass-renormalon corrections have
opposite signs, with the mass correction in the @xmath scheme largely
prevailing at small orders, yielding positive effects.

As the radius becomes very large, the jet renormalon becomes less and
less pronounced, in the pole-mass scheme, leading to smaller corrections
at all orders. This is consistent with the discussion given in Sec. 5.2
, where we have seen that, for large radii, the reconstructed mass
becomes strongly related to the top pole mass, since it approaches what
one would reconstruct from the ‘‘true’’ top decay products. ¹ ¹ 1 We
recall here that, in the narrow width limit, and in perturbation theory,
the concept of a “true” top decay final state is well defined.

#### 6.4 @xmath boson energy

The coefficients of the perturbative expansion of the average energy of
the @xmath boson in the pole and @xmath schemes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

are displayed in Tab. 6.5 . We notice that the perturbative expansions
are similarly behaved in both schemes up to @xmath , while, for higher
orders, the @xmath scheme result is clearly better convergent. This
supports the observation, done in Sec. 5.3 , that the top width screens
the renormalon effect if the @xmath mass is used. In fact, the @xmath
order renormalon contribution is dominated by scales of order @xmath ,
as illustrated in Sec. 2.3 , very near the top width.

By looking at the @xmath row, we notice that a variation of roughly
10 GeV in the value of the top mass, corresponding to the pole- @xmath
mass difference, leads to a variation of less than 1 GeV in @xmath .
This implies that the sensitivity of the @xmath -boson energy @xmath to
the top mass is much weaker than for the reconstructed-top mass @xmath .
Indeed, in Secs. 5.2 and 5.3 we already noticed that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

The value of the @xmath derivative is strongly affected by our choice of
the rest frame energy @xmath GeV, that corresponds to a boost @xmath for
an on-shell top-quark. Thus, despite the fact that @xmath is free from
physical renormalons, if the top quark has substantial kinetic energy,
the weak sensitivity of such observable to the value of the top mass may
in practice reduce the precision of the measurement.

### Chapter 7 Summary and conclusions

In this first part of the thesis we have examined non-perturbative
corrections related to infrared renormalons relevant to typical
top-quark mass measurements, in the simplified context of a @xmath
process, with an on-shell final-state @xmath boson and massless @xmath
quarks. As a further simplification, we have considered only
vector-current couplings. We have however fully taken into account top
finite width effects.

We have investigated non-perturbative corrections that arise from the
resummation of light-quark loop insertions in the gluon propagator,
corresponding to the so called @xmath limit of QCD. The @xmath limit
result can be turned into the so called large- @xmath approximation, by
replacing the large- @xmath beta function coefficient with the true QCD
one. This approximation has been adopted in several contexts for the
study of non-perturbative effects (see e.g. Refs. [ 33 , 11 , 52 , 10 ,
36 , 54 ] ).

In this paper we have developed a method to compute the @xmath results
exactly, using a combination of analytic and numerical methods. The
latter is in essence the combination of four parton level generators,
that allowed us to compute kinematic observables of arbitrary
complexity. We stress that, besides being able to study the effect of
the leading renormalons, we can also compute numerically the
coefficients of the perturbative expansion up and beyond the order at
which it starts to diverge.

Although our findings have all been obtained in the simplified context
just described, we can safely say that all effects that we have found
are likely to be present in the full theory, although we are not in a
position to exclude the presence of other effects related to the
non-Abelian nature of QCD, or to non-perturbative effects not related to
renormalons.

Our findings can be summarized as follows:

-   The total cross section for the process at hand is free of physical
    linear renormalons, i.e. its perturbative expansion in terms of a
    short distance mass is free of linear renormalons. This result holds
    both for finite top width and in the narrow-width limit. In the
    former case, the absence of a linear renormalon is due to the
    screening effect of the top finite width, while, in the latter case,
    it is a straightforward consequence of the fact that both the top
    production cross section and the decay partial width are free of
    physical linear renormalons.

    By examining the perturbative expansion order by order, we find
    that, already at the NNLO level, the @xmath scheme result for the
    cross section is much more accurate than the pole-mass-scheme one.

    We stress that our choice of 300 GeV for the incoming energy
    corresponds to a momentum of 100 GeV for the top quark, that in turn
    roughly corresponds to the peak value of the transverse momentum of
    the top quarks produced at the LHC. Thus, the available phase space
    for soft radiation at the LHC is similar to the case of the process
    considered here, so that it is reasonable to assume that our result
    gives an indication in favour of using the @xmath scheme for the
    total cross section without cuts at the LHC.

-   As soon as jet requirements are imposed on the final state,
    corrections of order @xmath arise. They have a leading behaviour
    proportional to @xmath , where @xmath is the jet radius, for small
    @xmath [ 53 , 14 ] . These corrections are present irrespective of
    the top-mass scheme being used. They are however reduced if the
    efficiency of the cuts is increased, for example by increasing the
    jet radius, giving an indication in favour of the use of the @xmath
    scheme for the total cross section calculation also in the presence
    of cuts. It should be stressed, however, that with a typical jet
    radius of 0.5 the behaviour of the perturbative expansion in the
    @xmath and Pole-mass scheme are very similar, with a rather small
    advantage of the first one over the latter.

-   The reconstructed-top mass, defined as the mass of the system
    comprising the @xmath and the @xmath jet, has the characteristic
    power correction due to jets, with the typical @xmath dependence. No
    benefit, i.e. reduction of the power corrections, seems to be
    associated with the use of a short-distance mass. In particular, at
    large jet radii, when the jet renormalon becomes particularly small,
    in the pole mass scheme the linear renormalon coefficient is
    smaller. This observation is justified if one considers that, in the
    narrow-width limit, the production and decay processes factorize to
    all orders in the perturbative expansion, yielding a clean
    separation of radiation in production and decay. In this limit, the
    system of the top decay products is well defined, and its mass is
    exactly equal to the pole mass. Consistently with this observation,
    we have shown that, for very large jet radii, the linear renormalon
    coefficient for the reconstructed-top mass is quite small (if the
    observables is expressed in terms of the pole mass). One may then
    worry that, when reconstructing the top mass from the full final
    state, renormalons associated with soft emissions in production from
    the top and from the @xmath quark may affect the reconstructed mass,
    since these soft emissions may enter the @xmath -jet cone. By
    comparing the reconstructed mass obtained using only the top decay
    products to the one obtain using all final state particles, we have
    shown that these effects are in fact small.

    We should also add, however, that the benefit of using very large
    jet radii cannot be exploited at hadron colliders, since we expect
    other renormalon effects, due to soft-gluon radiation in production
    entering the jet cone. This problem can in principle be investigated
    with our approach, by applying it to the process of @xmath
    production in hadronic collisions.

-   We have considered, as a prototype for a leptonic observable
    relevant for top mass measurement, the average energy of the @xmath
    boson. We have found two interesting results:

    -   In the narrow-width limit, this observable has a linear
        renormalon, irrespective of the mass scheme being used for the
        top. This finding does not support the frequent claim that
        leptonic observables should be better behaved as far as
        non-perturbative QCD corrections are concerned. It also reminds
        us that, even if we wanted to measure the top-production cross
        section by triggering exclusively upon leptons, we may induce
        linear power corrections in the result that cannot be eliminated
        by going to the @xmath scheme.

        The presence of renormalons in leptonic observables seems to be
        in contrast with what is found in inclusive semileptonic decays
        of heavy flavours [ 10 , 52 ] . We have however verified that
        there is no contradiction with this case. If the average value
        of the @xmath energy is computed in the top rest frame (which
        makes it fully analogous to a leptonic observable in @xmath
        decay) then no renormalon is present if the result is expressed
        in terms of the @xmath mass.

    -   For finite widths, if a short-distance mass is used, there is no
        linear renormalon. We verified this numerically, and furthermore
        we were also able to give a formal proof of this finding. What
        this means in practice is that the perturbative expansion for
        this quantity will have factorial growth up to an order @xmath ,
        that will stop for higher orders. In practice, for realistic
        values of the width, this turns out to be a relatively large
        order. Thus, although in principle we cannot exclude a useful
        direct determination of the top short-distance mass from
        leptonic observables, it seems clear that finite-order
        calculations should be carried out at relatively high orders (up
        to the fourth or fifth order) in order to exploit it. Although
        it seems unlikely that results at these high orders may become
        available in the foreseeable future, perhaps it is not
        impossible to devise methods to estimate their leading
        renormalon contributions, still allowing a viable mass
        measurement (this assumning that the weaker sensitivity of
        leptonic obervables to the top-mass value does not prove to be
        too strong a limitation).

In this work we have made several simplifying assumptions. These
assumptions were motivated by the fact that the computational technique
is new, and we wanted to make it as simple as possible. Some of these
restrictions may be removed in future works. For example, we could
consider hadronic collisions, the full left-handed coupling for the
@xmath , the @xmath finite width and the effects of a finite @xmath
mass. Although removing these limitations can lead to interesting
results, we should not forget that our calculation does not exhaust all
sources of non-perturbative effects that can affect the mass
measurement. As an obvious example, we should consider that confinement
effects are not present in our large- @xmath approximation, while, on
the other hand, it is not difficult to show that they may give rise to
linear power corrections. It is clear that theoretical problems of this
sort should be investigated by different means.

## Part II Top-quark mass extraction with Monte Carlo event generators

### Chapter 8 Introduction

The main results presented in the following sections can be also found
in Ref. [ 55 ] and refer to the problem of the determination of the
theoretical uncertainty associated with the use of Monte Carlo (MC)
event generators to infer the top-quark mass.

The question on how precisely we can measure the top mass at hadron
colliders is related to our understanding of QCD and collider physics.
In view of the large abundance of top-pair production at the LHC, it is
likely that precise measurements will be performed with very different
methods, and that comparing them will give us confidence in our ability
to handle hadron-collider physics problems.

Top-mass measurements are generally performed by fitting @xmath
-dependent kinematic distributions to MC predictions. The most precise
ones, generally called direct measurements , rely upon the full or
partial reconstruction of the system of the top-decay products. The
ATLAS and CMS measurements of Refs. [ 7 ] and [ 8 ] , yielding the value
@xmath (syst) GeV and @xmath (syst) GeV respectively, fall into this
broad category.

The MC event generators employed for the direct measurements make use of
the pole mass that is, as we have seen, affected by non perturbative
corrections of order @xmath due to the presence of infrared renormalons.

The theoretical problems raised upon the top-quark mass measurement
issues have induced several theorists to study and propose alternative
methods. The total cross section for @xmath production is sensitive to
the top mass, and has been computed including NNLO QCD corrections [ 56
] , that have been recently combined with NLO electroweak ones [ 57 ] .
These computations can be employed to extract a top mass value [ 58 , 59
, 60 ] . If it is computed in the @xmath scheme, it has the advantage of
being free from the pole-mass renormalons.

In Refs. [ 61 , 62 ] observables related to the @xmath kinematics are
considered in NWA and with full off-shell matrix elements in the
dilepton channel, respectively. The authors of Ref. [ 63 ] presented a
method based upon the charged-lepton energy spectrum, that is not
sensitive to top production kinematics, but only to top decay, arguing
that, since this has been computed at NNLO accuracy [ 64 , 65 ] , a very
accurate measurement may be achieved. Some authors have advocated the
use of boosted top jets (see Ref. [ 66 ] and references therein). In
Ref. [ 67 ] , the authors make use of the @xmath -jet energy peak
position, that is claimed to have a reduced sensitivity to production
dynamics. In Ref. [ 68 ] , the use of lowest Mellin moments of lepton
kinematic distributions is discussed. In the leptonic channel, it is
also possible to use distributions based on the “stransverse” mass
variable [ 69 ] , which generalizes the concept of transverse mass for a
system with two identical decay branches [ 70 , 71 ] . Some of these
methods have in fact been exploited [ 72 , 73 , 74 , 69 , 75 ] to yield
alternative determinations of @xmath .

It turns out, however, that the direct methods yield smaller errors at
the moment, and it is likely that alternative methods, when reaching the
same precision level, will face similar theoretical problems. Because of
this, and given the fact that recent studies [ 12 , 13 ] have shown that
the renormalon ambiguity in the top-mass definition is not as large as
previously anticipated, being in fact well below the current
experimental error. ¹ ¹ 1 In fact, values in this range were obtained
much earlier in Refs. [ 46 , 76 ] , mostly in a bottom physics context,
but since the renormalon ambiguity does not depend upon the heavy quark
mass, they also apply to top. it is still worthwhile to employ direct
measurements and to try to implement more and more accurate MC event
generators, to avoid biased measurements.

Recently, many efforts have been done in order to implement NLO+PS
generators capable of handling a decayed coloured resonance, like the
top quark in the contest of the POWHEG BOX [ 38 ] and MadGraph5_aMC@NLO
[ 77 ] . In these references two alternatives of the standard
Frixione-Kunszt-Signer subtraction method [ 78 ] are discussed taking as
example the case of single top production. In Ref. [ 79 ] the same
problem, applied to the process of top-pair production, is discussed for
the Catani-Seymour subtraction method [ 80 ] .

In this work, we exploit the availability of the new POWHEG BOX
generators for top-pair production, in order to perform a theoretical
study of uncertainties in the top-mass determination. In particular, we
are in a position to assess whether NLO corrections in top decay and
finite width effects, non-resonant contributions and interference of
radiation generated in production and decay can lead to sizeable
corrections to the extracted value of the top mass. Since the old @xmath
generator [ 81 ] , that implements NLO corrections only in production,
is widely used by the experimental collaborations in top-mass analyses,
we are particularly interested in comparing it with the new generators,
and in assessing to what extent it is compatible with them. We will
consider variations in the scales, parton distribution functions (PDFs)
and the jet radius parameter to better assess the level of compatibility
of the different generators.

We are especially interested in effects that can be important in the
top-mass determination performed in direct measurements. Thus, the main
focus of our work is upon the mass of a reconstructed top, that we
define as a system comprising a hard lepton, a hard neutrino and a hard
@xmath jet. We will assume that we have access to the particle truth
level, i.e. that we can also access the flavour of the @xmath jet, and
the neutrino momentum and flavour. We are first of all interested in
understanding to what extent the mass peak of the reconstructed top
depends upon the chosen NLO+PS generator. This would be evidence that
the new features introduced in the most recent generators are mandatory
for an accurate mass extraction.

We will also consider the inclusion of detector effects in the form of a
smearing function applied to our results. Although this procedure is
quite crude, it gives a rough indication of whether the overall
description of the process, also outside of the reconstructed resonance
peak, affects the measurement.

Besides studying different NLO+PS generators, we have also attempted to
give a first assessment of ambiguities associated with shower and
non-perturbative effects, by interfacing our NLO+PS generators to two
shower MC programs: Pythia8.2 [ 82 ] and Herwig7.1 [ 83 , 84 ] . Our
work focuses upon NLO+PS and shower matching. We thus did not consider
further variations of parameters and options within the same parton
shower (PS), nor variations on the observables aimed at reducing the
dependence upon those. ² ² 2 An interesting example of work along this
direction can be found in Refs. [ 85 ] and [ 86 ] , where the impact of
the colour reconnection model on top-mass measurement is analysed. In
Ref. [ 87 ] , a study is performed to determine whether the use of
jet-grooming techniques in top-mass measurement can reduce the MC tune
dependence.

We have also considered two alternative proposals for top-mass
measurements: the position of the peak in the @xmath -jet energy [ 67 ]
and the leptonic observables of Ref. [ 68 ] . The first proposal is an
example of a hadronic observable that should be relatively insensitive
to the production mechanism, but may be strongly affected by NLO
corrections in decay. The second proposal is an example of observables
that depend only upon the lepton kinematics, and that also depend upon
production dynamics, thus stronger sensitivity to scale variations and
PDFs may be expected. It is also generally assumed that leptonic
observables should be insensitive to the @xmath -jet modelling. One
should remember, however, that jet dynamics affects lepton momenta via
recoil effects, so it is interesting to study whether there is any
ground to this assumption.

The study presented in this work was triggered by the availability of
new NLO+PS generators describing top decay with increasing accuracy. ³ ³
3 A fixed order study concerning the impact of the top-decay
implementation on top mass determinations can be found in Ref. [ 88 ] :
NLO QCD predictions for the @xmath process are compared to those
obtained using the narrow width approximation, where the process of
@xmath production is described at NLO QCD and the decay of the top
quarks is implemented at LO, at NLO or by a PS. As such, its initial aim
was to determine whether and to what extent these new generators, and
the associated new effects that they implement, may impact present
top-mass measurements. As we will see, had we limited ourselves to the
study of the NLO+PS generators interfaced to Pythia8.2 , we would have
found a fairly consistent picture and a rather simple answer to this
question.

Since another modern shower generator that can be interfaced to our
NLO+PS calculation is available, namely Herwig7.1 , we have developed an
appropriate interface to it, and have also carried out our study using
it as our shower model. Our results with Herwig7.1 turn out to be quite
different from the Pythia8.2 ones, to the point of drastically altering
the conclusions of our study. In fact, variations in the extracted top
mass values due to switching between Pythia8.2 and Herwig7.1 prevail
over all variations that can be obtained within Pythia8.2 by switching
among different NLO+PS generators, or by varying scales and matching
parameters within them. Moreover, the comparison of the various NLO+PS
generators, when using Herwig7.1 , does not display the same degree of
consistency that we find within Pythia8.2 . If, as it seems, the
differences found between Pythia8.2 and Herwig7.1 are due to the
different shower models (the former being a dipole shower, and the
latter an angular-ordered one), the very minimal message that can be
drawn from our work is that, in order to assess a meaningful theoretical
error in top-mass measurements, the use of different shower models,
associated with different NLO+PS generators, is mandatory.

This part is organized as follows. In Chap. 9 we briefly review the
features of the POWHEG generators. We also briefly discuss the
interfaces to the parton-shower programs Pythia8.2 and Herwig7.1 . More
details about the NLO+PS matching are discussed in appendix E.3 . In
Chap. 10 , we detail the setup employed for the phenomenological studies
presented in the subsequent sections and we describe how we relate the
computed value of our observables to the corresponding value of the top
mass that would be extracted in a measurement. In Chap. 11 , we perform
a generic study of the differences of our generators focusing upon the
mass distribution of the @xmath -jet system. The aim of this section is
to show how this distribution is affected by the different components of
the generators by examining results at the Born level, after the
inclusion of NLO corrections, after the PS, and at the hadron level. In
Chap. 12 we consider as our top-mass sensitive observable the peak
position in the mass distribution of the @xmath -jet system. We study
its dependence upon the NLO+PS generator being used, the scale choices,
the PDFs, the value of @xmath and the jet radius parameter. Furthermore,
we present and compare results obtained with the two shower MC
generators Pythia8.2 and Herwig7.1 . We repeat these studies for the
peak of the @xmath -jet energy spectrum [ 67 ] in Chap. 13 , and for the
leptonic observables [ 68 ] in Chap. 14 . In Chap. 15 we summarize our
results, and in Chap. 16 we present our conclusions. In the appendices
we give some technical details.

### Chapter 9 Powheg Box generators for top-pair production

In this section we describe the features of the NLO generators
implemented in the POWHEG BOX framework that describe the process of
top-pair production and decay, i.e. the @xmath , the @xmath and the
@xmath generators ¹ ¹ 1 The @xmath and @xmath generators can be found
under the User-Processes-V2 directory of the POWHEG BOX V2 repository in
the hvq and ttb_NLO_dec directories, respectively. The @xmath generator
can be found under the User-Processes-RES/b_bbar_4l directory of the
POWHEG BOX RES code. Detailed instructions are found at
powhegbox.mib.infn.it . . The POWHEG method is described in Appendix E .

The first top-pair production generator implemented in the POWHEG BOX
and the most widely used, up to now, is the @xmath program [ 81 ] . It
describes the process of production of @xmath pairs at NLO. The top
decay is introduced in an approximate way according to the method
presented in Ref. [ 89 ] that makes it possible to take into account
approximatively off-shell and spin correlations effects. Radiation off
the top-quark decay-products is fully handled by the PS. The ones that
we consider, Pythia8.2 and Herwig7.1 , implement internally
matrix-element corrections (MEC) for top decay. Furthermore, Herwig7.1
also optionally includes a POWHEG-style hardest-radiation generation.
Thus, the accuracy in the description of top decay is, for our purposes,
equivalent to the NLO level.

The second in time generator implemented is the @xmath code [ 90 ] . NLO
corrections and spin correlations are implemented exactly using the
narrow-width method, thus interference of radiation generated in
production and decay is not included. Off-shell effects are implemented
via a reweighting method, such that the LO cross section includes them
exactly. It also contains contributions of associated top-quark and
@xmath -boson production at LO.

In @xmath the POWHEG method was adapted to deal with radiation in
resonance decays. As it is discussed in Appendix E.2 , this offers the
possibility to modify the standard POWHEG single-radiation approach. For
the case of @xmath production followed by leptonic top decay, the
“resonance aware” POWHEG formalism enables us to generate events that
contains up to three emissions: from the production process and from the
@xmath and @xmath quarks arising after the @xmath and @xmath decay. This
represents an improvement with respect to the single-emission formalism,
where only the hardest emission would have been kept. Indeed, for the
@xmath production process, the hardest emission is most likely the one
from the production process. This would leave to the PS the task to
generate the hardest emission off the top quark, limiting the effective
accuracy employed for the description of the top decay. On the other
hand, the multi-emission formalism allows to overcome this problem since
the hardest emission of each decayed resonance is already included in
the LH event.

A general procedure for dealing with decayed emitting resonances has
been implemented in a fully general and automatic way in a new version
of the POWHEG BOX code, the POWHEG BOX RES [ 38 ] . This framework
allows for the treatment of off-shell effects, non-resonant subprocesses
including full interference, and for the treatment of interference
between radiation generated in production and from the resonances decay.
Further details are given in Appendix E . The first generator
implemented in POWHEG BOX RES is the @xmath code [ 91 ] , that describes
the process @xmath , that is dominated by top-pair production with
leptonic decay, including all QCD NLO corrections in the 4-flavour
scheme, i.e. accounting for finite @xmath -mass effects. Furthermore,
double-top, single-top and non-resonant ² ² 2 By non-resonant we mean
processes that do not contain an intermediate top quark, e.g. @xmath .
diagrams are all included with full spin-correlation effects, radiation
in production and decays, and their interference.

The interfaces between the POWHEG BOX generators and standard shower MC
programs that we have employed, i.e. the Pythia8.2 and Herwig7.1 , are
detailed in Appendix E.3 .

### Chapter 10 Phenomenological analysis setup

We simulate the process @xmath , which is available in all the three NLO
generators we are investigating. It is dominated by top-pair production,
with a smaller contribution by @xmath topologies.

The @xmath and @xmath generators employ the pole-mass scheme for the
renormalization of the top mass @xmath , while in @xmath the complex
mass scheme [ 91 ] is adopted, with the complex mass defined as @xmath .

The center-of-mass energy of our simulated sample is @xmath TeV. The
parton distribution function (PDF) used is the central member of the
MSTW2008nlo68cl set [ 92 ] . PDF variations to assess the theoretical
uncertainty are also performed. Using the internal reweighting facility
of the POWHEG BOX , we produced predictions for the central member of
the following PDF sets:
PDF4LHC15_nlo_30_pdfas [ 93 ] , CT14nlo [ 94 ] , MMHT2014nlo68cl [ 95 ]
, NNPDF30_nlo_as_0118 [ 96 ] .
We also generated a sample using the central parton-distribution
function of the
PDF4LHC15_nlo_30_pdfas set, and, by reweighting, all its members, within
the @xmath generator. In this case, our error is given by the sum in
quadrature of all deviations. We find that the variation band obtained
in this way contains the central value results for the different PDF
sets that we have considered. It thus makes sense to use this procedure
for the estimate of PDF uncertainties. Since reweighting for the 30
members of the set in the @xmath or in the @xmath case is quite time
consuming and since the dependence on the PDF is mostly due to the
implementation of the production processes, and all our generators
describe it at NLO accuracy, we thus assume that the PDF uncertainties
computed in the @xmath case are also valid for the @xmath and @xmath
cases. We have indeed checked that by reweighting to several PDF sets we
get very similar variations for all generators.

In the POWHEG BOX , the scale used to generate the real emissions is the
transverse momentum of the radiated parton with respect to the emitter.
Variations of this scheme can lead to different radiation pattern around
the @xmath jet, that can in turn have a non-negligible effect on the
reconstructed mass and thus must be evaluated to assess the theoretical
uncertainty. Since, at the moment, the POWHEG BOX does not offer the
possibility to vary the definition of the scale of the emission, the
simplest way at our disposal for studying the sensitivity to the
intensity of radiation from the @xmath quark is by varying the value of
@xmath . To this end we use the NNPDF30_nlo_as115 and NNPDF30_nlo_as121
sets, where @xmath =0.115 and @xmath =0.121, respectively. In the
reweighting procedure, only the inclusive POWHEG cross section is
recomputed. The Sudakov form factor is not recomputed, so that the
radiated partons retain the same kinematics. For this reason, it can not
be employed to evaluate the @xmath dependence since it changes the
Sudakov form factor. For this reason, we generated two dedicated
samples.

The typical scale of radiation in top decay can be estimated to be
30 GeV, that corresponds to one-half of the typical @xmath energy in the
top rest frame. The ratio of the @xmath values for the two PDF sets
considered is 1.052 at @xmath and it becomes 1.06 at @xmath GeV. On the
other hand, a scale variation of a factor of two above and below @xmath
GeV yields a variation in @xmath of about 26%. This can be taken as a
rough indication that a standard scale variation would yield to a
variation in the peak position that is @xmath times larger than the one
obtained by varying @xmath .

The central renormalization and factorization scale ( @xmath and @xmath
) is given by the quantity @xmath , defined, following Ref. [ 91 ] , as
the geometric average of the transverse masses of the top and anti-top

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (10.1)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the top and anti-top energies @xmath and longitudinal momenta
@xmath are evaluated at the underlying-Born level. In the @xmath case,
there is a tiny component of the cross section given by the topology

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (10.2)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this case @xmath is taken as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (10.3)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath .

We studied the dependence of our results on @xmath and @xmath , that
gives an indication of the size of higher-orders corrections. We varied
@xmath and @xmath around the central scale @xmath defined in eqs. ( 10.1
) and ( 10.3 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (10.4)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are varied over the following combinations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (10.5)
  -- -------- -- --------

The scale variations have been performed using the reweighting
technique.

The parameter hdamp controls the separation of remnants, see eq. ( E.21
), in the production of @xmath pairs with large transverse momentum ¹ ¹
1 We have only ISR remnants, this separation is not performed for
radiation in decay. . We set it to the value of the top mass. ² ² 2 See
Appendix F.1 for a discussion concerning the value of hdamp employed.

The central predictions, together with the scale and PDF set variations,
for a total of 12 weights, have been obtained for each generator under
study for three top mass values: 169.5 GeV, 172.5 GeV, 175.5 GeV. The
@xmath variations and the @xmath sample containing the 30 members of the
PDF4LHC15_nlo_30_pdfas set have been produced only for @xmath GeV. The
number of events for each generated sample, together with an indicative
computational time, are reported in Tab. 10.1 .

#### 10.1 Physics objects

In our analyses, we set the @xmath hadrons stable, in order to simplify
the definitions of @xmath jets. Jets are reconstructed using the Fastjet
[ 50 ] implementation of the anti- @xmath algorithm [ 51 ] with @xmath .
We denote as @xmath ( @xmath ) the hardest (i.e. largest @xmath ) @xmath
( @xmath ) flavoured hadron. The @xmath ( @xmath ) jet is the jet that
contains the hardest @xmath ( @xmath ). ³ ³ 3 Note that this notation is
the opposite of what is commonly adopted for @xmath mesons, where @xmath
refers to the meson containing the @xmath quark. It will be indicated as
@xmath ( @xmath ). The hardest @xmath ( @xmath ) and the hardest @xmath
( @xmath ) are paired to reconstruct the @xmath ( @xmath ). The
reconstructed top (anti-top) quark is identified with the corresponding
@xmath ( @xmath ) pair. In the following we will refer to the mass of
this system as @xmath .

We require the presence of a @xmath jet and a separated @xmath jet, that
satisfy

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (10.6)
  -- -------- -- --------

These cuts suppress the @xmath topologies, that are not included by the
@xmath generator and included only at LO by @xmath . The hardest @xmath
and the hardest @xmath must satisfy

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (10.7)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 10.2 Methodology

In the following we will focus upon three observables, the peak of the
reconstructed-top mass distribution @xmath , the peak of the @xmath -jet
energy spectrum @xmath [ 67 ] and the average value of the leptonic
observable of Ref. [ 68 ] , and we will examine several sources of
theoretical uncertainty in the top-mass extraction.

Our observables are sensitive to the value of the top-mass and they bear
a simple relation with it

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (10.8)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the input mass parameter in the generator, and @xmath
GeV is our reference central value for the top mass. The parameters
@xmath and @xmath can be extracted using a MC generator and in general
depend on the generator and the setups employed. Given an experimental
result for the observable @xmath , @xmath , the extracted top-mass value
is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (10.9)
  -- -------- -- --------

Changing the generator (or its setup), leads to different parameters
@xmath and @xmath , and thus to a different value for the top-mass
@xmath . The difference between the two extracted masses reads

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.10)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the second term is parametrically smaller if we assume that at
least one of them yields a @xmath value sufficiently close to @xmath .
If this is the case, we are allowed to write

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.11)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In practice, in the following, we will compute the @xmath parameter
using the @xmath generator, that is the one that requires less
computation time. We also checked that using the other generators for
this purpose yields results that differ by at most 10%, confirming the
validity of our approximation.

### Chapter 11 Anatomy of the reconstructed-top mass distribution

Before comparing the predictions of the several generators employed, we
investigate the impact of the several ingredients of a typical NLO+PS on
the kinematic distribution of the reconstructed-top mass @xmath .
Despite the fact this is a simplified observable, it can be considered a
proxy of all top-mass sensitive observables that rely upon the full or
partial reconstruction of the top quark. As we will see in Chap. 12 ,
where the extraction of the peak of the distribution is discussed, our
very crude approach allows us to concentrate more on theoretical issues
rather than experimental ones.

On the perturbative side, we can compare the predictions obtained with
our three NLO generators, that describe the top decay with different
level of accuracy and assess the impact of the PS employed. On the
non-perturbative side, we illustrate the effect of including
hadronization and underlying event in the simulation.

#### 11.1 Les Houches event level comparison of the generators

We begin by comparing the three generators at the Les Houches
event (LHE) level, i.e. before applying the PS. These events contain
only the POWHEG hardest emission(s).

We first compare the LO distributions, i.e. without the inclusion of
radiative corrections. This is illustrated in Fig. 11.1 , where we see
that a non-negligible (although not dramatic) difference in shape is
present also at the LO level between the @xmath and the other two
generators.

This difference between the @xmath and the other two generators is due
to the different description of how off-shell effects. The @xmath and
@xmath generators are guaranteed to yield the correct top-virtuality
distribution at the NLO and LO level, respectively. This is not the case
for the @xmath generator, where the resonance structure is recovered by
a reweighting procedure that does not guarantee LO accuracy.

We now investigate the impact of the POWHEG hardest emission(s) on the
LO distributions. In Fig. 11.2 we compare @xmath , normalized to 1 in
the displayed range, at LO and NLO accuracy using the @xmath (left
panel) and the @xmath (right panel) generators. Since the @xmath
generator implements NLO corrections only in the production process, the
@xmath distribution is not significantly modified when moving from the
LO to the NLO prediction. On the other hand, the @xmath generator
includes radiative corrections also to the decay process. Thus, when
comparing the NLO and the LO curves, large differences below the peak
region, that can be easily interpreted as due to radiation outside the
@xmath -jet cone, arise.

The @xmath generator enables us to specify whether NLO accuracy is
required both in production and decay (default behaviour), or just in
production (by using the nlowhich 1 option). A graphical display of both
options is given in Fig. 11.3 . As we have already seen, NLO corrections
in production leads to a roughly constant @xmath -factor, while
radiation from top decay affects the shape of the distribution.

#### 11.2 Shower effects

We now investigate how the PS, that provides radiations beyond the
hardest one, affect the shape of the @xmath distributions.

In Fig. 11.4 we can see the impact of the PS provided by Pythia8.2 (red)
and by Herwig7.1 (blue) on the @xmath (left) and @xmath (right)
generators. In @xmath , we notice a large effect in the low tail of the
distribution, since radiation in decay is fully generated by the shower.
Conversely for @xmath we get smaller shower corrections, since the
hardest radiation in decay is already included at the LHE level. In both
cases, we see an enhancement in the region above the peak. This is
attributed to shower radiation that is captured by the @xmath -jet cone.

We observe that, after shower, the @xmath result becomes qualitatively
very similar to the @xmath one, as shown in Fig. 11.5 .

The inclusion of the shower in @xmath leads to effects similar to those
observed in @xmath .

#### 11.3 Hadronization and underlying events

The effect of hadronization and multi-parton interactions (MPI), as
modelled by Pythia8.2 and Herwig7.1 , when interfaced to the @xmath
generator, is showed in Fig. 11.6 .

The hadronization (red) has a large impact on the final distributions.
It widens the peak for both generators. However, in the Herwig7.1 case,
we also observe a clear enhancement of the high mass region, that is not
as evident in the Pythia8.2 case. The MPI (blue), that generate
particles that can deposit in the @xmath -jet cone, raise the tail of
the distributions above the peak. In the combined effect of
hadronization and MPI (black), Herwig7.1 has a wider peak. On the other
hand, the high tail enhancement seems similar in the two generators.

The impact of the several components we have analysed, i.e. radiative
corrections, the hadronization and the MPI, strongly depend on the
jet-radius parameter @xmath . By increasing (or decreasing) @xmath , the
peak position is shifted to the left (or right) as it is shown in Fig.
11.7 .

Furthermore, as we will see in Chap. 12 , differences in the
implementation of radiation from the resonances, the hadronization model
and the underlying events can also shift the peak, leading eventually to
a displacement of the extracted top mass, that should be carefully
assessed for a sound estimate of the top-quark mass theoretical
uncertainty.

### Chapter 12 Reconstructed-top mass distribution

The peak of the reconstructed mass @xmath , defined in Sec. 10.1 , is a
representative of all the direct measurement methods. To simplify our
analysis, we assume we can distinguish between the @xmath and the @xmath
flavoured jets and that we can fully reconstruct the neutrinos momenta
together with their sign. Our approach is very crude but it enables us
to focus on theoretical issues rather then experimental ones. Indeed, if
we find differences in the extracted mass using our ideal @xmath
observable, we would be forced to conclude that there is an irreducible
theoretical error (i.e. an error that cannot be reduced by increasing
the experimental accuracy) on the mass measurement.

In order to mimic the experimental systematics, we introduce a Gaussian
smearing to the @xmath distributions. If differences among the
generators are found in this latter case, the problem is less severe and
may be reduced once experimental resolution is improved.

However, we need to remark that also “irreducible” errors (according to
the definition given above) may be reduced in practice. This is the case
if one of the generators at hand does not fit satisfactorily measurable
distributions related to top production. If we change the allowed range
for the parameters of the generator in order to reproduce the data
fairly. This procedure can reduce the error associated with top-quark
mass measurements.

In Sec. 12.1 we describe the procedure for the extraction of the
reconstructed-top mass peak, for both the ideal @xmath distribution and
the smeared one. In Sec. 12.2 we will compare the three POWHEG BOX
generators for @xmath production interfaced to Pythia8.2 . Scale and PDF
variations are also taken into account, together with @xmath variations
to investigate the sensitivity to the intensity of radiation from the
@xmath quark. In Sec. 12.3 we investigate the differences between the
Pythia8.2 and Herwig7.1 predictions and the various alternative settings
that the Herwig7.1 program offers ¹ ¹ 1 Unless specified otherwise,
Pythia8.2 and Herwig7.1 are setup to run in full hadron mode including
shower, hadronization and multi-parton interactions. .

#### 12.1 @xmath extraction

We first fit the @xmath distribution around the peak region. We call
@xmath the histogram of our distribution, and @xmath our fitting
functional form, where @xmath represent the fitting parameters

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (12.1)
  -- -------- -- --------

To extract the parameters @xmath we proceed as follows:

-   We find the bin with the highest value, and assign its center to the
    variable @xmath .

-   We find all surrounding bins whose value is not less than @xmath .
    We assign to the variable @xmath the range covered by these bins
    divided by two.

-   We minimize the @xmath computed from the difference of the integral
    of @xmath in each bin, divided by the bin size, with respect to
    @xmath , choosing as a range all bins that overlap with the segment
    @xmath .

-   From the fitted function we extract the maximum position and assign
    it to @xmath .

-   If the reduced @xmath of the fit is less than 2, we keep this
    result. If not, we replace @xmath and repeat the operation until
    this condition is met.

Once the parameters @xmath are determined, the extracted peak position
@xmath is found by solving

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (12.2)
  -- -------- -- --------

Its error is derived by propagating the errors of the parameters @xmath
extracted using our fitting procedures, in the expression of the peak.
This procedure is applied to both the ideal @xmath distribution and the
smeared one.

The histogram of the smeared distribution @xmath is obtained convoluting
@xmath with a Gaussian of width @xmath GeV (that is the typical
experimental resolution on the reconstructed top mass)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (12.3)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the central value of the @xmath bin and @xmath its
width. @xmath is a normalization constant.

The @xmath coefficient of eq. ( 10.8 ) that links @xmath and @xmath is
found performing a linear fit for the three values of @xmath 169.5 GeV,
172.5 GeV, 175.5 GeV. Since @xmath is the mass of the reconstructed top,
we expect @xmath for the @xmath observable.

The values for the @xmath coefficients that we have obtained with the
three generators showered with Pythia8.2 are collected in Tab. 12.1 ,
and confirm our expectation.

Thus, we can safely assume

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (12.4)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 12.2 Comparison among different NLO+PS generators

We begin by showing comparisons of our three generators, interfaced with
Pythia8.2 , for our reference top-mass value of 172.5 GeV.

The @xmath distributions of the @xmath and @xmath generators are
compared in Fig. 12.1 , before (left) and after (right) applying the
Gaussian smearing.

In the left plot we see that the two generators yield a very similar
shape and the results concerning @xmath are very similar. This is an
indication that interference effects in radiation and other off-shell
effects, that are included in @xmath but not in @xmath , have a very
minor impact on the peak position, at least if we consider a measurement
with an ideal resolution. The results obtained applying a 15 GeV
smearing on the distribution are shown in the right plot of Fig. 12.1 .
The smearing procedure correlates points near the peak together with the
tails of the @xmath distribution, increasing the impact on @xmath of the
region away from the peak, where there are larger differences between
the two generators. This leads to a difference in the peak position of
@xmath MeV.

In Figs. 12.2 we compare the @xmath and the @xmath generators. We see a
negligible difference in the peak position in the non-smeared case,
while, in the smeared case, the @xmath generator differs from @xmath by
@xmath MeV, similar in magnitude to the case of @xmath , but with
opposite sign.

Our findings are summarized in Tab. 12.2 , where we also include results
obtained at the shower level, i.e.  without the inclusion of the
underlying event and of the hadronization.

We notice that @xmath , even if it does not implement NLO corrections in
top decay, yields to results similar to those of the most accurate
@xmath generator. This is due to the inclusion of matrix-element
corrections (MEC) in top decay by the Pythia8.2 PS. MEC are indeed
equivalent, up to an irrelevant normalization factor, to next-to-leading
order corrections in decay. This observation is confirmed by examining
Tab. 12.3 , where predictions obtained with and without MEC are
compared.

When MEC are not included, the peak position in the smeared distribution
provided by the @xmath generator receives a considerable shift, near
1 GeV. On the other hand, the @xmath and @xmath generators, that already
include the hardest emission off @xmath quarks, display a reduced
sensitivity on the MEC. This leads to the conclusion that the MEC in
Pythia8.2 do a decent job in simulating top decay as far as the @xmath
distribution is concerned. The remaining uncertainty of roughly @xmath
MeV in the case of both @xmath and @xmath generators, pulling in
opposite directions, is likely to be due to the approximate treatment of
off-shell effects.

##### 12.2.1 Matching uncertainties

The FSREmission veto procedure described in Appendix E.3.2 represents
the most accurate way to perform the vetoed shower on the POWHEG BOX
generated events interfaced with the Pythia8.2 , because it uses the
POWHEG definition of transverse momentum rather than the Pythia8.2 one.

There is also an alternative, the ScaleResonance procedure, always
described in Appendix E.3.2 , where the scale of the POWHEG emissions
from the @xmath and the @xmath are set as initial scales for the showers
evolutions. The ScaleResonance procedure can introduce a mismatch that
we take as an indication of the size of the matching uncertainties. The
extracted peak position for the @xmath and @xmath with the two matching
procedures are summarized in Tab. 12.4 .

We can see that these differences are roughly 20 MeV in @xmath for both
the no-smearing and smearing case, and in @xmath they are a few MeV for
the no-smearing case, and 20 MeV with smearing.

This is due to the fact that the first emissions of the decayed top has
already a small transverse momentum and in the collinear limit the
POWHEG and the Pythia8.2 definitions of @xmath are equivalent.

We can also compare the default behaviour for dealing with radiation in
the production process with the results obtained with the PowhegHooks
veto machinery, that is activated with the setting

    POWHEG:veto = 1.

The results are shown in Tab. 12.5 .

A slightly increased dependence on the veto procedure is found
concerning radiation in the production process, since it is in general
much more harder than the radiation in production and thus the two
@xmath definitions may differ. However, we notice that even for the
smeared mass distribution the differences between the @xmath obtained
with PowhegHooks and the default ones are rather small and equivalent
for all the NLO generators. Thus, our choice of not using the
PowhegHooks settings as default does not alter the comparison among the
three codes.

##### 12.2.2 Scale, PDF and strong-coupling variations

In Tab. 12.6 we summarize the uncertainties due to scale, PDF and
strong-coupling variations, connected with the extraction of the @xmath
peak position, for the input mass @xmath GeV, for all the generators
showered with Pythia8.2 .

The upper (lower) error due to scale variation reported in the table is
obtained by taking the maximum (minimum) position of the @xmath peak for
each of the seven scales choices of eq. ( 10.5 ), minus the one obtained
for the central scale.

In the PDF case, as discussed in Chap. 10 , we compute the PDF
uncertainties only for the @xmath generator, and assume that they are
the same for @xmath and @xmath .

We consider a symmetrized strong-coupling dependence uncertainty, whose
expression is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (12.5)
  -- -------- -- --------

We stress that these variations have only an indicative meaning. In a
realistic analysis, experimental constraints may reduce these
uncertainties. We also stress that these are not the only theoretical
uncertainties. Others may be obtained by varying MC parameters. Here we
focus specifically on those uncertainties that are associated with the
NLO+PS generators.

As we have already discussed, the use of the @xmath and the @xmath
generators would lead to a negligible bias in the @xmath distribution if
we were able to measure it without any resolution effects. However, if
we introduce a smearing to mimic them, the description of the region
away from the peak plays an important role, and the @xmath and @xmath
generators yield predictions for the mass peak position that are shifted
by roughly @xmath MeV in the downward and upward direction respectively
with respect to @xmath .

We also notice that the @xmath generator is the most affected by
theoretical uncertainties. In particular, the @xmath and @xmath
generators have an unrealistically small scale dependence of the peak
shape, due to the way in which off-shell effects are approximately
described. The @xmath generator displays a non-negligible sensitivity
only to the strong-coupling constant. The theoretical errors that we
have studied here lead to very small effects for the @xmath generator,
since it does not include radiative corrections in the top decay. On the
other hand, the @xmath generator is bound to be more sensitive to
variation of parameters in Pythia8.2 , that in this case fully controls
the radiation from the @xmath quark.

##### 12.2.3 Radius dependence

In this section we investigate the stability of the previous results
with respect to the choice of the jet radius. The results are summarized
in Tab. 12.7 .

For the distributions without smearing, the differences between the
three generators are small and decrease as @xmath increases. For the
smeared distributions, the differences between @xmath and @xmath
decrease as the radius increases, while the difference between the
@xmath and the @xmath generator increases.

The small differences in the @xmath dependence among the three
generators in the non-smeared cases can be understood if we consider
that differences in the @xmath radiation do not affect much the peak
position in the non-smeared distribution, but rather they affect the
strength of the tail on the left side of the peak. On the other hand,
the peak position is affected by radiation in production and by the
underlying-event structure, that is very similar in the three
generators.

It should be noticed that the difference between the displacements of
the @xmath and @xmath with respect to @xmath is less than @xmath MeV and
@xmath MeV, respectively, below the current statistical precision of
top-mass measurements. Thus, the good agreement found among the three
generators persists also for different @xmath values.

#### 12.3 Comparison with Herwig7.1

In order to assess uncertainties due to the shower Monte Carlo (SMC)
program, in this section we compare the results obtained using Herwig7.1
and Pythia8.2 .

In Tab. 12.8 we compare the @xmath peak position extracted for the input
mass @xmath GeV using the three generators showered with Pythia8.2 and
Herwig7.1 . For the @xmath generator, the differences are of the order
of @xmath MeV for both the smeared and non-smeared case, but with
opposite signs. In the smeared case, both the @xmath and @xmath
generators yield much larger differences, of more than 1 GeV.

In Tab. 12.9 we report the differences between the Herwig7.1 and
Pythia8.2 predictions for all the generators, at the NLO+PS level and at
the full hadron level.

We notice that at the NLO+PS level and without smearing, the differences
between the two parton-shower programs are negligible. For the smeared
distributions, at both the NLO+PS and full level, the differences are
roughly 1 GeV for the @xmath and the @xmath generator. For @xmath the
differences are considerably smaller, although not quite negligible.

The origin of these large differences is better understood by looking at
the differential cross sections plotted in Figs. 12.3 and 12.4 .

In Fig. 12.3 we plot the results for the non-smeared case, at the NLO+PS
level (left) and at the full hadron level (right): while the peak
position is nearly the same for both Pythia8.2 and Herwig7.1 , the shape
of the curves is very different around the peak, leading to a different
mass peak position when smearing is applied, as displayed in Fig. 12.4 .
We notice that in this last case we see a difference in shape also after
smearing. This suggests that at least one of the two generators may not
describe the data fairly.

Since we observe such large differences in the value of @xmath in
Herwig7.1 and Pythia8.2 , we have also studied whether sizeable
differences are also present in the @xmath dependence upon the jet
radius @xmath . The results are shown in Tab. 12.10 , and displayed in
Fig. 12.5 .

In the case of the @xmath generator, the difference between Pythia8.2
and Herwig7.1 goes from @xmath to @xmath MeV. Thus, assuming for
instance that Pythia8.2 fits the data perfectly, i.e. that it extracts
the same value of the mass by fitting the @xmath values obtained with
the three different values of @xmath , Herwig7.1 would extract at @xmath
a mass value that is larger by @xmath MeV from the one extracted at
@xmath . We stress that the differences in the @xmath behaviour of
@xmath may have the same origin as the difference in the reconstructed
mass value, since both effects may be related to the amount of energy
that enters the jet cone, and it is not unlikely that, by tuning one of
the two generators in such a way that they both have the same @xmath
dependence, their difference in @xmath would also be reduced. ² ² 2
Similarly, one could fit appropriate calibration observables associated
to the @xmath -jet structure, along the lines of Ref. [ 97 ] . It is
unlikely, however that this would lead to a much improved agreement,
since the difference in slope is much less pronounced than the
difference in absolute value.

##### 12.3.1 Alternative settings in Herwig7.1

We have examined several variations in the Herwig7.1 settings, in order
to understand whether the Herwig7.1 results are reasonably stable, or
depend upon our particular settings.

###### 12.3.1.1 MEC and POWHEG options in Herwig7.1

Herwig7.1 applies matrix-element corrections by default, but it also
offers the possibility to replace the MEC with its internal POWHEG
method, when available, to achieve NLO accuracy in top decays. These
options are activated by the instructions

    set ShowerHandler:HardEmission None

or

    set ShowerHandler:HardEmission POWHEG

respectively. We have verified that, as expected, switching off the
matrix-element corrections does not significantly affect the @xmath and
@xmath results. In the case of the @xmath generator, we can compare the
default case, where MEC is on, with the cases where POWHEG replaces MEC,
and with the case where neither MEC nor POWHEG is implemented. The
results are shown in Tab. 12.11 .

We notice that the inclusion of MEC enhances by more than 1.3 GeV the
peak position of the smeared distribution. A similar result was found in
Pythia8.2 (see Tab. 12.3 ), where the difference was slightly less than
1 GeV. The difference between the POWHEG and MEC results is much below
the 1 GeV level but not negligible. This fact is hard to understand,
since the POWHEG and MEC procedures should only differ by a
normalization factor.

We have seen previously that the three NLO+PS generators interfaced to
Pythia8.2 yield fairly consistent results for the reconstructed top mass
peak. The same consistency is not found when they are interfaced to
Herwig7.1 . However, the best agreement is found when the internal
POWHEG option for top decay is activated in Herwig7.1 , as can be seen
in Tab. 12.12 .

The difference between the POWHEG and MEC or POWHEG Herwig7.1 results is
puzzling, since they have the same formal accuracy. We will comment
about this issue later on.

###### 12.3.1.2 Veto procedures in Herwig7.1

As discussed in Appendix . E.3.3 , Herwig7.1 offers two different
classes that implement the veto procedure: the ShowerVeto , our default
one, where the veto is performed at the emission level, and the
FullShowerVeto class, where the veto is performed at the end of the
whole showering phase. The corresponding results are summarized in Tab.
12.13 . For both the @xmath and the @xmath the two procedures lead to a
200 MeV difference in the peak position for the smeared distributions.
The origin of such difference is not fully clear to us. In part it may
be ascribed to the fact that when using the ShowerVeto class we mix two
different definitions of transverse momentum (the Herwig7.1 and the
POWHEG one), and in part may be due to the fact that in the
FullShowerVeto class the vetoing is done on the basis of the shower
structure after reshuffling has been applied.

###### 12.3.1.3 Truncated showers

In Ref. [ 98 ] it was shown that, when interfacing a POWHEG generator to
an angular-ordered shower, in order to compensate for the mismatch
between the angular-ordered scale and the POWHEG hardness, that is taken
equal to the relative transverse momentum in radiation, one should
supply appropriate truncated showers. None of our vetoing algorithms
take them into account, but it turns out that Herwig7.1 provides
facilities to change the settings of the initial showering scale
according to the method introduced in Ref. [ 99 ] , that, in our case,
are equivalent to the inclusion of truncated showers (see Appendix E.3.3
). The effects this inclusion, performed with the settings of eq. ( E.27
), for the @xmath and @xmath generators are shown in Tab. 12.14 .

As we can see, this does not introduce dramatic changes in the peak
position: in fact the differences are negligible in the distributions
without smearing, and are roughly @xmath MeV when smearing is applied.
It should be noticed that these settings slightly increase the
difference with respect to the results obtained with Pythia8.2 .

### Chapter 13 The energy of the @xmath jet

In Ref. [ 67 ] it was proposed to extract @xmath using the peak of the
energy spectrum of the @xmath jet. This method has been investigated by
the CMS collaboration in Ref. [ 73 ] , where it was found

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (13.1)
  -- -------- -- --------

At leading order, the @xmath jet consists of the @xmath quark alone, and
its energy in the top rest frame, neglecting top-width effects, is fixed
and given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (13.2)
  -- -------- -- --------

i.e. the spectrum is a delta function in the energy and its value is
independent from the top-production mechanism. In the laboratory frame,
because of the variable boost that affects the top, the delta function
is smeared into a wider distribution, but it can be shown that its peak
position remains at @xmath . On the basis of this observation we are led
to assume that also after the inclusion of off-shell effects, radiative
and non-perturbative corrections, the relation between @xmath and the
top pole-mass @xmath should be largely insensitive to production
dynamics.

We performed a study of the @xmath observable along the same lines
adopted for @xmath in the previous section. If the range of variations
of the top mass around a given central value @xmath is small enough, a
linear relation between @xmath and the top mass must hold, so that we
can write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (13.3)
  -- -------- -- --------

It was suggested in Ref. [ 73 ] that the @xmath distribution @xmath is
better fitted in terms of @xmath . Thus, in order to extract the peak
position, we fitted the energy distribution with a fourth order
polynomial

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (13.4)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . The fitting procedure is the same employed to extract
@xmath , that is described in Sec. 12.1

The parameter @xmath of eq. ( 13.3 ), extracted from a linear fit of the
three @xmath values corresponding to the three different values of
@xmath that we have considered (see Tab. 10.1 ) using the @xmath
generator showered by Pythia8.2 , was found to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (13.5)
  -- -------- -- --------

compatible with the expected value of 0.5 from eq. ( 13.2 ). ¹ ¹ 1 When
using the @xmath generator we obtain @xmath , while with the @xmath one,
we get @xmath . When using Herwig7.1 instead of Pythia8.2 , we find
values compatible with the given ones within 10%.

#### 13.1 Comparison among different NLO+PS generators

In Fig. 13.1 we plot the logarithmic energy distribution for the three
generators interfaced to Pythia8 , together with their polynomial fit.
The extracted @xmath peaks from the @xmath and the @xmath generators are
compatible within the statistical errors. On the other hand, the @xmath
generator yields a prediction which is roughly @xmath @xmath @xmath MeV
smaller than the @xmath one. We thus observe that the jet modelling
implemented by Pythia8.2 with MEC seems to yield slightly less energetic
jets. An effect going in the same direction was also observed for the
@xmath observable (see Tab. 12.6 , the first column of the results with
smearing), although to a smaller extent.

In Tab. 13.1 we have collected the values of @xmath computed with MEC,
and the differences between the results with and without MEC. We notice
that the MEC setting has little impact in the @xmath and @xmath cases.
On the other hand, in the @xmath case the absence of MEC would have lead
to an @xmath value about 2 GeV smaller than with MEC. We take this as
another indication that the implementation of radiation in top decay
using MEC leads to results that are much closer to the NLO+PS ones.

In Tab. 13.2

we summarize our results together with the scale, PDF and @xmath
uncertainties, that are extracted with a procedure analogous to one
described for the @xmath observable. We also report the corresponding
statistical errors of our results. We see that scale and PDF variations
have negligible impact on our observable, given the small sensitivity on
the production dynamics, the only important change being associated with
the choice of the NLO+PS generator.

We notice that our errors on scale and PDF variations are much smaller
than our statistical errors. On the other hand, these variations are
performed by reweighting techniques, that, because of correlations, lead
to errors in the differences that are much smaller than the error on the
individual term. In view of the small size of these variations, we do
not attempt to perform a better estimate of their error. On the other
hand, the variation of @xmath do not benefit from this cancellation, and
are all below the statistical uncertainties.

As previously done for @xmath , we have also investigated the dependence
of the @xmath -jet peak positions on the jet radius. The results are
summarized in Tab. 13.3 .

While we observe a marked change in @xmath , that grows by @xmath and
@xmath GeV when going from @xmath to @xmath and from @xmath to @xmath
respectively, @xmath and @xmath differ by @xmath by much smaller
amounts. It is not clear whether such small differences could be
discriminated experimentally.

According to eqs. ( 10.11 ) and ( 13.5 ), the uncertainties that affect
the value of the extracted top mass are nearly twice the uncertainties
on the @xmath -jet energy. Considering the difference for @xmath between
@xmath and @xmath in Tab. 13.3 , we see that, by using @xmath instead of
@xmath , the extracted top mass would be roughly 900 MeV larger. This
should be compared with the corresponding difference of about 150 MeV,
that is shown in Tab. 12.7 , for the smeared @xmath case. In any case,
these difference are much more smaller than the statical error of
2.66 GeV quoted by CMS in Ref. [ 73 ] .

As before, we have checked the sensitivity of our result to variations
in the matching procedure in Pythia8.2 , by studying the difference
between ScaleResonance and FSREmission options. The differences turn out
to be of the order of the statistical error.

#### 13.2 Comparison with Herwig7.1

In this section, we study the dependence of our results on the shower MC
program, comparing Herwig7.1 and Pythia8.2 predictions. We extract the
differences in the @xmath position for three values of the jet radius:
@xmath , 0.5 and 0.6. The results are summarized in Tab. 13.4 , where we
also show the results at the PS-only level,

and in Fig. 13.2 .

From Tab. 13.4 we clearly see that the @xmath and the @xmath generators
display larger discrepancies. For example, for the central value @xmath
, we would get @xmath GeV, that roughly corresponds to @xmath GeV, much
larger than the 2.66 GeV statistical error quoted in Ref. [ 73 ] . In
the case of the @xmath generator the difference is near 1 GeV, implying
that the extracted mass using @xmath + Herwig7.1 would be 2 GeV bigger
than the one obtained with @xmath + Pythia8.2 .

We find that the differences between Herwig7.1 and Pythia8.2 increases
for larger jet radii. Furthermore, by looking at Fig. 13.2 , we notice
that the @xmath generator displays a different @xmath dependence, as we
have already observed from Tab. 13.3 . Figure 13.2 indicates that @xmath
and @xmath are in better agreement for larger values of the jet radius.
This was also observed for the peak of the @xmath smeared
distribution (Tab. 12.7 ).

We notice that, as in the case of the reconstructed mass peak, the
predominant contribution to the difference arise at the PS level.

As for the previous cases, we have examined the variations due to a
different choice of the matching scheme in Herwig7.1 , that we found to
be below the 200 MeV level, and thus negligible in the present context.

### Chapter 14 Leptonic observables

In this section, we investigate the extraction of the top mass from the
leptonic observables introduced in Ref. [ 68 ] . This method has been
recently studied by the ATLAS collaboration in Ref. [ 75 ] that finds

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (14.1)
  -- -------- -- --------

Following Ref. [ 68 ] , we consider the subsequent five observables

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

i.e. the transverse momentum of the positive charged lepton, and the
transverse momentum, the invariant mass, the energy and the scalar sum
of the transverse momenta of the lepton pair. We compute the average
value of the first three Mellin moments for each of the above mentioned
observables, @xmath , with @xmath and @xmath . We assume that, if we do
not vary too much the range of the top mass, we can write the linear
relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (14.2)
  -- -------- -- --------

For ease of notation, we will refer to @xmath and @xmath as @xmath and
@xmath in the following. Their determination will be discussed later.

We choose as reference sample the one generated with @xmath matched with
Pythia8.2 , using @xmath GeV as input mass and the central choices for
the PDF and scales. We indicate the values of the observables computed
with this generator as @xmath , and with @xmath the values of the
observable computed either with an alternative generator or with
different generator settings, but using as input parameter the same
reference mass. The mass value that we would extract from the events of
the reference sample using the new generator is then given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (14.3)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since all the leptonic observables are statistical-correlated among each
other, we then performed a weighted average of all the results
considering as covariance matrix

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (14.4)
  -- -------- -- --------

being @xmath the error on the extracted top-mass relative to the
observable @xmath and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (14.5)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the statistical correlation between @xmath and @xmath . This
procedure has been taken from Appendix B of Ref. [ 75 ] .

We begin by showing in Tabs. 14.1 and 14.2 the average values of the
leptonic observables computed with our three NLO+PS generators
interfaced with Pythia8.2 and Herwig7.1 . We show the central values,
the differences with respect to @xmath , and the upper and lower results
induced by scale, PDF and @xmath variations.

The scale and PDF variations are performed by reweighting. As a
consequence of that, the associated error is much smaller than the
statistical error on the cross section. In order to estimate it, we have
divided our sample of events in ten sub-samples, computed the
observables for each sub-sample, and carried out a straightforward
statistical analysis on the ten sets of results. We found errors that
never exceed the quoted value by more than 13%.

For the PDF variation, we have verified that differences due to
variations in our reference PDF sets (see Chap. 10 ) are very similar
among the different generators. On the other hand, a full error study
using the PDF4LHC15_nlo_30_pdfas set was only performed with the @xmath
generator, and the associated errors exceed by far the variation band
that we obtain with our reference sets. Thus, also in this case we quote
the PDF variations only for @xmath , implying that a very similar
variation should also be present for the others. It is clear from the
tables that the PDF uncertainties are dominant for several observables,
and scale variations are also sizeable.

The large variations in the @xmath column are not always conclusive
because of the large statistical errors (in parentheses), due to the
fact that we cannot perform this variation by reweighting. However,
unlike for the @xmath case, here the PDF dependence is not small, and
thus we cannot conclude that the @xmath variation probes mainly the
sensitivity to the intensity of radiation in decay, since when we vary
@xmath we change also the PDF set.

It is instead useful to look at the effect of MEC on the leptonic
observables, displayed in Tab. 14.3 .

We observe that in the @xmath and @xmath case the effect of MEC is
compatible with the statistical uncertainty. In the @xmath case we find
instead sizeable effects. This is expected, since large-angle radiation
from the @xmath quark, by subtracting energy to the whole @xmath system,
affects significantly also leptonic observables.

In Ref. [ 68 ] it was observed that the observables @xmath and @xmath
had larger errors due to a stronger sensitivity to radiative
corrections, and were more sensitive to spin-correlation effects. We see
a confirmation of this observations in their larger errors due to scale
variation, and in the fact that for @xmath their central value is
shifted with respect to the @xmath and @xmath generators, that treat
spin correlations in a better way.

In Tab. 14.4 we show the extracted values of the @xmath coefficients for
the first Mellin moment of each observable. The @xmath values
corresponding to the different generators are compatible within the
statistical errors. We thus choose the values computed with the @xmath
generator, that have the smallest error. According to eq. ( 14.3 ), we
can translate a variation in an observable into a variation of the
extracted mass, that for the first Mellin moment is simply obtained
applying a @xmath factor. The results are illustrated in Tab. 14.5 .

The errors shown have been obtained by summing in quadrature the
statistical error and the scale and PDF uncertainties. We have not
included the @xmath variation in the error in order to avoid
over-counting, since, in the present case, is likely to be largely
dominated by the change in the associated PDF.

The overall errors on the last two lines of Tab. 14.5 are obtained with
the same procedure adopted in Ref. [ 68 ] to account for correlations
among the different observables. We do not see excessive differences
among our three generators showered with the same MC generator, while
the differences between the Pythia8.2 and Herwig7.1 results are
considerably large. This is also the case for the @xmath generator, that
has a much simpler interface to both Pythia8.2 and Herwig7.1 .

We observe in Tab. 14.5 that the inclusion of higher moments of the
leptonic observables does not modify appreciably the results from the
first moments. This is a consequence of the large error on the higher
moments, and of the strong correlations among different moments.

The results in Tab. 14.5 are also summarized in Fig. 14.1 , where the
discrepancy between Pythia8.2 and Herwig7.1 and the mutual consistency
of the different observables can be immediately appreciated.

As we did for @xmath and @xmath , also in the present case we have
computed the leptonic observables without including hadronization
effects, i.e. at parton-shower only level, in order to determine whether
the differences between Pythia8.2 and Herwig7.1 are due to the shower or
to the hadronization. Our findings are summarized in Tab. 14.6 . Most of
the differences already arise at the shower level, this is not
surprising since the hadronization and the underlying event does not
alter the leptons momenta.

As for the previous observables, we have studied the effect of changing
the matching scheme in decay, by switching between our two alternative
matching schemes with Pythia8.2 and Herwig7.1 , and by considering the
settings of eq. ( E.27 ) in Herwig7.1 . In both cases we find results
that are consistent within statistical errors.

We also evaluate the impact of the PowhegHooks veto for radiation in
production, the results are presented in Tab. 14.7 . Like for the @xmath
case, the differences between the two alternatives are very small, in
particular, given the present statistical error, it is not negligible
only for the @xmath of the lepton pair. Furthermore, the discrepancies
are roughly the same for each NLO generator. Thus, our previous
conclusions will not be modified by the use of PowhegHooks to deal with
radiation in the production process.

### Chapter 15 Summary and outlook

In this second part of the thesis we have compared generators of
increasing accuracy for the production and decay of @xmath pairs
considering observables suitable for the measurement of the top mass.
The generators that we have considered are:

-   The @xmath generator [ 81 ] , that implements NLO corrections in
    production for on-shell top quarks, and includes finite-width
    effects and spin correlations only in an approximate way, by
    smearing the on-shell kinematics with Breit-Wigner forms of
    appropriate width, and by generating the angular distribution of the
    decay products according to the associated tree-level matrix
    elements [ 89 ] .

-   The @xmath generator [ 90 ] , that implements NLO corrections in
    production and decay in the narrow-width approximation. Spin
    correlations are included at NLO accuracy. Finite width effects are
    implemented by reweighting the NLO results using the tree-level
    matrix elements for the associated Born-level process, including
    however all finite width non-resonant and interference effects at
    the Born level for the given final state.

-   The @xmath generator [ 91 ] , that uses the full matrix elements for
    the production of the given final state, including all non-resonant
    diagrams and interference effects. This includes interference of QCD
    radiation in production and decay.

The main focus has been the study of the mass distribution of a
particle-level reconstructed top, consisting of a lepton-neutrino pair
and a @xmath -quark jet with the appropriate flavour. The peak position
of the mass of this system is our observable, that is loosely related to
the top mass. We considered its distributions both at the particle
level, and by assuming that experimental inaccuracies can be summarized
by a simple smearing with a resolution function, a Gaussian with a width
of 15 GeV, which is the typical resolution achieved on the top mass by
the LHC collaborations. This observable is an oversimplified version of
the mass observables that are used in direct top-mass measurements, that
are the methods that lead to the most precise mass determinations.

We have found a very consistent picture in the comparison of our three
generators when they are interfaced to Pythia8.2 , and thus we begin by
summarizing our results for this case. We first recall what we expect
from such comparison. When comparing the @xmath and the @xmath
generators, we should remember that the latter has certainly better
accuracy in the description of spin correlations, since it implements
them correctly both at the leading and at the NLO level. However, we do
not expect spin correlations to play an important role in the
reconstructed top mass. As a further point, the @xmath generator
implements NLO corrections in decay. In the @xmath generator, the decay
is handled by the shower, where, by default, Pythia8.2 includes
matrix-element corrections (MEC). These differ formally from a full NLO
correction only by a normalization factor, that amounts to the NLO
correction to the top width. Thus, as long as the MEC are switched on,
we do not expect large differences between @xmath and @xmath . As far as
the comparison between @xmath and @xmath , we expect the difference to
be given by NLO off-shell effects, and by interference of radiation in
production and decay, since these effects are not implemented in @xmath
. This comparison is particularly interesting, since the interference
between production and decay can be considered as a “perturbative
precursor” of colour reconnection effects.

The results of these comparisons can be summarized as follows:

-   The @xmath and the @xmath generators yield very similar results for
    most of the observables that we have considered, implying that NLO
    off-shell effects and interference between production and decay are
    modest.

-   As far as @xmath (the peak of the reconstructed mass distribution)
    is concerned, the @xmath and the @xmath generators yield very
    similar results, confirming the fact that the MEC implementation in
    Pythia8.2 has an effect very similar to the POWHEG implementation of
    NLO corrections in decay in the @xmath . We have also observed that,
    if we switch off the MEC, the agreement between the two generators
    is spoiled. More quantitatively, we find that the spread in the peak
    of the reconstructed mass at the particle level among the three
    NLO+PS generators is never above 30 MeV. On the other hand, if
    resolution effects are accounted for with our smearing procedure, we
    find that the @xmath result is 147 MeV smaller, and the @xmath
    result 140 MeV larger than the @xmath one. These values are safely
    below currently quoted errors for the top-mass measurements with
    direct methods.

    If we switch off the MEC in Pythia8.2 , we find that the peak
    position at the particle level in the @xmath case is displaced by
    61 MeV, while, if smearing effects are included, the shift is of
    @xmath MeV, a rather large value, that can however be disregarded as
    being due to the poor accuracy of the collinear approximation in
    @xmath radiation when MEC corrections are off.

-   The jet-energy peak seems to be more sensitive to the modelling of
    radiation from the @xmath quark. In fact, while the @xmath and the
    @xmath results are quite consistent with each other, with the peak
    positions differing by less than 200 MeV, the @xmath result differs
    from them by more than 500 MeV. This would correspond to a
    difference in the extracted mass of the top quark roughly equal to
    twice that amount. On the other hand, if the MEC in @xmath are
    switched off, the shift in the @xmath -jet energy peak is more than
    1.9 GeV. This leads us to conclude that the impact of modelling of
    @xmath radiation on the @xmath -jet peak is much stronger than in
    the reconstructed top mass peak. We stress, however, that the
    difference between @xmath (with MEC on) and the other two generators
    is safely below the errors quoted in current measurements [ 73 ] .

-   For the leptonic observables, we generally see a reasonable
    agreement between the different generators. The largest differences
    are found in the @xmath case, for the @xmath and @xmath , larger
    than 500 MeV with respect to the other two. In Ref. [ 68 ] it was
    noticed that these observables had larger errors due to a stronger
    sensitivity to radiative corrections, and to spin-correlation
    effects, that are modelled incorrectly by @xmath .

Several sources of possible uncertainties have been explored in order to
check the reliability of these conclusions. First of all, two different
matching procedures for interfacing the @xmath and @xmath generators to
Pythia8.2 have been implemented. For example, for the reconstructed mass
peak, we have checked that switching between them leads to differences
below 20 MeV for both generators. The effect of scales, @xmath and PDF
uncertainties have also been examined, and were found to yield very
modest variations in the reconstructed mass peak. It was found, in
particular, that scale variations lead to a negligible peak displacement
(below 7 MeV) in the @xmath and @xmath case, while the effect is of
@xmath MeV for @xmath . The lack of scale dependence in the @xmath and
@xmath is easily understood as being due to the fact that the peak shape
is obtained by smearing an on-shell distribution with a Breit-Wigner
form, that does not depend upon any scale, and it suggests that, in
order to get realistic scale-variation errors, the most accurate @xmath
generator should be used. We have also computed results at the shower
level, excluding the effects of hadronization and multi-parton
interactions, in order to see if the consistent picture found at the
hadron level is also supported by the parton-level results, and we have
found that this is indeed the case.

We have thus seen that the overall picture of the comparison of our
three NLO+PS generators within the framework of the Pythia8.2 shower is
quite simple and consistent. For the most precise observable, i.e. the
peak of the reconstructed mass distribution, it leads to the conclusions
that the use of the most accurate generator may lead to a shift in the
measured mass of at most 150 MeV, which is well below the present
uncertainties quoted by the experimental collaborations.

Our study with Herwig7.1 instead reveals several problems. We can
summarize our findings as follows:

-   The results obtained with Herwig7.1 differ substantially from those
    obtained with Pythia8.2 . In particular, the peak of the
    reconstructed mass distribution at the particle level is shifted by
    -66 and -39 MeV in the @xmath and @xmath cases, and by +235 MeV in
    the @xmath case. When the experimental resolution is accounted for,
    using our smearing procedure, the shift raises to -1091 and
    -1179 MeV in the @xmath and @xmath cases, and to -251 MeV in the
    @xmath case.

-   The results obtained within the Herwig7.1 framework display large
    differences between the @xmath generator with respect to @xmath and
    @xmath ones. In particular, while the @xmath result exceeds the
    @xmath one only by about 50 MeV in both the particle level and
    smeared cases, @xmath exceeds @xmath by 311 MeV at particle level,
    and by 693 MeV after smearing.

These results are quite alarming. The shifts reach values that are
considerably larger than current experimental uncertainties.

In the @xmath case, which is the NLO+PS generator currently used for
top-mass studies by the experimental collaborations, the difference in
the mass-peak position between Herwig7.1 and Pythia8.2 , for the smeared
distribution, is -251 MeV, uncomfortably large but still below current
errors. One would then be tempted to conclude that the large shifts may
be linked to some problems concerning the new generators. However, we
also notice that the same difference is +235 MeV when no smearing is
applied, so it is about as large in magnitude but with the opposite
sign. This indicates that the shape of the reconstructed mass
distribution is considerably different in the two shower models. Lastly,
if we use the internal POWHEG implementation of top decay (rather than
the MEC) in Herwig7.1 , the difference with respect to Pythia8.2 raises
to 607 MeV. Thus, we conclude that in the @xmath case the smaller
difference between Herwig7.1 and Pythia8.2 is accidental, and is subject
to considerable variations depending upon the settings.

Also in this case we checked whether the MEC yield an improved agreement
between the @xmath and the other two generators, as was observed for
Pythia8.2 . We find that, by switching off MEC, the @xmath + Herwig7.1
result decreases by 307 MeV at particle level, and by 1371 MeV in the
smeared case. These effects are qualitatively similar to what was
observed in Pythia8.2 . However, in the present case, when MEC are
switched off, the @xmath result exceeds the @xmath one by a negligible
amount at the particle level, and is lower than the @xmath one by
678 MeV in the smeared case.

The discrepancy between @xmath and the other two generators is mitigated
if, instead of the MEC procedure, the internal POWHEG option of
Herwig7.1 for top decay is used. In this case, the discrepancy between
@xmath and @xmath is reduced to 244 MeV with no smearing, and to 337 MeV
with smearing. We thus see that the consistency of the three NLO+PS
generators interfaced to Herwig7.1 is not optimal as in Pythia8.2 . It
is however acceptable if the internal POWHEG feature is used rather than
MEC in Herwig7.1 .

We have performed several studies to determine the origin of the
difference between Pythia8.2 and Herwig7.1 , and to check whether it
could be attributed to some problem in our matching procedure. They can
be summarized as follows:

-   We have shown that the difference is mostly due to the shower model,
    since it is already largely present at the parton level.

-   We have considered the @xmath dependence of the Herwig7.1 result. It
    differs from the one in Pythia8.2 , leading to the hope that both
    generators may not represent the same set of data well, and tuning
    them may reduce their differences. However, we have also noticed
    that the difference in slope is much smaller than the difference in
    size.

-   We have already mentioned that we have also compared results by
    making use of the internal POWHEG implementation of top decay in
    Herwig7.1 , rather than using MEC. We have found non-negligible
    differences in this case.

-   We have implemented alternative veto procedure in the matching of
    Herwig7.1 with the NLO+PS generators. We found differences of the
    order of 200 MeV, not large enough to cover the discrepancy with
    Pythia8.2 .

-   When interfacing POWHEG generators to angular-ordered showers, in
    order to maintain the double-logarithmic accuracy of the shower, one
    should introduce the so called “truncated showers” [ 98 ] . One
    could then worry that the lack of truncated showers is at the origin
    of the discrepancies that we found. Fortunately, Herwig7.1 offers
    some optional settings that are equivalent to the introduction of
    truncated showers. We found that these options lead to a shift of
    only 200 MeV in the peak position.

In summary, we found no indication that the discrepancy with Pythia8.2
is due to the specific matching procedure and general settings that we
have used in Herwig7.1 .

When comparing Herwig7.1 and Pythia8.2 in the computation of the @xmath
-jet energy peak, we have found even larger differences: when using
@xmath and @xmath , the shifts are of the order of 2 GeV, while for
@xmath the shift is around 1 GeV. They correspond to differences in the
extracted mass of around 4 GeV in the first two cases, and 2 GeV in the
last one. This is not surprising, in view of the stronger sensitivity of
the @xmath -jet peak to the shower model.

Finally, when considering leptonic observables, we find again large
differences between Herwig7.1 and Pythia8.2 . Most differences already
arise at the shower level. Notice that this is in contrast with the
naive view that leptonic observables should be less dependent upon QCD
radiation effects and jet modelling. The comparison between Herwig7.1
and Pythia8.2 for leptonic observables can by appreciated by looking at
Fig. 14.1 , representing the value of the extracted top mass from a
sample generated with @xmath interfaced to Pythia8.2 .

### Chapter 16 Conclusions

We focus our conclusions on the results obtained for the reconstructed
mass peak, since the issues that we have found there apply to the direct
top mass measurements, that are the most precise. The experimental
collaborations extensively use the @xmath generator for this kind of
analyses, and since new generators of higher accuracy, the @xmath and
the @xmath ones, have become available, we have addressed the question
of whether the physics effects not included in @xmath may lead to
inaccuracies in the top-mass determination. The answer to this question
is quite simple and clear when our generators are interfaced to
Pythia8.2 . The differences that we find are large enough to justify the
use of the most accurate generators, but not large enough to drastically
overturn the conclusions of current measurements. Notice that, since the
@xmath generator does not include NLO corrections in decays, we might
have expected a very different modelling of the @xmath -jet in @xmath
with respect to the other two generators, leading to important shifts in
the extracted top mass value. It turns out, however, that the Pythia8.2
handling of top decay in @xmath , improved with the matrix-element
corrections, does in practice achieve NLO accuracy up to an irrelevant
normalization factor.

This nicely consistent picture does not hold anymore if we use Herwig7.1
as shower generator. In particular, it seems that the MEC implemented in
Herwig7.1 do not have the same effect as the handling of radiation in
decay of our modern NLO+PS generators, leading to values of the
extracted top mass that can differ up to about 700 MeV. Furthermore,
interfacing our most accurate NLO+PS generator (the @xmath one) to
Herwig7.1 leads to an extracted top mass of up to 1.2 GeV smaller with
respect to the corresponding result with Pythia8.2 .

At this point we have two options:

-   Dismiss the Herwig7.1 results, on the ground that its MEC handling
    of top decay does not match our modern generators.

-   Consider the Herwig7.1 result as a variation to be included as
    theoretical error.

We believe that the first option is not soundly motivated. In fact, the
implementation of MEC in Pythia8.2 is also technically very close to
what POWHEG does. The hardest radiation is essentially generated in the
same way, and in both cases the subsequent radiation is generated with a
lower transverse momentum. Thus the good agreement between the two is
not surprising. The case of Herwig7.1 is completely different, since in
angular-ordered showers the hardest radiation is not necessarily the
first [ 54 ] . It is thus quite possible that the differences we found
when Herwig7.1 handles the decay with MEC, with respect to the case when
POWHEG does, are due to the fact that the two procedures, although
formally equivalent (i.e. both leading to NLO accuracy) are technically
different. In this last case, their difference should be attributed to
uncontrolled higher-order effects, and should thus be considered as a
theoretical uncertainty.

A further question that this analysis raises is whether we should
consider the variation between the Pythia8.2 and the Herwig7.1 programs
as an error that should be added to current top-mass measurements. By
doing so, current errors, that are of the order of 500-600 MeV, would
become larger than 1 GeV. We believe that our crude modelling of the
measurement process does not allow us to draw this conclusion. The
analysis procedures used in direct measurements are much more complex,
and involve adequate tuning of the MC parameters and jet-energy
calibration using hadronic @xmath decays in the same top events. It is
not unlikely that these procedures could lead to an increased
consistency between the Pythia8.2 and Herwig7.1 results. However, in
view of what we have found in our study, it is difficult to trust the
theoretical errors currently given in the top quark mass determination
if alternative NLO+PS and shower generators combinations are not
considered.

## Part III Appendix

### Appendix A Radiative corrections to quark lines

In this appendix we describe how to treat radiative corrections to
external quark lines and how to compute the mass counterterm.

We denote by @xmath the set of all the one-particle-irreducible
corrections to an heavy quark line whose bare mass is @xmath . If we
include all the possible self-energy @xmath insertions into a free
propagator we obtain the expression for the dressed propagator

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.1)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where we have used the fact that @xmath commutes with @xmath . The
location of the pole of the full propagator, i.e. the pole mass @xmath ,
is equal to eigenvalue of the operator @xmath that satisfies

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

We can introduce a mass counterterm @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

so that we can replace in our Lagrangian

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The Feynman rule for the mass counterterm is thus defined as the
insertion, in the fermion propagator, of the vertex @xmath .

At order @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

so that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The dressed propagator expressed in terms of the pole mass is thus given
by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

that has a pole for @xmath . If we consider eigenvalues of @xmath
slightly different from @xmath , the propagator becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.8)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where we have defined

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

If we introduce the rescaled field @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

we have the effect of the fermion self-energy correction to an external
line is equivalent to multiply the leading order amplitude for a factor
@xmath . At order @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where, neglecting orders @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus, the contribution to the virtual amplitude containing radiative
corrections to an external quark line is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

being @xmath the LO amplitude.

An alternative to the pole mass scheme is given by the @xmath scheme.
The mass counterterm is defined in order to absorb only the divergent
part of @xmath (performing the replacement @xmath )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.14)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the @xmath mass evaluated at the scale @xmath and (d)
denotes the divergent part. We have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.15)
     @xmath      (A.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where (f) denotes the finite part.

#### a.1 One-loop radiative corrections to heavy quark lines

In the following we describe how to compute the one-loop on-shell
top-quark self energy at order @xmath . We give a finite mass @xmath to
the gluon, since this result is necessary for the computation of the
self energy at all orders in @xmath , as discussed in Sec. 3.2 . Since
we adopt the @xmath scheme, in our computation we perform the
replacement

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that, as we have seen in Sec. 3.1 , the @xmath counterterms have a
very simple expression since they need to absorb only the UV divergent
part of the radiative corrections.

At order @xmath , the top-quark self-energy expression with a gluon of
mass @xmath in @xmath dimensions is given by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.18)
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (A.19)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where the suffix @xmath signals the presence of a finite gluon-mass
@xmath and @xmath and @xmath are the one-point and two-point Feynmam
scalar integrals

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.20)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.21)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

#### a.2 Mass counterterm

From eq. ( A.6 ), we see that the pole mass counterterm can be obtained
from the self energy evaluated for the eigenvalue of the operator @xmath
equal to @xmath . We thus compute @xmath . As it is shown in Sec. 3.2 ,
we also need the exact @xmath -dimensional expression for the @xmath and
@xmath cases, while for a generic @xmath value it is sufficient the
@xmath expressions.

##### a.2.1 Non-vanishing gluon mass

We now calculate @xmath for a generic value of @xmath . Eq. ( A.19 )
becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.22)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

and the scalar integrals assume the values

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.23)
     @xmath   @xmath               (A.24)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can check that for small @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

while for large @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

Substituting the values of @xmath and @xmath in eq. ( A.22 ), we get

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.28)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

For small @xmath we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

while for large @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

We thus have that the mass counterterm in the pole scheme, computed
keeping a fixed gluon mass @xmath , is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.31)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

##### a.2.2 Massless gluon

We are now interested in the particular case @xmath . By setting @xmath
in eq. ( A.22 ), we find

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.32)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In this case, it is possible to use the exact @xmath dimensional
expressions for the scalar integrals

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.33)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.34)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

so that we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

By expanding around @xmath we get

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.36)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

By comparing this expression with eq. ( A.29 ), we find that the small
@xmath result smoothly converges to the massless one. Since @xmath
corresponds to the standard result peformed with massless gluons, we
have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

The pole mass counterterm is thus given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

As shown in eq. ( A.14 ), if we adopt the @xmath scheme, the mass
counterterm contains only the divergent part of @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### a.2.3 Large gluon mass

In order to evaluate the exact @xmath dimensional expression of eq. (
A.22 ) for large @xmath we just need to compute @xmath neglecting terms
of order @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath               
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.41)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where we have defined

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . For small @xmath the integral yields

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.43)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

so

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.44)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

By inserting eqs. ( A.44 ) and ( A.33 ) in eq. ( A.22 ) and neglecting
terms of the order @xmath we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the subscript @xmath signals that @xmath has been computed for a
large value of @xmath and subleading powers @xmath have been neglected.
By expanding @xmath around @xmath we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

as we found in eq. ( A.30 ).

#### a.3 External field normalization

From eqs. ( A.11 ) and ( A.12 ) we have that the external field
normalization is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

We perform this computation at @xmath keeping a finite gluon mass @xmath
and, separately, for @xmath . Conversely to the previous case, the small
@xmath limit is not guaranteed to approach smoothly the @xmath result,
since to compute @xmath we deal both with IR and UV singularities.

We rewrite eq. ( A.19 ) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath , the derivative of with respect @xmath evaluated at @xmath
can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using eq. ( A.50 ) and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

eq. ( A.48 ) becomes

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
                          (A.52)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The calculation of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

must be carried out by distinguishing the two cases @xmath and @xmath .

##### a.3.1 Massless gluon

We need to compute the derivative of @xmath for @xmath in order to
evaluate the derivative of @xmath . If @xmath , we have the well-known
result

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.53)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Substituting eqs. ( A.53 ), ( A.23 ) and the @xmath expansion of eq. (
A.34 ) in eq. ( A.52 ) and setting @xmath we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

So, from eq. ( A.12 ), we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### a.3.2 Massive gluon

We now compute the derivative of the bubble integral for @xmath .

  -- -------- -- --------
                 
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (A.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

The denominator can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can suppose @xmath negative thanks to the analytic continuation.

  -- -- -------- -------- -------- --------
        @xmath   @xmath            (A.59)
                 @xmath   @xmath   
                 @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- -------- --------

We have defined

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.60)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

and, similarly,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

The final result is

  -- -- -------- -------- -- --------
        @xmath   @xmath      (A.62)
  -- -- -------- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can easily demonstrate that, for small @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

Inserting eqs. ( A.62 ), ( A.23 ) and ( A.24 ) in eq. ( A.52 ) leads to

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (A.65)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

From eq. ( A.12 ) we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.66)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

From eqs. ( A.26 ) and ( A.64 ) we can extract the small @xmath
behaviour

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### a.4 Radiative corrections to external massless quark lines

We now compute the field normalization for a massless @xmath quark. At
order @xmath , the self-energy for a massless quark computed with a
gluon of mass @xmath is given by setting @xmath in eq. A.19 .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

The tadpole integral is given by eq. ( A.23 ), while the bubble one is
given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.69)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Thus, for small @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can now compute the mass counterterm and the field normalization
constant for a massless @xmath quark

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.71)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.72)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The above computation of @xmath cannot be used to infer the value for
@xmath . Indeed in this case eq. ( A.68 ) becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.73)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and, since @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

### Appendix B A useful dispersive relation

We want to apply a dispersive relation to the function

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a complex number far from the real positive axis. The
procedure is similar to the one proposed in Ref. [ 33 ] . We notice that
@xmath has a pole at @xmath and a branch cut for @xmath .

We choose as integration path the closed contour @xmath , depicted in
Fig. B.1 . Applying the residue theorem we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the path @xmath is displayed in fig. B.1 . Notice that we have
ignored the presence of the Landau singularity at

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

correponding to the vanishing of the denominator in the expression

  -- -- -- -------
           (B.4)
  -- -- -- -------

This is because we are only interested in the formal power expansion in
@xmath of our result, and no such singularity is present in the
coefficients of the geometric expansion in eq. ( B.4 ).

The contribution along the circle of radius @xmath in eq. ( B.2 ) goes
to zero in the @xmath limit. The contribution given by the small circle
of radius @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

We are thus left with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.6)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where @xmath is an infinitesimal imaginary part that enables us to avoid
the branch cut on the real axis. For positive values of @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the imaginary part vanishes for @xmath . We can thus write

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.8)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

If @xmath is a real-positive number, we can still employ eq. ( B.8 )
since we need to include a small positive imaginary part @xmath coming
from the Feynman prescription, so that @xmath is indeed a complex
number.

Since the imaginary part of @xmath vanishes for @xmath and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (B.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

eq. ( B.8 ) can be rewritten as:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (B.10)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where the @xmath lower boundary underlines the fact that the delta
function arising from the imaginary part of @xmath must be included.

The dispersive relation we presented here is useful to evaluate virtual
contributions in which the gluon line has been dressed with the
insertion of infinite fermionic bubbles. When IR divergences are not
present, the form in eq. ( B.10 ) can be safely employed, since the
@xmath limit is smooth and does not require extra care. Furthermore, in
this case, it is also possible to set to zero the quark-mass regulator
@xmath . When IR singularities are present, the @xmath value must be
handled separately, since it requires for example dimensional
regularization to deal with soft and collinear divergences. In this
case, eq. ( B.8 ) is more appropriate since it shows a clear separation
between the @xmath and the @xmath regions.

### Appendix C Single-top production in the narrow-width approximation

In this appendix we compute the NLO corrections to the total cross
section for the process @xmath in the narrow-width approximation (NWA),
i.e. for a vanishing top width, keeping a finite gluon mass @xmath . The
top mass is defined in the on-shell (real) pole scheme. We denote it
with @xmath since we reserve @xmath for the complex top mass. We can
write

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

At one loop, in the NWA,

  -- -- -- -------
           (C.3)
  -- -- -- -------

As we have shown in eq. ( 4.45 ), to compute the all-orders corrections
to a physical tree-level quantity in the large- @xmath limit, we need
the expression of its NLO corrections calculated keeping a fixed gluon
mass @xmath . ¹ ¹ 1 The term @xmath of eq. ( 4.50 ) is identically 0
since we do not impose any selection cuts. We denote this quantity with
@xmath . The linear @xmath dependence of @xmath is responsible for the
presence of linear renormalons.

#### c.1 Production cross section

At LO, neglecting all the couplings, the production cross section is
given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Its derivative with respect to @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

We computed separately the virtual and the real cross sections for
several positive values of the gluon mass @xmath and we denote with
@xmath their sum. The external field normalization constant of the
@xmath and of the @xmath quark, used in the expression of the UV
normalized virtual contribution, are given by eqs. ( A.72 ) and ( A.66 )
respectively. We used the COLLIER [ 39 ] library for the evaluation of
the one-loop scalar integrals. The @xmath computation was performed
separately within the POWHEG BOX RES framework. In this case the
external @xmath normalization constant is 0, while the top one is given
in eq. ( A.55 ).

We display our results in Fig. C.1 , where we also plot the straight
line

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

that interpolates fairly well the points we have computed for small-
@xmath values. Since to move from the pole to the mass scheme, we can
naively replace @xmath , we notice that, if the top mass is expressed in
terms of the @xmath one, the inclusive cross section is free from linear
renormalons. This behaviour is expected, since it is a totally inclusive
decay of a colour-neutral system.

#### c.2 Top decay width

At LO, neglecting all the couplings, the decay width of the top quark is
given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Its derivative with respect to @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

As we did for the production cross section, we computed the virtual and
the real corrections separately keeping a fixed gluon mass @xmath and we
denoted with @xmath their sum. From Fig. C.2 it is clear that, if the
top mass is expressed in the @xmath -mass scheme, the top decay width is
free from linear renormalons. Although not obvious, this cancellation is
expected since the absence of linear renormalons in the heavy-particles
decay-width expressed in terms of the @xmath mass was already shown in
Refs. [ 10 , 33 , 52 ] .

#### c.3 Considerations

We have just seen that both @xmath and @xmath are linear-renormalon free
if expressed in terms of the @xmath mass, so it is the cross section
@xmath in NWA. In Sec. 5.1.2 we showed that this behaviour is achieved
also for finite top width, since the top quark can never be on-shell if
a complex mass scheme is used. A formal demonstration of the
cancellation of the linear sensitivity in case of finite top width is
given in appendix D .

### Appendix D Cancellation of the linear sensitivity in the total cross
section and in leptonic observables

In order to discuss the cancellation of the linear sensitivity in the
total cross section and in the energy of the @xmath boson, @xmath , when
finite top-width effects are included, we make use of the old-fashioned
perturbation theory. To this purpose, we first briefly summarize the
main features of this approach in Appendix D.1 and we recall the
conditions for Landau threshold singularities in Appendix D.2 . In
Appendix D.3 we show that, as long as @xmath , the Landau singularities
are not present and thus, if we adopt a short-distance mass, no linear
@xmath -term can arise, being @xmath the mass of the gluon.

#### d.1 Old-fashioned perturbation theory

In the old-fashioned (time-ordered) perturbation theory the propagator
denominators in a Feynman diagram are split into an advanced and a
retarded part

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

and @xmath . The time Fourier transform of the first term vanishes for
negative time, while for the second term it vanishes for positive time

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (D.3)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (D.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

These results can be easily demonstrated by promoting the integration
path into a semicircle integral and applying the residue theorem.

We observe that the first term in eq. ( D.1 ), that corresponds to an
advanced propagator, propagates positive energies in the future, while
the second one, i.e. the retarded one, propagates negative energies in
the past.

In presence of an unstable particle, the denominator is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

so that @xmath has a negative imaginary part. As a consequence, we also
have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and both functions have exponential damping for large positive
(negative) time. We notice that the @xmath factor is not necessary in
intermediate states containing the unstable particle, because they can
never be on-shell.

We can write any Feynman diagram assigning an independent momentum to
each propagator, and include a factor @xmath to each vertex to ensure
four-momentum conservation, where @xmath is the sum of all four-momenta
entering the vertex. Furthermore, the time component of the @xmath
function can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Thus each advanced or retarded propagator will carry the factor

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are the time variables associated with the
beginning and the end of the propagator, that are chosen accordingly to
the direction of @xmath . Performing the @xmath integration, we get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath replaced by its on shell (positive or negative) value in all
other occurrences (i.e. propagator numerators or vertex factors).

By splitting each propagator into an advanced and retarted part, a
single Feynman diagram will split into a sum of diagrams with all
possible different time orderings for the vertices. We consider a graph
with a given ordering, and label the time of each vertex as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

and we can collect all exponential in the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where by @xmath we mean the total energy entering the @xmath vertex.
Integrating in @xmath from @xmath to infinity yields a factor

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then, performing the @xmath integration yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

and so on. The last integral in @xmath is unrestricted, yielding

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

i.e. the total energy entering in all the vertices must be zero. The
delta function is usually removed from the amplitude.

In order to have a clearer picture of the resulting graph, we can attach
a line coming from @xmath to all vertices with an entering external
momentum, and a line going to @xmath from all vertices with outgoing
external momenta. Then we imagine we cut our Feynman graphs with lines
at constant time between any pair or time-ordered vertices @xmath . This
line defines the intermediate state @xmath . We define the energy of the
intermediate state @xmath as the sum @xmath of the energy flowing in all
cut lines (including those from @xmath or to @xmath ) from smaller to
larger times. Then, the denominator of the @xmath vertex is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the energy of the intermediate state before all
vertices, and the energy of the intermediate state after all vertices,
that are equal by momentum conservation. In fact, in general the
denominator arising from the @xmath vertex is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath is the total energy entering the last vertex, it must equal
the energy of the @xmath intermediate state, minus the energy of the
@xmath state

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

The denominator arising from the @xmath vertex is instead

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Arguing as before, @xmath , so

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

and so on. Indeed, if we take for example the Feynman diagram of Fig.
D.1 and we write the energy entering in each vertex, we have

-   @xmath

-   @xmath ;

-   @xmath ;

-   @xmath .

We can now formulate the rules for representing a given Feynman graph as
the sum of contributions coming from old-fashioned perturbation theory:

1.  For a given Feynman graph, consider all possible ordering of its
    vertices. Write the whole Feynman graph formula without the
    inclusion of the @xmath factors.

2.  For each line joining two vertices provide the factor

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (D.20)
      -- -------- -- --------

    where @xmath is the modulus of the three-momentum flowing in the
    graph. Assume that the energy @xmath flowing in propagators from
    smaller to larger time vertices is positive. This factor indeed
    multiplies the advanced/retarded propagator in eq. ( D.1 ).

3.  In all numerator factors of the Feynman graph, substitute the time
    component of the momenta flowing in the propagators with its
    on-shell value, with the sign determined according to the convention
    of the previous point. This is a consequence of eq. ( D.9 ).

4.  Assign 3-momenta as usual, with 3-momentum conservation at each
    vertex, and

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (D.21)
      -- -------- -- --------

    momentum integration.

5.  Add lines from @xmath to each vertex with entering external
    momentum.

6.  Add lines to @xmath to each vertex with exiting external momentum.

7.  Consider all intermediate states between any pair of nearby
    vertices. For each intermediate state provide a factor

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (D.22)
      -- -------- -- --------

    where @xmath is the total energy coming from @xmath (or going to
    @xmath ) and @xmath is the energy of the state @xmath .

Notice that each energy denominator carries a factor of @xmath , and so
does each vertex. Since the number of energy denominators is equal to
the number of vertices minus 1, one @xmath will survive in the product.

#### d.2 Landau singularities

Landau singularities [ 100 , 101 ] are naturally explained in the
old-fashioned perturbation theory. In general, we have a denominator of
the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

The so-called Landau anomalous threshold can arise when a sequel of
singular denominators appear at the same time. Let us assume we have a
single loop where the 3-momentum @xmath flows, and we have a set of
denominators

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Assuming that the term @xmath can be different for each denominator
amounts to the assumption that we may have external momenta entering at
any vertex. We now assume that at some value of @xmath all denominators
vanish at the same time. A necessary and sufficient condition for this
to be an avoidable singularity is that upon integrating in any component
of @xmath all @xmath pole are on the same side of the integration plane
near @xmath . We expand a energy denominator for @xmath .

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (D.25)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

In one dimension the sign of the imaginary part of the complex pole is
given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

so, if this sum has the same sign for all the @xmath , the singularity
is avoidable since it lies in the same part of the complex plane for all
the denominators. In 3 dimensions, if there is a direction in the
3-dimensional integration space (corresponding to the 3-momenta flowing
in the loop) such that, integrating along it, it leaves the
singularities of all the @xmath on the same side of the complex plane,
the integration contour can be deformed away from the singularity, so
that the denominators cannot contribute to the singularities. This is
achieved if there is at least one direction of @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

have the same sign for all @xmath . Thus, all vectors given by the sum
in ( D.27 ) have components of the same sign in at least one direction
and so no null linear combination

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

must exist for any sequence of @xmath . Conversely, if a null linear
combination exists, ( D.27 ) cannot be satisfied for any choice of
@xmath . This is the so-called Landau anomalous threshold singularity.

The physical interpretation of eq. ( D.28 ) is quite interesting. We
interpret the @xmath as the time between the first vertex on the left
and on the right of the @xmath intermediate state. The ratios in the sum
in ( D.28 ) are just the velocities of the particles, so, velocities
times time equal the displacements. So, the sum of all displacements of
internal particles must be zero. Since all internal particles are nearly
on-shell (i.e. their displacement can be as large as one likes), this
means that their displacements must be compatible with kinematic
constraints. This is better illustrated with the example of Fig. D.2 .

The condition for the singularity is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

for positive @xmath . This is the same as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

i.e. the displacement of particle 1 between its initial and final
vertex, plus the displacement of particle 3 between its initial and
final vertex is equal and opposite to the subsequent displacement of
particles 2 and 4. In other words, the momenta should be such that the
particles meet again after having come apart.

#### d.3 The specific case

We now consider our @xmath process. An example of NLO diagram is shown
in Fig. D.3 .

The corresponding contribution to the cross section is obtained by
setting either one of the 2, 3, 4 intermediate states on the energy
shell, and changing the sign of the @xmath in the denominators to the
right of the cut. We then define

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (D.31)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (D.32)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (D.33)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (D.34)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (D.35)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (D.36)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (D.37)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (D.38)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Notice that the top energy has an imaginary part, so that no @xmath is
needed in the denominators containing it. We never include the
corresponding cuts since the top width prevents this particle from being
on-shell. Thus, the only intermediate states contributing to cuts will
be the ones that do not include the top. According to the optical
theorem, the cross section is given by the imaginary part of a sum of
contributions like the one displayed in Fig. D.3 . Since we do not
include contributions in which the top is on-shell, in the integrand for
the cross section we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

When performing the 3-momentum integral for the loops not including the
@xmath line, one can come close to the singularity in the denominators.
However, if there is a direction in the 9-dimensional integration space
(corresponding to the three 3-momenta flowing in the loops) such that,
integrating along it, it leaves the singularities of @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath on the same side of the complex plane, the integration contour
can be deformed away from the singularities, so that the denominators
cannot contribute to mass singularities. The singularity for small
@xmath will thus be determined only by the remaining factor

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

that gives a quadratic sensitivity to the gluon mass @xmath .

As we have already discussed, the only cases when an appropriate
deformation of the contour does not exist correspond to Landau
singularities.

In order to explore the possible Landau configuration, one can start
with the graph of Fig. D.3 with the top lines shrunk to a point. In
fact, the top is always off-shell, and it cannot propagate over large
distances. The remaining configuration is shown in Fig. D.4 .

In order for the 2, 3 and 4 intermediate states to be on-shell at the
same time, either both the @xmath and the @xmath are collinear to the
gluon, or the gluon is soft. In the first case, also the two @xmath
quarks and the gluon are collinear, and are all travelling in the
opposite direction with respect to the @xmath . Thus, they cannot meet
at the same point on the last vertex to the right. On the other hand, if
the gluon is soft, the @xmath , the @xmath and the @xmath produced at
the primary vertex have momenta that sum to zero, so, again their
velocities will make them diverge. In both cases eq. ( D.28 ) cannot be
satisfied and these configurations lead to an avoidable singularity. One
can try to shrink other propagators to a point to see if two
intermediate states can be on-shell. Shrinking a @xmath and a @xmath
line to a point leads to configuration with two massless system (either
@xmath quarks of collinear @xmath systems) and a @xmath , that again
cannot meet at the same point. Shrinking the @xmath , the two @xmath or
the two @xmath lines to a point shrinks the whole graph to a point,
leading to nothing. Thus, no Landau configuration can exist, so one
infers that the @xmath sensitivity of the total cross section is at
least quadratic.

We can repeat the same reasoning including a factor @xmath in our
Feynman graph. The argument runs as before, and so even for the average
energy of the @xmath one expects that the sensitivity to the gluon mass
is at least quadratic. Notice that in order for this to work, one needs
that the @xmath factor is the same for all cuts, which is in fact the
case.

This argument fails if @xmath is sent to zero. Indeed in this case
@xmath and @xmath can be simultaneously singular but their @xmath have
opposite signs. Under these condition, the pinch is clearly unavoidable.

As a last point, we recall that the total cross section is free of
linear @xmath sensitivity also in the limit of zero width. This happens
because, in the zero-width limit, the cross section factorizes into a
production cross section times a decay width, and both of them are free
of linear sensitivity to @xmath if the mass is in a short-distance
scheme. The same, however, does not hold for the average @xmath . In
fact, the cancellation of mass singularities in @xmath cannot be proven
in the same fashioned adopted here, since logarithmic divergences are
also present in the wave-function renormalization, and cannot be treated
in a straightforward way in the old-fashioned perturbation theory.

### Appendix E The Powheg Box framework

The fixed order computations needed to evaluate the factors @xmath and
@xmath of eqs. ( 4.45 ) and ( 4.64 ) and the NLO generators described in
chap. 9 are implemented in the POWHEG BOX . The POWHEG BOX is a
framework that can be used to generate NLO events that can be interfaced
to modern parton shower (PS) according to the POWHEG method [ 98 , 102 ,
103 ] . The latest release, i.e. the POWHEG BOX RES [ 38 ] , has been
developed to handle processes containing coloured resonances that can
emit.

#### e.1 NLO computations in the Powheg Box (Res)

The POWHEG BOX can be used as an integrator for fixed order NLO
computations. The user has to provide, according to Ref. [ 103 ] :

-   the Born squared amplitude;

-   the finite part of the virtual squared amplitude;

-   the real squared amplitude;

-   the Born phase space (in the POWHEG BOX RES it can be generated
    automatically);

-   the flavour structure of the Born and of the real processes;

-   the Born colour- and spin-correlated squared amplitudes.

We describe the main features for the computations of a @xmath process
at NLO for a generic hadron-hadron collision. We introduce @xmath to be
the set of variables

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

being @xmath the fractions of the hadrons energies carried by the
incoming partons and @xmath the four-momenta of the outgoing particles.
We define the luminosity @xmath , where @xmath is the parton
distribution function relative to the first hadron and it describes the
probability of finding a parton @xmath carrying a fraction @xmath of the
hadron energy. If one of the incoming particle is a lepton, we replace
@xmath with @xmath . We also denote with @xmath the partonic Born cross
section, with @xmath the partonic UV-renormalized virtual cross section
and with @xmath the partonic real cross section. The total NLO cross
section is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where the @xmath terms are introduced by the renormalization of @xmath
and they ensure the cancellation of the initial-state collinear
singularities contained in @xmath . If the incoming particle @xmath is a
lepton, @xmath . For ease of notation, we define

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The Kinoshita-Lee-Nauenberg (KLN) [ 104 , 105 ] theorem guarantees us
that the infrared divergences contained in @xmath and in @xmath cancel,
yielding to a finite prediction for @xmath .

In order to handle numerically eq. ( E.1 ), a counterterm @xmath is
introduced, that approaches the real cross section in the soft and
collinear limit, such as @xmath is finite. The phase space @xmath can be
rewritten as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the phase space of the underlying Born configuration and
@xmath is a set of 3 kinematic variables that describe the phase space
of the extra parton emitted in the @xmath -body configuration. The total
cross section now takes the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath            
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where the expression in the squared brackets is finite in @xmath
dimensions and thus can be evaluated numerically.

With this subtraction formalism, we can compute predictions for any
generic infrared-safe observable @xmath , i.e. such that @xmath when one
parton becomes soft or collinear to another one. More explicitly, we
have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath            
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

In the POWHEG BOX framework, the counterterms @xmath introduced eq. (
E.1 ) is evaluated using the Frixione-Kunszt-Signer (FKS) subtraction [
78 ] method. The real cross section is written as a sum of terms, each
of them containing at most one collinear and one soft singularity
associated with one parton (the FKS parton). We label with @xmath the
region of the phase space where the parton @xmath becomes soft or
collinear to an incoming parton, @xmath the region where @xmath and
@xmath are collinear. We introduce non-negative functions @xmath and
@xmath , that in the POWHEG BOX are defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

being @xmath and @xmath the energies and the four-momenta of the parton
@xmath , @xmath the angle between the parton @xmath and the beams axis,
everything computed in the partonic rest frame. This enables us to
introduce the @xmath functions defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

The real cross section @xmath is then split into a sum of contributions
associated to the several singular regions:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

This decomposition offers us the possibility to choose a different
parametrization for the @xmath -body phase space for each contribution
@xmath .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

A fully detailed description of this method can be found in Ref. [ 102 ]
. What we want to underline is that for each region @xmath , we have a
subtraction term @xmath , that approaches @xmath when @xmath is
singular. The subtraction terms @xmath are automatically built by POWHEG
BOX from the Born squared amplitude ¹ ¹ 1 More precisely, also the spin-
and colour-correlated squared amplitudes are necessary. For further
details, see [ 103 ] .

  -- -- -- --------
           (E.13)
  -- -- -- --------

and @xmath is a function that can be easily integrated analytically in
@xmath dimensions over the radiation phase space. The underlying Born
phase space @xmath associated with @xmath is reconstructed using a
mapping @xmath . When the parton @xmath is soft or collinear to the
parton @xmath , @xmath should fulfill the following property:

  -- -- -- --------
           (E.14)
  -- -- -- --------

where the incoming partons energy-fraction differs in case of an
initial-state emission. The inverse mapping @xmath is used to generate
the real emission phase space from @xmath and the three radiation
variables.

From eq. ( E.13 ) we see that the subtraction term is proportional to
the Born and thus it will contains the denominators like @xmath , being
@xmath and @xmath the pole mass and the decay width of resonance and
@xmath its virtuality obtained from the momenta of its decay products as
computed in the @xmath -body kinematic, while @xmath contains the same
denominators but evaluated using the full @xmath -body kinematic. In the
collinear limit, the momenta of the underlying Born configurations are
assigned by merging the two collinear partons and then applying some
reshuffling to ensure that all the external particles are on their mass
shell. The procedure described in Sec. 5 of Ref. [ 102 ] does not
preserve @xmath and the resonance momentum will differ of an amount of
order @xmath , being @xmath the energy of the resonance. As it is shown
in Ref. [ 38 ] , the cancellation of the divergences contained in @xmath
and in @xmath takes place only if @xmath . We clearly see that for small
decay width the convergence is problematic, and it is completely spoiled
in the zero-width limit.

To this purpose, a new version of the POWHEG BOX , namely the POWHEG BOX
RES [ 38 ] , has been built. Given a flavour structure all the possible
intermediate resonances histories are assigned. The mapping between the
real phase space and the underlying Born configuration preserves the
virtuality of the assigned intermediate resonances.

A similar procedure, applied to the dipole subtraction formalism, is
described in Ref. [ 79 ] .

#### e.2 NLO events with the POWHEG method

The POWHEG method, proposed for the first time in Ref. [ 98 ] , enables
to consistently match NLO computations with PS algorithms.

In order to preserve the NLO accuracy of inclusive observables, the
events generated according to the POWHEG method have weight

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have introduced

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Sudakov form factor, that describes the non-emission probability, is
defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath and the hardness of the emission @xmath is defined to be the
transverse momentum of the emitted parton with respect to the emitter.
Thus, the differential cross section for the first emission becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

The event generated by POWHEG BOX using eq. ( E.19 ) is then completed
by a standard shower MC program, like Pythia or Herwig . The core of a
shower MC is represented by the PS that generates the subsequent
emissions in the collinear limit. In order not to spoil the NLO accuracy
of the result, a veto algorithm is implemented in such a way that all
the emissions with a transverse momentum larger that the POWHEG one are
discarded. Further details are given in appendix E.3 . The SMC provides
also a model for the underlying event, that is generally described in
terms of multiple-parton interactions (MPI), and for the hadronization.
The POWHEG BOX framework offers the possibility to separate the real
contribution @xmath in two pieces, one containing all the infrared
singularities and one finite for @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the parameter @xmath is called hdamp in the POWHEG jargon. Only
@xmath is used in the computation of eq. ( E.19 ), while the @xmath
contribution, that corresponds to high transverse momentum radiation, is
evaluated separately and it is employed to generate Born-like events
called remnants . It is also possible to have a process that admits real
corrections that are not associated with any singular region. Those
contributions are handled separately in an analogous way to the remnants
. The POWHEG formula thus becomes

  -- -------- -------- -- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath               (E.22)
                          @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -- -------- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are evaluated only using @xmath and @xmath
collects the either the remnants or the finite real processes.

In the standard POWHEG formalism, radiation is generated using the
Sudakov form factor defined in eq. E.17 and it contains the ratio @xmath
. If the resonance virtualities are not the same when building the
underlying Born phase space, large ratios that badly violate the
collinear approximation can arise. The improved version of the FKS
method implemented in POWHEG BOX RES overcomes this problem.

Furthermore, the PS that will complete the event should be instructed to
preserve the mass of the resonances. In the POWHEG BOX RES framework
this is achieved by providing a resonance assignment to radiation.

To each Born configuration a resonance structure @xmath is assigned. The
only contribution @xmath we consider are those where the collinear
partons both arises from the same resonance (the production process is
considered as a resonance). We label with @xmath all the resonances
contained in @xmath and we denote by @xmath a singular contribution
where an emission is originated from the decay products of @xmath . The
improved resonance-aware POWHEG formalism allow us to write

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (E.23)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Radiation is now generated according to the POWHEG Sudakov form factor
both for the production and for all resonance decays that involve
coloured partons. This feature also offers the opportunity to modify the
standard POWHEG single-radiation approach: instead of keeping only
hardest radiation from one of all possible origins, the POWHEG BOX RES
can generate simultaneously the hardest radiation in production and in
each resonance decay. The Les Houches (LH) events can thus contain more
radiated partons, one for production and one for each resonance.

Multiple-radiation events have to be completed by a shower MC program,
that has to generate radiation from each origin without exceeding the
hardness of the corresponding POWHEG one, thus requiring an interface
that goes beyond the simple Les Houches standard [ 106 ] . The two most
widely used PS programs, Pythia and Herwig , already implement a veto
algorithm for radiation in production in order to guarantee that the
POWHEG emission is the hardest, while radiation in decay is left, by
default, unrestricted.

#### e.3 NLO+PS matching

We briefly describe now how the NLO events generated with POWHEG BOX (
RES) can be completed by the shower MC programs Pythia8.2 or Herwig7.1 .

##### e.3.1 Interface to shower generators

According to the POWHEG method, the event needs to be completed by a
standard shower MC program. The subsequent emissions included by the PS
must be softer than the POWHEG generated one. In the standard Les
Houches Interface for User Processes (LHIUP) [ 106 ] , each generated
event has a hardness parameter associated with it, called scalup . The
POWHEG BOX sets this parameter is set equal to the relative transverse
momentum of the generated radiation @xmath . By default, radiation in
decay is left unrestricted and the starting scale is set to be of the
order of the resonance virtuality. The PS preserves the virtuality of
the resonance, like the POWHEG BOX RES does when generating the real
emission, if its decay products have the resonance as mother particle in
the LH event record.

A generic method for interfacing POWHEG processes that include radiation
in decaying resonances with PS generators was introduced in Refs. [ 90 ]
and [ 91 ] : radiation from the top decay products is left unrestricted
and when the event is completed. A veto is applied a posteriori : if any
radiation in the decaying resonance shower is found to be harder than
the POWHEG generated one, the event is showered again.

The practical implementation of the veto procedure depends on whether we
are using a dipole, as in Pythia8.2 , or an angular-ordered shower, as
in Herwig7.1 . In the following we describe the implementation of our
veto procedures. Conversely to the method introduced in Ref. [ 90 ] , we
do not need the whole event to be completed before applying the veto,
thus saving a lot of computational time.

##### e.3.2 Pythia8.2

The Pythia8.2 [ 82 ] code implements a @xmath ordered shower. Thus, the
matching with POWHEG BOX is natural because it is enough to require that
the starting scale of the shower evolution is scalup , i.e. the
transverse momentum of the POWHEG emission coming from the production
process.

When multiple emissions are concerned, the user can define a starting
scale for each resonance, implementing the virtual functions
canSetResonanceScale and scaleResonance . In this way also emissions
from a resonance can have an upper limit defined by the corresponding
POWHEG emission, like it is done by default for radiation from the
production process. This solution was adopted for example in Ref. [ 91 ]
.

However, the @xmath definitions employed by Pythia and by the POWHEG BOX
are slightly different. To overcome this issue, the Pythia8.2 program
offers the possibility to use the PowhegHooks class. Each time an
emission takes place, its transverse momentum is re-computed with the
POWHEG BOX definition: if it is higher than scalup , the emission is
discarded.

We have implemented a new class, PowhegHooksBB4L , that can be used for
the case of @xmath production and decay. We rewrote the FSREmission
method to guarantee that when an emission is originated from the
production process, the PowhegHooks machinery can be employed ² ² 2 We
have checked that the PowhegHooks veto in production does not alter
significantly the results presented in this work, thus we have not
adopted it. , otherwise, when it comes from the @xmath (or the @xmath )
the momenta of the emitter and of the emitted particles @xmath and
@xmath are boosted in the top frame and the transverse momentum of the
radiation is computed using

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

if the emitter is a @xmath (or @xmath ) heavy quark, using

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

otherwise. If it is harder than the corresponding POWHEG one, this
emission is discarded. The FSREmission veto algorithm represents our
default choice for handling radiation in decay.

##### e.3.3 Herwig7.1

The Herwig7.1 package [ 83 , 84 ] implements an angular ordered PS. In
the collinear limit, the variable @xmath that parametrizes the hardness
of the emission is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath the energy of the emitter before the emission and @xmath the
angle between the two emitted particles. A brief sketch of the evolution
of an angular ordered PS is represented graphically in Fig. E.1 . The
initial stages are characterized by large-angle soft radiation (green),
while the hardest emission, i.e. the one with largest @xmath (red), may
appear later.

The procedure on how POWHEG-style NLO emissions can be matched with an
angular ordered shower is discussed in detail in Ref. [ 98 ] . Here we
give only a brief summary. The hardest emission originated from a parton
@xmath satisfies the following properties:

-   it can be found by following the hardest line each time a branching
    takes place;

-   if @xmath is a gluon, the probability that the hardest emission
    takes place after a @xmath can be neglected, since this splitting is
    not soft-singular;

-   if @xmath is a quark, following the hardest line coincides with
    following the quark line since the probability that a gluon carries
    the main part of the energy after a @xmath splitting is power
    suppressed.

When matching an event generated with POWHEG BOX with an angular ordered
PS, the scale @xmath of the POWHEG emission should be computed. The two
partons corresponding to the POWHEG emission should be merged and an
angular ordered PS associated with the paired parton, starting from
@xmath , the maximum allowed scale, down to @xmath , should be
implemented. All the emissions with a transverse momentum larger than
scalup , i.e. the @xmath of the POWHEG emission, must be vetoed. This
shower is called truncated-vetoed shower and corresponds to the green
contribution portrayed in Fig E.1 . When the scale @xmath is reached,
all the subsequent vetoed showers (blue emissions in Fig. E.1 ) are
implemented. Since truncated-vetoed showers are known to give rise only
to a little contribution ³ ³ 3 In the POWHEG simulations where truncated
showers have been implemented and studied [ 107 , 108 , 109 , 110 , 111
] their effect was found to be basically negligible. , Herwig7.1
neglects them by default, simply requiring that all the emissions have a
transverse momentum smaller than scalup .

However, by doing so, all the large angle emissions with a scale larger
than @xmath would be missing. The veto technique introduced in Ref. [ 99
] and activated in Herwig7.1 with the settings

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (E.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

performs a task equivalent to the implementation of truncated showers.
For example if a @xmath splitting is the POWHEG hardest emission, the
initial angle for radiation from the gluon is taken as the maximum angle
between the gluon and its two colour partners, i.e. the incoming and the
outgoing quark @xmath . This leads to unrestricted radiation from the
gluon. However, the colour factor @xmath associated with this radiation
is reduced by a factor of two if the scale of the emission @xmath is
larger than the POWHEG one @xmath , while it is restored to @xmath for
smaller angles. Since @xmath in the large @xmath limit, we see that this
is equivalent to the inclusion of a truncated-vetoed shower from the
incoming @xmath quark down to a scale @xmath . If not specified, in this
work the settings of eq. ( E.27 ) have not been used.

The Herwig7.1 code offers two alternative solutions for the
implementation of a veto algorithm that can act on the emissions coming
from resonances. The two methods are equivalent at the
leading-logarithmic accuracy level, i.e. at all orders in powers of
@xmath .

It is possible to implement the virtual function vetoTimeLike belonging
to the ShowerVeto class. We have built the BB4LShowerVeto class that
inherits the vetoTimeLike method from ShowerVeto . Each time an emission
that has a @xmath or a @xmath quark as shower progenitor takes place, it
is rejected if its transverse momentum is larger than the one of the
corresponding POWHEG emission. This implementation of the veto is the
analogous of the default behaviour employed to treat radiation from the
production process. The drawback of this method is that we are unable to
compute the @xmath of the emission we are inspecting using eqs. ( E.24 )
and ( E.25 ), since the momenta of the emitted particles have not been
generated yet, so we must rely on the Herwig7.1 definition of transverse
momentum. However, the two definitions are the same at the
leading-logarithmic accuracy level.

An alternative is represented by the virtual function vetoShower , which
belongs to the FullShowerVeto class. As the name of the class suggests,
this veto is applied at the end of the full showering phase, before the
hadronization takes place. In our implementation of the
BB4LFullShowerVeto class, the hardest emissions of the showers initiated
by the coloured (anti-)top decay products, i.e. the (anti-)bottom and
eventually a gluon, is searched. If we encounter an emission whose
transverse momentum is larger than the corresponding POWHEG one, the
event is showered again. This method enables us to use the POWHEG @xmath
definition, since we have access to the momenta of the particles.
However, since some momentum reshuffling must be applied to keep the
external particles on their mass-shell after a @xmath branching, the
transverse momentum of the intermediate emissions turns out to be
computed with off-shell partons. This has an impact only beyond the
leading-logarithmic accuracy level.

If not specified, we adopted BB4LShowerVeto to perform the veto.

### Appendix F The treatment of remnants for multiple-emission processes

As we have seen in Appendix E.2 , in POWHEG it is possible to separate
the real cross section, in a given singular region @xmath , into two
contributions @xmath and @xmath , where @xmath does not contain any
singularities, while @xmath is singular. Only @xmath is exponentiated in
the Sudakov form factor and used for the computation of @xmath , while
the leftover @xmath , dubbed the remnant contribution, is finite upon
phase space integration [ 98 ] .

In all our three NLO generators it is possible to achieve this
separation for initial-state radiation (ISR) emissions by setting the
parameter hdamp ¹ ¹ 1 We used an hdamp value equal to the input
top-quark mass, i.e. the qmass parameter for the @xmath generator, tmass
for @xmath and @xmath . in the powheg.input file. Denoting with @xmath
the production region, eq. ( E.21 ) tells us that @xmath and @xmath are
defined as

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (F.1)
     @xmath   @xmath      (F.2)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the transverse momentum of the emitted parton relative
to the beam axis. The scalup variable contained in the Les Houches
event, that is used by the parton shower program to veto emissions
harder than the POWHEG one, is set equal to @xmath .

Since remnant events are non-singular, the associated radiation has
transverse momenta of the order of the partonic center-of-mass energy.
We can thus define scalup as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (F.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

We have checked that, by using as scalup the default POWHEG scale
(i.e. the transverse momentum of the radiated parton) the @xmath and the
@xmath values are very close to the ones we have presented in this
paper. This is consistent with the expectation that these observables
should be relatively insensitive to radiation in production, that in our
case is always treated as ISR. The same holds for the leptonic
observable @xmath . For the remaining ones, a higher sensitivity to ISR
effects is not excluded, and in fact the differences of the first Mellin
moments reported in Tab. 14.1 with the corresponding ones obtained with
the default scalup value, for the @xmath generator showered with
Pythia8.2 , are given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (F.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

In comparison with Tab. 14.1 , we see that these variations are of the
same order or smaller than those arising from scale and PDF
uncertainties.

In the @xmath code, when ISR remnants are generated, no radiation in
decay is produced. ² ² 2 This behaviour may be changed in the future.
Thus, in this case, radiation off the resonances is fully handled by the
parton shower, without the use of a veto algorithm to limit the @xmath
of the radiated partons.

The @xmath generator does instead implement radiation in decay also for
remnants, and thus in this case vetoing is performed as for the standard
events.

The absence of emissions from the @xmath and @xmath resonances in
remnant events for the @xmath generator, in contrast with the @xmath
one, is probably the reason why the former generator displays a slightly
larger sensitivity to matrix-element corrections (see Tabs. 12.3 , 13.1
and 14.3 ).

To summarize:

-   @xmath : Emissions in decay are never vetoed. For remnant events the
    scalup value used to limit radiation in production is set to @xmath
    .

-   @xmath : Emissions in decay are always vetoed. For remnant events
    the scalup value is set to @xmath .

-   @xmath : Emissions in decay are always vetoed except if the event is
    a remnant, in which case they are never vetoed. For remnant events
    the scalup value is set to @xmath .

#### f.1 Sensitivity of the results on hdamp

For our top-mass studied we have choosen

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (F.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

being the top mass @xmath a scale of our hard process. However, since we
focus on top-pair production, also

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (F.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

seems an equally natural choice. We thus investigate the sensitivity of
our result on the value of hdamp . Sice this parameter affects only the
treatment of ISR, we restricted our comparison to the @xmath generator,
on the ground that all the generators under analysis describe ISR with
the same accuracy. We thus generated a sample of @xmath events with the
setting in eq. ( F.6 ). The impact of the two choices in eqs. ( F.5 ,
F.6 ) is shown in Tab. F.1 .

We notice that all the observables suggest a @xmath value larger for the
@xmath case ( @xmath ), apart from the energy of the @xmath -jet and the
mass of the lepton pair where, however, the standard deviation has the
same size of the difference. The discrepancy between the two
alternatives is in general very small, in particular if we consider the
reconstructed mass, where the two predictions differ by 3-4 MeV. The
energy of the lepton pair corresponds to a mass shift of @xmath GeV, but
with an error of @xmath GeV. Given our statistical error, the only
observable that shows a non-negligible difference is the transverse
momentum of the lepton pair, where we find a @xmath shift of @xmath GeV.
In any case, the variations produced by the different choices of hdamp
are smaller than those induced by scale and PDF variations (see Tab.
14.1 ).
