# 1 Introduction

The purpose of this article is to extend my work on smooth Fréchet
globalizations of Harish-Chandra modules to include parameters. In [ BK
] it is asserted that their work carries that goal out. This may be so,
but non-linear groups do not appear in [ BK ] (e.g. the metaplectic
group). In this paper a different tactic is taken to this problem. We
approach it from the perspective of the excellent thesis of Vincent van
der Noort who studies the question: Given an analytic family of
Harish-Chandra modules, how does the corresponding family of CW
completions depend on the parameter? The CW completion was first
realized in terms of imbedding into parabolically induced
representations. This paper considers another class of Harish-Chandra
modules that were first studied in a special case in [ HOW ] . For lack
of a name they were called J–modules. These Harish-Chandra modules are
constructed using a free subalgebra of the center of the enveloping
algebra generated by the split rank number of independent elements that
was first studied in [ HOW ] . This algebra is denoted @xmath in this
paper. In the category of Harish-Chandra modules with @xmath action by a
fixed character the J–modules in the category are projective.
Furthermore, every Harish-Chandra module has a resolution by J–modules.
Much of the paper, involves analyzing the CW globalizations of families
of J–modules using a key results of van der Noort, which also play an
important role in other aspects of the paper. For the sake of
completeness a complete proof of these results is included.

In van der Noort’s thesis the parametrization studied were holomorphic
and results were proved about holomorphic dependence of CW
globalizations. He essentially solved the problem in the case when the
parameter space is one complex dimension modulo the possible necessity
to go to a branched covering. In this paper I prove that if the
dependence of the Harish-Chandra modules in the parameters is real
analytic then the dependence of the CW completion is continuous
(Corollary 41 ).

The final two sections of the paper give a proof of the meromorphic
continuation of @xmath Eisenstein series using the continuation of
@xmath –finite Eisenstein series in Langlands [ L2 ] , Chapter 7. This
is done by reducing the problem to a general result on the holomorphic
dependence of the extensions of what we call linear functionals of
locally uniform moderate growth on families of parabolically induced
Harish-Chandra modules. Except for the use of Van der Noort’s result and
some notation this part of the paper (sections 11 and 12) can be read
independently of the rest of the paper.

## 2 The subalgebra D of @xmath

Let @xmath be a real reductive group of inner type. That is, if @xmath ,
@xmath then @xmath is contained in the identity component of @xmath Let
@xmath be a maximal compact subgroup of @xmath and let @xmath denote the
corresponding Cartan involution of @xmath (and of @xmath ). on Set
@xmath and @xmath let @xmath be the projection of @xmath onto @xmath
corresponding to @xmath . Fix a symmetric @xmath –invariant bilinear
form, @xmath , on @xmath such that @xmath is negative definite and
@xmath is positive definite Extend @xmath to a homomorphism of @xmath
onto @xmath . Then @xmath is the projection corresponding to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In [ HOW ] we found homogeneous elements @xmath of @xmath with @xmath
with @xmath and orthonormal basis of @xmath with respect @xmath
Satisfying the following properties

1. @xmath are algebraically independent.

2. There exists a finite dimensional homogeneous subspace @xmath of
@xmath such that the map @xmath given by multiplication is an
isomorphism.

If @xmath contains no simple ideals of type E one can take @xmath If
@xmath is split over @xmath then @xmath .

Let @xmath denote the space of harmonic elements of @xmath , that is,
the orthogonal complement to the ideal @xmath in @xmath relative to the
Hermitian extension of inner product @xmath . Then the Kostant-Rallis
theorem ( [ KR ] ) implies that the map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

given by multiplication is a linear bijection. This and 2. easily imply

###### Lemma 1

The map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

given by multiplication is a linear bijection.

Let @xmath be a maximal abelian subspace of @xmath and let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be such that @xmath . If @xmath then set @xmath . Set @xmath
and @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath is the orthogonal complement to @xmath in @xmath relative to
@xmath . Let @xmath be the projection of @xmath onto @xmath
corresponding to this decomposition. Then the Chevalley restriction
theorem implies that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is an isomorphism of algebras. Also, as above, if @xmath is the
orthogonal complement to @xmath in @xmath . Then the map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

given by multiplication is a linear bijection. Putting these
observations together the map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

given by multiplication is a linear bijection. We also note that the map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a linear bijection. This in turn implies

###### Lemma 2

The map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

given by multiplication is a linear bijection.

Let @xmath denote the symmetrization map from @xmath to @xmath then
@xmath is a linear bijection and @xmath . Let @xmath denote the center
of @xmath . Set @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that if @xmath and if @xmath is the standard filtration of @xmath
then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The above and standard arguments ( [ HOW ] Theorem 2.5 and Lemma 5.2)
imply

###### Theorem 3

Let the notation be as above. Then

1. The map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a linear bijection.

2. The map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a linear bijection.

## 3 A class of admissible finitely generated @xmath–modules

Retain the notation in the preceding section. Note that Theorem 3
implies that the subalgebra @xmath of @xmath is isomorphic with the
tensor product algebra @xmath and that @xmath is free as a right @xmath
under multiplication. If @xmath is a @xmath –module then form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Denote by @xmath the Harish–Chandra category of admissible finitely
generated @xmath –modules. Let @xmath be a finite dimensional continuous
@xmath –module that is also a @xmath –module and the actions commute
then @xmath acts on @xmath as follows:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then as a @xmath –module

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath acting trivially on @xmath . Note that @xmath since the
multiplicities of @xmath –types in @xmath are finite and @xmath is
clearly finitely generated as a @xmath –module. Let @xmath be the
category of finite dimensional @xmath –modules with @xmath acting
continuously and the action of @xmath and @xmath commute.

###### Lemma 4

@xmath defines an exact faithful functor from the category @xmath to
@xmath .

Proof. This follows since @xmath is free as a module for @xmath under
right multiplication.

As usual, denote the set of equivalence classes of irreducible, finite
dimensional, continuous representations of @xmath by @xmath . If @xmath
set @xmath equal to the sum of all irreducible @xmath
–subrepresentations of @xmath in the class of @xmath . Then @xmath is
invariant under the action of @xmath hence under the action of @xmath .

If @xmath there is a finite subset @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Set @xmath and one has the canonical @xmath –module surjection @xmath
given by @xmath A submodule of an element of @xmath is in @xmath so

###### Proposition 5

If @xmath then there exists a sequence of elements @xmath and an exact
sequence in @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Notice that this exact sequence us a free resolution of @xmath as a
@xmath –module.

Let @xmath be an algebra homomorphism. Let @xmath be the full
subcategory of @xmath consisting of modules @xmath such that if @xmath
then it acts by @xmath . The next result is an aside that will not be
used in the rest of this paper and is a simple consequence of the
definition of projective object.

###### Lemma 6

Let @xmath be a finite dimensional @xmath –module and let @xmath act on
@xmath by @xmath yielding an object @xmath . Then @xmath is projective
in @xmath .

## 4 The objects in @xmath

If @xmath then @xmath has an isotypic decomposition @xmath . Only a
finite number of the @xmath . If @xmath then @xmath for all @xmath . If
@xmath is an algebra homomorphism then we set @xmath for some @xmath
Then setting @xmath equal to the set of all algebra homomorphisms of
@xmath to @xmath we have the decomposition

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Fix a @xmath –module @xmath . Then @xmath is isomorphic with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath acting on @xmath and @xmath acting on @xmath .

If @xmath is an irreducible object in @xmath then Schur’s lemma implies
that @xmath acts by a single homomorphism to @xmath and @xmath is
irreducible as a @xmath –module. Set @xmath equal to the module with
@xmath acting by @xmath and @xmath acting by an element of @xmath .

We next analyze the homomorphisms @xmath . Let @xmath be such a
homomorphism then @xmath . Thus one simple parametrization is by @xmath
. We use the notation @xmath for the homomorphism such that @xmath . An
alternate parametrization is through the Harish-Chandra homomorphism.
Recall the exact sequence (c.f. [ RRG ] , Theorem 3.6.6)

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is standard that the linear map @xmath is a linear bijection. This
and the definition of @xmath imply that @xmath is finitely generated as
a @xmath –module.  This in turn implies that @xmath is finitely
generated as a @xmath –module. Thus we have a morphism @xmath such that
@xmath is the homomorphism @xmath . Hence @xmath for @xmath . Set @xmath
.

###### Definition 7

Let @xmath be a complex or real analytic manifold. An analytic family in
@xmath based on @xmath is a pair @xmath of a a finite dimensional
continuous @xmath –module, @xmath , and a @xmath such that @xmath is a
representation of @xmath on @xmath and @xmath is analytic for all @xmath
.

## 5 Analytic families of @xmath–modules

Throughout this section analytic will mean complex analytic in the
context of a complex analytic manifold and real analytic in the contest
of a real analytic manifold. Theorem 3 implies

###### Corollary 8

Let @xmath then

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

as an @xmath -module with @xmath and @xmath acting trivially on @xmath
and @xmath acting trivially on @xmath .

Let @xmath be an analytic family of objects in @xmath based on @xmath .
Let @xmath be the object in @xmath with @xmath acting by its action on
@xmath and @xmath action by @xmath . @xmath

###### Theorem 9

Notation as above. Let @xmath be the action of @xmath on

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

under the identification

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath then the map @xmath is an analytic map.

Proof. Theorem 3 implies that if @xmath is a basis of @xmath , @xmath is
a basis of @xmath and @xmath is a basis for @xmath then if @xmath are
multi-indices of size @xmath respectively then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a basis of @xmath . Here, as usual, @xmath , … This implies that if
@xmath then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This implies that if we take a basis @xmath of @xmath then the elements
@xmath form a basis of @xmath . Thus if @xmath then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The theorem follows from this formula.

If @xmath is a complex manifold or a real analytic manifold and @xmath
is a vector space over @xmath then a map @xmath is said to be
holomorphic, real analytic or continuous if for each @xmath there exists
a open neighborhood, @xmath ,  of @xmath such that if @xmath then @xmath
and @xmath is holomorphic,real analytic or continuous respectively.

###### Definition 10

Let @xmath be a complex or real analytic manifold. Then an
holomorphic,analytic or continuous family of admissible @xmath –modules
based on @xmath is a pair, @xmath , of an admissible @xmath –module,
@xmath , and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that @xmath is holomorphic (resp. analytic, resp. continuous) for
all @xmath , @xmath and if we set @xmath for @xmath then @xmath is an
admissible finitely @xmath –module. It will be called a family of
objects in @xmath if each @xmath is finitely generated.

###### Theorem 11

Let @xmath be an analytic or complex manifold. Let @xmath be an family
of objects in @xmath based on @xmath and define @xmath to be the module
with action @xmath . Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath act by the tensor product action with its action on @xmath
trivial) and let @xmath be given by @xmath with @xmath the action of
@xmath on @xmath . If @xmath then @xmath is an analytic family of
objects in @xmath based on @xmath .

Proof. We argue as in the proof of Theorem 9 . Let @xmath be a basis of
@xmath such that for each @xmath there exists @xmath such that @xmath ,
let @xmath be a basis of @xmath , let @xmath be a basis of @xmath and
let @xmath be a basis of @xmath . Then if @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The theorem follows.

Next we define another type of analytic family. Let @xmath and @xmath be
the connected subgroups of @xmath with @xmath and @xmath . Let @xmath be
the centralizer of @xmath in @xmath . Set @xmath then @xmath is a
minimal parabolic subgroup of @xmath .

###### Definition 12

An analytic family of finite dimensional @xmath –modules based on the
manifold (real or complex analytic) @xmath is a pair @xmath with @xmath
a finite dimensional continuous @xmath –module and a real analytic map
@xmath such that @xmath is holomorphic and @xmath is a representation of
@xmath .

Let @xmath be a continuous representation of @xmath . Set @xmath equal
to the space of all smooth @xmath satisfying @xmath . Define and action
@xmath of @xmath on @xmath as follows: if @xmath then extend @xmath to
@xmath by @xmath , then, since @xmath and @xmath , @xmath is @xmath on
@xmath set @xmath . Also set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath and @xmath . Let @xmath be the space of all right @xmath
finite elements of @xmath

Put and @xmath –invariant inner product, @xmath on @xmath . If @xmath
then set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath normalized invariant measure on @xmath . The following is
standard.

###### Proposition 13

Let @xmath be an analytic family of finite dimensional representations
of @xmath based on the complex or real analytic manifold @xmath . Set
@xmath for @xmath . If @xmath is the common value of @xmath , then
@xmath is an analytic family of objects in @xmath based on @xmath .

Proof. It is standard that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is real analytic and holomorphic in @xmath for @xmath .

###### Definition 14

If @xmath and @xmath are analytic families of objects in @xmath based on
the manifold @xmath then a homomorphism of the analytic (resp.
continuous) family @xmath to @xmath is a map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that

1. @xmath is an analytic map of @xmath to @xmath for all @xmath

2. @xmath with @xmath .

If @xmath the space @xmath has a natural structure of an @xmath module
and an @xmath module. Since @xmath and @xmath is a simply connected Lie
group @xmath has a natural structure of a finite dimensional continuous
@xmath –module with action @xmath . Let @xmath denote the natural
surjection

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath , @xmath , define @xmath , then @xmath and it is easily seen
that @xmath . Combining the above results we have

###### Theorem 15

Let @xmath be an analytic (resp. continuous) family in @xmath based on
the manifold @xmath . Let @xmath be the analytic family (as in Theorem
11 ) corresponding to @xmath . Then recalling that @xmath define @xmath
Then @xmath defines a homomorphism of the analytic family @xmath to
@xmath with @xmath and @xmath is defined as in Theorem 9 .

We will use the notation @xmath for the analytic family associated with
@xmath .

## 6 Some results of Vincent van der Noort

Throughout this section @xmath will denote a connected real or complex
analytic manifold. We will use the terminology analytic to mean complex
analytic or real analytic depending on the context.

We continue the notation of the previous sections. In particular @xmath
is a real reductive group of inner type.

We denote (as is usual) the standard filtration of @xmath , by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be an admissible @xmath module. We note that if @xmath is a
finite dimensional @xmath –invariant subspace of @xmath then there
exists a finite subset @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath we denote by @xmath the span of @xmath in @xmath .

The purpose of this section is to prove a theorem of van der Noort which
first appeared in his thesis [ VdN ] . Our argument follows his original
line with a few simplifications. We include the details only because he
is not expected to publish it. In his thesis he emphasized the
holomorphic case.

Fix a maximal torus, @xmath , of @xmath then @xmath is a Cartan
subalgebra of @xmath . Set @xmath equal to its complexification. We
parametrize the homomorphisms of @xmath to @xmath by @xmath for @xmath
using the Harish–Chandra parametrization. Endow @xmath with the discrete
topology. Then we note that if @xmath is a compact subset of @xmath then
there exist a finite number of elements @xmath and compact subsets ,
@xmath , of @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath and @xmath then set @xmath ( @xmath ) @xmath @xmath ), @xmath
@xmath , @xmath is taken to be a representative of the class @xmath .
@xmath is @xmath which equals as a @xmath –module @xmath @xmath . If
@xmath set @xmath . @xmath is the corresponding Kunze-Stein intertwining
operator (c.f. [ W1 ] , 8.10.18. p.241).

###### Proposition 16

Let @xmath and let @xmath be open with compact closure. Then there
exists @xmath such that @xmath for all @xmath .

The proof of this result will use the following lemma.

###### Lemma 17

If @xmath then there exists an open neighborhood of @xmath , @xmath ,
and a finite subset @xmath of @xmath such that @xmath for all @xmath .

Proof. If @xmath fix @xmath . If @xmath for all @xmath and if @xmath and
@xmath then @xmath (c.f. [ RRG ] , Theorem 5.4.1 (1)). Fix such a @xmath
(which always exists since the operator @xmath ), take @xmath and @xmath
an open neighborhood of @xmath such that @xmath for @xmath . Let @xmath
be arbitrary. There exists a positive integer, @xmath , such that @xmath
for all @xmath and such that @xmath is the highest weight of a finite
dimensional spherical representation, @xmath of @xmath relative to
@xmath . The lowest weight of @xmath relative to @xmath is @xmath and
@xmath acts trivially on that weight space thus @xmath has @xmath as a
quotient representation (see [ W1 ] ,8.5.14,15). Take @xmath to be the
set of @xmath –types that occur in both @xmath and @xmath and @xmath .

We now prove the proposition. By the lemma above for each @xmath there
exists @xmath and @xmath as in the statement of the lemma. The @xmath
form an open covering of @xmath which is assumed to be compact. Thus
there exist a finite number @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Take @xmath This proves the proposition.

###### Lemma 18

Let @xmath denote the infinitesimal character of @xmath . If @xmath is a
compact subset of @xmath then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is compact.

Proof. Fix a system of positive roots for @xmath ( @xmath the identity
component of @xmath ). If @xmath is the highest weight of @xmath
relative to this system of positive roots and if @xmath is the half sum
of these positive roots then @xmath with @xmath . This implies the
lemma.

###### Lemma 19

Let @xmath be an analytic family of admissible @xmath modules based on
@xmath . Assume that @xmath is such that @xmath is finitely generated.
If @xmath is an element of @xmath there exist analytic functions @xmath
on @xmath such that if @xmath and @xmath is an eigenvalue of @xmath then
@xmath is a root in @xmath of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof. Let @xmath be a finite number of elements of @xmath such that
@xmath . Let @xmath @xmath . Then we define the @xmath the by the
formula

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The Cayley-Hamilton theorem implies that @xmath vanishes on @xmath . Let
@xmath then there exist @xmath and @xmath such that @xmath is a basis of
@xmath . Let @xmath be the projection onto the @xmath –isotypic
component of @xmath . Thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(a one dimensional space) is non–zero for @xmath . This implies that
there exists an open neighborhood, @xmath , of @xmath in @xmath such
that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a basis of @xmath for @xmath . That

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

implies that @xmath for @xmath . The connectedness of @xmath implies
that @xmath for @xmath . Thus @xmath for all @xmath . This proves the
Lemma.

If @xmath is a @xmath –module then set @xmath equal to the set of @xmath
such that there exists @xmath with @xmath for all @xmath .

###### Corollary 20

Keep the notation and assumptions of the previous lemma, If @xmath is
compact then there exists a compact subset @xmath of @xmath such that
@xmath for all @xmath .

Proof. Let @xmath be a generating set for @xmath and let @xmath be the
function in the previous lemma corresponding to @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath analytic in on @xmath . If @xmath then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(c.f. [ RRG ] ,7.A.1.3). If @xmath is compact then there exists a
constant @xmath such that @xmath for all @xmath and @xmath . This
implies the corollary.

###### Theorem 21

Let @xmath be an analytic family of admissible @xmath modules based on
@xmath . Assume that there exists @xmath such that @xmath is finitely
generated. If @xmath is a compact subset of @xmath then there exists
@xmath a finite subset such that if @xmath then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof. Let @xmath as in the above corollary for @xmath . Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath is compact so there exist @xmath and @xmath , compact subsets of
@xmath , such that @xmath . Let @xmath be the finite set corresponding
to @xmath in Proposition 16 . Set @xmath . Let @xmath be an exhaustion
of the @xmath –types of @xmath with each @xmath finite.

We will use the notation @xmath for the @xmath –module @xmath . Let
@xmath . Set @xmath then @xmath and @xmath . Each @xmath is finitely
generated and admissible, hence of finite length. Therefore @xmath has a
finite composition series

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

or a countably infinite composition series

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath irreducible. Thus by the dual form of the subrepresentation
theorem there exists for each @xmath and @xmath so that @xmath is a
quotient of @xmath . Observe that @xmath . Thus @xmath for some @xmath .
Let @xmath be a quotient module of @xmath . Then @xmath with @xmath a
submodule of @xmath . There must be an @xmath such that @xmath . Let
@xmath be minimal subject to this condition. Then @xmath . Thus @xmath
is a submodule of @xmath . Hence @xmath for some @xmath . This implies
that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Indeed,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Corollary 22

(To the proof) Let @xmath be an analytic family of finitely generated
admissible @xmath modules based on @xmath . Let @xmath be open in @xmath
with compact closure. Let for each @xmath , @xmath be a @xmath
–submodule of @xmath . Then there exists a finite subset @xmath such
that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof. In the proof of the theorem above all that was used was that the
set of possible infinitesimal characters is compact.

## 7 Imbeddings of families of @xmath–modules

Let @xmath be a connected real or complex analytic manifold and let
@xmath be an analytic family of objects in @xmath based on @xmath The
purpose of this section is to prove

###### Theorem 23

Let the representation of @xmath , @xmath , on

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

be as in Theorem 9 and let @xmath be the analytic family as in Theorem
15 . If @xmath is a compact subset of @xmath then there exists @xmath
such that if @xmath then @xmath is injective.

This is a slight extension of a result in [ HOW ] . Given @xmath then
@xmath as a composition series @xmath and each @xmath is isomorphic with
the representation @xmath with @xmath an irreducible representation of
@xmath and @xmath and @xmath with @xmath and @xmath . Also note that
there is a natural @xmath –module exact sequence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We may assume that the composition series is consistent with this exact
sequence. This implies that the @xmath that appear in @xmath are of the
form @xmath with @xmath a restricted positive root (i.e. a weight of
@xmath on @xmath ).

Now consider the corresponding exact sequence of @xmath –modules.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The @xmath –modules @xmath with @xmath an irreducible representation of
@xmath with Harish-Chandra parameter @xmath (for @xmath ) and @xmath
have infinitesimal character with Harish-Chandra parameter @xmath . We
are finally ready to prove the theorem.

Let @xmath be the compact set @xmath . Let @xmath with @xmath compact in
@xmath .  Assume that the result is false for @xmath . Then for each
@xmath there exists @xmath and @xmath such that @xmath but @xmath .
Label the Harish -Chandra parameters that appear in @xmath , @xmath with
@xmath and @xmath (recall that we have fixed a maximal torus of @xmath
). The above observations imply that @xmath contains an element of the
form @xmath with @xmath a sum of @xmath positive roots, @xmath and
@xmath . We now have our contradiction @xmath which is compact. But the
set of @xmath is unbounded.

## 8 Families of Hilbert and Fréchet representations

###### Definition 24

Let @xmath be metric space. A continuous family of Hilbert
representations based on @xmath of @xmath is a pair @xmath of a Hilbert
space @xmath and @xmath strongly continuous such that if @xmath then
@xmath is a strongly continuous representation of @xmath . The family
will be called admissible if @xmath is independent of @xmath and @xmath
for each @xmath .

###### Lemma 25

Let @xmath be a continuous family of admissible Hilbert representations
of @xmath based on the connected real or complex analytic manifold
@xmath and denote by @xmath the action of @xmath on @xmath (the @xmath
–finite @xmath –vectors). Then @xmath is a continuous family of
admissible @xmath –modules based on @xmath .

Proof. If @xmath then @xmath denotes the space of all @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath the character of @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We also note that if @xmath and @xmath then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath the usual action of @xmath on @xmath as a left invariant
vector field. Thus, if @xmath and @xmath then the map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is continuous.

The following lemma is Lemma 1.1.3 in [ RRG ] taking into account
dependence on parameters. The proof is essentially the same taking into
account the dependence on parameters and using the local compactness of
@xmath

###### Lemma 26

Let @xmath be a locally compact metric space and let @xmath be a Hilbert
space. Assume that for each @xmath , @xmath (bounded invertible
operators such that

1) If @xmath and @xmath are compact subsets of @xmath and of @xmath
respectively then there exists a constant @xmath such that @xmath for
@xmath

2) The map @xmath is continuous for all @xmath .

Then @xmath is a continuous family of representations of @xmath based on
@xmath and conversely if @xmath is a continuous family of Hilbert
representations then 1) and 2)  are satisfied.

An immediate corollary is

###### Corollary 27

Let @xmath be an admissible, continuous family of Hilbert
representations of @xmath based on the locally compact metric space
@xmath . Set for each @xmath , @xmath then @xmath is a continuous,
admissible family of Hilbert representations of of @xmath based on
@xmath .

Let @xmath be a norm on @xmath that is a continuous function from @xmath
to @xmath (the positive real numbers) such that

1. @xmath ,

2. @xmath ,

3. The sets @xmath are compact.

4. If @xmath then if @xmath then @xmath

If @xmath is a finite dimensional representation of @xmath with compact
kernel and if @xmath is an inner product on @xmath that is @xmath
–invariant then if @xmath is the operator norm of @xmath then @xmath is
a norm on @xmath . Taking the representation on @xmath given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then we may (and will) assume in addition

5. @xmath .

Note that 5. implies that @xmath .

Using the same proof as Lemma 2.A.2.1 in [ RRG ] (which we give for the
sake of completeness) one can prove

###### Lemma 28

If @xmath is a continuous family of Hilbert representations modeled on
@xmath and if @xmath is a compact subset of @xmath then there exists
constants @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof. Let @xmath . Then if @xmath and @xmath then @xmath by strong
continuity. The principle of uniform boundedness (c.f. [ RS ]
,III.9,p.81) implies that there exists a constant, @xmath , such that
@xmath for @xmath . Let @xmath . In particular if @xmath then @xmath .
Also,

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Thus for all @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath , @xmath and let @xmath be such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath then @xmath with @xmath and @xmath so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Take @xmath and @xmath .

We define @xmath to be the space of all @xmath such that of @xmath
(thought of as a left invariant differential operator) and @xmath then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath is a Fréchet (using the semi-norms @xmath ) algebra (under
convolution) of functions on @xmath

Lemma 2.A.2.4 in [ RRG ] implies that there exists @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This implies that @xmath acts on any Banach representation, @xmath of
@xmath via

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Recall that a pair @xmath of a Fréchet space, @xmath , and a
representation of @xmath , @xmath , on @xmath is called a smooth Fréchet
representation of moderate growth if the map @xmath is @xmath and if
@xmath is a continuous seminorm on @xmath then there exists a continuous
seminorm @xmath on @xmath and @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This implies that a smooth Fréchet representation of moderate growth is
an @xmath –module. A smooth Fréchet representation of moderate growth is
defined to be admissible if the @xmath –module @xmath is admissible. It
is said to be of Harish-Chandra class if @xmath is admissible and
finitely generated. Let @xmath be the category of smooth Fréchet
representations of moderate growth in the Harish-Chandra class.

The CW theorem

###### Theorem 29

The functor @xmath from @xmath to @xmath is an isomorphism of
categories.

We will prove this as a consequence of the usual statement of the
theorem is (see [ RRG ] Theorem 11.6.7 (2))

###### Theorem 30

If @xmath , for @xmath and if @xmath then @xmath extends to a continuous
element of @xmath with closed image that is a topological summand.

If @xmath have the property that @xmath then one has

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As the formal sums that converge relative to the continuous seminorms
endowing the topology on @xmath and @xmath respectively. The identity
map on @xmath induces an isomorphism of @xmath and @xmath . But this is
given by the identity map on @xmath . Hence @xmath . This implies the
isomorphism of categories.

The inverse functor can be seen as follows. Let @xmath @xmath and let
@xmath be a Hilbert representation of @xmath such that @xmath is
equivalent to @xmath . Let @xmath give the isomorphism. Let @xmath the
Hilbert space structure on @xmath and let @xmath . If @xmath set @xmath
and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then @xmath extends to an isomorphism of @xmath onto @xmath . Thus
defining @xmath on @xmath we have @xmath and @xmath . The uniqueness
implies that @xmath defines the inverse functor.

Another corollary of the CW theorem is (see [ HOW ] Theorem 11.8.2)

###### Theorem 31

If @xmath and if @xmath then @xmath is closed in @xmath and a
topological summand.

###### Corollary 32

If @xmath is a Hilbert representation of @xmath such that @xmath and if
@xmath is generated by the subspace @xmath then @xmath .

###### Definition 33

A continuous family of objects in @xmath based on the metric space
@xmath is a pair @xmath of a Fréchet space @xmath and a continuous map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(here @xmath is the algebra of continuous operators on @xmath with the
strong topology) such that such that for each @xmath , if @xmath then
@xmath . We will say that the family has local uniform moderate growth
if for each @xmath a compact subset of @xmath and each continuous
seminorm on @xmath there exists a continuous seminorm @xmath on @xmath
and @xmath such that if @xmath then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Definition 34

A holomorphic family of objects in @xmath based on the complex manifold
@xmath is a continuous family @xmath such that the map @xmath is
holomorphic from @xmath to @xmath for all @xmath , @xmath .

###### Lemma 35

If @xmath is a continuous family of Hilbert representations based on the
metric space @xmath such that the representations @xmath and the @xmath
vectors are the @xmath vectors then @xmath is a continuous family of of
objects in @xmath based on the metric space @xmath that is of local
uniform moderate growth.

Proof. We note that if @xmath and @xmath then the map @xmath is
continuous from @xmath into @xmath . Also @xmath with @xmath . The last
assertion follows from Lemma 28 .

For want of a better place to put it we include the following simple
Lemma in this section.

###### Lemma 36

Let @xmath be a finite dimensional continuous representation of @xmath
and let @xmath be a locally compact metric space (resp. an analytic
manifold). If @xmath let @xmath be an inner product on @xmath such that
@xmath acts unitarily with respect to @xmath for @xmath and such that
the map @xmath is continuous (resp. real analytic) for all @xmath . Then
there exists, for each @xmath and an ordered orthonormal basis of @xmath
@xmath such that the map @xmath is continuous (resp. real analytic) and
the matrix of @xmath with respect to @xmath is independent of @xmath .
Furthermore, if @xmath is compact and contractible and @xmath is a
finite dimensional continuous representation of @xmath and @xmath is
continuous and surjective for @xmath then @xmath with @xmath can be
taken in @xmath .

Proof. Fix an inner product, @xmath , on @xmath such that @xmath is
unitary. Then there exists a positive definite Hermitian operator (with
respect to @xmath ), @xmath such that @xmath . Then @xmath is continuous
(resp. real analytic) in @xmath . Now,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Set @xmath then @xmath . Thus if @xmath then @xmath is continuous (resp.
real analytic) and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be an (ordered) orthonormal basis of @xmath with respect to
@xmath then @xmath is an orthonormal basis of @xmath with respect to
@xmath .If @xmath then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

To prove the second assertion note that @xmath is a @xmath –vector
bundle over @xmath . Since @xmath compact and contractible the bundle is
a trivial @xmath –vector bundle ( [ A ] ,Lemma 1.6.4). Thus there is a
representation @xmath of @xmath and @xmath continuous such that @xmath
and @xmath is injective. Notice that @xmath is a @xmath –module
isomorphism. Now pull back the inner product @xmath to @xmath using
@xmath getting a @xmath –invariant inner product, @xmath , on @xmath and
push the inner product to @xmath getting  a @xmath –invariant inner
product @xmath on @xmath Now apply the first part of the lemma to get an
orthonormal basis @xmath of @xmath with respect to @xmath and an
orthonormal basis @xmath ( @xmath ) with respect to @xmath such that the
matrices of the action of @xmath with respect to each of these bases is
constant. Take @xmath for @xmath and @xmath for @xmath .

## 9 Continuous globalization of families of @xmath–modules

We maintain the notation of the previous sections.

Let @xmath be a connected analytic manifold and let @xmath be an
analytic family of of objects in @xmath based on @xmath .

###### Theorem 37

Let @xmath be open with compact closure. There exists a continuous
family @xmath of Hilbert representations of @xmath based on @xmath such
that the continuous family of @xmath –modules @xmath is isomorphic with
the analytic family @xmath of objects in @xmath based on on @xmath
(thought of as a continuous family). Furthermore, the @xmath vectors of
@xmath are the @xmath vectors for every @xmath

Proof. Let @xmath then Theorem 3 2.implies

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

for every @xmath . In particular it is independent of @xmath . Theorem
23 implies that there exists @xmath and for each @xmath the map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is injective. Note that the space of @xmath –finite vectors in @xmath is
the @xmath –finite induced representation @xmath and hence independent
of @xmath . Let @xmath be the Hilbert space completion of @xmath
corresponding to unitary induction from @xmath to @xmath . This gives an
analytic family of Hilbert representations of @xmath , @xmath . For each
@xmath the family of linear operators @xmath is analytic in @xmath (see
Theorem 15 ) and injective. On @xmath put for each @xmath the inner
product @xmath . Then @xmath acts unitarily with respect to @xmath for
@xmath and @xmath is real analytic. Let @xmath be as in Lemma 36 . Then
@xmath is analytic. Put @xmath and set @xmath then @xmath is an analytic
map of @xmath into the manifold of orthogonal projection operators of
rank @xmath on @xmath . Set 37

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then @xmath is the closure in the Hilbert space @xmath of @xmath .
Observing that the @xmath –finite vectors in @xmath are contained in the
analytic vectors implies that @xmath is invariant under @xmath . Note
@xmath is continuous in the strong operator topology from @xmath to the
bounded operators on @xmath . This is proved by the following standard
calculus style argument. Let @xmath be a unit vector and @xmath . We can
expand @xmath in @xmath with @xmath and let @xmath be given then there
exists @xmath a finite set such that @xmath . Also @xmath is analytic in
@xmath thus there exists a neighborhood @xmath of @xmath in @xmath such
that @xmath .for @xmath . Noting that @xmath we have @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For each @xmath put the inner product @xmath on @xmath . Pull back the
action of @xmath on @xmath to the Hilbert space completion, @xmath of
@xmath with respect to @xmath to get the representation @xmath of @xmath
such that @xmath is equivalent with @xmath . Note that @xmath is an
orthonormal basis of @xmath for all @xmath . If @xmath define @xmath by
@xmath . Then @xmath is a unitary @xmath –isomorphism with inverse
@xmath . Fix @xmath , set @xmath and set @xmath Then @xmath is the
desired continuous family. The last assertion follows from the fact that
the @xmath vectors of @xmath are the @xmath vectors.

The technique in the proof of the Theorem above involving the bases
@xmath will be used several times in the next section.

## 10 Continuous globalization of families of objects in @xmath

###### Theorem 38

Let @xmath be an analytic family of objects in @xmath based on the
analytic manifold @xmath . Let @xmath then there exists, @xmath , an
open neighborhood of @xmath in @xmath and a continuous family of Hilbert
representations @xmath such that the family @xmath is isomorphic with
@xmath (as a continuous family). Furthermore, the @xmath vectors of
@xmath are the @xmath vectors.

Proof. Let @xmath be an open neighborhood of @xmath in @xmath with
compact closure. Then Theorem 21 implies that there exists @xmath a
finite subset such that @xmath Let @xmath . @xmath is invariant under
the action @xmath for all @xmath . This implies that @xmath defines an
analytic family of objects in @xmath based on @xmath . Let @xmath be the
corresponding @xmath –family. Then we have the surjective analytic
homomorphism of families

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath mapping @xmath onto @xmath for all @xmath . Let @xmath be
the action of @xmath on the space @xmath (which we regard to be the
fixed @xmath –representation @xmath ) the Corollary 22 implies that
there exists a finite subset @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath Let @xmath be the continuous family of Hilbert
representations based on @xmath corresponding to @xmath as in Theorem 37
. Let @xmath be an open neighborhood of @xmath contained in @xmath such
that @xmath is contractible. Let @xmath if @xmath let @xmath and
orthonormal basis of @xmath with respect to the pull back of @xmath to
@xmath such that @xmath is continuous on @xmath and @xmath is an
orthonormal basis of @xmath and the matrix of @xmath withe respect to
the @xmath is independent of @xmath (see the second part of Lemma 36 )
for @xmath . Define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let if @xmath let @xmath be the inner product on @xmath such that @xmath
is an orthonormal basis of @xmath . Define @xmath to be the Hilbert
space completion of @xmath with respect to @xmath . Let @xmath be the
closure of @xmath in @xmath . then since @xmath is a @xmath invariant
subspace of the analytic vectors @xmath is @xmath –invariant (c.f. [ RRG
] Proposition 1.6.6). The argument using the @xmath in the proof of
Theorem 37 one proves that @xmath defines a continuous family of Hilbert
representations based on @xmath . Also the space of @xmath –finite
vectors of @xmath is isomorphic with @xmath . Let @xmath be the quotient
representation on @xmath . Note that @xmath the quotient map on @xmath
corresponding to @xmath extends to a unitary map of @xmath onto @xmath
by the definition of @xmath . Set @xmath for @xmath . Finally, if @xmath
then define @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath . Then @xmath is unitary, strongly continuos and @xmath .
Set @xmath and @xmath )  then @xmath is the desired continuous family of
Hilbert representations based on @xmath .

We include the following corollary however as noted at the end of the
section it is not necessary to prove the main results that follow.

###### Corollary 39

Let @xmath be a connected analytic manifold and let @xmath be an
analytic family of objects in @xmath based on @xmath such that @xmath
then there exists a continuous family of Hilbert representations @xmath
such that the family @xmath is isomorphic with @xmath (as a continuous
family). Furthermore, the @xmath vectors of @xmath are the @xmath
vectors.

Proof. The previous theorem implies that there exists an open covering
@xmath of @xmath such that for each @xmath there exists a continuous
family of Hilbert representations @xmath such that @xmath is
continuously isomorphic with @xmath . For each @xmath the definition of
the Hilbert spaces @xmath implies that one has @xmath a unitary
isomorphism depending strongly continuously on @xmath .  This defines a
Hilbert vector bundle over @xmath . Kuiper’s Theorem implies that all
Hilbert bundles with infinite dimensional fibers are trivial ( [ BB ] ,
p.67). Thus there exists a fixed Hilbert space, @xmath , and for each
@xmath and each @xmath a unitary isomorphism that depends strongly
continuously on @xmath such that @xmath . Define @xmath .

This and Lemma 35 imply our main results

###### Theorem 40

There exists a continuous family @xmath of objects in @xmath based on
@xmath of local uniform moderate growth that globalizes the family
@xmath .

This can be interpreted in the following way:

###### Corollary 41

Let @xmath be the inverse functor to the @xmath –finite functor @xmath
and let @xmath is an analytic family of objects in @xmath based on the
connected analytic manifold @xmath such that @xmath . If @xmath then

1. For all @xmath as subspaces of @xmath . Set @xmath equal to the
common value.

2. The map @xmath is continuous from @xmath to @xmath , linear in @xmath
and @xmath in @xmath .

With this interpretation it is clear that this result follows from the
local version of the Hilbert globalization (that is the first theorem in
this section).

## 11 The dual functor

We now consider a dual functor. Let @xmath let @xmath (the continuous
dual). If @xmath then the following assertions are true

1. There exists @xmath a real analytic function on @xmath such that
@xmath .

2. If @xmath denotes the right regular action of @xmath on @xmath then
@xmath for @xmath . If @xmath is thought of as a left invariant
differential operator then @xmath .

3. There exists @xmath depending only on @xmath and @xmath such that
@xmath

We note that conditions 1. and 2 uniquely specify @xmath which satisfies
3.

If @xmath is an object of @xmath then denote by @xmath set of @xmath in
the algebraic dual, @xmath ,  of @xmath such that if @xmath then there
exists a real analytic function @xmath satisfying 1.,2. and 3.

A variant of the CW theorem proved in [ RRG ] Theorem 11.6.6, Corollary
11.6.3 is

###### Theorem 42

Let @xmath then if @xmath and if @xmath then @xmath

The purpose of this section is to prove a version of this theorem
depending on parameters for parabolic induced representations. Before we
state our result we will need some definitions and a lemma that will be
critical to the proof of the main result of the section.

Let @xmath be a real parabolic subgroup with given @xmath standard
Langlands decomposition. Set @xmath . Let @xmath be an admissible,
finitely generated Hilbert representation of @xmath with Hilbertspace
structure @xmath . Let @xmath set @xmath and let @xmath be a unitary
character of @xmath Then @xmath defines a unitary representation of
@xmath on @xmath . Let @xmath be the @xmath induced representation of
@xmath from @xmath to @xmath . Let @xmath and let @xmath . If @xmath
then set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

since the ambiguity in this expression is in @xmath this defines a
smooth function from @xmath to @xmath . As usual, define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then @xmath defines a family of smooth Fréchet representations of
moderate growth. Set @xmath

If @xmath define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be the corresponding norm on @xmath and let @xmath be the
Hilbert space completion of @xmath . In ??? se showed that if @xmath is
a compact subset of @xmath Then there exist @xmath and @xmath such that
@xmath

Let @xmath be such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Fix @xmath open in @xmath with compact closure and set @xmath .

Let @xmath be a finite dimenional, @xmath and @xmath @xmath invariant
subspace such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath . Let @xmath be an orthonormal basis of @xmath with
resepect to @xmath (Theorem 21 ).

If @xmath define a new inner product on @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Lemma 43

Fix @xmath in @xmath then there exists @xmath such that if @xmath and
@xmath then there exists @xmath such that if @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof. First note that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath is compact there exists a constant @xmath and @xmath such
that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath is a holomorphic family of objects in @xmath based on the
complex manifold @xmath then a correspondence @xmath will be called
Holomorphic if @xmath is holomorphic for all @xmath . A holomorphic
correspondence @xmath with @xmath is said to be of local uniform
moderate growth if for each compact subset @xmath there exists @xmath
such that if @xmath and @xmath then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath .

###### Theorem 44

Keep the notation above. Let for @xmath be holomorphic on an open subset
@xmath @xmath and of local uniform moderate growth. Then for each @xmath
, @xmath extends to an element of @xmath and the map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

given by @xmath maps to the continuous extension of @xmath is weakly
holomorphic.

The proof follows the method of the proof of Proposition 11.6.2 in [ RRG
] to prove a continuous version of the theorem. The holomorphic version
will be derived from the continuous version. Let @xmath @xmath and let
@xmath be an open neighborhood of @xmath with compact closure in @xmath
then as above there exists @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Also since the family @xmath is of local uniform moderate growth there
exists for each @xmath such that

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

for @xmath . Set @xmath As above, let @xmath be an orthonormal basis of
a @xmath and @xmath –invariant subspace of @xmath in @xmath such that
@xmath for @xmath (Theorem 21 ). If @xmath we have as above

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

This integral converges uniformly in @xmath since there exists @xmath
such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which also implies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Set @xmath equal to the Hilbert space completion of @xmath with respect
to @xmath for @xmath . Noting that relative to @xmath the action of
@xmath is unitary, so the action of @xmath on @xmath extends to @xmath .
Let @xmath with respect to @xmath . If @xmath is unitary and if @xmath
then @xmath . Also note that

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

If @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence @xmath . Thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using this, it is easily seen that for each @xmath , @xmath extends to a
strongly continuous representation of @xmath on @xmath .

I. The @xmath vectors of @xmath are the same as the @xmath vectors.

To prove this assertion note that if @xmath is the Casimir operator of
@xmath corresponding to the invariant form @xmath (see the beginning of
section 2). Also set @xmath equal to the Casimir operator of @xmath
corresponding to @xmath Set @xmath . Then elliptic regularity implies
that the @xmath vectors of @xmath in @xmath are the completion of @xmath
with respect to the seminorms @xmath .

One has

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath then

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now @xmath hence @xmath Hence setting @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Set @xmath Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The @xmath vectors are the completion of @xmath using the seminorms
@xmath . This proves I.

Set @xmath equal to the adjoint of @xmath with respect to @xmath . Then
the space @xmath –finite vectors of @xmath is @xmath and the
corresponding @xmath –module is the conjugate dual to @xmath and @xmath
which is the same as the action of @xmath . The CW theorem implies that
the space of @xmath –vectors of @xmath is @xmath . In particular, if
@xmath then the functional @xmath is a continuous functional on @xmath .

Note that if @xmath then for each @xmath there exists @xmath such that
@xmath for @xmath . Let @xmath denote the projection of @xmath to @xmath
corresponding to the direct sum decomposition @xmath . Set @xmath .
@xmath .

If @xmath and if @xmath and if @xmath is the character of @xmath and
@xmath is the dimension of @xmath and if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then 1. and 2. above imply

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Also 2. implies that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Also

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We will now show that the series @xmath converges uniformly in @xmath .
Indeed, the Schur orthogonality relations and the @xmath bi-invariance
of the  norm on @xmath imply that if @xmath then @xmath above implies
that there exists a constant, @xmath , depending only on @xmath such
that for all @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

II. There exist constants @xmath and @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for each @xmath .

To prove this assertion we note that @xmath is the space of @xmath –
@xmath ( @xmath ) vectors for @xmath acting on @xmath and every @xmath
with @xmath and @xmath . Indeed, this is a poinwise theorem that was
proved in [ RRG ] (3),pp. 90-91(in line 7 of p.91 there is a misprint
the power of @xmath the formula on that line should be @xmath not @xmath
). This implies that the underlying @xmath module of each of the @xmath
is @xmath . Hence the Casselmann-Wallach globalization of @xmath is
@xmath . Sicne it is also @xmath , @xmath is a continuous norm on @xmath
for each @xmath . This completes the proof of II.

III. Let @xmath be as in the previous lemma. Assume that @xmath . Then
there exists @xmath and @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This follows from Lemma 43 . Which says that if @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Finally we have provedt

IV. The extension of @xmath to @xmath for @xmath depends weakly
continuously on @xmath (that is, if @xmath then @xmath is continuous).

Indeed, II let @xmath and let @xmath be as above, an open neighborhood
of @xmath in @xmath with compact closure then Lemma 43 implies that the
series

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

converges in @xmath uniformly in @xmath ..

We now complete the proof of the theorem. Let @xmath and let @xmath be a
basis of @xmath such @xmath contains @xmath with @xmath the  closure of
the polydisk @xmath It is enough to prove the holomorphy assertion on
@xmath . If @xmath @xmath . Define @xmath for @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This integral defines a holomorphic function of @xmath on @xmath for
each @xmath .  If @xmath then @xmath Thus @xmath on @xmath .

## 12 Application to @xmath Eisenstein series

This section will involve terminology that would take us too far afield
to explain completely. Also, only those that would be bored with the
explanations would be interested in the results. For details in what is
omitted we suggest Langlands [ L1 ] . Let @xmath be a real reductive
group of inner type. Let @xmath be a discrete subgroup of @xmath such
that @xmath has finite volume. The results of this section will be true
for the class of @xmath and @xmath described in Chapter 1 of Langlands [
L2 ] . However, we will only consider the subclass of @xmath the real
points of an algebraic group, @xmath , defined over @xmath satisfying
one more condition which we will describe later in this paragraph. and
@xmath a subgroup that is of finite index in the points of a @xmath
–form of @xmath (the @xmath –points), i.e. an arithmetic subgroup. A
cuspidal parabolic subgroup of @xmath is the normalizer @xmath of a
parabolic subgroup @xmath of @xmath defined over @xmath . Then @xmath
has a @xmath –Langlands decomposition @xmath with @xmath the unipotent
radical of @xmath and @xmath the intersection of the kernels of @xmath
with @xmath a character defined over @xmath and @xmath is a Levi-factor
of @xmath that is defined over @xmath . The other condition is that the
“ @xmath ” in the Langlands decomposition of @xmath is trivial. Then
@xmath and identifying @xmath with @xmath then @xmath is an arithmetic
subgroup of @xmath .

Throughout this section @xmath will be a fixed Let @xmath be space of
@xmath vectors of a closed, @xmath –invariant, irreducible subspace of
@xmath . Let @xmath denote the right regular action of @xmath on @xmath
. Let @xmath be a maximal compact subgroup of @xmath such that @xmath is
maximal compact in @xmath . We consider the smooth representation @xmath
where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath is the space of all @xmath functions
from @xmath to @xmath such that @xmath for @xmath and @xmath . If @xmath
define @xmath for @xmath and @xmath for @xmath .  Then since the
ambiguity in the expression of an element @xmath as @xmath is in @xmath
. @xmath is a @xmath map of @xmath to @xmath . We define @xmath . Endow
@xmath with the @xmath topology so @xmath is a Fréchet space. Note that
if we set @xmath then @xmath is a holomorphic family of objects in
@xmath based on @xmath .

If @xmath set @xmath for @xmath . Then @xmath . Consider

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

This series converges absolutely and uniformly in compacta in the set of
all @xmath with Re @xmath for all roots @xmath of @xmath acting on
@xmath . Langlands has shown that if @xmath is in @xmath then this
series has a meromorphic continuation to all @xmath . In this section a
proof will be given that the meromorphic continuation is true for all
@xmath .

Note in the set above where the series converges @xmath is an
automorphic function. Here, a smooth function, @xmath on @xmath is
called an automorphic function if

1. @xmath is @xmath –finite and

2. There exists @xmath such that if @xmath looked upon as a left
invariant differential operator then @xmath for all @xmath .

Usually the condition that @xmath is right @xmath –finite is also
included in the definition.

###### Lemma 45

If @xmath then in the range of convergence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath is the right regular representation of @xmath on @xmath .

Proof. This follows from

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath the identity element of @xmath hence of @xmath .

If @xmath and @xmath then there exists an open neighborhood of @xmath ,
@xmath , in @xmath and @xmath a non-zero holomorphic function on @xmath
such that @xmath is holomorphic. Let @xmath be the set of pairs @xmath
with @xmath in @xmath and @xmath a non-zero holomorphic function on
@xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is holomorphic on @xmath . If @xmath is an open subset of @xmath with
compact closure then there exists a finite subset @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath (Theorem 21 ). Let @xmath be a basis of @xmath then if @xmath
and @xmath then if @xmath , @xmath then @xmath is holomorphic in @xmath
for all @xmath and @xmath .

###### Proposition 46

Let @xmath be open in @xmath with compact closure such that there exists
@xmath holomorphic on @xmath and continuous in the closure of @xmath
such that @xmath is holomorphic on @xmath for all @xmath and @xmath Then
there exists @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Proof. Lemma 5.1 in [ L2 ] implies that if the constant terms of @xmath
relative to @xmath –rank one parabolic subgroups @xmath containing
@xmath have exponents @xmath and if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath ( @xmath added to the exponent is to dominate the logarithmic
term in Langlands’ inequality). On the other hand, the main observation
in [ W2 ] implies that the @xmath are restrictions of exponents of the
@xmath –module @xmath . This implies that @xmath is bounded by the
maximum of the norms of the Harish-Chandra parameters of @xmath (here
the norms are with respect to the Hermitian extension of the inner
product @xmath on @xmath ). Thus since the closure of @xmath is compact
there exists @xmath such that @xmath for @xmath . Take @xmath .

We are now ready to prove

###### Theorem 47

If @xmath then @xmath has a meromorphic continuation to @xmath .

Proof. Let @xmath and let @xmath be an open neighborhood of @xmath with
compact closure such that there exists @xmath and @xmath as above. If
@xmath define @xmath . Then @xmath and if we set @xmath then the above
lemma shows that @xmath is of uniform moderate growth on @xmath hence
satisfies the hypotheses of Theorem 44 which implies that the extension
of @xmath to @xmath is weakly holomorphic in @xmath . Since @xmath is
arbitrary in @xmath this completes the proof.