In the thesis we study holomorphic germs from @xmath to @xmath ,
which are singular only at the origin, with a special emphasis on the
distinguished class of finitely determined germs. The results are
published in two articles, joint with András Némethi, they are contained
in Chapter 3 and 5.

Stability and finite determinacy of germs are discussed in Chapter 1.
Here we review several theorems of Mather and Gaffney following the
articles of Wall, Mond, Marar and Nuño-Ballesteros. Furthermore, we
review the analytic invariants of germs introduced by Mond, namely the
number of Whitney umbrellas and triple values of a stabilization.

In Chapter 2 we introduce the Smale invariant, which classifies the
immersions of spheres up to regular homotopy. We review formulas of
Hughes–Melvin and Ekholm–Szűcs, which express the Smale invariant of an
immersion from the @xmath -sphere to the @xmath -sphere using singular
Seifert surfaces. We introduce Ekholm’s invariants for stable
immersions. Here we mainly refer to the articles of Hughes, Szűcs,
Ekholm and Takase.

In Chapter 3 we identify the Smale invariant of immersions associated
with holomorphic germs with an analytic invariant of the germs, namely
with the number of Whitney umbrellas of a stabilization, answering a
question of Mumford from 1961. We give representatives for all regular
homotopy classes of immersions from the @xmath -sphere to the @xmath
-sphere using the simple germs from Mond’s list, answering Smale’s
question in this dimension. We give a new proof for Mond’s theorem for
corank– @xmath germs about the number of Whitney umbrellas via the newly
defined complex Smale invariant. We identify the correct sign in the
Hughes–Melvin and Ekholm–Szűcs formulas. We express the Ekholm invariant
of stable immersions associated with finitely determined germs in terms
of the analytic invariants of Mond. We conclude that these analytic
invariants are @xmath invariants, and their combination expressing the
Ekholm invariant is a topological invariant of the finitely determined
germs.

The image of a finitely determined germ provides a non-isolated
hypersurface singularity in @xmath . In Chapter 5 we determine the
boundary of the Milnor fibre of these singularities. We summarize in
Chapter 4 the main properties of the Milnor fibre and the resolution of
isolated singularities, in which case the boundary of the Milnor fibre
is diffeomorphic to the link and to the boundary of any resolution of
the singularity as well. Here we use the de Jong–Pfister book and the
articles of Milnor, Looijenga and Némethi. In the non-isolated case the
Némethi–Szilárd book provides a general algorithm to determine the
Milnor fibre boundary, however for concrete examples it is preferable to
find a more direct procedure.

In Chapter 5 the Milnor fibre boundary is constructed as a surgery of
the @xmath -sphere along the double point curves of the immersion
associated with the holomorphic germ. The gluing of the pieces along
their torus boundaries is described by the newly defined vertical
indices and homological invariants. For a certain class of germs the sum
of these invariants is expressed with the number of Whitney umbrellas.
In practice our algorithm provides a plumbing graph of the Milnor fibre
boundary by modifying a good embedded resolution graph of the double
point locus of the finitely determined germ. The examples we discuss are
the simple germs from Mond’s list and a corank– @xmath germ from an
article of Marar and Nuño-Ballesteros.
