The main purpose of Chapter 1 is to introduce Mond invariants @xmath and
@xmath of holomorphic germs @xmath . @xmath is the number of cross cap
points, @xmath is the number of triple values of a stabilization of
@xmath , but each can be calculated as the codimension of a suitable
ideal of the local ring as well, without stabilizing @xmath . Chapter 1
also serves as a collection of relations of these invariants with other
concepts, which will appear in the subsequent chapters.

First we introduce the notion of germs and the finiteness property of
them. We follow [ 20 , 48 ] . The associated smooth map @xmath is
defined for finite germs @xmath , it slightly generalizes the notion of
the associated immersion introduced in [ 53 ] .

The theory of stability and finite determinacy of germs were devised by
e.g. H. Whitney, J. N. Mather and C. T. C. Wall [ 71 , 35 , 36 , 37 , 38
] . We introduce both concepts with respect to @xmath -equivalence
(left-right equivalence). The discussion of the stability also serves as
a background for the singular Seifert surfaces, which are defined in
Chapter 2 as stable smooth maps. We review theorems of Mather and
Gaffney characterizing the stability and finite @xmath -determinacy in
terms of the @xmath and @xmath codimensions of a germ. The only stable
multigerms of a map @xmath are regular simple points, regular double
values with transverse intersection of the branches, regular triple
values with regular intersection of the branches and simple Whitney
umbrella (cross cap) points. The triple values and the Whitney umbrellas
are isolated points.

The discussion of the Fitting ideals has two purposes. The defining
equation @xmath of the image of a finite germ @xmath can be determined
using Fitting ideals. Moreover, by this process one can calculate the
equations of the multiple point spaces of @xmath in the target as well.
In particular, the number of the triple values of a stabilization can be
determined with the help of Fitting ideals.

We introduce @xmath as the codimension of the ideal in the local ring
@xmath generated by the determinants of the @xmath minors of the
Jacobian matrix of @xmath [ 43 , 45 ] . Similarly, @xmath is the
codimension of the second Fitting ideal associated with @xmath in @xmath
. If @xmath is finitely @xmath -determined, then both @xmath and @xmath
are finite, and any stabilization of @xmath has @xmath cross caps and
@xmath triple values. The finiteness of @xmath is equivalent with the
fact that @xmath is singular only at the origin, which also means that
the associated map @xmath is an immersion. Finite @xmath -determinacy is
equivalent with the fact that the associated map @xmath is a stable
immersion. Mond [ 45 ] introduced a third invariant @xmath for corank–
@xmath germs @xmath , such that the finite @xmath -determinacy of @xmath
is equivalent with the finiteness of the three invariant @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath . These invariants appear in the formulas expressing the
image Milnor number (which is the second Betti number of the image of a
stabilization of @xmath ), and in the formulas comparing the Milnor
numbers of the four double point spaces as well [ 47 , 30 , 34 ] . The
structure of the double point spaces plays an important role in Chapter
5 . The end of Chapter 1 is a short review about a reinterpretation of
Mond’s invariants provided by W. L. Marar and J. J. Nuño-Ballesteros [
32 ] .

Chapter 2 provides an introduction to the Hirsch-Smale theory [ 16 , 64
] , which transforms regular homotopy problems (differential topology)
to homotopy theory (algebraic topology). The main purpose is to review
the Hughes–Melvin definition of the integer valued Smale invariant of
immersions @xmath [ 17 ] , and the Ekholm–Szűcs formulas expressing the
Smale invariant in terms of the properties of singular Seifert surfaces
[ 9 ] .

Smale’s theorem is the generalization of the Whitney–Graustein theorem
about plane curve immersions @xmath , and it is a special case of the
Hirsch theorem, in fact, a special case of the @xmath -principle of
Gromov. We review Hirsch theorem and the construction of the Smale
invariant @xmath of an immersion @xmath . @xmath is an element of an
Abelian group depending on the dimensions @xmath and @xmath , and two
immersions @xmath are regular homotopic if and only if their Smale
invariants are equal. The possibility of the ‘sphere eversion’ is a
consequence of Smale’s theorem as well.

J. F. Hughes and P. M. Melvin [ 17 ] proved that there are embeddings
@xmath wich are not regular homotopic to each other. They also express
the Smale invariant of an embedding @xmath with the signature of a
Seifert surface, which is a @xmath -manifold in @xmath whose boundary is
the image of the embedding. T. Ekholm and A. Szűcs [ 9 ] generalized
this result to arbitrary immersions @xmath using singular Seifert
surfaces. One contribution of their formulas is the invariant @xmath of
stable immersions @xmath introduced by Ekholm in [ 7 ] . It has several
slightly different definitions [ 7 , 8 , 9 , 60 ] . We review these
definitions and the proof of their equivalence.

The end of Chapter 2 is an outline of various related results, we
mention here two of them. S. Kinjo defined immersions @xmath associated
with plumbing graphs of type @xmath and @xmath . The point is that their
Smale invariants agree with the Smale invariants of the immersions
associated with the coverings @xmath of the singularities of type @xmath
and @xmath , see below in the introduction. The @xmath valued cobordism
invariant called ‘total twist’ of immersions @xmath [ 18 ] is used
later, in Chapter 5 , to conclude that @xmath and the number of the
non-trivially covered double point curve components of a finitely
determined germ @xmath have the same parity.

Chapter 3 includes our results published in [ 53 ] . The main theorem
answers the question of Mumford mentioned above. Namely, @xmath holds
for holomorphic germs @xmath singular only at the origin, where @xmath
is the Smale invariant of the immersion @xmath associated with @xmath .
We refer to this result as the ‘main formula’. There are several
consequences of this result.

Using the main formula we can provide explicit (‘algebraic’)
representatives of each regular homotopy class of immersions @xmath .
This answers a question of Smale [ 64 ] . In contrast with the known
@xmath constructions, these realizations are very simple polynomial
maps, and the computation of the Smale invariant via @xmath is extremely
simple.

The non-standard embeddings @xmath of Hughes and Melvin [ 17 ] cannot be
realized as the associated immersion of some @xmath . Although this fact
follows from a deep result of Mumford [ 50 ] , using our main formula we
provide a new proof for it. Moreover, the ‘topological vanishing’ @xmath
implies that @xmath is the regular germ via our formula.

We prove the formula @xmath in two steps. We introduce the newly defined
‘complex Smale invariant’ @xmath of @xmath . It turns out that @xmath
and @xmath . We use @xmath as the number of cross caps of a
stabilization of @xmath , and we do not use its algebraic definition as
the codimension of the ramification ideal. However, as a by-product of
the calculation we provide a new proof for the theorem of Mond declaring
the equivalence of the two definitions of @xmath in the case of corank–
@xmath germs.

Note that the integer valued Smale invariant is well defined only up to
sign. To determine the correct sign of the main formula, we fix
generators of the corresponding infinite cyclic groups. The
Hughes–Melvin and Ekholm–Szűcs formulas carry the sign ambiguity as
well. We determine their correct sign with the help of the main formula
and calculations of concrete examples. As a by-product of this
procedure, we express the contributions of the Ekholm–Szűcs formulas in
terms of @xmath and @xmath for a special singular Seifert surface, which
is created from a holomorphic stabilization of @xmath by stabilizing the
complex Whitney umbrella points in @xmath sense. In particular, @xmath
holds for finitely determined germs @xmath and their associated stable
immersions @xmath .

It follows from our results that the analytic invariants @xmath and
@xmath are @xmath invariants as well, moreover, @xmath is a topological
invariant of @xmath.
