Novelty detection is a process for distinguishing the observations that
differ in some respect from the observations that the model is trained
on. Novelty detection is one of the fundamental requirements of a good
classification or identification system since sometimes the test data
contains observations that were not known at the training time. In other
words, the novelty class is often is not presented during the training
phase or not well defined.

In light of the above, one-class classifiers and generative methods can
efficiently model such problems. However, due to the unavailability of
data from the novelty class, training an end-to-end model is a
challenging task itself. Therefore, detecting the Novel classes in
unsupervised and semi-supervised settings is a crucial step in such
tasks.

In this thesis, we propose several methods to model the novelty
detection problem in unsupervised and semi-supervised fashion. The
proposed frameworks applied to different related applications of anomaly
and outlier detection tasks. The results show the superior of our
proposed methods in compare to the baselines and state-of-the-art
methods.

LaTeX PhD Thesis Engineering University of Cambridge

\subtitle

Applications in abnormal event and situational change detection from
data series \dept Dipartimento di Ingegneria
navale, elettrica, elettronica e delle telecomunicazioni \university
University of Genova \crest [] \degreetitle Doctor of Philosophy
\college Scuola Politecnica \degreedate February 2019 \subject LaTeX

[]

{dedication}

I would like to dedicate this thesis to my parents and teachers
(without whom nothing would have been possible)

  “As far as the laws of mathematics refer to reality, they are not
  certain; and as far as they are certain, they do not refer to
  reality.”
  – Albert Einstein
