## Introduction

### Preliminaries and main results

This thesis contains the results of two joint papers with András Némethi
[ 53 , 54 ] and the background related to them. Némethi’s program aims
to create bridges between different areas of the singularity theory,
e.g. to compare the topological and analytic/algebraic invariants of
complex singularities. In our case the bridge is created between
immersion theory (differential topology) and two rather distinct areas
of local complex singularity theory (‘Milnor fibration package’ and
‘analytic stability package’.)

The main objects of our study are holomorphic germs @xmath . These are
triples of locally convergent complex power series in two variables. We
are mostly interested in two classes of them. The first class consists
of the holomorphic germs singular only at the origin, i.e. @xmath is an
immersion. The second class is a subset of the first one, it contains
the so-called finitely @xmath -determined (or @xmath -finite) germs. By
Mather–Gaffney criterion [ 71 ] these are the germs whose restrictions
@xmath are stable immersions.

If @xmath is singular only at the origin, one can associate with @xmath
an immersion from the @xmath -sphere @xmath to the @xmath -sphere @xmath
at the level of links. This immersion is the restriction of @xmath to a
suitably chosen @xmath -sphere around the origin of @xmath . If
additionally @xmath is finitely @xmath -determined, the associated
immersion is stable, i.e. it has only regular simple and double values,
with transverse intersection of the branches at each double value.

In our case the associated immersion plays a similar role as the link in
the case of isolated singularities. As it is a @xmath map, it allows
more flexible deformations than the holomorphic germ @xmath . Up to
regular homotopy (which means deformation through immersions) the
immersions @xmath are completely classified by the integer valued
invariant @xmath , the so-called Smale invariant of the immersion @xmath
. Stephen Smale published his invariant in 1959 [ 64 ] , and already two
years later David Mumford in his seminal article [ 50 ] asked for the
analytic/algebraic characterization of the Smale invariant of the
immersion associated with a holomorphic germ @xmath . The main result of
[ 53 ] provides a complete answer to the question of Mumford, see
Chapter 3 . We identify the Smale invariant of the associated immersion
with an analytic invariant of @xmath , namely, with the number of the
cross caps of a stabilization of @xmath . This result implies various
consequences both in singularity theory and immersion theory.

The image of a finitely @xmath -determined germ @xmath can also be
defined as the zero set of certain germ @xmath , and provides a
non-isolated hypersurface singularity @xmath . Indeed, @xmath vanishes
along the set of the double values of @xmath . A very restricted class
of non-isolated singularities occurs in this way. The normalization of
@xmath is smooth, in fact, its normalization map is @xmath , and all the
transverse curves corresponding to the components of the singular locus
of @xmath have type @xmath .

The Milnor fibre of @xmath is defined as the @xmath -level set @xmath of
@xmath intersected with a ball @xmath with sufficiently small radius
@xmath , @xmath . It plays a central role in the study of local
singularities. In the case of isolated singularities, the boundary of
its Milnor fibre is diffeomorphic to the link of @xmath . András Némethi
and Ágnes Szilárd in [ 55 ] present a general algorithm, which provides
the boundary of the Milnor fibre for any non-isolated hypersurface
singularity @xmath , although it is rather technical and in concrete
examples is rather computational. In [ 54 ] we present an independent
algorithm providing the Milnor fibre boundary for our restricted class
of non-isolated singularities, see Chapter 5 . This algorithm uses
directly the geometry of @xmath . Namely, it produces the Milnor fibre
boundary as a surgery of @xmath along the double point locus of the
immersion associated with @xmath . Technically the algorithm provides a
plumbing graph of the Milnor fibre boundary by modifying a good embedded
resolution graph of the double point locus of @xmath .

### Summary and organization of the thesis

#### Immersions associated with holomorphic germs

The main purpose of Chapter 1 is to introduce Mond invariants @xmath and
@xmath of holomorphic germs @xmath . @xmath is the number of cross cap
points, @xmath is the number of triple values of a stabilization of
@xmath , but each can be calculated as the codimension of a suitable
ideal of the local ring as well, without stabilizing @xmath . Chapter 1
also serves as a collection of relations of these invariants with other
concepts, which will appear in the subsequent chapters.

First we introduce the notion of germs and the finiteness property of
them. We follow [ 20 , 48 ] . The associated smooth map @xmath is
defined for finite germs @xmath , it slightly generalizes the notion of
the associated immersion introduced in [ 53 ] .

The theory of stability and finite determinacy of germs were devised by
e.g. H. Whitney, J. N. Mather and C. T. C. Wall [ 71 , 35 , 36 , 37 , 38
] . We introduce both concepts with respect to @xmath -equivalence
(left-right equivalence). The discussion of the stability also serves as
a background for the singular Seifert surfaces, which are defined in
Chapter 2 as stable smooth maps. We review theorems of Mather and
Gaffney characterizing the stability and finite @xmath -determinacy in
terms of the @xmath and @xmath codimensions of a germ. The only stable
multigerms of a map @xmath are regular simple points, regular double
values with transverse intersection of the branches, regular triple
values with regular intersection of the branches and simple Whitney
umbrella (cross cap) points. The triple values and the Whitney umbrellas
are isolated points.

The discussion of the Fitting ideals has two purposes. The defining
equation @xmath of the image of a finite germ @xmath can be determined
using Fitting ideals. Moreover, by this process one can calculate the
equations of the multiple point spaces of @xmath in the target as well.
In particular, the number of the triple values of a stabilization can be
determined with the help of Fitting ideals.

We introduce @xmath as the codimension of the ideal in the local ring
@xmath generated by the determinants of the @xmath minors of the
Jacobian matrix of @xmath [ 43 , 45 ] . Similarly, @xmath is the
codimension of the second Fitting ideal associated with @xmath in @xmath
. If @xmath is finitely @xmath -determined, then both @xmath and @xmath
are finite, and any stabilization of @xmath has @xmath cross caps and
@xmath triple values. The finiteness of @xmath is equivalent with the
fact that @xmath is singular only at the origin, which also means that
the associated map @xmath is an immersion. Finite @xmath -determinacy is
equivalent with the fact that the associated map @xmath is a stable
immersion. Mond [ 45 ] introduced a third invariant @xmath for corank–
@xmath germs @xmath , such that the finite @xmath -determinacy of @xmath
is equivalent with the finiteness of the three invariant @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath . These invariants appear in the formulas expressing the
image Milnor number (which is the second Betti number of the image of a
stabilization of @xmath ), and in the formulas comparing the Milnor
numbers of the four double point spaces as well [ 47 , 30 , 34 ] . The
structure of the double point spaces plays an important role in Chapter
5 . The end of Chapter 1 is a short review about a reinterpretation of
Mond’s invariants provided by W. L. Marar and J. J. Nuño-Ballesteros [
32 ] .

Chapter 2 provides an introduction to the Hirsch-Smale theory [ 16 , 64
] , which transforms regular homotopy problems (differential topology)
to homotopy theory (algebraic topology). The main purpose is to review
the Hughes–Melvin definition of the integer valued Smale invariant of
immersions @xmath [ 17 ] , and the Ekholm–Szűcs formulas expressing the
Smale invariant in terms of the properties of singular Seifert surfaces
[ 9 ] .

Smale’s theorem is the generalization of the Whitney–Graustein theorem
about plane curve immersions @xmath , and it is a special case of the
Hirsch theorem, in fact, a special case of the @xmath -principle of
Gromov. We review Hirsch theorem and the construction of the Smale
invariant @xmath of an immersion @xmath . @xmath is an element of an
Abelian group depending on the dimensions @xmath and @xmath , and two
immersions @xmath are regular homotopic if and only if their Smale
invariants are equal. The possibility of the ‘sphere eversion’ is a
consequence of Smale’s theorem as well.

J. F. Hughes and P. M. Melvin [ 17 ] proved that there are embeddings
@xmath wich are not regular homotopic to each other. They also express
the Smale invariant of an embedding @xmath with the signature of a
Seifert surface, which is a @xmath -manifold in @xmath whose boundary is
the image of the embedding. T. Ekholm and A. Szűcs [ 9 ] generalized
this result to arbitrary immersions @xmath using singular Seifert
surfaces. One contribution of their formulas is the invariant @xmath of
stable immersions @xmath introduced by Ekholm in [ 7 ] . It has several
slightly different definitions [ 7 , 8 , 9 , 60 ] . We review these
definitions and the proof of their equivalence.

The end of Chapter 2 is an outline of various related results, we
mention here two of them. S. Kinjo defined immersions @xmath associated
with plumbing graphs of type @xmath and @xmath . The point is that their
Smale invariants agree with the Smale invariants of the immersions
associated with the coverings @xmath of the singularities of type @xmath
and @xmath , see below in the introduction. The @xmath valued cobordism
invariant called ‘total twist’ of immersions @xmath [ 18 ] is used
later, in Chapter 5 , to conclude that @xmath and the number of the
non-trivially covered double point curve components of a finitely
determined germ @xmath have the same parity.

Chapter 3 includes our results published in [ 53 ] . The main theorem
answers the question of Mumford mentioned above. Namely, @xmath holds
for holomorphic germs @xmath singular only at the origin, where @xmath
is the Smale invariant of the immersion @xmath associated with @xmath .
We refer to this result as the ‘main formula’. There are several
consequences of this result.

Using the main formula we can provide explicit (‘algebraic’)
representatives of each regular homotopy class of immersions @xmath .
This answers a question of Smale [ 64 ] . In contrast with the known
@xmath constructions, these realizations are very simple polynomial
maps, and the computation of the Smale invariant via @xmath is extremely
simple.

The non-standard embeddings @xmath of Hughes and Melvin [ 17 ] cannot be
realized as the associated immersion of some @xmath . Although this fact
follows from a deep result of Mumford [ 50 ] , using our main formula we
provide a new proof for it. Moreover, the ‘topological vanishing’ @xmath
implies that @xmath is the regular germ via our formula.

We prove the formula @xmath in two steps. We introduce the newly defined
‘complex Smale invariant’ @xmath of @xmath . It turns out that @xmath
and @xmath . We use @xmath as the number of cross caps of a
stabilization of @xmath , and we do not use its algebraic definition as
the codimension of the ramification ideal. However, as a by-product of
the calculation we provide a new proof for the theorem of Mond declaring
the equivalence of the two definitions of @xmath in the case of corank–
@xmath germs.

Note that the integer valued Smale invariant is well defined only up to
sign. To determine the correct sign of the main formula, we fix
generators of the corresponding infinite cyclic groups. The
Hughes–Melvin and Ekholm–Szűcs formulas carry the sign ambiguity as
well. We determine their correct sign with the help of the main formula
and calculations of concrete examples. As a by-product of this
procedure, we express the contributions of the Ekholm–Szűcs formulas in
terms of @xmath and @xmath for a special singular Seifert surface, which
is created from a holomorphic stabilization of @xmath by stabilizing the
complex Whitney umbrella points in @xmath sense. In particular, @xmath
holds for finitely determined germs @xmath and their associated stable
immersions @xmath .

It follows from our results that the analytic invariants @xmath and
@xmath are @xmath invariants as well, moreover, @xmath is a topological
invariant of @xmath .

#### Boundary of the Milnor fibre

Chapter 4 contains the definitions and some properties of the Milnor
fibre and the resolution of surface singularities @xmath . The plumbing
construction and the embedded resolution of plane curve singularities
are also summarised in Chapter 4 .

The Milnor fibre of an isolated hypersurface surface singularity is well
studied and it is rather well understood. It has the homotopy type of a
bouquet of 2–spheres, it is an oriented smooth 4–manifold whose boundary
is diffeomorphic with the link of the singular germ and also with the
boundary of any resolution of the germ [ 42 , 51 , 52 ] . This boundary
is a plumbed 3–manifold and one can take as a plumbing graph any of the
resolution graphs. It is the basic bridge between the Milnor fibre and
the resolution (both of them being complex analytic fillings of it), and
this connection produces several nice formulas connecting the invariants
of these fillings. Here primarily we think about formulas of Laufer [ 27
] or Durfee [ 5 ] and their generalizations, see e.g. [ 70 ] .

For non–isolated hypersurface singularities in @xmath the situation is
more complicated. First of all, the link of the germ is not smooth,
hence the boundary of the Milnor fibre cannot be isomorphic with it.
Moreover, a (any) resolution is in fact the resolution of the
normalization (which might contain considerable less information than
what one needs in order to recover the Milnor fibre @xmath , or the
Milnor fibre boundary @xmath ), see e.g. [ 62 , 55 ] . For example (see
our case), it can happen that the normalization is smooth, while @xmath
is rather complicated. However, the boundary of the Milnor fibre is
still a plumbed 3–manifold, and one expects that its plumbing graph
codifies considerable information about the germ. @xmath can be obtained
by surgery of two pieces: one of them is the boundary of the resolution
of the normalization, the other one is related to the transverse
singularities associated with the singular curves of the hypersurface
singularity [ 62 , 55 , 39 ] . In particular, the boundary of the Milnor
fibre plays the same crucial role as in the isolated singularity case
(in fact, it is the unique object in this case, which might fulfil this
role): it is the first step in the description of the Milnor fibre, and
it is the bridge in the direction of the resolution and the transverse
types of the components of the singular locus.

[ 55 ] presents a general algorithm, which provides the boundary of the
Milnor fibre @xmath for any non–isolated hypersurface singularity in
@xmath . However, this algorithm uses (some information from) the
embedded resolution of this pair, hence it is rather technical and in
concrete examples is rather computational. Therefore, for particular
families of singularities it is preferable to find more direct
description of the plumbing graph of @xmath directly from the peculiar
intrinsic geometry of the germ. For several examples in the literature
see e.g. [ 55 ] (homogeneous singularities, cylinders of plane curves,
@xmath , @xmath ), [ 63 ] ( @xmath ); or for other classes consult also
[ 40 ] and [ 1 ] .

Chapter 5 contains the results of [ 54 ] . It provides an explicit
construction producing the plumbing graph for the boundary of the Milnor
fiber of a non-isolated hypersurface singularity @xmath given by the
image of a finitely determined complex analytic map germ @xmath . One of
the main ingredients is the link @xmath in @xmath of the reduced double
point curve @xmath with irreducible components @xmath , where @xmath is
the reduced singular locus. It is equipped with a pairing of the
components @xmath induced by the pairing of the double points. Then, the
Milnor fiber boundary is constructed as a surgery of @xmath along @xmath
such that whenever @xmath the tubular neighbourhoods of the paired
components have to be glued together, while in the case @xmath a special
@xmath -manifold @xmath with torus boundary is glued along @xmath . The
description of the gluing maps uses the newly defined invariants
‘vertical indices’ associated with the irreducible components of @xmath
. Their relation with @xmath is clarified whenever @xmath is a corank–
@xmath germ and @xmath vanishes. As a result, the explicit plumbing
graph of the Milnor fiber boundary is constructed from a good embedded
resolution graph of @xmath . The algorithm is also illustrated on
several examples.

### The main examples

#### Finitely determined germs

D. Mond’s list of simple germs [ 45 , Table 1] contains finitely @xmath
-determined holomorphic germs @xmath with @xmath . These germs are
organized in four families @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and there
are two sporadic elements, the Whitney umbrella (cross cap) and @xmath .

The associated immersions of @xmath provide representatives of all
regular homotopy classes with negative Smale invariant, see Section 3.5
.

The Whitney umbrella is stable as a holomorphic germ @xmath , see
Example 1.2.16 , but not in the @xmath sense, as a real germ @xmath . We
present a @xmath stabilization of the complex Whitney umbrella in
Section 3.7 and we calculate directly the contributions of the
Ekholm–Szűcs formula.

In Section 5.5 we present a plumbing graph of the Milnor fibre boundary
of the image of @xmath for all members of Mond’s list.

The germs @xmath of type @xmath are the only germs in the list with
@xmath . In Section 1.3 we calculate @xmath and the equation of @xmath
using Fitting ideals.

@xmath is a corank– @xmath germ from [ 31 ] , that is, @xmath . We
present the Milnor fibre boundary of its image, see Section 5.5 .

#### Quotient singularities

The simple singularities @xmath are the quotient singularities of type
@xmath - @xmath - @xmath , that is, @xmath for a certain finite subgroup
@xmath . The covering map of a quotient singularity is a germ @xmath
whose image is @xmath . The components of @xmath are the generators of
the @xmath -invariant algebra @xmath [ 65 ] .

These germs @xmath are singular only at the origin, but they are not
finitely @xmath -determined germs, i.e. @xmath is a nonstable immersion.
In fact, if @xmath , then every point of @xmath is at least triple value
of @xmath , and for @xmath the transversality of the branches does not
hold.

In Subsection 1.4.3 we present @xmath of these germs @xmath , hence the
Smale invariant of the associated immersions @xmath follows from the
main formula, see Section 3.5 .

In Section 3.7 we present a holomorphic stabilization of the covering
germ @xmath of the @xmath singularity, and we calculate @xmath directly.
Note that its associated immersion @xmath is regular homotopic with the
immersions of the same structure (that is, a composition of a covering
with an embedding) studied in several articles [ 41 , 11 , 7 , 24 ] ,
see the discussion in Subsection 2.3.2 .

### Notations and terminology

-   @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath : the set of integers, rational,
    real, complex numbers.

-   @xmath means that the (oriented) smooth manifold @xmath and @xmath
    are (oriented) diffeomorphic.

-   @xmath means that the algebraic structures or bundles @xmath and
    @xmath are isomorphic, or denotes the analytic equivalence of the
    analytic spaces/germs @xmath and @xmath .

-   @xmath means that the algebraic structure (module, vector space)
    @xmath is generated by @xmath and @xmath . @xmath denotes the group
    presented by generators @xmath and @xmath and relations @xmath and
    @xmath .

-   @xmath denotes the ideal in the ring/algebra @xmath generated by the
    elements @xmath (or denotes the pair of arbitrary elements @xmath
    and @xmath as well).

-   @xmath denotes the dimension of the vector space or manifold @xmath
    over @xmath . Dimension over another field @xmath is denoted by
    @xmath . The rank of a matrix/linear map @xmath is denoted by @xmath
    .

-   @xmath , resp. @xmath denotes the (oriented) diffeomorphism type of
    the unit sphere, resp. the unit ball in @xmath . The @xmath -disc is
    denoted by @xmath . When it is important, we distinguish the
    embedded and the abstract spheres and balls in the notation.

-   @xmath denotes the set of homotopy classes of continuous maps
    between the topological spaces @xmath and @xmath .

-   @xmath denotes the bouquet (wedge, one-point union) of the (pointed)
    topological spaces @xmath and @xmath .

-   @xmath , resp. @xmath denotes the homology groups, resp. cohomology
    groups of the topological space @xmath with coefficient group @xmath
    .

-   @xmath is the @xmath -th homotopy group of the topological space
    @xmath .

-   @xmath ( @xmath ) denotes the differential/tangent map/Jacobian
    matrix of the function/map/germ @xmath (at the point @xmath ).

-   We call a smooth (or analytic) germ @xmath regular (resp. singular),
    if the rank of @xmath is equal (resp. is less than) the minimum of
    the dimensions of @xmath and @xmath .

-   @xmath denotes the set of @xmath matrices over @xmath with
    determinant @xmath . In the real case @xmath is the set of @xmath
    matrices with determinant @xmath .

-   @xmath ( @xmath ), resp. @xmath ( @xmath ) denotes the set of real
    ortogonal matrices (with determinant @xmath ), resp. complex unitary
    matrices (with determinant @xmath ).

-   @xmath (where @xmath denotes @xmath or @xmath ) is the Stiefel
    manifold that consists of linearly independent @xmath -frames of
    @xmath .

## Chapter 1 Deformation of complex map germs

### 1.1. Finite complex germs and their restrictions at the level of
links

#### 1.1.1. Finite germs

The basic objects of the thesis are certain types of holomorphic map
germs @xmath . The concept of the germ is an important tool in the study
of the local behaviour of the maps.

Two subsets @xmath and @xmath of the topological space @xmath have the
same germ at @xmath , if there is a neighbourhood @xmath of @xmath such
that @xmath . The equivalence classes of this equivalence relation are
called the germs of spaces at the point @xmath [ 20 , Definition 3.4.1.]
. The germs along a subset @xmath can be defined similarly.

Let @xmath and @xmath be two germs of topological spaces. A germ of a
continuous map @xmath is defined as an equivalence class of maps @xmath
, with @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath are representatives of @xmath
and @xmath respectively. Two maps @xmath and @xmath are equivalent (they
define the same germ) if they agree on an open neighbourhood @xmath of
@xmath [ 20 , Definition 3.4.6.] . Changing @xmath to a finite subset
@xmath we get the notion of multi-germ . [ 48 , 71 ]

We also can define smooth (resp. analytic, holomorphic) germs of maps,
as germs of smooth (resp. analytic, holomorphic) maps. We study
holomorphic germs @xmath throughout this chapter, and germs of complex
analytic spaces are studied in Chapter 4 .

The notion of germ is particularly interesting in the complex analytic
category, because of uniqueness of analytic continuation: if @xmath and
@xmath are open sets in @xmath with @xmath connected, and @xmath are
complex analytic maps which coincide on some open @xmath , they coincide
on all of @xmath [ 48 ] .

The holomorphic germs @xmath can be identified with the @xmath -tuples
of locally convergent power series in @xmath variables with constant
terms @xmath , i.e. with the elements of @xmath , where @xmath is the
unique maximal ideal in the local ring @xmath .

A holomorphic germ @xmath is called finite , if @xmath is a finite set,
that is, @xmath for a small enough representative of @xmath [ 20 ,
Definition 3.4.7., Theorem 3.4.24] .

Finiteness can be characterized by the local algebras. The germ @xmath
induces an algebra homomorphism @xmath . In this way @xmath becomes a
module over @xmath , sometimes it is denoted by @xmath as well.

###### Theorem 1.1.1 ([20, Theorem 3.4.24.]).

The following facts are equivalent:

(a) @xmath is finite.

(b) @xmath is a finitely generated @xmath -module.

(c) @xmath is a finite dimensional @xmath -vector space.

Note that @xmath denotes the ideal generated by the coordinate functions
of @xmath .

A finite germ @xmath is generically @xmath to @xmath to its image, if
there is a hypersurface @xmath (where @xmath ) such that @xmath induces
a bijection between @xmath and @xmath .

#### 1.1.2. Restriction of @xmath at the level of links

Here we present the discussion from [ 53 , Section 2.1.] slightly
generalized. This topic is closely related to the link of complex
analytic spacegerms, which is discussed in Chapter 4 .

If @xmath is a complex analytic germ with an isolated singularity @xmath
then its link @xmath can be defined as follows. Set a real analytic map
@xmath such that @xmath . Then, for @xmath sufficiently small, @xmath is
an oriented manifold, whose isotopy class (in @xmath ) is independent of
all the choices, cf. Lemma (2.2) and Proposition (2.5) of [ 29 ] . E.g.,
if @xmath is a subset of @xmath , then one can take the restriction of
@xmath (the norm of @xmath ). In this way, the link of @xmath is the
sphere @xmath . Nevertheless, the general definition is very convenient
even if @xmath .

Let @xmath be a finite holomorphic germ ( @xmath ). Define @xmath by
@xmath . Since @xmath , @xmath too.

###### Lemma 1.1.2.

There exists an @xmath sufficiently small such that @xmath is a
non-metric @xmath closed ball around the origin of @xmath for any @xmath
. Its boundary, @xmath is canonically diffeomorphic to @xmath . In fact,
for @xmath with @xmath , any standard metric sphere @xmath sits in
@xmath , and it is isotopic with @xmath in @xmath .

In the sequel @xmath and @xmath will be identified. When it is important
to differentiate them we will use the notation @xmath . We write also
@xmath and @xmath .

###### Definition 1.1.3.

The restriction @xmath is the (smooth) map associated with @xmath at the
level of links.

### 1.2. Finite determinacy and stability

#### 1.2.1. Equvivalence of the germs

Several equivalence relations of the germs are studied in the
literature. We refer mainly to Wall’s survey paper [ 71 ] and the book
of Mond and Nuño-Ballesteros [ 48 ] (which is still unpublished). The
concept of stability and finite determinacy makes sense after fixing a
certain equivalence relation. Geometrically @xmath -equivalence is the
most reasonable, that corresponds to the coordinate changes in the
source and in the target of a germ. We use only @xmath -equivalence in
this thesis. However, the results and classification theorems connected
with @xmath -equivalence require the study of some of the other
equivalences as well.

Most of the equivalences come from certain group actions on the set of
germs, the equivalence classes are the orbits of the action. The group
@xmath (resp. @xmath ) consists of the germs of local automorphism of
the target (resp. the source), and acts on the germs by composing from
the left (resp. from the right). The corresponding equivalence relation
is the left (resp. right) equivalence of the germs. The direct product
of these groups is denoted by @xmath , its left-right action induces
@xmath -equivalence. The type of the local automorphisms depends on the
category of the germs: these are local homeomorphisms for continuous
germs, local diffeomorphisms for smooth germs, local analytic
equivalences, biholomorphisms for real analytic, holomorphic germs.
There are two other groups which are often studied, @xmath and @xmath ,
the last one is contact equivalence.

In this thesis we use only @xmath -equivalence, but in several different
categories. For the study of holomorphic germs we usually use complex
analytic @xmath -equivalence, but some of our results can be interpreted
in other categories as well: as it will turn out, some analytic
invariants of the germs are invariant under topological (or smooth)
@xmath -action as well, see Subsection 3.1.6 . The flexibility to use
the smooth category is provided by the study of the link, since @xmath
is a smooth map between smooth manifolds (spheres).

The singular Seifert surfaces discussed in Subsection 2.2.3 are defined
as stable smooth maps. Thus we need @xmath -equivalence of global maps
as well: that corresponds to the action of global homeomorphisms
(diffeomorphism, biholomorphism) of the source and the target. Moreover,
the stability with respect to this equivalence (global @xmath
-equivalence) can be reduced to the local stability of the germs of the
map, [ 48 , 37 ] .

The following general concepts can be found in [ 71 , 48 ] , here we
present the main theorems to provide a stable background to our study.
Most of them hold for @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath equivalences
too, in smooth and analytic categories as well. But they are meaningless
in the continuous category, because there is no Taylor-expansion and the
codimension of the orbits cannot be defined.

Note that most of the notions and invariants introduced in this chapter
are @xmath -invariants. That is, if @xmath and @xmath are @xmath
-equivalent germs (as complex analytic germs), then @xmath is @xmath
-stable (resp. finitely @xmath -determined) if and only if @xmath is
@xmath -stable (resp. finitely @xmath -determined), @xmath , @xmath ,
and similarly the invariants @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath (and the
Milnor number of other double point spaces) agree for @xmath and @xmath
.

#### 1.2.2. Unfolding and stability

@xmath -stability means that any small perturbation of a germ is @xmath
-equivalent with the germ itself. To make this precise, we need the
notion of unfoldings.

###### Definition 1.2.1.

(a) An @xmath -parameter unfolding of @xmath is a germ

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that @xmath .

(b) Two unfoldings @xmath and @xmath of @xmath are @xmath -equivalent
unfoldings, if there are diffeomorphism germs @xmath and @xmath , which
are unfoldings of the identity of @xmath and @xmath , and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(c) An unfolding of @xmath is trivial if it is equivalent with the
constant unfolding, @xmath .

If the unfolding @xmath is fixed, then we will use the notation @xmath
instead of @xmath for the deformation of @xmath corresponding to the
parameter value @xmath .

An unfolding is versal if it induces all the unfoldings up to @xmath
-equivalence:

###### Definition 1.2.2.

(a) The pull-back of an @xmath -parameter unfolding @xmath of @xmath
with a germ @xmath is the @xmath -parameter unfolding @xmath , @xmath .

(b) An @xmath -parameter unfolding @xmath of @xmath is called versal
unfolding, if any unfolding (with arbitrary number of parameters) is
equivalent with @xmath for a certain germ @xmath .

###### Definition 1.2.3.

A germ @xmath is stable (more precisely, @xmath -stable) if any
unfolding of @xmath is trivial.

The definitions of the unfolding and trivial unfolding generalize to
multi-germs, replacing the base point @xmath in the source with a finite
set @xmath . Then the stability of a multi-germ can be defined in the
same way. Moreover the stability of the multi-germs can be reduced to
the stability of its germs. For details we refer to [ 48 ] . Here we
present only the simplest case, which is used many times in this thesis.
First we need a definition.

###### Definition 1.2.4.

The subspaces @xmath of the vector space @xmath (of finite dimension)
meet in general position (or have regular intersection ) if @xmath .

Note that for two subspaces regular intersection means transversality.

###### Proposition 1.2.5.

A multigerm of regular germs (i.e., each branch is the germ of an
immersion) is stable if and only if the intersection of the branches is
regular.

###### Remark 1.2.6.

By Theorem 4 in [ 37 ] (see also in [ 48 ] ) the stability of proper
smooth global maps is equivalent with the stability of its multi-germs.
This fact shows that we do not need to introduce the notion of ‘global
stability’. We call a smooth map stable if all its multi-germs of are
stable.

#### 1.2.3. Finite determinacy and codimension

###### Definition 1.2.7.

A holomorphic germ @xmath is finitely @xmath -determined if there is an
integer @xmath such that whenever the @xmath -jet ( @xmath -th Taylor
polynomial) of a germ equals with the @xmath -jet of @xmath , then the
germ is @xmath -equivalent with @xmath .

Next we define the @xmath -codimension of @xmath , this is the
codimension of the @xmath -orbit of @xmath in the space of the germs
@xmath . We define the @xmath -codimension as well [ 71 , pg. 485.] , [
48 ] . Stability and finite determinacy can be characterized by these
invariants.

Let @xmath denote the set of the germs of vector fields on @xmath ,
these are the germs of holomorphic sections of the tangent bundle @xmath
. @xmath is the space of germ of vector fields along @xmath , these are
the germs of holomorphic sections of the pull-back tangent bundle @xmath
. Let @xmath denote the vector fields along @xmath which are @xmath at
the origin, clearly @xmath . Note that @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are
@xmath -modules, in particular they are @xmath -vector spaces.

Furthermore, the following identifications hold by introducing local
coordinates.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Define the @xmath -linear maps

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In local coordinates @xmath is the multiplication by the Jacobian of
@xmath , while @xmath is the substitution of the components of @xmath .

The tangent space @xmath of the @xmath -orbit of @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

it is a subspace of @xmath [ 71 , pg. 485.] , [ 48 ] .

###### Definition 1.2.8.

The @xmath -codimension of @xmath is @xmath .

The extended tangent space @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

it is a subspace of @xmath [ 71 ] , [ 48 ] .

###### Definition 1.2.9.

The @xmath -codimension of @xmath is @xmath .

To motivate these definitions note that @xmath is equal to the ‘set of
one-parameter infinitesimal deformations of @xmath ’, that is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath contains the elements of @xmath correspond to the unfoldings
with @xmath . @xmath can be considered as the tangent space of the space
of the germs @xmath at @xmath .

@xmath consists of the vector fields along @xmath which correspond to
trivial infinitesimal deformations and are @xmath at the origin, ie.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are one-parameter families of germs of
biholomorphisms in the source and in the target with @xmath , @xmath .
Without the extra conditions @xmath , @xmath the formula provides @xmath
.

The extended codimension is a more natural concept in many cases, see
e.g. Theorem 1.2.10 below. However @xmath does not correspond to any
group action or equivalence of the germs, since it allows the origin to
move.

Stability and finite determinacy can be determined by the following
characterization theorems by Mather, see Theorems 1.2., 3.4. and
Proposition 4.5.2. in [ 71 ] , or [ 35 , 36 , 48 ] .

###### Theorem 1.2.10.

Let @xmath a holomorphic germ. Then the following are equivalent:

(a) @xmath is stable.

(b) The @xmath -codimension of @xmath is @xmath .

Property (b) is called ‘infinitezimal stability’. By Theorem 1.2.10 this
is eqiuvalent with stability. In the sense of Remark 1.2.6 ‘global
stability’ is also equivalent with them.

###### Theorem 1.2.11.

Let @xmath be a holomorphic germ. Then the following are equivalent:

(a) @xmath is finitely @xmath -determined.

(b) The @xmath -codimension of @xmath is finite.

(c) The @xmath -codimension of @xmath is finite.

(d) @xmath admits a versal unfolding.

The minimal number of parameters of a versal unfolding is exactly the
@xmath -codimension of @xmath . A versal unfolding with minimal numer of
parameters is called miniversal unfolding. This is unique up to @xmath
-equivalence of unfoldings. All the other versal unfoldings can be
obtained as a trivial unfolding of the miniversal unfolding up to @xmath
-equivalence of unfoldings.

Finally, by Mather-Gaffney criterion [ 71 , Theorem 2.1.] finite
determinacy is equivalent with isolated instability, which means each
multi-germ of @xmath is stable in a sufficiantly small representative of
@xmath .

###### Theorem 1.2.12 (Mather-Gaffney criterion [30, 71, 48]).

A finite holomorphic germ @xmath ( @xmath ) is finitely determined if
and only if @xmath has isolated instability at @xmath .

Note that there is a more general version of Mather-Gaffney criterion,
which agrees with our version for finite germs mapping @xmath with
@xmath . Cf. [ 30 , Theorem 2.11.] , [ 71 , Theorem 2.1.] and [ 48 ] .

###### Remark 1.2.13.

The concept of stability and finite determinacy can be defined similarly
for @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath equivalences too, and they
determine important classes of germs. For example @xmath -stable (resp.
@xmath -stable) germs are the germs of the immersions (resp.
submersions), and a germ is finitely @xmath -determined if and only if
it is finite. The codimension and the extended codimension can also be
defined for the other groups, and the characterisation theorems 1.2.10 ,
1.2.11 , 1.2.12 hold in the same form, if we replace @xmath with any of
the other groups.

Furthermore, all the concepts and theorems 1.2.10 , 1.2.11 hold in
smooth and real analytic category too. However Theorem 1.2.12 holds only
for holomorphic germs. For real analytic germs the following criterion
is useful.

###### Proposition 1.2.14 ([71, Proposition 1.7.]).

For real analytic germs the following are equivalent:

(a) The germ is finitely determined as a smooth germ.

(b) The germ is finitely determined as a real analytic germ.

(c) The complexification of the germ is finitely determined as a
holomorphic germ.

#### 1.2.4. Examples

###### Example 1.2.15 (@xmath).

A germ @xmath is stable if and only if it is regular (submersion) or it
is Morse type, i.e. equivalent with @xmath .

A germ @xmath with isolated singularity at @xmath (which means @xmath is
submersion outside the origin) is finitely determined. See [ 20 ,
Theorem 9.1.3.] or [ 48 ] .

###### Example 1.2.16 (Whitney-umbrella).

The ( @xmath -equivalence class of) the germ @xmath is called Whitney
umbrella (or cross cap , pinch point ), see Figure 1.1 . Another often
used form is @xmath , see Example 5.1. in [ 32 ] , which is summarized
in paragraph 1.5.2 , and @xmath from Mond’s simple germ list in [ 45 ] .
@xmath and @xmath are @xmath -equivalent, since @xmath holds with the
germs of diffeomorphisms @xmath and @xmath .

The Whitney umbrella is stable as a holomorphic germ @xmath , and also
as real analytic or smooth germ @xmath , cf. 1.2.12 . Its stability is
very important throughout the thesis, hence we present here a proof of
this fact, by calculating the @xmath -codimension of @xmath (and then
referring to Theorem 1.2.10 ).

For an arbitrary germ of a vector field

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

one has

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

thus @xmath consists of germs of vector fields whose components are
power series of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . It is clear that the only
monomials which cannot appear in the components are the odd powers of
@xmath . The Jacobian of @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

thus for a germ of a vector field

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore @xmath contains the vector fields whose coordinate functions
are odd powers of @xmath . One can conclude that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

thus the @xmath -codimension of @xmath is @xmath , which means @xmath is
stable.

###### Example 1.2.17 (@xmath).

(a) A germ @xmath is stable if and only if it is

1.  an immersion (given by @xmath up to @xmath -equivalence), or

2.  a Whitney umbrella.

(b) The stable multi-germs of a map from @xmath to @xmath are the

1.  regular single values (with @xmath preimage in which the germ of the
    map is an immersion),

2.  regular double values with transverse intersection,

3.  regular triple values with regular intersection,

4.  single Whitney umbrella points.

(c) A germ @xmath is finitely @xmath -determined if and only if (a small
enough representative of) @xmath is a stable immersion with only double
values. That is, all the multi-germs of @xmath have type (1) or (2) from
the list of the stable multi-germs in part (b).

Part (c) follows from Theorem 1.2.12 and from the fact, that isolated
stable multi-germs ((3) and (4) from the list in (b)) can be omitted
with the choice of a small enough representative of @xmath .

###### Example 1.2.18 (@xmath).

The stable germs and multigerms of the real analytic or smooth maps from
@xmath to @xmath are formally the same as the complex ones. That is,
part (a) and (b) of 1.2.17 hold word for word if we change @xmath to
@xmath . This follows from the fact that the calculation of the @xmath
-codimension is a formal algebraic procedure, cf. Example 1.2.16 .

However part (c) of Example 1.2.17 is not valid for real germs, only in
one direction: a finitely @xmath -determined real analytic or smooth
germ @xmath is stable immersion outside the origin. This follows
directly from Proposition 1.2.14 and part (c) of Example 1.2.17 . On the
other hand, @xmath is an immersion outside the origin if and only if the
Jacobian ideal of @xmath is concentrated to the origin. It can happen
that the real zero set of the Jacobian ideal consists only the origin,
but its complex zero set is bigger: such a germ is an immersion outside
the origin as a real germ, but not as a complex germ, hence it is not
finitely determined. Finitely determined real germs from @xmath to
@xmath are studied for example in [ 33 ] .

###### Example 1.2.19 (@xmath).

A holomorphic map from @xmath to @xmath can be regarded as a smooth
(real analytic) map from @xmath to @xmath . However the stability of the
complex map does not imply the stability of the real map, because the
complex Whitney umbrella is not stable as a germ from @xmath to @xmath .
The list of the stable multi-germs of a map from @xmath to @xmath
consists of regular simple, double and triple values with regular
intersection (cf. 1.2.17 ), and – instead of the isolated complex
Whitney umbrella points – it contains the fold points (whose normal form
is @xmath ), which form a submanifold of dimension @xmath . In Section
3.7 we present a real stabilization of the complex Whitney umbrella.

### 1.3. Fitting ideals

#### 1.3.1. Presentation matrix

The equation of the image and the multiple point spaces in the target
can be determined by Fitting ideals. Here we present the general
procedure and some examples. For more details and the properties of
these ideals we refer to [ 48 , 49 ] .

Let @xmath be a finite holomorphic germ and @xmath . Then @xmath has a
well-defined image, @xmath is an analytic set in @xmath . The ideal of
the functions vanishing on the image of @xmath can be determined by
Fitting ideal method.

By Theorem 1.1.1 @xmath is a finitely generated @xmath -module, see also
[ 48 , 49 ] , we denote it by @xmath . A choice of a set of generators
induces an epimorphism @xmath . Its kernel is also finitely generated,
because @xmath is Noetherian. That can be summarised in the exact
sequence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We call the homomorphism @xmath the presentation of @xmath , its matrix
is the presentation matrix of @xmath (denoted also by @xmath ). Each
column of @xmath expresses a relation between the generators, and they
together generate all the relations.

@xmath may be chosen injective, and this forces @xmath ( @xmath is a
square matrix) [ 48 ] .

###### Definition 1.3.1.

The @xmath -th Fitting ideal @xmath of @xmath is the ideal in @xmath
generated by the determinants of the @xmath minors of the presentation
matrix @xmath .

It can be shown that the Fitting ideals do not depend on the choice of
the presentation @xmath .

@xmath provides an analytic structure of the @xmath -fold multiple value
set of @xmath .

###### Theorem 1.3.2.

The zero set of @xmath consists of points in @xmath with at least @xmath
preimages counting with multiplicity.

Especially, for @xmath the Fitting ideal provides an analytic structure
of the image of @xmath .

###### Theorem 1.3.3 ([69]).

The zero set of @xmath is the image of @xmath . In other words @xmath .

Although @xmath is not necessarily a reduced equation, its geometrical
meaning is very natural, as we will see in Example 1.3.5 .

A presentation can be found by the following procedure. Let @xmath
denote the coordinates of the point @xmath in the source, and let @xmath
denote the coordinates in the target. @xmath , that is, @xmath .

1.  Define @xmath as @xmath . Suppose that @xmath is finite. This always
    can be obtained by a linear change of the coordinates.

2.  Find generators @xmath of @xmath , i.e. @xmath generates @xmath as a
    module over @xmath via @xmath . By Nakayama lemma that happens if
    and only if the classes of @xmath form a basis of the @xmath -vector
    space @xmath , which is finite dimensional since @xmath is finite.
    Note that one of the generators must be a unit, we take @xmath .

3.  Find the coefficients @xmath (in the target) to express @xmath for
    all @xmath .

4.  Define @xmath , where @xmath is @xmath for @xmath and @xmath for
    @xmath . Then @xmath is a presentation matrix of @xmath .

#### 1.3.2. Examples

###### Example 1.3.4 (@xmath, @xmath).

In this case @xmath . This is a simple germ from Mond’s list [ 45 ] , in
fact, the first one, for which finding the equation of the image is not
trivial. Here we provide it as the determinant of a presentation matrix.
We use coordinates @xmath in the source and @xmath in the target.

@xmath is also finite, since @xmath . @xmath , thus the module @xmath is
generated by @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a presentation matrix of @xmath .

The equation of the image is @xmath . @xmath is the ideal generated by
@xmath . The determinants of the @xmath minors of @xmath generate the
first Fitting ideal, @xmath . Its zero set consists of the double values
of @xmath . Finally, @xmath is generated by the @xmath minors of @xmath
, thus @xmath . Its zero set is a fat point: the origin with
multiplicity @xmath . This corresponds to the fact that any stable
deformation of @xmath has @xmath triple values, cf. Subsection 1.4.2 .

###### Example 1.3.5 (Singularities of type @xmath).

These are quotient singularities of the form @xmath , where @xmath
denotes the cyclic group of order @xmath , and the action is @xmath for
@xmath . @xmath is the image of a map @xmath , whose components are the
generators of the invariant algebra @xmath , see [ 65 , page 95] ,
namely @xmath . For @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a presentation matrix of @xmath . @xmath is a not reduced equation of
the image of @xmath : it reflects to the fact that @xmath is a double
cover of its image outside the origin. @xmath , the ideal generated by
the determinants of the @xmath minors of @xmath equals to the ideal
generated by @xmath , corresponding to the fact that the whole image of
@xmath consists of double values. @xmath is a codimension @xmath ideal
in @xmath , that means any stable deformation of @xmath has @xmath
triple value, see 1.4.2 and Figure 1.3 .

For arbitrary @xmath the equation given by @xmath is the @xmath -th
power a reduced germ, reflecting to the @xmath -fold covering outside
the origin.

###### Example 1.3.6 (Cuspidal edge).

Consider @xmath . The presentation matrix is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath . However @xmath does not have ordinary double values, the
cuspidal edge @xmath lies in the closure of the double values of a
stable deformation of @xmath .

### 1.4. Invariants of a stabilization

#### 1.4.1. Stabilization

A useful method to find invariants of the @xmath -equivalent classes of
complex germs is to consider a stabilization of the germ, and count the
stable multigerms that appear. In a lucky situation their number does
not depend on the choice of the stabilization and it can be calculated
by algebraic methods, that is, without stabilizing the germ. This is the
procedure how the invariants @xmath and @xmath can be introduced.

A @xmath -parameter unfolding is a stabilization (stable deformation) of
the germ @xmath , if @xmath is stable for all parameter values @xmath .
However, @xmath is not a germ: to make the definition correct, we have
to fix a representative.

Consider a @xmath -parameter unfolding @xmath , and fix small enough
neighbourhoods @xmath and @xmath . Let @xmath and @xmath for each @xmath
. Then @xmath is a stabilization of @xmath , if for every parameter
value @xmath each multi-germ of the map @xmath is stable. For a fixed
parameter value @xmath , we call the map @xmath also a stabilization of
@xmath – hopefully without any confusion.

Stabilization always exists, if @xmath are ‘nice dimensions’ in the
sense of Mather [ 38 , 48 , 71 ] , ie. if stable maps are dense (in the
@xmath sense). Note that in these dimensions stable maps are sometimes
called generic .

Take @xmath . If @xmath is finitely determined, then it admits a versal
unfolding @xmath with @xmath parameters. Thus each stabilization of
@xmath is equivalent with @xmath with some germ @xmath . With the
minimal number of parameters (i.e. @xmath equals to the @xmath
-codimension of @xmath ) the versal unfolding in unique, up to
isomorphism.

Let us fix a small enough representative of the miniversal unfolding.
The bifurcation set consists of the points @xmath in the parameter space
@xmath for which @xmath is not stable. The bifurcation set is an
analytic subvariety, see [ 48 ] , indeed proper subvariety if @xmath are
nice dimensions, which implies that the complement of it is connected in
@xmath . Thus if @xmath and @xmath are stable, then there is real path
@xmath connecting @xmath and @xmath such that @xmath is stable for all
@xmath . In addition, the projection to the parameter space produces a
locally trivial fibration of the image of the versal unfolding @xmath
over the complement of the bifurcation set. The fibres are the images of
the stabilizations corresponding to different parameter values. See for
details [ 47 , 30 , 61 ] .

The image of a stabilization is called the disentanglement of @xmath .

###### Proposition 1.4.1 ([47, Lemma 1.3.]).

The topology of the disentanglement of a finitely @xmath -determined
germ @xmath is independent of the chosen stabilization.

This theorem implies the well-definedness of the number of isolated
stable multi-germs in each type. Especially, in the @xmath nice
dimensions:

###### Theorem 1.4.2.

Let @xmath be a finitely determined germ. Then the number of Whitney
umbrellas and triple values are independent of the stabilization of
@xmath .

#### 1.4.2. The invariants @xmath and @xmath

Here we summarize the main properties of Mond’s invariants @xmath and
@xmath . For proofs and details we refer to [ 43 , 44 , 45 , 49 , 48 ] .

Let @xmath be a holomorphic germ. Let @xmath denote the determinants of
the three @xmath minors ( @xmath ). Let @xmath be the ideal of the local
ring @xmath generated by the elements @xmath , where @xmath is the
Jacobian matrix of @xmath . @xmath is called the Jacobian ideal or the
ramification ideal of @xmath . Define

  --------- -- -------- --
  (1.4.1)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

###### Theorem 1.4.3.

Let @xmath be a finitely determined germ. Then @xmath and @xmath are
finite and any stabilization of @xmath has @xmath Whitney umbrella
points and @xmath triple values.

The key tool for the proof of 1.4.3 is the so-called Cohen-Macaulay
property of the ideals @xmath and @xmath in the case of finitely
determined germs @xmath . Cohen-Macaulay property implies a good
behaviour under deformation, in our cases that means the conservation of
the codimensions. E.g.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

holds for a (not necessarily stable) perturbation @xmath of @xmath .
Here @xmath denotes the germ of @xmath at @xmath . Then it is enough to
check that @xmath if @xmath is @xmath -equivalent with a
Whitney-umbrella and @xmath for regular germs, hence the sum counts the
Whitney umbrellas of a stabilization. Similar discussion holds for
@xmath . For details we refer to [ 45 , 49 , 48 ] .

In Remark 3.3.6 we give an independent proof for the equality of @xmath
and the number of Whitney umbrella points of a stabilization in the case
of corank–1 map germs, cf. Example 1.4.10 .

In [ 45 ] Mond introduced a third invariant @xmath for corank– @xmath
germs, which ‘measures, in some sense, the non-transverse
self-intersection concentrated at the origin’. Geometric interpretation
of @xmath is not yet known for the author of the present thesis. Later
@xmath was replaced with more intuitive invariants, see theorems 1.5.3
and 1.5.6 . Here we do not present the definition of @xmath .

We summarize some equivalent characterizations of finite determinacy of
germs @xmath . See [ 45 , 33 ] .

###### Theorem 1.4.4.

Let @xmath be a holomorphic germ. Then the following are equivalent:

(a) @xmath is finitely @xmath -determined.

(b) @xmath is a stable immersion, cf. Theorem 1.2.11 , Example 1.2.17 .

(c) The associated map of spheres @xmath (cf. Definition 1.1.3 ) is a
stable immersion, that is, it has only single values and double values
with transverse intersection.

###### Theorem 1.4.5.

Let @xmath be a corank– @xmath germ. Then @xmath is finitely @xmath
-determined if and only if @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are finite.

On the other hand the finiteness of any of the three invariants has also
a geometrical interpretation. E.g. the following holds for @xmath .
(Recall that a stabilization is defined in a sufficiently small
neighbourhood of the origin.)

###### Theorem 1.4.6.

Let @xmath be a holomorphic germ. Then the following are equivalent:

(a) @xmath is finite.

(b) @xmath is singular only at the origin, that is, @xmath implies
@xmath . In other words @xmath is an immersion.

(c) The associated map of spheres @xmath is an immersion.

If these claimes hold, then any stabilization of @xmath has @xmath
Whitney umbrella points. Cf. [ 44 , 45 ] .

If @xmath , then @xmath has positive dimension, and along @xmath the
rank of @xmath is @xmath . Hence corollary below follows from part (a)
and (d) of Theorem 1.4.6 .

###### Corollary 1.4.7.

If @xmath is finite, then @xmath is a finite germ.

Germs with finite @xmath , or equivalently, germs singular only at the
origin are our basic objects in Chapter 3 .

###### Remark 1.4.8.

@xmath can be defined also in higher dimensions, for germs @xmath ,
where the higher dimensional Whitney umbrellas are isolated points.
These germs are studied in [ 22 ] .

###### Proposition 1.4.9.

If @xmath is finite, then any stabilization of @xmath has the same
number of triple points, and this number is @xmath (cf. [ 49 , 44 ] ).

By Theorem 1.4.6 , in the case of finite germs the failure of the
finiteness of @xmath corresponds to the existense of a cuspidal edge ,
that is, a line of singular points. In general any of the following
three properties implies the failure of the finite determinacy of a germ
@xmath [ 33 ] : (a) there is a line of singular points, (b) there is a
line of triple points, (c) there is a line of non-transverse
self-intersection.

#### 1.4.3. Examples

###### Example 1.4.10 (Finitely determined corank–@xmath germs).

Let @xmath be a finitely determined germ with @xmath . Such a germ is
@xmath -equivalent with a germ of the form @xmath [ 43 ] . Then the
Jacobian ideal is generated by @xmath and @xmath , thus its codimension
@xmath is the intersection multiplicity of the plane curves @xmath and
@xmath at the origin.

Several concrete examples can be found e.g. in the list of Mond
contaning the simple germs [ 45 ] . For example the family @xmath given
by @xmath has @xmath Whitney umbrellas in a stabilization, see Figure
1.2 for @xmath . For @xmath the germ itself is @xmath -equivalent with
the Whitney umbrella.

###### Example 1.4.11 (@xmath type germs).

Assume that @xmath , where @xmath for some germ @xmath , such that
@xmath is not divisible by @xmath . The ( @xmath -equivalence classes
of) these germs are often labeled by the Boardman symbol @xmath , this
notation refers to the classification of the germs up to their @xmath
-jet, see [ 33 , 43 ] . They are exactly the finitely determined corank–
@xmath map germs with no triple points in their stabilization, that is,
with @xmath , see [ 43 , 33 ] for details.

###### Example 1.4.12 (A corank–@xmath germ).

There are also finitely determined germs @xmath with @xmath . Several
examples can be found in [ 31 ] . A concrete one is @xmath . For this
germ @xmath and @xmath .

###### Example 1.4.13 (Cuspidal edge).

Let @xmath (cf. Example 1.4.11 ). Then @xmath , @xmath is not finitely
determined, indeed it is not an immersion outside the origin.

###### Example 1.4.14 (Singularities of type @xmath).

As in Example 1.3.5 , consider the @xmath -fold cover of the @xmath
singularity, @xmath . Then @xmath and @xmath , cf. Figure 1.3 for @xmath
. Outside the origin @xmath is an immersion, but not a stable immersion.
In fact, the whole image of @xmath consists of at least @xmath -fold
multiple values, thus the intersection of the branches is not
transverse. Thus @xmath is not finitely determined. For @xmath , @xmath
, cf. Example 1.3.5 . However @xmath for @xmath , since the whole image
consists of at least @xmath -fold multiple values.

The covering maps of the quotient singularities of type @xmath and
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath are also regular outside the origin, thus
@xmath is finite for them. However they are not finitely determined,
from the same reason that was explained for type @xmath . These germs
provide us interesting examples later in Chapter 3 . We present here a
possible computation of @xmath for these germs.

###### Example 1.4.15 (Singularities of type @xmath).

These are the quotient singularities of form @xmath where @xmath denotes
the binary dihedral group, [ 65 , page 89] . @xmath [ 65 , page 95] . By
a computation @xmath . In singularity theory the quotient is the @xmath
–singularity.

A possible computation of @xmath is based on the following facts.

###### Lemma 1.4.16.

(a) Take @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath are coprimes. Then one has
the following exact sequence:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(b) Take @xmath such that the ideal @xmath has finite codimension, and
@xmath for some @xmath . Then one has the following exact sequence:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Part (a) is well-known as the additivity property of the local
intersection number of plane curves, see e.g. [ 12 ] . The proof of part
(b) is similar. ∎

Using these lemmas the codimension of @xmath of the @xmath singularity
can be calculated, and it is @xmath .

###### Example 1.4.17 (Weighted homogeneous germs and @xmath, @xmath and
@xmath).

Assume that the three components of @xmath are weighted homogeneous of
weights @xmath and @xmath and degree @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Then,
cf. [ 46 ] , @xmath Mond proved this identity for finitely @xmath
-determined germs, but the same proof works for germs with finite @xmath
.

For example, if @xmath is as in Example 3.1.4 , then all three
components are homogeneous ( @xmath ). In the case of @xmath and @xmath
the degrees are @xmath and @xmath respectively. Hence the values @xmath
from Examples 1.4.14 and 1.4.15 follow in this way as well.

For @xmath and @xmath singularities the degrees are @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath respectively, see [ 65 , 4.5.3–4.5.5] , hence the corresponding
values @xmath are @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

#### 1.4.4. Disentanglement and the image Milnor number

Recall for finitely determined germs from @xmath to @xmath the topology
of the disentanglement (that is, the image of a stabilization) does not
depend on the choice of the stabilization, cf. Proposition 1.4.1 .

Note that the disentanglement is a stratified space, each stratum is a
connected ‘isosingular locus’ of stable multi-germs.

In many cases the disentanglement plays the role of the Milnor fibre of
isolated singularities, for example it has the following property,
analogously with Theorem 4.1.10 . (In fact, the proof uses 4.1.10 , see
[ 47 ] ).

###### Theorem 1.4.18 ([47, Theorem 1.4.]).

The disentanglement of a finitely determined germ @xmath is homotopy
equivalent with a bouquet of @xmath -spheres, ie. with @xmath .

###### Definition 1.4.19.

The number of the spheres in the bouquet (that is, the @xmath -th Betti
number of the disentanglement) @xmath is called the image Milnor number
of @xmath .

###### Theorem 1.4.20 ([30, 3.2.-3.4.], [47]).

For finitely determined germs @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

holds, where @xmath is the Milnor number of the double point curve
@xmath , see paragraph 1.5.1 .

###### Theorem 1.4.21 ([21, 47]).

For a finitely determined germ @xmath , the image Milnor number @xmath
is bigger or equal than the @xmath -codimension of @xmath . If @xmath is
weighted homogeneous, then equality holds.

For finitely determined germs @xmath , @xmath , the statement of Theorem
1.4.21 is Mond’s conjecture.

We use the disentanglement as a complex singular Seifert surface of the
immersion @xmath . See Section 3.6 .

### 1.5. Further invariants

#### 1.5.1. The double point structure

The possible algebraic descriptions of the multiple point spaces of
complex germs are studied in general in [ 58 , 30 , 45 , 48 ] . Here we
summarize the double point structure of germs @xmath . The Milnor
numbers of the four double point curves are related to each other
through the invariants @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Indeed, @xmath can
be replaced by one of this Milnor numbers. In this paragraph we refer
mainly to [ 34 , 30 ] .

The double point spaces of a finite germ @xmath can be summarized in the
following diagram (see [ 34 , 30 ] ).

  --------- -- -------- --
  (1.5.1)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

@xmath is the lifting of the double point space of @xmath . A general
algorithm to determine it can be found in [ 34 , 45 ] , here we sketch
it in our case. We use the following notation: the coordinates of the
point @xmath are @xmath , @xmath ( @xmath ), The coordinate functions of
@xmath are @xmath , @xmath .

Let @xmath denote the ideal of the diagonal in @xmath , that is @xmath .
Then @xmath , thus there are @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

holds for @xmath . Then @xmath is the zero set of the ideal

  --------- -- -------- --
  (1.5.2)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

where @xmath is the ideal generated by the determinants of the @xmath
minors of the matrix @xmath .

Note that @xmath . Hence @xmath contains the ordinary double points
@xmath , that is @xmath and @xmath , as well as the points @xmath of the
diagonal, where @xmath is a singular point of @xmath .

There are several other methods to determine @xmath which work in
special cases. For instance @xmath provides the same ideal as ( 1.5.2 )
for finitely determined germs, see [ 58 ] .

@xmath is the double point space in the source. It is the image of the
projection @xmath restricted to @xmath . The ideal of @xmath can be
given as the @xmath -th Fitting ideal of the projection @xmath .

Finite determinacy can be characterized by the help of the curves @xmath
and @xmath as follows.

###### Theorem 1.5.1 ([34, Theorems 2.4., 3.4., 3.5.]).

Let @xmath a finite and generically @xmath to @xmath complex germ. The
following are equivalent:

(a) @xmath is finitely @xmath -determined.

(b) @xmath is a germ of reduced curve and @xmath is generically @xmath
to @xmath .

(c) @xmath is a germ of reduced curve.

(d) The Milnor number @xmath of @xmath is finite. (See Subsection 4.1.2
for definition).

Note that if @xmath is generically @xmath to @xmath , then it is an
embedding for a choice of a small enough representative. @xmath is
called the Mond number of @xmath .

If @xmath is finitely determined, there is a useful method to determine
the reduced equation @xmath of @xmath . Let @xmath be the equation of
the image of @xmath . Then @xmath is the same for all @xmath , where
@xmath is the determinant of the @xmath minor of @xmath removed the
@xmath -th row, and @xmath is the @xmath th partial derivative of @xmath
. See [ 59 , 3 ] .

@xmath is the quotient of @xmath by the @xmath -action @xmath on @xmath
. @xmath embeds as a germ of analytic subspace of @xmath . If @xmath is
a corank–1 germ, then @xmath and also @xmath can be embedded to @xmath .

The space of double values @xmath is the zero set of the first Fitting
ideal @xmath .

The four double point spaces can be defined also for maps, specially for
a stabilization @xmath of @xmath . Then @xmath is a smooth curve in
@xmath , and the projection @xmath is a stable immersion with transverse
double values in the triple points of @xmath . @xmath is also a smooth
curve, the factorization by @xmath is a double branched covering,
ramifies at the (lifting of the) Whitney umbrella points. @xmath is an
immersion with triple values in the triple values of @xmath .

If @xmath is a corank– @xmath finitely determined germ, then all the
curves @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath are isolated complete
intersection (ICIS) (cf. Chapter 4 ). However the Milnor number of these
curves can be defined also for corank– @xmath germs, see [ 34 ] . The
Milnor numbers relate to each other by the following formulas, according
to the description of the double point curves of a stabilization.

###### Theorem 1.5.2 ([34, Theorem 4.3.]).

If @xmath is a finitely determined germ, then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Theorem 1.5.3 ([32, 30]).

If @xmath is a finitely determined quasihomogeneous corank– @xmath germ,
then @xmath , and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

#### 1.5.2. Slicing

In [ 32 ] there is an interesting reinterpretation of the invariants
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath for corank– @xmath germs @xmath . This is the
nearest approach to our results explained in Chapter 3 , as both derive
these invariants from the properties of a transverse object. In [ 32 ]
this object is the transverse slice of @xmath defined below, while in
Chapter 3 that is the immersion @xmath associated with @xmath .

The idea is the following. After change of coordinates the germ @xmath
can be considered as a @xmath -parameter unfolding of a finitely
determined plane curve, called transverse slice. Then invariants of
@xmath can be obtained from the parameter space of the versal unfolding
of the transverse slice.

Let @xmath be a finite, generically @xmath to @xmath , corank– @xmath
holomorphic map germ. Up to @xmath -equivalence it can be written in a
form @xmath , such that @xmath and @xmath , where @xmath denotes the
Zariski tangent cone of @xmath .

Introduce the notation @xmath . Then @xmath is a @xmath -parameter
unfolding of the curve @xmath , called transverse slice . The transverse
slice is a finitely @xmath -determined germ of plane curve. Its finite
determinacy follows from the transversality conditions described in the
previous paragraph.

Note that the transverse slice is not unique, its analytic type depends
on the choice of the coordinates, but its topological type does not. Its
@xmath -invariant
@xmath is equal to the multiplicity of @xmath at @xmath .

###### Proposition 1.5.4 ([32, 3.1.]).

@xmath is finitely @xmath -determined if and only if @xmath is a
stabilization of @xmath .

Consider the miniversal deformation @xmath of @xmath where @xmath . Then
@xmath can be pulled back from the versal deformation by a curve @xmath
. If @xmath is finitely determined, then @xmath intersects the
bifurcation set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

only at the origin.

@xmath is a hypersurface in @xmath , its reduced equation decomposes as
@xmath corresponding to @xmath -codimension– @xmath multi-germs of plane
curves. @xmath is a stable plane curve (that is, self-transverse
immersion) if @xmath . For @xmath the curve @xmath has a cusp, for
@xmath the curve @xmath has a triple point, for @xmath the curve @xmath
has a tacnode , that is, self-tangent double point. In other words, the
three components of @xmath correspond to the three Reidemeister moves of
a @xmath -parameter deformation of a plane curve.

###### Theorem 1.5.5 ([32, 3.7–3.10.]).

Let the finitely determined corank– @xmath germ
@xmath be the stabilization of its transverse slice @xmath pulled back
from the miniversal unfolding by the curve @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The order of @xmath is the intersection multiplicity of the curves
@xmath and @xmath , that is, the number of the transverse intersection
points of @xmath and a perturbation of @xmath . In each intersection
point @xmath the corresponding curve @xmath has a cusp (resp. triple
point). On the other hand, since @xmath describes a @xmath -parameter
stable unfolding of @xmath , which is @xmath , a @xmath -parameter
perturbation of @xmath is a @xmath -parameter unfolding of @xmath , that
is, a @xmath -parameter unfolding of @xmath . The cusps and the triple
points of @xmath correspond to the Whitney umbrellas and the triple
values of the unfolding of @xmath .

The third invariant

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is the number of values @xmath of a perturbation of @xmath , such that
@xmath has a tacnode.

The following relations hold to the new invariants.

###### Theorem 1.5.6 ([32, 3.8. and p. 1388]).

Let the finite, generically @xmath to @xmath , corank– @xmath germ
@xmath be the @xmath -parameter unfolding of its transverse slice @xmath
pulled back from the miniversal unfolding by the curve @xmath . Then

(a) @xmath is finitely determined if and only if @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath are finite (defined as @xmath ).

(b) @xmath .

## Chapter 2 Immersions of spheres to Euclidean spaces

### 2.1. Hirsch–Smale theory

#### 2.1.1. Hirsch theorem

This chapter contains the basic theorems of Hirsch and Smale, and the
formulae of Hughes–Melvin [ 17 ] and Ekholm–Szűcs [ 9 ] corresponding to
the immersions of the @xmath -sphere to @xmath . The last section
contains other results and applications, which are related to our study
presented in Chapter 3 .

Hirsch–Smale theory [ 16 , 64 ] transforms regular homotopy problems
(differential topology) to homotopy theory (algebraic topology).

Let @xmath and @xmath be smooth manifolds of dimension @xmath and @xmath
respectively. A smooth map @xmath is an immersion , if at every point
@xmath the differential @xmath is injective (monomorphism). In other
words, immersions are ‘local embeddings’. Two immersions @xmath are
regular homotopic if they can be deformed to each other through
immersions, that is, if there exists a smooth map @xmath such that
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath is an immersion for all @xmath . Regular
homotopy is an equivalence relation on the set of immersions from @xmath
to @xmath . An injective immersion of a compact manifold @xmath is
called embedding .

We use the following notations. @xmath denotes an immersion from @xmath
to @xmath , and @xmath denotes an embedding. @xmath is the set of
regular homotopy classes of the immersions from @xmath to @xmath , and
its subset @xmath consists of regular homotopy classes which admit
embedding representatives.

The differential of an immersion is a fibrewise injective linear bundle
map @xmath , say bundle monomorphism . We call two bundle monomorphisms
homotopic if they are homotopic through bundle monomorphisms.

###### Theorem 2.1.1 (Hirsch [16]).

If @xmath , the differential @xmath induces a bijection between @xmath
and the homotopy classes of the bundle monomorphisms.

If @xmath , a more concrete identification can be done. For an immersion
@xmath the bundle @xmath is trivial, moreover for different immersions
the corresponding bundles are naturally isomorphic. Let @xmath be the
bundle of bundle homomorphisms from @xmath to @xmath (over the identity
map of @xmath ), and its subbundle @xmath consists of bundle
monomorphisms. @xmath is a vector bundle with fibre @xmath . @xmath is a
locally trivial bundle whose fibre is the Stiefel-manifold @xmath
consists of monomorphisms from @xmath to @xmath , or in other words, the
linearly independent @xmath -frames of @xmath . (The compact Stiefel
manifold consisting of orthonormal @xmath -frames of @xmath is homotopy
equivalent with @xmath via its natural embedding. We do not distinguish
them in the notation.)

###### Theorem 2.1.2 (Hirsch [16]).

(a) If @xmath , the differential @xmath induces a bijection between
@xmath and the homotopy classes of the continuous sections of @xmath .

(b) If additionally @xmath is parallelizable (that is, @xmath is
trivial), then a chosen trivialization of @xmath provides a bijection
between @xmath and @xmath .

Part (a) of Theorem 2.1.2 does not hold in general for @xmath , not even
if all the immersions from @xmath to @xmath are homotopic and @xmath is
a trivial bundle, cf. Example 2.1.13 .

#### 2.1.2. Smale invariant

Although in the case of spheres the tangent bundle is not trivial in
general, the homotopy classes of the sections in part (a) of Theorem
2.1.2 can be replaced by homotopy classes of continuous maps, as in part
(b).

###### Theorem 2.1.3 (Smale [64]).

There is a bijection

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The bijection is induced by the map @xmath , where @xmath is called the
Smale invariant of the immersion @xmath . (The relation between the
bijections in Theorem 2.1.3 and in Theorem 2.1.2 (b) is clarified in
Remark 2.1.7 .)

Here we present the construction of the Smale invariant, cf. [ 18 , p.
159] , [ 7 , 3.2.] . Let @xmath be the unit sphere in @xmath , that is
@xmath , and define @xmath and @xmath . Let @xmath be an open
neighbourhood of @xmath in @xmath . Fix a trivialization @xmath of the
tangent bundle @xmath .

By a regular homotopy it can be achieved that @xmath agrees with the
standard embedding @xmath on @xmath . We define a continuous map @xmath
as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the reflection in the hyperplane @xmath restricted to
@xmath . Then @xmath .

###### Remark 2.1.4.

If @xmath is a connected Lie group, or a quotient of it by a closed
connected subgroup, then @xmath can be identified with the homotopy
classes of the continuous maps @xmath without any base point. This fact
can be applied to @xmath , cf. [ 66 , 19 ] . Furthermore, for Lie
groups, the group operation of @xmath agrees with that induced by the
pointwise multiplication in @xmath ; cf. [ 66 , p. 88 and 89] .

Then Theorem 2.1.3 can be reformulated as follows.

###### Theorem 2.1.5 (Smale [64]).

For an immersion @xmath , the Smale invariant @xmath is independent of
the choices, it is determined by @xmath . Furthermore, two immersions
@xmath and @xmath are regular homotopic if and only if @xmath , and each
element of @xmath arises as @xmath of some immersion @xmath .

###### Remark 2.1.6.

@xmath is a group with respect to the operation ‘connected sum’. The
connected sum @xmath of the immersions @xmath and @xmath is the induced
immersion from @xmath to @xmath [ 18 , p. 164] , [ 7 , 3.4.] . The Smale
invariant provides a group ismorphism @xmath . In particular, in @xmath
the identity element is the standard embedding, thus its Smale invariant
is the identity element of @xmath . See [ 18 , 7 ] .

###### Remark 2.1.7.

In some dimensions @xmath is parallelizable, for instance if @xmath or
@xmath . Then by part (b) of Theorem 2.1.2 there is a bijection @xmath ,
but it depends on the choice of the trivialization of @xmath . Hence it
does not agree with the Smale invariant in general. The relation between
them is @xmath , where @xmath is the standard embedding. Cf. [ 7 ] and
Example 2.1.12 .

###### Question 2.1.8.

Smale asked in [ 64 ] to characterize the regular homotopy classes in
terms of the geometry of the immersion, and give explicit
representatives of each regular homotopy class.

Several results appeared in this topic, see for instance examples 2.1.9
, 2.1.11 and [ 18 , 7 , 24 ] . Our results also fit to this program, cf.
[ 53 ] or Chapter 3 .

#### 2.1.3. Examples

###### Example 2.1.9 (Eversion of the Sphere).

The Smale invariant @xmath of an immersion @xmath sits in @xmath . Thus
any immersion @xmath is regular homotopic with the standard embedding
@xmath . For instance the standard embedding composed with the
hyperplane reflection @xmath is regular homotopic with the standard
embedding. A regular homotopy between them is an eversion of the sphere
.

###### Example 2.1.10 (@xmath, @xmath).

The Stiefel-manifold @xmath is @xmath -connected, cf [ 19 , 66 ] . Hence
for @xmath any immersion from @xmath to @xmath is regular homotopic with
the standard embedding.

###### Example 2.1.11 (@xmath).

For an immersion @xmath

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

cf. [ 19 , 66 ] . By a regular homotopy @xmath can be deformed to a
stable immersion, which has self-transverse double values. If @xmath is
even, it is possible to associate a sign to each double value, and
@xmath is the algebraic number of the double values. For odd @xmath (
@xmath ) the Smale invariant agrees with the algebraic number of double
values modulo @xmath . The exceptional case @xmath is discussed in the
next example.

###### Example 2.1.12 (@xmath).

The Smale invariant of a plane curve immersion is an element of @xmath .
By the result of Whitney [ 72 ] , the winding number is a complete
regular homotopy invariant. For an immersion @xmath the winding number
@xmath is the degree of @xmath . Thus the winding number is the
invariant according to part (b) of Theorem 2.1.2 , but it is not the
Smale invariant, cf. Remark 2.1.7 . However, by fixing a base point and
a support line with a convention for the starting of the curve at the
base point, it is possible to associate a sign to each double value of
the immersion, cf. [ 72 ] . Then @xmath is the algebraic number of the
double values, but its sign depends on the choice of the convention. By
Remark 2.1.7 @xmath . The sign ambiguity can be avoided by fixing the
conventions.

The examples 2.1.13 and 2.1.14 are results of a discussion with Tamás
Terpai.

###### Example 2.1.13 (@xmath).

By Hirsch’s Theorem 2.1.1 @xmath is in bijection with the bundle
monomorphisms @xmath up to homotopy. Such a monomorphism associates to
each point of @xmath a nonzero tangent vector of @xmath , hence up to
homotopy it can be considered as a map from @xmath to @xmath . Thus
@xmath is in bijection with @xmath . Even though @xmath is a trivial
bundle for all @xmath immersions, part (a) of Theorem 2.1.2 cannot be
applied. Indeed, the sections of @xmath up to homotopy are in bijection
with @xmath .

###### Example 2.1.14 (@xmath).

The inclusion @xmath (where @xmath is any point of @xmath ) induces a
map from @xmath to @xmath . This map is surjective, since every regular
homotopy classes can be represented by an immersion avoiding the
infinity. If @xmath , then the map is also injective, because the
regular homotopy also can be chosen such that it avoids infinity. Hence
@xmath can be identified with @xmath for @xmath .

The map from @xmath to @xmath is surjective but not injective in
general. Let @xmath and @xmath be immersions from @xmath to @xmath , and
let @xmath be a regular homotopy between @xmath and @xmath through the
infinity. It can be assumed that infinity is a regular value of @xmath ,
and the algebraic number of its preimages is @xmath . Then @xmath is
regular homotopic with @xmath in @xmath , where @xmath is the hyperplane
reflection of @xmath restricted to @xmath , cf. Example 2.1.9 , and
@xmath denotes the connected sum of two immersions, cf. [ 18 , 7 ] .

The normal degree @xmath , i.e. the degree of the Gauss map of @xmath is
a regular homotopy invariant for immersions @xmath with the properties
@xmath and @xmath , see [ 41 ] . Hence for odd @xmath a regular homotopy
through @xmath changes the normal degree with a multiple of @xmath , and
so changes the regular homotopy class of the immersion @xmath . Note
that @xmath is the winding number @xmath for @xmath , cf. examples
2.1.12 and 2.1.13 . Compare also with Hughes formula ( 2.3.2 ) for
immersions from @xmath to @xmath , where @xmath is the first component
of @xmath , and Example 2.1.9 , in which case @xmath .

### 2.2. Immersions of @xmath to @xmath

#### 2.2.1. Immersions and embeddings

Hughes and Melvin [ 17 ] proved that there are embeddings of @xmath to
@xmath which are not regular homotopic to each other, thus it is
impossible to express the Smale invariant in terms of the double point
set (like e.g. in Example 2.1.11 ). They expressed the Smale invariant
of an embedding with the help of a Seifert surface.

For an immersion @xmath the Smale invariant is in @xmath , and @xmath .
The isomorphisms are induced by the @xmath -fibration @xmath and the
standard embedding @xmath , cf. [ 19 , 66 ] . The isomorphism of @xmath
and @xmath is a priori non–canonical, but they can be identified with a
choice of a generator in @xmath . It is described in Section 3.2 .

###### Theorem 2.2.1 (Hughes, Melvin [17]).

@xmath .

Furthermore, @xmath of an embedding @xmath can be expressed by the
signature of a Seifert surface .

###### Theorem 2.2.2 (Hughes, Melvin [17]).

Let @xmath be an embedding and @xmath be a Seifert surface of @xmath ,
i.e. @xmath is a compact oriented @xmath -manifold with boundary @xmath
and @xmath is an embedding such that @xmath . Let @xmath be the
signature of @xmath . Then

  --------- -- -------- --
  (2.2.1)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

Theeorems 2.2.1 and 2.2.2 can be summarized on the following diagram:

  --------- -- -------- --
  (2.2.2)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

###### Remark 2.2.3.

Hughes and Melvin proved a more general result for embeddings from
@xmath to @xmath . An alternative proof for Theorems 2.2.1 and 2.2.2 can
be found in [ 67 ] .

###### Remark 2.2.4.

The sign ambiguity of the formula ( 2.2.1 ) is caused by the sign
ambiguity of the Smale invariant as a @xmath -invariant, more precisely,
by the identification of the target of @xmath with @xmath , and by the
nature of the proof of ( 2.2.1 ) as well. One of the goals of Chapter 3
is to indicate the correct sign in this and other Smale invariant
formulae in this section, whenever the Smale invariant is replaced by
the sign-refined Smale invariant, see Subsection 3.2.1 .

For the proof of Theorems 2.2.1 and 2.2.2 Hughes and Melvin introduced
an alternative definition of the Smale invariant of immersions @xmath .
We review their construction here, since we use this definition of the
Smale invariant throughout Chapter 3 . Note that Szűcs used another
construction in [ 67 ] .

Let @xmath be a tubular neighbourhood of the standard @xmath , and let
@xmath be an orientation preserving immersion extending @xmath , i.e.
@xmath . Let @xmath be the tangent bundle of @xmath . It inherits a
global trivialization from the natural trivialization of @xmath . In
particular, there is a map (the Jacobian matrix)

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Its homotopy class is the Smale invariant of @xmath :

  --------- -- -------- --
  (2.2.3)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

via the homotopy equivalence induced by the inclusion @xmath . (The base
point is irrelevant in @xmath , cf. Remark 2.1.4 ).

###### Proposition 2.2.5.

@xmath does not depend on the choice of @xmath and @xmath , it depends
only on the regular homotopy class of @xmath , and @xmath is a
bijection.

Indeed, Smale proved that his original invariant gives a bijection
between @xmath and @xmath , cf. Subsection 2.1.2 and [ 64 ] . Hughes and
Melvin proved that their alternative definition ( 2.2.3 ) of the Smale
invariant does not depend on the choice of @xmath and agrees with the
original Smale invariant through the natural group isomorphism @xmath .

#### 2.2.2. Ekholm’s Vassiliev invariant @xmath

In analogy with Arnold’s invariants for plane curves @xmath , Ekholm [ 7
] introduced the invariants @xmath and @xmath (denoted by originally) of
stable immersions from @xmath to @xmath . Here we describe @xmath in
detail. It appears in Subsection 2.2.3 as a contribution in the
Ekholm–Szűcs formulas, and for immersions associated with holomorphic
germs we express @xmath in terms of @xmath and @xmath , see Subsection
3.1.5 .

A stable immersion of @xmath to @xmath has only regular simple and
double values with transverse intersection of the branches at the double
values. By [ 7 , Proposition 5.2.2.] there are two types of codimension–
@xmath immersions, i.e. immersions which can appear in a stable regular
homotopy between two stable immersions:

(a) immersion with one triple value (with regular intersection of the
branches) and

(b) immersion with self tangency at one point (that is, @xmath is a
double value of @xmath , and @xmath holds instead of transversality).

Ekholm’s invariants @xmath and @xmath are constant along regular
homotopies through stable immersions. @xmath changes by @xmath when the
regular homotopy steps through an immersion with self tangency and does
not change under triple point moves. @xmath changes by @xmath under
triple point moves and does not change when stepping through immersion
with self tangency [ 7 , Theorem 2] . @xmath is equal to the number of
the double point curve components of @xmath in the target (that is, the
number of components of @xmath , see below).

The invariant @xmath of a stable immersion @xmath measures the linking
of a shifted copy of the double values with the image of @xmath . There
are different versions for the definition, see below. Here we review
these definitions and their equivalence in the simplest case, for
immersions @xmath , although originally they were introduced in [ 7 , 8
, 9 , 60 ] for different levels of generalizations (for other manifolds,
higher dimensions).

Let @xmath be a stable immersion, and let @xmath be the double point
locus of @xmath , i.e. @xmath . @xmath is a closed @xmath -manifold, and
@xmath is a @xmath -fold covering. @xmath is endowed with an involution
@xmath such that @xmath for all @xmath .

The first definition is from [ 7 , 6.2.] . Let @xmath be a normal vector
field of @xmath such that @xmath is @xmath in @xmath . Such a vector
field @xmath is unique up to homotopy, and for instance each component
of a Seifert framing provides such a vector field. If @xmath is the
result of pushing @xmath slightly along @xmath , then the linking number
@xmath equals to @xmath . Let @xmath be a double value of @xmath . Then
@xmath defines a normal vector field @xmath along @xmath . Let @xmath be
the result of pushing @xmath slightly along @xmath , then @xmath and
@xmath are disjoint. The invariant is the linking number

  --------- -- -------- --
  (2.2.4)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

(or equivalently, @xmath ). Note that Ekholm used an other notation:
@xmath is denoted by @xmath , and @xmath is defined as @xmath in [ 7 ,
2.2., 6.2.] .

The second definition is [ 9 , Definition 11.] , [ 60 , Definition 2.2.]
. The normal bundle @xmath of @xmath is trivial, since the oriented
rank– @xmath vector bundles over @xmath are classified by @xmath . Any
two trivializations are homotopic, since their difference represents an
element in @xmath . Let @xmath be the homotopically unique normal
framing of @xmath , and in a double value @xmath define @xmath . @xmath
is a normal vector field along @xmath , and let @xmath be the result of
pushing @xmath slightly along @xmath . Then @xmath and @xmath are
disjoint. The invariant is the linking number (or equivalently, the
homology class)

  --------- -- -- --
  (2.2.5)         
  --------- -- -- --

Note that the framing @xmath can be replaced by an arbitrary nonzero
normal vector field @xmath of @xmath , since it can be extended to a
framing whose first component is @xmath .

The third definition is in [ 9 , Definition 4.] , see also [ 8 , 4.5.,
4.6.] . Let @xmath be a nonzero normal vector field of @xmath over
@xmath , that is, a nowhere zero section of @xmath . Let @xmath be the
homology class represented by @xmath in @xmath , where @xmath denotes
the total space of the bundle of nonzero normal vectors of @xmath . Let
@xmath be the value of the vector field @xmath along @xmath at the point
@xmath . Let @xmath be the result of pushing @xmath slightly along
@xmath , then @xmath and @xmath are disjoint. The invariant is

  --------- -- -------- --
  (2.2.6)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

where @xmath .

By [ 8 , Lemma 4.15.] @xmath is well-defined, that is, @xmath does not
depend on the choice of the normal field @xmath . Moreover, if @xmath is
the restriction of a (global) normal vector field of @xmath to @xmath ,
then @xmath . Indeed, the restriction of the normal field of @xmath to a
Seifert surface @xmath of @xmath results a surface @xmath , whose
boundary is the image of @xmath . Hence @xmath .

The invariants @xmath , @xmath (and so @xmath ) are equal to each other.
This fact follows from the basic property of @xmath and @xmath proved in
[ 7 , 8 ] , see Proposition 2.2.6 below. The proof of this proposition
is a result of a discussion with András Szűcs.

###### Proposition 2.2.6.

(a) The three definitions are equivalent, i.e. @xmath . Let us denote
@xmath by @xmath .

(b) @xmath is an invariant of stable immersions. It changes by @xmath
under triple point moves and does not change under self tangency moves.
In other words: if @xmath and @xmath are regular homotopic stable
immersions, @xmath is a stable regular homotopy between them, then
@xmath is equal to the algebraic number of triple values of the map
@xmath , @xmath .

###### Proof.

Part (b) is proved independently for @xmath [ 7 , Lemma 6.2.1.] and for
@xmath [ 8 , Theorem 1.] . Using them we prove part (a) as follows.

Since @xmath and @xmath changes in the same (or opposite) way along a
regular homotopy, @xmath is a regular homotopy invariant. Moreover
@xmath and @xmath are additive under connected sum, see [ 8 , Lemma
5.2., Proposition 5.4.] , [ 7 , 6.5.] . It follows that @xmath defines a
homomorphism from @xmath to @xmath . If @xmath is an embedding, then
@xmath , hence @xmath is @xmath on the @xmath -index subgroup @xmath of
@xmath . It follows that @xmath is @xmath for any stable immersion. ∎

###### Remark 2.2.7.

@xmath can be defined also for nonstable immersions which do not have
triple values. Any immersion @xmath admits a small perturbation by
regular homotopy to a stable immersion @xmath , and if @xmath does not
have triple values, then any two stable perturbations can be joined with
a regular homotopy without stepping through triple point. Thus @xmath
can be defined as @xmath of any small stable perturbation @xmath of
@xmath .

###### Remark 2.2.8.

Ekholm also defined the invariant @xmath for stable immersions @xmath ,
which is the analogue of Arnold’s ‘strangeness’ for plane curve
immersions [ 7 , 2.2., 6.5.] . changes by @xmath under triple point
moves, it is additive with respect to connected sum, and changes sign
under precomposing an immersion with a reflection in the source. For
immersions associated with holomorphic germs we express @xmath and in
terms of @xmath and @xmath , see Subsection 3.1.5 .

#### 2.2.3. Ekholm–Szűcs formulas

Ekholm and Szűcs generalized the Hughes–Melvin formula 2.2.2 for
immersions via generic singular Seifert surfaces , in two different
ways: mapped either in @xmath or in @xmath [ 9 ] , see also [ 10 , 60 ]
.

If @xmath is a compact oriented @xmath -manifold and @xmath is a stable
@xmath map, then @xmath has isolated @xmath –points (cusps) . These are
the singular points of @xmath restricted to its singular locus @xmath .
Each cusp point is endowed with a well–defined sign. Let @xmath be their
algebraic number (cf. [ 9 ] ).

###### Theorem 2.2.9 (Ekholm, Szűcs [9]).

Let @xmath be an immersion and @xmath be a compact oriented @xmath
-manifold with boundary @xmath . Let @xmath be a generic map such that
@xmath is regular homotopic to @xmath and @xmath has no singular points
near the boundary. Then

  --------- -- -------- --
  (2.2.7)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

The second formula uses stable @xmath maps @xmath defined on compact
oriented @xmath -manifolds @xmath . It involves two topological
invariants associated with such a map. Next we review their definitions.
They will be computed for two concrete holomorphic maps in order to
identify the missing sign in Section 3.6 .

If @xmath is as above, then it has isolated triple values (three local
sheets of @xmath intersecting in general position). Such a point is
endowed with a well–defined sign [ 9 , 2.3] ).

###### Definition 2.2.10 ([9]).

@xmath denotes the algebraic number of the triple values of @xmath .

Next, assume that @xmath and @xmath is generic, it is nonsingular near
the boundary, and @xmath . Here @xmath is the closed half–space of
@xmath . The set of double values of @xmath is an immersed oriented
@xmath -manifold, denoted by @xmath . Its oriented boundary consists of
two parts, the intersection of @xmath , and the other, disjoint with
@xmath , is the set of singular values @xmath of @xmath . Let @xmath be
a copy of @xmath shifted slightly along the outward normal vector field
of @xmath in @xmath . Then @xmath .

###### Definition 2.2.11 ([9]).

@xmath denotes the linking number of @xmath and @xmath in @xmath .

###### Theorem 2.2.12 (Ekholm, Szűcs [9]).

Let @xmath be an immersion and @xmath be a compact oriented @xmath
-manifold with boundary @xmath . Let @xmath be a generic map nonsingular
near the boundary, such that @xmath and @xmath is regular homotopic to
@xmath . Then

  --------- -- -------- --
  (2.2.8)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

### 2.3. Outline of other related results

#### 2.3.1. Immersions of @xmath to @xmath

Here we review a formula for the Smale invariant for immersions of
@xmath to @xmath [ 18 , 11 ] . For some connections with our cases see
Subsection 2.3.2 and Example 3.5.2 .

The Smale invariant of an immersion @xmath is an element of @xmath . The
description of the generators of @xmath (usually denoted by @xmath and
@xmath ) can be found in [ 66 ] or [ 11 ] , and also in Section 3.2 of
this thesis (where the first generator is denoted by @xmath instead of
@xmath ).

The standard embedding @xmath induces an embedding @xmath , and so a
homomorphism @xmath . This homomorphism is @xmath , @xmath (cf. [ 66 ,
11 ] and Section 3.2 ). Thus for an immersion @xmath with @xmath , the
Smale invariant of the composition @xmath is @xmath .

Hughes [ 18 ] expressed the Smale invariant in terms of an immersed
Seifert surface as follows.

###### Theorem 2.3.1 ([18, Theorem 3.1.]).

Let @xmath be an immersion which admits an immersed Seifert surface,
i.e. there is a compact oriented @xmath -manifold @xmath with boundary
@xmath and an immersion @xmath such that @xmath . Then

  --------- -- -------- --
  (2.3.1)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

where @xmath is the Euler characteristic, and @xmath is the signature of
@xmath .

An immersion @xmath induces a stable framing of @xmath via the bundle
isomorphism @xmath , where @xmath denotes the trivial line bundle.
Indeed, the Smale invariant measures the difference of this stable
framing and the standard one (induced by the standard embedding). By [
25 ] the homotopy class of the stable framing is characterized by two
integers, the normal degree (also called the degree) @xmath of @xmath
and the Hirzebruch defect (also called signature defect) @xmath . See
for definitions [ 25 , 5 ] . @xmath is described in detail in Example
2.1.14 . Here we review some properties of @xmath which can be used as
an alternative definition in our cases. When the stable framing extends
to a framing of a compact oriented @xmath -manifold @xmath with boundary
@xmath , then @xmath and @xmath , thus ( 2.3.1 ) can be written in the
form

  --------- -- -------- --
  (2.3.2)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

As it is proved in [ 11 ] , the Smale invariant formula ( 2.3.2 ) holds
for all immersions @xmath .

Note that the formulas ( 2.3.1 ) and ( 2.3.2 ) are compatible with (
2.2.1 ). Indeed, by ( 2.3.1 ) and ( 2.3.2 ) the Smale invariant of
@xmath is @xmath , where @xmath is an immersed Seifert surface. See [ 11
, 67 ] .

For an arbitrary immersion @xmath the Hirzebruch defect @xmath can be
expressed in terms of a singular Seifert surface, i.e., a stable map
@xmath from a compact oriented @xmath -manifold with boundary @xmath ,
such that @xmath is regular homotopic with @xmath and @xmath is regular
near the boundary. Such a map @xmath has isolated @xmath -points, also
called umbilic points , i.e. the points where the rank of @xmath is
@xmath , each of them can be equipped with a sign. Then

  --------- -- -------- --
  (2.3.3)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

where @xmath is the algebraic number of the @xmath -points. See [ 68 ,
11 ] . In [ 11 , Theorem 2.7] the formula ( 2.3.3 ) is generalized for
non-stable maps with isolated umbilic points. In this case each umbilic
point can be equipped with an index, and if @xmath denotes the sum of
the indices, ( 2.3.3 ) holds in the same form.

#### 2.3.2. Immersions associated with plumbing graphs

Ekholm and Takase [ 11 ] and Kinjo [ 24 ] defined immersions associated
with plumbing graphs, and calculated their Smale invariant by using the
formulae ( 2.3.2 ) and ( 2.3.3 ). Here we summarize their results.

Let @xmath be a plumbing graph with all genera @xmath and even Euler
numbers, see Subsection 4.2.2 or [ 56 ] . We denote by @xmath (resp.
@xmath ) the @xmath -manifold (resp. the @xmath -manifold with boundary)
associated with @xmath . Note that @xmath . Then @xmath determines an
immersion @xmath , and also @xmath in the following way [ 11 , 24 ] .

If the algebraic number of the double values of a stable immersion
@xmath is @xmath , then the Euler number of its normal bundle is @xmath
. Therefore, for a vertex @xmath with genus @xmath and Euler number
@xmath one associates a stable immersion @xmath with @xmath double
values, and its tubular neighbourhood is the image of an immersion from
the disc bundle over @xmath with Euler number @xmath . Plumbing these
immersions for each vertex according to @xmath provides the immersion
@xmath .

If @xmath is the quotient of @xmath by an action of a finite group
@xmath , then the composition of the factorization @xmath and the
immersion @xmath defines an immersion @xmath .

In [ 11 ] @xmath is the graph with one vertex and Euler number @xmath ,
and so @xmath is a lens space. The Smale invariant of the corresponding
immersion @xmath is

  --------- -- -------- --
  (2.3.4)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

In [ 24 ] @xmath is the weighted Dynkin diagram @xmath (resp. @xmath )
with Euler number @xmath of each vertex. So @xmath is a lens space
(resp. @xmath , where @xmath is the binary dihedral group or also called
dicyclic group). The Smale invariant of the corresponding immersion
@xmath (resp. @xmath ) is

  --------- -- -------- --
  (2.3.5)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

  --------- -- -------- --
  (2.3.6)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

For any plumbing graph @xmath , the composition @xmath (where @xmath is
the standard embedding) can be deformed to an embedding by a regular
homotopy in @xmath . Indeed, the composition @xmath can be deformed to a
embedding by a regular homotopy, and this induces a regular homotopy of
the tubular neighbourhood. Thus the immersions @xmath and @xmath have
the same structure as the immersions associated with the covering maps
@xmath of the @xmath and @xmath singularities, namely @xmath .

The immersions associated with the covering maps of the @xmath and
@xmath quotient singularities have Smale invariant @xmath , resp. @xmath
, see Example 3.5.2 . Therefore they are regular homotopic either with
the immersion @xmath (resp. @xmath ) or @xmath (resp. @xmath ) from
@xmath to @xmath , where @xmath is the standard embedding, and @xmath is
the reflection @xmath . Note that precomposing with @xmath changes the
sign of the Smale invariant. But there are other differences between the
two types of immersions as well, which may change the sign. In our
construction @xmath is the lens space @xmath , which is diffeomorphic to
@xmath with reversed orientation. Indeed, the plumbing graph of @xmath
in our case is @xmath (resp. @xmath ) with Euler numbers @xmath .
Moreover the author of this thesis does not know the relation of the
sign conventions for the Smale invariant used in [ 24 ] and here, see
Section 3.2 . It would be interesting to see a direct relation between
these immersions, which applied to the @xmath , @xmath , @xmath graphs
may provide the Smale invariant of the immersions associated with these
graphs.

The immersion @xmath was studied in several papers, e.g. [ 41 , 7 ] ,
and it has many connections with our work. Ekholm’s invariant @xmath is
well-defined by Remark 2.2.7 , as @xmath of a small stable perturbation
of @xmath with regular homotopy. A regular homotopy deforming @xmath to
a stable immersion is given in [ 11 , Section 4] , and by the
calculation from that article @xmath follows. Another stabilizing
regular homotpy of @xmath (or @xmath ) is given in Subsection 3.7.2 via
the stabilization of the double covering map of the @xmath singularity,
and @xmath follows too. Note that the number of the double curve
components (Ekholm’s @xmath invariant) is different in the two cases:
the stable immersion given in [ 11 ] has one double curve component,
while the one given in Subsection 3.7.2 has @xmath . The immersion
associated with the corank– @xmath germ of Example 1.4.12 can also be
considered as a stable version of @xmath with @xmath double curve
components, see Subsection 5.5.8 . Indeed, @xmath and @xmath implies
@xmath and @xmath , cf. 3.1.5 , 3.1.2 .

#### 2.3.3. Immersions of @xmath-manifolds

This subsection contains a summary of the immersions of arbitrary @xmath
-manifolds. We mention here some results about their characterization up
to regular homotopy according to [ 73 , 60 ] , and up to cobordism
according to [ 18 , 68 ] .

Since every closed oriented @xmath -manifold is parallelizable, a choice
of a trivialization @xmath of the tangent bundle @xmath determines a
bijection between @xmath and @xmath , which associates with an immersion
@xmath the map @xmath , cf. Theorem 2.1.2 . If @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

holds. Note that the degree (resp. the degree and the induced
homomorphism between the fundamental groups) completely characterises
the maps from @xmath to @xmath (resp. the maps from @xmath to @xmath )
up to homotopy.

Consider an immersion @xmath . By [ 73 ] the corresponding invariant in
@xmath can be identified as follows.

The orientation determines a normal framing @xmath of the immersion
@xmath . The first integer is the normal degree @xmath of @xmath , i.e.
the degree of the Gauss map @xmath , @xmath , cf. Example 2.1.14 and (
2.3.1 ).

In @xmath any vector @xmath determines a basis @xmath , where @xmath is
the canonical basis of the pure imaginary quaternions. @xmath and @xmath
are two bases of @xmath , and the transition matrix between them defines
a map @xmath , which composed with the Gram-Schmidt process @xmath
provides the map @xmath . The degree @xmath of @xmath is the second
integer. The third invariant is the cohomology class @xmath induced by
the homomorphism @xmath .

###### Theorem 2.3.2 ([73, Theorem 1]).

The map @xmath induced by the correspondence @xmath is a bijection.

In the @xmath case let us fix a generator @xmath such that @xmath is the
Euler-class of the @xmath -bundle @xmath . Then the Wu-invariant of an
immersion @xmath with respect to the trivialization @xmath of @xmath is
the element @xmath , cf. [ 60 , Definition 3.3.] . The normal Euler
class of @xmath is equal to @xmath by [ 73 , Theorem 2] , see also [ 60
, Theorem 3.1., Remark 3.2] .

Now we restrict the discussion to the regular homotopy classes of
immersions with trivial normal bundle, denoted by @xmath . The normal
Euler class of such an immersion @xmath is @xmath , hence @xmath is an
order– @xmath element in @xmath . Let @xmath denote the set of the
order– @xmath elements. Let @xmath denote the non-closed manifold
obtained from @xmath by removing a @xmath -ball.

###### Theorem 2.3.3.

(a) [ 60 , pg. 5] @xmath induces a bijection between @xmath and @xmath .

(b) [ 60 , pg. 5, 9] There is an integer valued regular homotopy
invariant @xmath such that the correspondence @xmath induces a bijection
between @xmath and @xmath .

(c) [ 60 , Theorem 3.8.] For every element @xmath there exists an
embedding @xmath with @xmath .

The invariant @xmath can be defined via a singular Seifert surface, it
is the analogue of the Smale invariant via formulae ( 2.2.7 ) and (
2.2.8 ).

Introduce the notation @xmath where @xmath is the torsion subgroup of
@xmath . Any immersion @xmath admits a normal framing @xmath , however
it is not unique up to homotopy. Define @xmath as ( 2.2.5 ) for a stable
immersion @xmath with a fixed normal framing @xmath .

Let @xmath be a compact oriented @xmath -manifold with boundary @xmath .
Let @xmath be a generic map such that @xmath is regular homotopic to
@xmath and @xmath has no singular points near the boundary. Define

  --------- -- -------- --
  (2.3.7)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

Let @xmath be a generic map nonsingular near the boundary, such that
@xmath and @xmath is regular homotopic to @xmath . Define

  --------- -- -------- --
  (2.3.8)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

###### Theorem 2.3.4 (Lemmas 5.5., 5.7., theorems 5.6., 5.8. in [60]).

(a) @xmath is an integer, and it does not depend on the choice of @xmath
and @xmath . It depends only on the regular homotopy class of @xmath .

(b) @xmath is an integer, and it does not depend on the choice of @xmath
, @xmath and @xmath . It depends only on the regular homotopy class of
@xmath .

(c) @xmath .

(d) Two immersions @xmath with @xmath are regular homotopic if and only
if @xmath , where @xmath .

Cobordism of immersions is an equivalence relation between immersions of
different manifolds. Two immersions @xmath and @xmath of closed (resp.
closed, oriented) manifolds @xmath and @xmath are cobordant (resp.
oriented cobordant ) if there is a compact manifold @xmath with boundary
@xmath (resp. a compact oriented manifold @xmath with oriented boundary
@xmath , where @xmath denotes @xmath with opposite orientation) and an
immersion @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath . Let @xmath (reps. @xmath
) denotes the cobordism classes of the immersions of @xmath -manifolds
to @xmath (resp. the oriented cobordism classes of the immersions of
oriented @xmath -manifolds to @xmath ). @xmath and @xmath form groups
with respect to the disjoint union, which agrees with the connected sum
up to (oriented) cobordism.

@xmath , where @xmath denotes the third stable homotopy group of spheres
[ 67 , Lemma 1.4.] , [ 68 ] . Each class in @xmath can be represented by
an immersion of @xmath via the following diagram, cf. [ 67 , Lemma 1.8.]
, [ 68 , pg. 41, 43] .

  --------- -- -------- --
  (2.3.9)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

The homomorphism on the right of the diagram is called @xmath
-homomorphism , its kernel is @xmath , cf. Theorem 2.2.2 , [ 17 , 67 ] .
There are also geometric formulae to determine the oriented cobordism
class of an immersion @xmath , see [ 68 , Theorem 3.1., Remark 3.6.] .

By [ 18 , Theorem 4.1.] @xmath , and the cobordism class of a stable
immersion of @xmath to @xmath is completely determined by its total
twist , which is the parity of the number of non-trivially covered
double point curve components. In particular, the total twist of a
stable immersion @xmath is a regular homotopy invariant, it defines a
homomorphism @xmath . From this fact we conclude a correspondence
between analytic invariants in Subsection 5.1.3 .

#### 2.3.4. Regular homotopy class of the embedded link

We mention here two results about a very similar topic to the material
discussed in Chapter 3 . The articles [ 10 ] and [ 23 ] study links of
isolated hypersurface singularities (cf. Chapter 4 ) up to regular
homotopy.

Although [ 10 ] contains a generalization of the Hughes-Melvin theorem
2.2.1 and of singular Seifert surface formulae ( 2.2.7 ) and ( 2.2.8 )
for immersions and embeddings of homotopy @xmath -spheres, here we only
concentrate to [ 10 , Section 5.1.] . Consider the Brieskorn equations
@xmath , which determine isolated singularites @xmath . Their links
@xmath are homotopy spheres (also called exotic spheres): @xmath is
homeomorphic, but not diffeomorphic to @xmath for all @xmath . @xmath is
diffeomorphic to @xmath , and @xmath is diffeomorphic to @xmath if and
only if @xmath .

By [ 10 ] , the embeddings of @xmath into @xmath are not regular
homotopic for different values of @xmath , and they represent all the
regular homotopy classes of the immersions which contain embeddings,
i.e. @xmath . In particular, @xmath provide embeddings @xmath which are
not regular homotopic to the standard embedding, each appears as the
link of a complex hypersuface singularity. In contrast with this fact,
nonstandard embeddings @xmath cannot be realized as links of suface
singularities in @xmath , cf. Theorem 3.1.3 .

A similar question is studied in [ 23 ] about the link of @xmath , where
@xmath . Its link depends on the parity of @xmath , that is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The question is that in the case of links with different equations but
with the same diffeomorphism type do they represent different regular
homotopy classes?

For @xmath odd, @xmath (see ( 2.2.3 )) by Bott periodicity [ 2 ] . Thus
the question is irrelevant in this case.

In the other case @xmath it turns out that the question is not
well-posed: precomposing an immersion @xmath with a self-diffeomorphism
of @xmath can change the regular homotopy type of @xmath . In other
words the regular homotopy class of the inclusion @xmath depends on the
choice of the identification of @xmath with @xmath .

A well-defined notion is the image regular homotopy type : the
immersions @xmath and @xmath @xmath are image regular homotopic if there
is a self diffeomorphism @xmath of @xmath such that @xmath is regular
homotopic with @xmath . By [ 23 ] there are two image regular homotopy
classes of immersions @xmath , and the image regular homotopy class of
the inclusion @xmath depends on the parity of @xmath .

## Chapter 3 Immersions associated with holomorphic germs

### 3.1. Summary of the results

#### 3.1.1.

This chapter includes the results of the paper [ 53 ] . Our main goal is
to analyse the complex analytic realizations of the elements of the
groups @xmath and @xmath . Recall that @xmath via the Smale invariant.
We use ( 2.2.3 ) for its definition throughout Chapter 3 .

Let @xmath be a holomorphic germ. We assume that @xmath is singular only
at the origin, that is @xmath in a small representative of @xmath . Such
a germ, at the level of links of the spacegerms @xmath and @xmath ,
provides an immersion @xmath , cf. Definition 1.1.3 and Theorem 1.4.6 .
If an element of @xmath , or @xmath respectively, can be realized (up to
regular homotopy) by such an immersion, we call it holomorphic . The
corresponding subsets will be denoted by @xmath and @xmath respectively.

As we will see, @xmath is not symmetric with respect to a sign change of
@xmath , hence, in order to identify the subset @xmath without any
sign-ambiguity, we will fix a ‘canonical’ generator of @xmath . This
will be done via the ismorphisms @xmath and by fixing a canonical
generator in @xmath (see 3.2.3 ). Sometimes, to emphasize that we work
with the Smale invariant with this fixed sign convention, we refer to it
as the sign–refined Smale invariant . Our second goal is to determine
the correct signs (compatibly with the above choice of generators) in
the Smale invariant formulas 2.2.2 and ( 2.2.7 ), ( 2.2.8 ), which were
stated only up to a sign–ambiguity.

#### 3.1.2. The set @xmath

One expects that the analytic geometry of holomorphic realization
imposes some rigidity restrictions, and also provides some further
connections with the properties of complex analytic spaces. Mumford
already in 1961 in his seminal article [ 50 ] asked for the
characterization of the Smale invariant of a holomorphic (algebraic)
immersion in terms of the analytic/algebraic geometry. This chapter
provides a complete answer to his question. A more precise formulation
of our guiding questions is:

###### Question 3.1.1.

(a) Which are the regular homotopy classes @xmath and @xmath represented
by holomorphic germs?

(b) How can a certain regular homotopy class be identified via complex
singularity theory, that is, via algebraic or analytic invariants of the
involved analytic spaces? Furthermore, if some @xmath realizes some
Smale invariant (e.g., if its Smale invariant is zero), then what kind
of specific analytic properties @xmath must have?

The main results of this chapter provide the following answer in the
case of immersions.

###### Theorem 3.1.2.

(a) @xmath is identified via the sign–refined Smale invariant @xmath by
the set of non–positive integers.

(b) If the immersion @xmath is induced by the holomorphic germ @xmath ,
then @xmath , where @xmath is the number of complex Whitney umbrella
points of a stabilization of @xmath . @xmath can be calculated in an
algebraic way, as the codimension of the ideal generated by the
determinants of the @xmath -minors of the Jacobian matrix of @xmath .
Cf. Subsection 1.4.2 .

The main tool of the proof of Theorem 3.1.2 is the concept of complex
Smale invariant of the germ @xmath . We introduce it in Section 3.3 and
then we prove that it agrees with @xmath . Next, in Section 3.4 we
identify the complex Smale invariant of a germ @xmath with the
(classical) Smale invariant of the link of @xmath . The proof of the
part (b) of Theorem 3.1.2 is then ready up to sign. In 3.2.3 we fix
explicit generators of the groups @xmath and @xmath and calculate the
homomorphism between them. With this convention the complex Smale
invariant of @xmath is equal to @xmath and is opposite to the
sign–refined Smale invariant.

Part (b) of Theorem 3.1.2 implies that the sign–refined Smale invariant
of a complex analytic realization is always non–positive. The proof of
part (a) is then completed by Example 3.5.1 , which provides analytic
representatives for all non–positive @xmath .

Note that in the present literature the known ( @xmath ) realizations of
certain Smale invariants @xmath are rather involved (similarly, as the
computation of @xmath for any concrete @xmath ), see e.g. [ 18 , 7 ] .
Here we provide very simple polynomial maps realizing all non–positive
Smale invariants. Furthermore, the computation of @xmath for any @xmath
is extremely simple.

Moreover, precomposing the above complex realizations with the @xmath
reflection @xmath , we get explicit representatives for all positive
Smale numbers as well, compare [ 7 , Lemma 3.4.2.] . In this way Theorem
3.1.2 together with Example 3.5.1 provides an answer to Smale’s question
2.1.8 .

#### 3.1.3. The set @xmath.

Recall that @xmath consists of regular homotopy classes (that is,
sign–refined Smale invariants in @xmath ) represented by holomorphic
germs @xmath whose induced immersions @xmath might not be embeddings,
but are regular homotopic with embeddings.

A more restrictive subset consists of those regular homotopy classes
(Smale invariants), which can be represented by holomorphic gems, whose
restrictions off origin are embeddings. Cf. Hughes–Melvin theorem 2.2.1
.

###### Theorem 3.1.3.

(a) @xmath .

(b) Assume that the immersion @xmath is the restriction at links level
of a holomorphic germ @xmath as above, @xmath . Then the following facts
are equivalent:

1.  @xmath (hence @xmath is not singular),

2.  @xmath ,

3.  @xmath is an embedding,

4.  @xmath is the trivial embedding.

Again, we wish to emphasize that the previous construction of the
generator of @xmath (that is, of a smooth embedding with @xmath ) is
complicated, it is more existential than constructive [ 17 ] . On the
other hand, by our complex realizations, for any given @xmath we provide
several easily defined germs, which are immersions, and are regular
homotopic with embeddings. Moreover, part (b) says that it is impossible
to find holomorphic representatives @xmath such that @xmath is already
embedding (except for @xmath ).

The essential parts of Theorem 3.1.3 (b) are the implications (2) @xmath
(1) and (3) @xmath (1), which conclude an analytic statement from
topological ones. The proof (2) @xmath (1) is based on Theorem 3.1.2 ,
which recovers the vanishing of the analytic invariant @xmath from the
‘topological vanishing’ @xmath .

A possible proof of ( @xmath embedding) @xmath ( @xmath ) is based on a
deep theorem of Mumford, which says that if the link of a complex normal
surface singularity is @xmath then the germ should be non–singular [ 50
] . We will provide two other possible proofs too: one of them is based
on Mond’s Theorem 1.4.3 , the other on a theorem of Ekholm–Szűcs 2.2.12
.

#### 3.1.4.

The literature of singular analytic germs @xmath is huge with several
deep and interesting results and invariants, see e.g. the articles of D.
Mond and V. Goryunov [ 13 , 14 , 15 , 44 , 45 , 46 ] and the references
therein, or Chapter 1 of this thesis. In singularity classifications
finitely determined or finite codimensional germs are central (with
respect to some equivalence relation). For germs @xmath Mond proved that
the finite @xmath -determinacy is equivalent with the finiteness of
three invariants @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , see [ 45 ] or Subsection
1.4.2 . This is more restrictive than our assumption @xmath , which
requires the finiteness of @xmath only, cf. Theorem 1.4.6 .

However, it is advantageous to consider this larger class, since there
are many key families of germs with infinite right-left codimension, but
with finite @xmath , and they produce interesting connections with other
areas as well (see e.g. the next example).

###### Example 3.1.4.

Consider a simple hypersurface singularity @xmath (that is, of type
A–D–E). They are quotient singularities, that is @xmath for certain
finite subgroup @xmath , cf. examples 1.3.5 , 1.4.14 , 1.4.15 , 1.4.17 .
Let @xmath be the link of @xmath (e.g., it is a lens space for A-type),
and consider the regular @xmath –covering @xmath . This composed with
the inclusion @xmath provides an immersion @xmath . Hence, the universal
cover of each A–D–E singularity automatically provides an element of
@xmath , which usually have infinite right–left codimension. The
corresponding Smale invariants are given in Section 3.5 . E.g., @xmath ,
hence @xmath represents (up to regular homotopy) a generator of @xmath .

Recently Kinjo, using the plumbing graphs of the links of A–D
singularities and @xmath –techniques, constructed immersions with the
same Smale invariants as our @xmath up to sign. See [ 24 ] or the
discussion in Subsection 2.3.2 . Hence, the natural complex analytic
maps @xmath provide analytic realizations of the @xmath constructions of
[ 24 ] , and emphasize their distinguished nature.

#### 3.1.5. Smale invariants and the geometry of Seifert surfaces.

In Section 2.2 we reviewed three major topological theorems, which
recover the classical Smale invariant in terms of the geometry of their
(singular) Seifert surfaces, namely the Hughes–Melvin Theorem 2.2.2 ,
and two theorems of Ekholm–Szűcs [ 9 ] , ( 2.2.7 ) and ( 2.2.8 ). All of
them carry the sign ambiguity of the Smale invariant (which sometimes is
also caused by the nature of their proofs).

Section 3.6 has two goals. First, we will indicate the correct sign in
all these formulae, whenever the Smale invariant is replaced by the
sign–refined Smale invariant. Moreover, we also determine the Seifert
type invariants in terms of @xmath and @xmath , whenever the immersion
is induced by a holomorphic germ @xmath .

When @xmath is a stable immersion, the invariant @xmath of stable
immersions introduced by Ekholm (cf. Subsection 2.2.2 ) is also
expressed in terms of @xmath and @xmath , namely @xmath . In other
words, Ekholm’s ‘strangeness’ invariant @xmath is equal to @xmath , see
Remark 2.2.8 .

From this point of view our results can be considered as complex
singular Seifert surface formulae expressing the invariants of an
immersion. The disentanglement (see 1.4.4 ) plays the role the singular
Seifert surface.

#### 3.1.6. @xmath-characterisation of @xmath and @xmath.

The formulae connecting the holomorphic invariants @xmath and @xmath
with @xmath -invariants @xmath and @xmath have the following
consequence.

###### Theorem 3.1.5.

Assume that the analytic germs @xmath and @xmath are @xmath @xmath
-equivalent (that is, @xmath holds for some germs of orientation
preserving diffeomorphisms @xmath and @xmath ). Then

(a) @xmath .

(b) If additionally @xmath is finitely @xmath -determined as a
holomorphic germ, then @xmath and @xmath .

Part (a) of Theorem 3.1.5 is proved as Corollary 3.4.2 , while part (b)
in Remark 3.6.4 .

In fact, one might even ask for the topological analogue of Theorem
3.1.5 : is it true that if @xmath holds for some germs of orientation
preserving homeomorphisms @xmath and @xmath , then @xmath and @xmath ?
In Remark 3.6.4 we show the following.

###### Corollary 3.1.6.

In the presence of a topological left–right equivalence as above, if
@xmath and @xmath are finitely @xmath -determined, then @xmath , hence
@xmath .

The full extension of Theorem 3.1.5 from @xmath to topological category
is obstructed by the following facts. Though we identify the analytic
invariant @xmath with the smooth Smale invariant @xmath , it is not yet
known if @xmath is stable with respect to topological left–right
equivalence. A possible way to prove this requires the extension of the
formulae from Section 2.2.3 from smooth to more general Seifert
surfaces, which exceeds the aims of the present thesis. (Also, we do not
know how the topological left–right equivalence behaves with respect to
analytic deformations used in Section 3.6 .)

### 3.2. Distinguished generators and sign conventions

#### 3.2.1. Smale invariant and orientation

Recall that we use ( 2.2.3 ) for definition of the Smale invariant
throughout Chapter 3 . We wish to emphasize the following facts
regarding orientations of @xmath and @xmath and their effects on
definition ( 2.2.3 ). (This might serve also as a small guide for the
next sections.)

Let us think about @xmath as the subset of @xmath , the boundary of the
4–ball @xmath in @xmath , or via embedding @xmath , as a subset of
@xmath . We do not wish to fix any orientation on it as the orientation
of @xmath (that would depend on the convention how one defines the
orientation of the boundary of an oriented manifold — called, say,
‘boundary convention’).

Note that in the definition ( 2.2.3 ) of the Smale invariant, not the
orientation of @xmath is used, but the orientation of the tubular
neighbourhood @xmath and the orientation of the target @xmath .
Moreover, @xmath is unsensitive to the orientation change simultaneously
in both @xmath . In this way we get an element @xmath , which is
independent of the orientation of @xmath and does not use any
orientation of @xmath . Furthermore, if we define (this will done in
3.2.3 ) a generator @xmath in @xmath , using again only the embedding
@xmath (and no other orientation data), then @xmath identifies with an
element of @xmath , such that its definition is independent of any
orientations of @xmath and @xmath , hence also of the ‘boundary
convention’.

All our discussions are in this spirit (except sections 2.2.3 and 3.6 ,
where oriented Seifert surfaces are treated): we run orientation and
‘boundary convention’ free definitions and statements (associated with
@xmath , regarded as a subset of @xmath , and immersions @xmath ).

However, if we fix a ‘boundary convention’, then @xmath (in @xmath )
will get an orientation (as @xmath ). Then, for any oriented abstract
@xmath , let us denote it by @xmath , and immersion @xmath , we can
define the Smale invariant @xmath (here ‘a’ refers to the ‘abstract’
@xmath ) by identifying @xmath with the embedded @xmath by an
orientation preserving diffeomorphism and taking @xmath . This @xmath
depends on the ‘boundary convention’, since the identification @xmath
depends on it: changing the convention we change @xmath by a sign.

This point of view should be adapted when @xmath will be the (oriented)
boundary of an oriented Seifert surface. But till Section 3.6 we will
focus on the first version, @xmath .

Next, in the definition of @xmath , one can replace @xmath by @xmath ,
where @xmath is the boundary of the ball in @xmath , and @xmath is
embedded naturally in @xmath , cf. Example 2.1.14 . By taking a generic
point @xmath we identify @xmath with @xmath , and @xmath will be
replaced by a tubular neighbourhood of @xmath in @xmath . Then the
definition ( 2.2.3 ) of @xmath can be repeated for any immersion @xmath
(where @xmath ) providing an element @xmath , which becomes an integer
once a generator @xmath is constructed from the embedding @xmath .
Again, this Smale invariant @xmath will be independent of the
orientations of @xmath and @xmath , hence of the ‘boundary convention’
as well.

For immersions defined in Subsection 1.1.2 , @xmath evidently sits
naturally in @xmath (hence also in a certain @xmath , cf. 3.4.1 ). This
together with Definition ( 2.2.3 ) provide @xmath (which becomes an
integer once @xmath will be constructed in 3.2.3 ).

#### 3.2.2. Switch complex to real

There is a natural map @xmath from @xmath to @xmath , which replaces any
entry @xmath of a matrix @xmath by the real @xmath –matrix @xmath .
@xmath holds. A map @xmath can be regarded as a map @xmath : if we
denote by @xmath ( @xmath ) the coordinates of @xmath , then for the
components of @xmath and @xmath one has

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then @xmath holds for the complex Jacobian of @xmath and the real
Jacobian of @xmath .

Let @xmath denote the inclusion. It is well–known (see e.g. [ 19 ] )
that

  --------- -- -------- --
  (3.2.1)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

###### Proposition 3.2.1.

The homomorphism @xmath is an isomorphism too.

###### Proof.

First, we provide a more conceptual proof, which does not identify
distinguished generators. Both sides are in the stable range (see [ 19 ]
), hence we can switch to the homomorphism @xmath induced by the
embedding @xmath . By (a proof of) Bott periodicity, the quotient @xmath
is homotopically equivalent to the loopspace @xmath of @xmath , cf. [ 2
] . Hence @xmath for @xmath and 4. Then the isomorphism follows from the
homotopy exact sequence of the fibration @xmath with fibre @xmath . ∎

In 3.2.3 we will give another, more computational proof, where we will
be able to fix distinguished generators for @xmath and @xmath , and via
these generators we identify @xmath with multiplication by @xmath .

#### 3.2.3. Conventions, identifications

First, we identify @xmath and @xmath and @xmath in the obvious way: we
identify the quaternion @xmath with @xmath and with the complex pair
@xmath , where @xmath and @xmath . Also, we identify @xmath with the
quaternions of unit length: @xmath .

We define the following maps. Set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath . @xmath is the (complex) matrix of the right
(quaternionic) multiplication with @xmath , that is, of the map @xmath ,
@xmath . Note that the left multiplication by @xmath is not a complex
unitary transformation, in general. Next, set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath . @xmath is the (real) matrix of the left multiplication
with @xmath (i.e., of the map @xmath , @xmath ).

Let @xmath be the map which assigns for a @xmath the (real) matrix
@xmath of the right multiplication with @xmath (i.e., of the map @xmath
, @xmath ).

Let @xmath be the map which assigns for a @xmath the (real) matrix
@xmath of the conjugation with @xmath (i.e., of the map @xmath , @xmath
).

We use the same notation for the compositions of these maps with the
inclusions @xmath and @xmath . Note that these inclusions commute with
@xmath .

###### Proposition 3.2.2.

[ 19 , Section 7, Subsection 12]

(a) @xmath .

(b) @xmath .

(c) @xmath and @xmath in @xmath .

In the sequel, using these base choices @xmath and @xmath we identify
the groups @xmath and @xmath with @xmath . Now we can state the explicit
version of Proposition 3.2.1 .

###### Proposition 3.2.3.

@xmath holds for @xmath .

###### Proof.

From definitions @xmath and @xmath , thus @xmath by part (c) of
Proposition 3.2.2 . ∎

###### Remark 3.2.4.

Let @xmath be the projection (choosing the first or the second column of
the matrix). Then @xmath is the unique generator for which @xmath .

###### Remark 3.2.5.

The conventions we use are not universal. For example, Kirby and Melvin
in [ 25 ] have chosen the same generators of @xmath and @xmath (these
are @xmath and @xmath with our notations), but they identified @xmath
and @xmath differently than us. Namely, they identified the quaternion
@xmath with @xmath and the complex pair @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath
. With that identification @xmath becomes the (complex) matrix of the
quaternionic left multiplication with @xmath . In that identification
@xmath would be equal to @xmath , since that is the homotopy class of
the map @xmath given by the composition @xmath , where @xmath is the
reflection @xmath .

### 3.3. The complex Smale invariant

#### 3.3.1.

In this section we define the complex Smale invariant @xmath for a
holomorphic germ @xmath , singular only at @xmath . It will be the
bridge between @xmath and @xmath .

###### Definition 3.3.1.

Consider the map (with target the complex Stiefel variety @xmath ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

defined via the natural trivialization of the complex tangent bundles
@xmath and @xmath . By definition, the complex Smale invariant of @xmath
is the homotopy class:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By the connectivity of the group of local coordinate transformations,
@xmath is independent of the choice of local coordinates in @xmath and
@xmath .

###### Remark 3.3.2.

The projection @xmath induces an isomorphism between @xmath and @xmath
(see e.g. [ 19 ] ). Hence, if we choose a complex normal vector field
@xmath of @xmath , then the map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

represents @xmath in @xmath . A canonical choice of @xmath could be the
complex conjugate of the cross product of the partial derivatives of
@xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Remark 3.3.3.

@xmath and in 3.2.3 we identify them through a fixed isomorphism. In
this way @xmath becomes a well-defined integer without any
sign–ambiguity.

###### Proposition 3.3.4.

Let @xmath be the cross cap, i.e. @xmath . Then @xmath .

###### Proof.

The map @xmath represents @xmath . We should compose this with @xmath ,
then with the inverse of the inclusion @xmath , and finally with the
projection @xmath ; and then calculate the degree of the resulting map
@xmath . In fact, along these compositions we will use (the
homotopically equivalent groups) @xmath and @xmath instead of @xmath and
@xmath . Therefore, we will arrive in @xmath instead of @xmath .

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The first composition gives the map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are the coordinates of the normal
vector @xmath (see Remark 3.3.2 ). This is modified by the homotopy

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

which maps @xmath into @xmath . [Note that the determinant is @xmath ,
thus the image is indeed in @xmath .] Hence, we obtain the map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which composes with the projection (first column) provides @xmath ,
@xmath . After a normalisation, the degree of the resulting map is
@xmath . ∎

The proof of Proposition 3.3.4 works for all germs of the form

  --------- -- -------- --
  (3.3.1)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

and implies that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This degree agrees with the intersection multiplicity of @xmath and
@xmath in @xmath , hence we proved the following, cf. Example 1.4.10 .

###### Proposition 3.3.5.

  --------- -- -------- --
  (3.3.2)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

holds for corank– @xmath germs @xmath singular only at the origin.

This identity @xmath will be proved in the general case in Section 3.3.2
.

###### Remark 3.3.6.

Conversely, the identity @xmath is proved in Section 3.3.2 independently
of Theorem 1.4.3 , therefore ( 3.3.2 ) together with Theorem 3.3.7 give
a new proof for Theorem 1.4.3 in the case of germs which satisfy @xmath
.

#### 3.3.2. The identity @xmath.

Next we identify the complex Smale invariant with the number of cross
caps.

###### Theorem 3.3.7.

@xmath .

###### Proof.

Consider the following diagram:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath . @xmath is an irreducible algebraic variety of complex
codimension @xmath , its Zariski open set @xmath is smooth.

First we prove that @xmath is equal to the linking number of @xmath and
@xmath in @xmath . This is defined as follows. If @xmath is a smooth
map, and @xmath is a smooth extension defined on the ball such that
@xmath and @xmath intersects @xmath transversally along @xmath , then
the linking number of @xmath and @xmath is the algebraic number of the
intersection points of @xmath and @xmath . By standard argument it is a
homotopy invariant of maps @xmath .

The linking number gives a group homomorphism @xmath . Next lemma shows
that this homomorphism is surjective.

###### Lemma 3.3.8.

Let @xmath be the cross cap. If @xmath and @xmath , then @xmath is the
only intersection point and the intersection is transverse at that
point.

###### Proof.

This is a straightforward local computation left to the reader. The
transversality follows also from the conceptual fact that the cross cap
is a stable map. ∎

The sign of the intersection multiplicity at the intersection point of
two complex submanifolds is always positive. For @xmath described in
3.3.8 the linking number of @xmath and @xmath is @xmath . This shows not
only that the homomorphism given by the linking number is surjective
(hence an isomorphism too), but also that this isomorphism agrees with
the chosen one in 3.2.3 . This follows from the fact that the complex
Smale invariant of the cross cap is exactly the chosen generator, see
Proposition 3.3.4 . Hence, the homomorphisms @xmath and coincide.

Next, we show that @xmath . Take a generic perturbation @xmath of @xmath
. @xmath is homotopic to @xmath , hence their linking numbers are the
same. @xmath has only cross cap singularities, their number is @xmath .
This means that @xmath intersects transversally @xmath in @xmath points.
Intersection of complex manifolds provides positive signs. ∎

###### Corollary 3.3.9.

@xmath .

### 3.4. The proof of Theorems 3.1.2 and 3.1.3

#### 3.4.1.

Theorem 3.1.2 follows from Theorem 3.3.7 , Proposition 3.2.3 and the
next identity.

###### Proposition 3.4.1.

@xmath .

###### Proof.

By the definition of the Smale invariant, one has to extend @xmath to a
neighbourhood of the standard embedding of @xmath in an @xmath (cf. (
2.2.3 )). On the other hand @xmath extends @xmath in the @xmath
direction. We will compare these two extensions using a common extension
@xmath , where @xmath is a suitable neighbourhood of @xmath in @xmath .

Let us consider a fixed @xmath which satisfy the properties of Corollary
1.1.2 . We also write @xmath , @xmath , @xmath for the @xmath ball in
@xmath , and @xmath for its boundary. (Late we will drop some of the
@xmath ’s.) For positive @xmath , @xmath sufficiently closed to @xmath ,
@xmath , and for @xmath one defines @xmath , where @xmath , @xmath is
the @xmath -disc in @xmath , and @xmath is the complex normal vector of
@xmath , see Remark 3.3.2 . Since the normal bundle of @xmath in @xmath
is trivial (and since the transversality is an open property), we get
that @xmath is diffeomorphic to @xmath . In fact, if @xmath is the
natural projection, then for any @xmath we can define @xmath . Then each
@xmath is a @xmath 3-sphere, being the boundary of the @xmath 4-ball
@xmath . Then @xmath . Moreover, @xmath is a thickened tubular
neighbourhood of @xmath , homeomorphic to the real 6-ball. Its corners
can be smoothed, hence we think about it as a @xmath ball. Its boundary
@xmath (diffeomorphic to the 5-sphere) is the union of @xmath
(diffeomorphic to @xmath ) and @xmath (diffeomorphic to @xmath ).

In a point @xmath the differential of @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus, the homotopy class of @xmath equals @xmath (cf. 3.3.2 ).
Therefore, taking the real function @xmath (cf. 3.2.2 ), its real
Jacobian satisfies @xmath .

On the other hand we show that @xmath . In order to recover the Smale
invariant @xmath of @xmath , first we need to fix a global coordinate
system in a contractible neighbourhood of the source @xmath in @xmath
and also in @xmath containing @xmath . Let us introduce the ‘outward
normal at the end’ convention to orient compatibly a manifold and its
boundary. In this way we fix an orientation of @xmath and @xmath .
(According to 3.2.3 , the output of the proof is independent of the
convention choice.)

In the first case we introduce a coordinate system in @xmath compatibly
with the orientation, where @xmath is an arbitrary point (e.g. @xmath ).
Let @xmath denote the framing of @xmath induced by this coordinate
system. We can extend the outward normal frame @xmath of @xmath in
@xmath to the rest of @xmath (as the outward normal vector of @xmath ).
This framing can be extended to a neighbourhood @xmath of @xmath in
@xmath . Let @xmath denote this framing (or more precisely, @xmath is
the transition function from the standard framing inherited from @xmath
to the one just constructed).

The target is the standard @xmath . We can choose a point @xmath and a
coordinate system on @xmath compatibly with the orientation. The
coordinate system induces a framing @xmath of the tangent bundle @xmath
of @xmath . In the points of the target of @xmath the vectors of @xmath
and @xmath are linearly independent, that is, @xmath behaves like a
normal framing (this follows from the transversality property of 1.1.2
). We can extend it to a normal framing @xmath of @xmath in @xmath . In
this way we get a framing of the tangent bundle of a neighbourhood
@xmath of @xmath in @xmath . Let @xmath denote the transition from the
framing on @xmath inherited from @xmath to the framing just defined.

The Smale invariant @xmath is constructed in the following way, cf. (
2.2.3 ). Take

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the Jacobian of @xmath restricted to @xmath prescribed in the framings
@xmath and @xmath . The homotopy class of this matrix restricted to
@xmath (as a map @xmath ) is equal to @xmath . (Since @xmath preserves
the orientation, @xmath does as well.)

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

because @xmath , thus the homotopy class of @xmath equals @xmath .

On the other hand @xmath . As maps @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are
nullhomotopic because the vector fields are defined on the contractible
spaces @xmath and @xmath . Therefore (cf. Remark 2.1.4 )

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The left hand side of this identity is @xmath , while the right hand
side @xmath . ∎

###### Corollary 3.4.2.

Assume that the analytic germs @xmath and @xmath are @xmath left-right
equivalent, that is, @xmath holds for some germs of orientation
preserving diffeomorphisms @xmath and @xmath . Then @xmath .

###### Proof.

For a sufficiently small @xmath take @xmath and let @xmath be the
immersion associated with the germ @xmath (cf. 1.1.2 ).

As in the proof of Proposition 3.4.1 , let @xmath be the extension of
@xmath viewed as a real function. Then, by that proof, @xmath , which is
@xmath under the above identification.

Let us define @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath is a germ of orientation preserving diffeomorphism extending
@xmath .

Then @xmath restricted on some neighbourhood @xmath of @xmath plays the
role of a real extension of @xmath . One can verify that the proof of
Proposition 3.4.1 works for this extension as well, since it sends the
normal vector of @xmath into a non-tangent vector of @xmath . Therefore,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Finally, note that @xmath . This follows from the fact that the
functions @xmath and @xmath (with images in @xmath ) extend to the ball
@xmath . ∎

#### 3.4.2. Proof of Theorem 3.1.3.

Part (a) follows from Theorem 3.1.2 and [ 17 ] .

In part (b), the implications (1) @xmath (2,3,4), and (4) @xmath (3) are
clear.

The proof of (2) @xmath (1): (2) implies @xmath by Theorem 3.1.2 , while
this vanishing implies (1) via Mond’s Theorem 1.4.3 . For (3) @xmath (1)
we provide three proofs, each of them emphasize a different
geometrical/topological aspect.

(A) (Based on Mumford’s Theorem.) If @xmath is an embedding then the
image @xmath of @xmath is an isolated hypersurface singularity in @xmath
. Moreover, its link is @xmath , hence by Mumford’s theorem [ 50 ]
@xmath is smooth. Hence its normalization @xmath is an isomorphism.

(B) (Based on Mond’s Theorem.) Let us take the generic deformation
@xmath , and consider the closure @xmath of the preimage of the the set
of double values. It is a 1–dimensional closed complex analytic subspace
of the disc in @xmath . The preimages of cross cap and triple points are
interior points of the closure of @xmath , while its boundary is @xmath
is the preimage of the double points of the immersion of @xmath . If
@xmath is an embedding then @xmath , hence @xmath is a compact analytic
curve in (the disc of) @xmath , hence it should be empty. This shows
that @xmath has no cross cap and triple points either. Hence @xmath ,
which implies (1) by 1.4.3 as before.

(C) (Based on Ekholm–Szűcs Theorem.) As above, we get that @xmath is an
embedding. Since @xmath is an embedding, this embedding is regular
homotopic to @xmath , hence they have the same Smale invariant. In the
second case it can be determined by an Ekholm–Szűcs formula [ 9 ]
(recalled as Theorem 2.2.12 ): since @xmath is an embedded Seifert
surface with signature zero we get @xmath . This basically proves (3)
@xmath (2). Then we continue with the already shown (2) @xmath (1).

In fact, the main point of this last proof is already coded in
Hughes–Melvin Theorem [ 17 ] ( 2.2.2 here), but in that statement the
Seifert surface is in @xmath and not in @xmath (or in the 6–ball). But
2.2.12 shows that that Hughes–Melvin Theorem is true even if the
4–manifold @xmath with boundary in @xmath is embedded in @xmath (instead
of @xmath ).

### 3.5. Examples

###### Example 3.5.1 (@xmath from Mond’s list [45]).

@xmath ( @xmath ). The ramification ideal @xmath is generated by @xmath
, cf. Subsection 1.4.2 and Example 1.4.10 . Hence @xmath .

This family gives representatives for every regular homotopy class with
non-positive sign–refined Smale invariant. Furthermore, we can represent
any regular homotopy class with Smale invariant @xmath in the form
@xmath , where @xmath is the reflection @xmath (c.f. [ 7 , Lemma 3.4.2.]
).

###### Example 3.5.2 (Quotient singularities).

The covering map germs of the quotient singularities of type @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath are discussed in examples 1.3.5 , 1.4.14 , 1.4.15 and
1.4.17 , where the @xmath invariant of them is calculated. Their
associated immersions decompose in the form @xmath , cf. Example 3.1.4 .
The list of their Smale invariants @xmath is:

  --------- -- -------- --
  (3.5.1)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

The Smale invariant of the @xmath and @xmath types agrees up to sign
with the Smale invariant of the immersions constructed by Kinjo [ 24 ] ,
its discussion is in Subsection 2.3.2 . Finding a direct relation
between our immersions and Kinjo’s constructions would enable us to
determine the Smale invariant of the immersions associated with the
graphs @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

### 3.6. Ekholm-Szűcs formulae for holomorphic germs @xmath

#### 3.6.1.

In this section, from a stabilization of @xmath we construct a singular
Seifert surface, and we express the topological summands of ( 2.2.8 ) in
terms of holomorphic invariants.

The topological formulae ( 2.2.1 ), ( 2.2.7 ) and ( 2.2.8 ) targeting
the Smale invariant in terms of the geometry of oriented Seifert
surfaces are stated and proved only up to a sign ambiguity. In this next
section we will show that the sign–refined Smale invariant appears in
all these expressions with a unique well–defined sign, and we determine
it simultaneously for all formulae. The discussion has an extra output
as well: the topological ingredients in the formulae below will get
reinterpretations in terms of complex analytic invariants, provided that
the immersion is induced by a holomorphic germ @xmath .

First of all we have to reinterpret the formulae ( 2.2.1 ), ( 2.2.7 )
and ( 2.2.8 ) in the spirit of the discussion of Subsection 3.2.1 . We
replace @xmath (which is the unit sphere in @xmath ) with @xmath , the
‘oriented abstract @xmath ’, and we also need to fix a ‘boundary
convention’, in order to have the notion of oriented @xmath . Then
@xmath has a well-defined meaning, and @xmath inherits an orientation,
hence the boundary convention determines whether a diffeomorphism @xmath
is orientation preserving. @xmath denotes the Smale invariant (given by
any of its definitions, still having its sign–ambiguity). Nevertheless,
the sign–corrected formulae will be ‘boundary convention’ free, cf.
Theorem 3.6.5 .

#### 3.6.2. Singular Seifert surface associated with a stabilization

Let @xmath be a holomorphic germ singular only at the origin and let
@xmath be the immersion associated with @xmath . We take an @xmath as in
Corollary 1.1.2 , that is, we fix in the target a ball @xmath . We also
consider a holomorphic stabilization @xmath of @xmath (cf. Section 1.4.1
), and we fix @xmath sufficiently small, @xmath , such that the cross
caps and (if @xmath ) the triple points of @xmath sit in @xmath . We set
@xmath , it is a @xmath non–metric ball in @xmath . Its boundary is
@xmath , it is canonically diffeomorphic to @xmath .

The map @xmath is stable as a holomorphic map, but it is not stable as a
@xmath map, cf. Example 1.2.19 . The @xmath stability is obstructed by
its cross cap points. We will modify @xmath in the neighbourhood of
these points according to the following local model.

Let us fix local holomorphic coordinate systems in the source and the
target such that @xmath in the neighbourhood of a cross cap has local
equation @xmath . We consider its real smooth deformation (with @xmath
):

  --------- -- -------- --
  (3.6.1)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

Since the restriction of @xmath near the boundary of the local 4-ball is
stable, by a @xmath bump function the local deformation can be glued to
the trivial deformation of @xmath outside of local neighbourhoods of the
cross caps. This gives a @xmath global deformation @xmath of @xmath and
@xmath . The map @xmath is the singular Seifert surface we will
consider. Its restriction, @xmath is the immersion associated with
@xmath .

###### Proposition 3.6.1.

(a) @xmath is a stable smooth map, nonsingular near the boundary.

(b) @xmath is a stable immersion and it is regular homotopic to @xmath .

(c) If @xmath is a stable immersion, then @xmath is regular homotopic to
@xmath through generic immersions. In this case @xmath .

###### Proof.

(a) First one checks that the local @xmath is stable. This follows from
the computation from Section 3.7.1 . Its most complicated singularities
are @xmath (fold) points, the singular values constitute an @xmath ,
which – together with the double values of the image of the boundary of
the local ball – bounds the @xmath -manifold of the double values. Cf. [
9 , 2.3.] .

In the complement of local balls @xmath agrees with @xmath , hence it
has only simple points, self-transverse double points and isolated
triple points. All of them are stable. Hence @xmath has all the local
properties (multigerms) of a stable map, thus it is stable by Remark
1.2.6 .

(b) @xmath is stable in real sense too: it has only simple points and
self-transverse double points. @xmath is a regular homotopy between
@xmath and @xmath ( @xmath ).

(c) Being a stable immersion is an open condition (cf. [ 9 , 2.1.] ).
Furthermore, @xmath is constant along a regular homotopy through generic
immersions, cf. [ 7 ] . ∎

Next, we return back to the formula ( 2.2.8 ), applied for @xmath .
Clearly, @xmath .

###### Theorem 3.6.2.

Let @xmath be a holomorphic stabilization of @xmath with fixed @xmath
and the corresponding maps @xmath and @xmath as above. Then the
following statements hold.

(a) @xmath (cf. 1.4.9 ).

(b) @xmath .

(c) @xmath .

For the proof see 3.6.3 .

Note that @xmath is an analytic invariant of @xmath , since it is
defined as a (topological) invariant of an analytic deformation. Recall
from Proposition 1.4.9 that if @xmath , then @xmath is independent of
the deformation @xmath and is equal to @xmath .

###### Corollary 3.6.3.

If @xmath , then @xmath and @xmath is also independent of the
holomorphic stabilization @xmath of @xmath .

###### Remark 3.6.4.

(a) Assume that @xmath is finitely determined, that is, @xmath is a
stable immersion, cf. Theorem 1.4.4 . Then @xmath is finite, cf. Theorem
1.4.3 , and for any holomorphic stabilization @xmath one has @xmath (cf.
Proposition 3.6.1 ), hence @xmath .

(b) Note that if @xmath is finitely determined and the holomorphic germ
@xmath is @xmath left-right equivalent with @xmath (see Corollary 3.4.2
for precise definition), then the immersion @xmath associated with
@xmath is also stable immersion and @xmath . Therefore by Corollaries
3.4.2 and 3.6.3 we have @xmath too.

(c) More generally, @xmath and @xmath are topological left–right
equivalent and both of them are finitely @xmath -determined (so @xmath
and @xmath are stable immersions), then @xmath , hence Corollary 3.1.6
follows too.

(d) If @xmath and @xmath are finite, then @xmath is not necessarily
stable immersion, but it does not have triple points. Then by Remark
2.2.7 @xmath is well-defined as @xmath of any small stable perturbation
of @xmath with a regular homotopy. This provides an other proof for
Corollary 3.6.3 . However it is not clear, how can @xmath be determined
from the topology of @xmath itself, without stable perturbation. That
obstructs the generalization of part (b) and (c) for germs with finite
@xmath and @xmath .

###### Theorem 3.6.5.

With our sign–convention, if in the left hand side of the formulae (
2.2.1 ), ( 2.2.7 ) and ( 2.2.8 ) we put the sign–refined Smale invariant
@xmath , then the formulae are valid if we put the positive sign on the
right hand sides.

In particular, the validity of these sign–corrected formulae (e.g.,
@xmath ) is independent of the ‘boundary convention’: changing the
boundary convention changes the sign in both sides of the formulae
simultaneously.

The proof will appear in 3.6.3 .

###### Remark 3.6.6.

The formula ( 2.2.7 ), involving the (algebraic) number of real cusps of
maps @xmath is the real analogue of our theorem @xmath , involving the
number of cross caps of holomorphic deformations. This suggests that if
we replace a holomorphic deformation by a smooth generic map, then we
trade each cross cup by @xmath real cusps.

#### 3.6.3.

Proof. We prove Theorems 3.6.2 and 3.6.5 simultanously (see also the
discussion from Subsection 3.2.1 ).

In the definitions of the invariants @xmath , @xmath and @xmath one uses
very specific sign/orientation conventions, based on the orientation of
the involved subspaces in their definition.

For a triple value, the sign is determined in such a way that it is
@xmath whenever the triple value is obtained from a holomorphic triple
point (hence the orientations agree with the complex orientations).

Since in the local deformation @xmath we do not create any new triple
value, see e.g. the computation of Section 3.7 , all the triple values
of @xmath come from the complex triple points of the holomorphic @xmath
, hence (a) follows.

The proof of the remaining parts are based on computations of the
invariants @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath for two concrete cases.
For the integers @xmath and @xmath the definitions (orientation
conventions) are not immediate even in simple cases. Therefore, in our
computation we determine them only up to a sign. The point is that
computing ‘sufficiently many’ examples, the formula ( 2.2.8 ), even with
its sign ambiguity in front of the right hand side, and even with the
(new) sign ambiguities of the integers @xmath and @xmath , determine
uniquely all these signs. (This also shows that, in fact, there is a
unique universal way to fix the orientation conventions and signs in the
definitions of @xmath and @xmath such that ( 2.2.8 ) works universally.)

In Section 3.7 we will determine the following data:

  --------- -- -------- --
  (3.6.2)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

The singular values of @xmath are concentrated near the cross caps of
@xmath . For @xmath the value @xmath is @xmath , see (i). Since the sign
is the same for all cross caps, @xmath .

We introduce the notation

  --------- -- -------- --
  (3.6.3)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

@xmath agrees with @xmath up to sign, thus @xmath . Substituting this
and the data (i) of the cross cap in ( 3.6.3 ) we conclude that @xmath
and @xmath .

Next, using the date (ii) for @xmath , all the remaining sign
ambiguities can be eliminated: @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

The universal signs in formulae ( 2.2.1 ), ( 2.2.7 ) and ( 2.2.8 ) are
related by common examples, hence one of them determines all of them.

### 3.7. Calculations. The proof of (3.6.2).

We show the main steps of the computations. Note that if the germ @xmath
is weighted homogeneous, then @xmath can be chosen.

#### 3.7.1. The case of cross cap.

@xmath and @xmath is clear, cf. examples 1.4.10 and 1.4.11 . Next we
compute @xmath and @xmath . Set @xmath and the smooth perturbation
@xmath . The singular locus is @xmath .

@xmath has no singular point, hence @xmath has no cusp points. The most
complicated singularities of @xmath are @xmath (or fold) points. The
closure of the set of the double points @xmath of @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with the involution @xmath . The fix point set of the involution is
@xmath . Thus the set of the double points is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Each double point has exactly one pair with the same value, hence @xmath
has no triple point.

A parametrization of @xmath is @xmath where @xmath , @xmath .

The parametrization shows that the closure of @xmath is a Möbius band.
For @xmath we get @xmath , which is the midline of the Möbius band. The
set of double values is

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Writing @xmath we get the singular values of @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The inward normal field of @xmath in @xmath is the derivative of the
curve

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

at @xmath , that is @xmath . The pushing out of @xmath (cf. Definition
2.2.11 ) is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath . By Definition 2.2.11 we need the linking number of @xmath
and @xmath in @xmath . To calculate it we fill in @xmath with a
‘membrane’, which here will be the disc

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath is the algebraic number of the intersection points of @xmath and
@xmath . The only solution is @xmath , @xmath , and the intersection at
this point is transverse. Hence, for the smooth perturbation @xmath of
the cross cap @xmath .

Next we compute @xmath . The set of the double points of @xmath is
@xmath .

The set of the double values is @xmath , and the set of the double
values of @xmath is @xmath .

The sum of the normal vectors at @xmath is @xmath . Hence the shifted
copy of @xmath along @xmath is @xmath .

Since @xmath does not intersect @xmath for @xmath , we can choose @xmath
. An injective parametrization of @xmath is @xmath where @xmath . To
calculate the linking number of @xmath and @xmath in @xmath , we need a
membrane which fills in @xmath . We take

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath is the algebraic number of the intersection points of @xmath and
@xmath . But there is only one such point, namely @xmath , where @xmath
is the real root of @xmath . Moreover, this intersection is transverse.

#### 3.7.2. The @xmath singularity

By 1.3.5 , 1.4.14 its covering is given by @xmath . The immersion @xmath
associated with @xmath is not generic, @xmath is the @xmath -fold
covering of the projective space composed with the inclusion. Thus all
points of @xmath are double points of the immersion @xmath . Compare
@xmath with the immersion @xmath described in the end of Subsection
2.3.2 , see also [ 11 , Section 4] . @xmath is regular homotopic to
@xmath (up to precomposing with a reflection), and has the same
structure @xmath and vanishing @xmath -invariant.

On the other hand, by 1.4.14 , @xmath , and the codimension of the
second fitting ideal shows that @xmath , see 1.3.5 . The finiteness of
these invariants shows that the number of cross caps and triple points
of a generic deformation of @xmath are independent of the chosen
deformation. Below we give a concrete deformation @xmath of @xmath and
we calculate the invariant @xmath of the generic immersion @xmath
associated with @xmath .

The deformation is @xmath , see Figure 1.3 . The vector field

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is @xmath at the points @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . These are the cross
caps.

The defining equation @xmath (where @xmath ) of the double points leads
to the system of equations

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus the double locus @xmath has three parts and these parts correspond
to the three cross caps. The first part comes from the solution @xmath
and @xmath , which implies @xmath , hence @xmath with @xmath . This
provide the double value set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The second part comes from the solution @xmath and @xmath , which
implies @xmath , and @xmath with @xmath . The set of double values is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The third part comes from the solution @xmath and @xmath , which implies
@xmath , and @xmath with @xmath . The set of double values is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath , @xmath and @xmath intersect each other in the unique triple
value @xmath .

Let @xmath ( @xmath ) denote the disjoint components of the set of the
double values of @xmath . Clearly @xmath , where @xmath is the linking
number corresponding to the component @xmath . But @xmath . Indeed,
@xmath and @xmath is interchanged via the transformations @xmath (of
@xmath ) and @xmath (of @xmath ), and @xmath and @xmath via @xmath and
@xmath . Thus, it is enough to calculate @xmath . The needed vector
field along @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The set of the double values of @xmath corresponding to @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The shifted @xmath along @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is small enough. Nevertheless, we can choose @xmath ,
because @xmath for any @xmath . With the notation @xmath we give an
injective parametrization @xmath . We fill it with the membrane

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Computing the intersection points of @xmath and @xmath leads to the
equations

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath and @xmath small. The first two equations imply that @xmath
and @xmath . Multiplying the first two equations one gets

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

From the third equation follows @xmath , hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the right hand side is negative if @xmath is small enough. Hence
@xmath , and @xmath .

### 3.8. A note on the real case

#### 3.8.1. Immersions associated with real germs

There is a real version of part (b) of Theorem 3.1.2 which follows
directly from the result of Whitney and Smale.

Let @xmath be a real analytic germ singular only at @xmath . With the
same method as in the complex case we can associate an immersion @xmath
with @xmath (see 1.1.2 ). The set of regular homotopy classes is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the invariant equals to the algebraic number of self-intersection
points of a stable immersion regular homotopic to @xmath ( @xmath if
@xmath is odd). Cf. examples 2.1.11 , 2.1.13 and 2.1.14 .

A stabilization @xmath of @xmath has only cross cap type singularities,
i.e. locally right–left equivalent with germs of the form @xmath , where
@xmath and @xmath , cf. Example 1.2.18 and Remark 1.4.8 . These cross
caps are isolated, and if @xmath is even, we can associate a sign for
each of them as a boundary component of the corresponding oriented
double point curve. @xmath restricted to the boundary is a stable
immersion @xmath . @xmath and @xmath are regular homotopic, and @xmath
has two kinds of double values:

(a) double values related to a cross cap (that is, they are connected by
a segment consisting of double values of @xmath ),

(b) double values not related to a cross cap.

When @xmath is even, the sign associated to a cross cap agrees with the
sign associated with the self intersection point of @xmath related to
the cross cap. Thus the algebraic number of such cross caps is equal to
the algebraic number of double values of type (a) ( @xmath if @xmath is
odd). The double points of type (b) are pairwise joined up by segments
of the double values of @xmath , thus the algebraic number of them is
@xmath . Moreover, it can happen that two cross caps are joined by a
segment consisting of double values of @xmath , but then they will have
different algebraic sign, hence they will not contribute in the sum.
Hence, we proved:

###### Proposition 3.8.1.

The Smale invariant of @xmath agrees with the algebraic number of the
cross cap points appearing in a stabilization of @xmath ( @xmath if
@xmath is odd).

###### Remark 3.8.2.

In [ 33 ] a complete topological invariant of finitely determined real
germs @xmath is introduced and calculated in many cases: the Gauss word
of the associated immersion @xmath .

## Chapter 4 Singular holomorphic spacegerms

### 4.1. The Milnor fibre

#### 4.1.1. Isolated, complete intersection and normal singularities

This chapter serves as an introduction and background to Chapter 5 ,
where we study the Milnor fibre of non-isolated hypersurfaces.

The aim of this subsection is to give a short introduction of the basic
types of singularities, and clarify the position of our mostly
interested type of surface singularities in this classification, see
Remark 4.1.5 . For the definitions and basic properties we refer to [ 29
, 20 , 51 ] .

A complex analytic spacegerm @xmath is the zero set of a holomorphic
germ @xmath [ 20 , Definition 3.4.2] . We assume that the ideal @xmath
is a radical ideal (i.e. @xmath ), in this case @xmath provides reduced
analytic structure of @xmath . (In general, by local Nullstellensatz [
20 , Theorem 3.4.4.] , @xmath is equal to the set of germs vanishing on
@xmath .)

If @xmath , then @xmath is called hypersurface in @xmath , see [ 29 ,
(1.A)] . If the rank of @xmath is equal to @xmath , then @xmath is
regular (or smooth), i.e. it is the germ of a complex manifold. The
dimension of @xmath is defined as @xmath , where @xmath is the rank of
the Jacobian @xmath at a generic point @xmath . @xmath is called
complete intersection if @xmath [ 29 , (1.5)] . Any hypersuface
singularity is a complete intersection by [ 29 , (1.1)] . If there is a
small enough representative of @xmath such that @xmath for all @xmath
and @xmath , then @xmath has an isolated singularity at @xmath (we also
say that @xmath is isolated).

@xmath is irreducible if for any decomposition @xmath , where @xmath and
@xmath are complex analytic spacegerms, @xmath or @xmath holds [ 20 ,
Definition 3.4.17.] . @xmath is irreducible if and only if @xmath is a
prime ideal [ 20 , Corollary 3.4.18.] . For a hypersurface singularity
@xmath that means @xmath is irreducible in @xmath .

The local ring of analytic functions defined on @xmath is @xmath , cf. [
20 , Definition 3.4.19., Lemma 3.4.20.] . An irreducible singularity
@xmath is called normal if @xmath is an integrally closed ring in its
field of fractions, or equivalently: if any bounded holomorphic function
@xmath can be extended to an analytic function defined on @xmath , see [
51 , Definition 1.3.] , and also [ 20 , Theorem 4.4.15.] .

The normalization of an irreducible germ @xmath is a normal germ @xmath
together with a finite, generically @xmath to @xmath map germ @xmath ,
cf. [ 20 , Definition 4.4.5.] . Every irreducible germ admits a unique
normalization. If @xmath is the normalization of @xmath , then @xmath is
isomorphic with the integral closure of @xmath [ 51 , 1.5.] . See [ 20 ,
Remark 4.4.6., Theorem 4.4.8.] .

###### Example 4.1.1 (Curves).

Let @xmath be an irreducible curve singularity, i.e. @xmath . @xmath is
normal if and only if it is smooth. Hence the normalization of a curve
is a parametrization @xmath , see [ 20 , Theorem 4.4.9., 4.4.10.] .

###### Example 4.1.2 (Surfaces).

A normal @xmath -dimensional singularity is always isolated (or
regular), and a complete intersection surface germ is normal if and only
if it has (at most) an isolated singularity [ 51 , 1.7 (b), 1.8.] . For
instance, the quotient singularities in Example 3.1.4 are normal
hypersurface singularities, hence their covering germs @xmath are not
normalizations.

###### Example 4.1.3 (Finitely determined germs).

A finitely determined germ @xmath is the normalization of its image
@xmath , where @xmath is the generator of the @xmath -th Fitting ideal
@xmath , cf. Section 1.3 . It can be illustrated by the Whitney umbrella
@xmath parametrized by @xmath or given as the zero set of @xmath . Since
@xmath , @xmath is an element of the integral closure of @xmath in the
fraction field of @xmath . The extension of @xmath with @xmath is the
integral closure of @xmath , and it is isomorphic with @xmath . See [ 20
, 4.4.7. (5)] for details.

###### Example 4.1.4 (Cuspidal edge).

The germ @xmath in Example 1.4.13 is also the normalization of its
image.

###### Remark 4.1.5.

None of the sets @xmath and @xmath includes the other one, as it is
shown by the examples 4.1.2 , 4.1.3 , 4.1.4 . Indeed the second class
contains exactly the finite, generically @xmath to @xmath map germs.
However the intersection of the two sets includes very important classes
of germs, for instance the finitely @xmath -determined germs.

#### 4.1.2. Milnor fibration

In this subsection we introduce the notion of the Milnor number and
Milnor fibration [ 42 , 52 , 29 ] .

Throughout this subsection let @xmath be a hypersurface singularity of
dimension @xmath , where @xmath is square free, i.e. it is a reduced
equation of @xmath . Let @xmath be the Jacobian ideal of @xmath
generated by the partial derivatives of @xmath . The Milnor number of
@xmath is @xmath [ 29 , (1.4)] .

###### Theorem 4.1.6.

(a) [ 29 , Proposition (1.2)] @xmath is finite if and only if @xmath has
(at most) an isolated singularity.

(b) [ 52 , E.1.6.] If @xmath is isolated, then any stabilization of
@xmath has @xmath Morse-points.

Since the defining germ @xmath of an isolated singularity @xmath is
finitely determined, and @xmath is stable if and only if it is a Morse
function, cf. Example 1.2.15 , Theorem 4.1.6 is analogue with theorems
1.4.2 and 1.4.3 .

By [ 42 , Corollary 2.9., Remark 2.11.] , [ 52 , Theorem 1.10.] there
exists an @xmath such that for all @xmath the oriented homeomorphism
type of the intersection @xmath of the sphere @xmath with radius @xmath
and @xmath does not depend on @xmath , that is, the pair @xmath has the
same homeomorphism type for all @xmath . Let us fix an @xmath . @xmath
is the link of @xmath . The embedded link determines the embedded
topological type of @xmath , namely the pair @xmath is homeomorphic to
the cone over @xmath . (In the non-isolated case this fact is proved in
[ 4 ] . Note that the link can also be defined when @xmath is not
hypersurface, as the intersection of @xmath with the sphere in @xmath of
small enough radius, or as the @xmath -level set of any real anlytic
germ @xmath , @xmath for small enough @xmath [ 29 , (2.4), (2.5)] .)

The Milnor fibre of @xmath can be defined via two different fibre
bundles, which happen to be isomorphic. The first is the local fibration
of @xmath , see [ 52 , Theorem 2.5.] , [ 29 , Theorem 2.8.] .

###### Theorem 4.1.7.

(a) For @xmath

  --------- -- -------- --
  (4.1.1)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

is a @xmath locally trivial fibration, such that its restriction @xmath
is also a @xmath locally trivial fibration.

(b) If, additionally, @xmath is isolated, then the fibration @xmath
extends to a @xmath locally trivial fibration @xmath , which is in fact
trivial fibration, since @xmath is contractible.

Next, we present the second fibration, the so-called Milnor fibration ,
see [ 42 , Theorem 4.8.] , [ 52 , Theorem 3.5.] . Let @xmath be an open
tubular neighborhood of @xmath , and define @xmath for @xmath .

###### Theorem 4.1.8.

(a)

  --------- -- -------- --
  (4.1.2)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

is a @xmath locally trivial fibration.

(b) The local fibration ( 4.1.1 ) and the Milnor fibration ( 4.1.2 ) are
bundle isomorphic.

The Milnor fibre @xmath is the fibre of either of the bundles ( 4.1.1 )
and ( 4.1.2 ), that is, @xmath with any @xmath , @xmath . The Milnor
fibre is well defined up to orientation preserving diffeomorphism, that
is, it is independent of the different choices.

Here we collect some important properties of @xmath and @xmath .

###### Theorem 4.1.9.

(a) [ 42 , Theorem 5.1.] @xmath is an oriented, compact, smooth,
parallelizable @xmath -manifold with boundary (in fact, @xmath is
complex manifold), and has the homotopy type of a finite CW-complex of
dimension @xmath .

(b) [ 42 , Theorem 5.2.] @xmath is @xmath -connected.

Isolated singularities have more restrictive properties for @xmath and
@xmath .

###### Theorem 4.1.10.

Let @xmath be an isolated hypersurface singularity in @xmath . Then

(a) [ 42 , Corollary 2.9.] @xmath is a smooth, oriented, closed @xmath
-submanifold of @xmath .

(b) (Corollary of Theorem 4.1.7 , part (b).) The boundary @xmath of
@xmath is diffeomorphic to @xmath , actually, they are isotopic
submanifolds of @xmath .

(c) [ 42 , Theorem 6.5.] @xmath is homotopically equivalent with a
bouquet of @xmath -spheres.

(d) [ 42 , Theorem 7.2.] The number of spheres in the bouquet is equal
to the Milnor number @xmath , i.e. @xmath .

### 4.2. Resolution and plumbing

#### 4.2.1. Resolution graph

The topological information of a resolution of the normal surface
singularity @xmath can be encoded in the resolution graph, which also
serves as a plumbing graph for the link. We refer to [ 51 , 55 , 56 ] .

Let @xmath be normal singularity of dimension @xmath , recall that
@xmath is isolated. A resolution of @xmath is a complex analytic map
@xmath , where @xmath is a smooth complex manifold of dimension @xmath
with boundary, @xmath is a complex analytic curve and @xmath is a
biholomorphism [ 51 , Definition 1.19.(a)] . Let @xmath be the
irreducible decomposition of @xmath , where @xmath is a finite set. The
components @xmath of @xmath are called exceptional divisors . The
resolution is called good if each @xmath is smooth curve, they intersect
each other transversally, in particular the intersection of any distinct
three of them is empty. A good resolution always exists and it is not
unique.

@xmath is diffeomorphic with the link @xmath of @xmath . Hence the
resolution @xmath and the Milnor fibre @xmath are two complex fillings
of @xmath , which fact allows to compare their invariants, see for
instance the formulas of Laufer [ 27 ] or Durfee [ 5 ] and their
generalizations, e.g. [ 70 ] .

The tubular neighbourhood @xmath of @xmath is diffeomorphic with the
total space of (the disc bundle of) the normal bundle of @xmath , which
is a @xmath @xmath -bundle over the Riemannian surface @xmath . Thus the
genus @xmath of @xmath and the Euler number @xmath of the normal bundle
of @xmath determines @xmath with its @xmath -bundle structure.
Furthermore @xmath is diffeomorphic to @xmath . The topology of @xmath ,
hence the topology of @xmath too, can be encoded in a decorated graph
@xmath , called the resolution graph , whose vertex set is @xmath , and
the vertexes @xmath and @xmath are joined with @xmath edges if @xmath .
Each vertex @xmath is decorated by two weights, the genus @xmath and the
Euler number @xmath [ 51 , Definition 1.19.(b)] . We omit the genus if
it is @xmath .

Define @xmath for @xmath , and @xmath . @xmath is generated by the
classes of @xmath , and @xmath is the intersection number of the
corresponding cycles. These numbers form the intersection matrix , which
contains the same information as the resolution graph, whenever @xmath
for all @xmath . A decorated graph @xmath occurs as a resolution graph
of a normal surface singularity if and only if the corresponding
intersection matrix is negative definite [ 51 , 1.23.(a)] .

@xmath and @xmath can be recovered from @xmath by plumbing, see below.
On the other hand, @xmath , or equivalently, the homeomorphism type of
@xmath determines the graph @xmath , hence the diffeomorphism type of
@xmath (up to plumbing operations) by [ 56 , Theorem 2] .

#### 4.2.2. Plumbing

In Chapter 5 we use the plumbing construction in a more general context
than it occurs for the resolution of normal singularities. Let @xmath be
a connected graph which can have multiple edges and loops, and each
vertex @xmath is decorated by the weights ( @xmath ), @xmath .
Furthermore each edge is decorated with a sign @xmath or @xmath . Then
the plumbing construction associates two manifolds to @xmath , a compact
oriented smooth @xmath -manifold @xmath , and its boundary, the closed
oriented smooth @xmath -manifold @xmath , as follows. For each vertex
@xmath fix a smooth, oriented @xmath -bundle @xmath with Euler number
@xmath , whose base space @xmath is a closed oriented surface with genus
@xmath . If @xmath is the endpoint of @xmath edges, then fix @xmath
basepoints in @xmath , fix disc-neighborhoods @xmath of these points, as
well as orientation preserving local trivializations @xmath . Any edge
between @xmath and @xmath determines a pair of multidiscs @xmath and
@xmath in @xmath and @xmath respectively. Identify them by @xmath , if
the edge has @xmath sign, and by @xmath , if the edge has @xmath sign
(where @xmath is the complex conjugate of @xmath ). After these gluings
we obtain a @xmath -manifold with corners, but these corners can be
smoothed out. Cf. [ 51 , 1.25.] , [ 56 ] , [ 55 , 4.1.] .

The resolution graph @xmath corresponding to a good resolution @xmath of
a normal surface singularity @xmath does not have loops and each edge
decoration is @xmath . The associated @xmath -manifold @xmath is
diffeomorphic to @xmath , whose boundary @xmath is diffeomorphic with
the link @xmath .

The @xmath -manifolds in the form @xmath associated with a plumbing
graph @xmath are called plumbed @xmath -manifolds .

The plumbing graph of a plumbed @xmath -manifold is not unique. The
possible operations of a plumbing graph which do not change the oriented
diffeomorphism type of @xmath are listed in [ 56 ] , [ 55 , 4.2.] . We
mention here some of them, which will be used in the examples of Chapter
5 . We follow the notations of [ 56 ] .

The graph operation [R0.(a)] is reversing the signs on all edges other
than loops adjacent to any fixed vertex. By [R0.(a)] the sign of the
edges can be reversed preserving the only relevant information, the
parity of the number of @xmath –edges along the cycles of the graph.

[R1] corresponds to the (inverse of the) blowing up of a point @xmath .
This operation is the key tool in the construction of embedded
resolution of plane curve singularities, see Subsection 4.2.3 . @xmath
can be a generic point, an intersection point of @xmath and @xmath , or
the self intersection point of @xmath . The three cases of [R1] are
shown in the picture, where @xmath and the edge signs @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath are related by @xmath .

[]

[]

[]

We also use the @xmath -chain absorption [R3] and the oriented handle
absorption [R5]. The edge signs @xmath ( @xmath ) are related by @xmath
provided that the edge sign in question is not on a loop, and @xmath ,
if it is on a loop.

[]

[]

We also use plumbing graphs with arrowhead vertexes. An arrowhead vertex
based on the vertex @xmath denotes a generic (oriented) fibre @xmath of
@xmath . Its boundary is an oriented knot @xmath . Additionally, the
@xmath -bundle structure of @xmath determines a trivialization @xmath of
the tubular neighbourhood of the knot.

In [ 56 ] there is a third decoration, the non-negative integer @xmath ,
which denotes the number of boundary components of the genus– @xmath
surface. This concept is closely related to the arrowhead vertexes. In
fact, the resulted @xmath -manifold has @xmath boundary components for
each vertex @xmath , and it can be obtained from the closed @xmath
-manifold by removing the open tubular neighbourhoods of @xmath knots
correspond to @xmath arrowhead vertexes based on @xmath .

#### 4.2.3. Embedded resolution of plane curves

Let @xmath be a plane curve singularity defined as the zero set of the
reduced germ @xmath . Let @xmath be the irreducible decomposition of
@xmath , and let @xmath be the irreducible decomposition of @xmath ,
where @xmath .

A good embedded resolution of @xmath is a good resolution @xmath of
@xmath with the additional property, that @xmath is a normal crossing
divisor in @xmath , that is, its irreducible components are smooth and
intersects each other transversally [ 51 , 1.28.] . Note that each
component @xmath of the exceptional divisor @xmath of any good
resolution of @xmath is diffeomorphic to @xmath .

The irreducible components of @xmath are the exceptional divisors @xmath
and the strict transforms corresponding to the components of @xmath .
That is, the components @xmath of the strict transform @xmath of @xmath
. Each @xmath intersects (transversally) only one exceptional divisor,
say @xmath .

The total transform of @xmath is the divisor @xmath , where the
multiplicity @xmath is the vanishing order of @xmath along @xmath .

Let @xmath be the embedded resolution graph of @xmath associated with
the resolution @xmath , i.e. the resolution graph of @xmath , where the
arrowhead vertexes @xmath codify the strict transforms @xmath . Note
that @xmath since it is the link of @xmath , and the link @xmath
determined by the arrowhead vertexes is the link of @xmath .

The multiplicities @xmath ( @xmath , @xmath ) are determined by @xmath
via the identities (see e.g. [ 26 , 51 ] )

  --------- -- -------- --
  (4.2.1)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

A good embedded resolution of a plane curve can be obtained by a
sequence of blowing-ups, whose local model is the blowing-up of the
origin in @xmath . That is the complex manifold @xmath with its natural
projection @xmath . The exceptional divisor @xmath is @xmath , and
@xmath defines a complex line bundle over it with Euler number @xmath .

@xmath admits a natural atlas with two charts whose domains are @xmath
and @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath denote the coordinates in @xmath .
The coordinates @xmath of @xmath are chosen such that @xmath holds,
similarly, @xmath holds in the coordinates @xmath of @xmath . The
transition map on @xmath is given by @xmath and @xmath .

#### 4.2.4. Examples

###### Example 4.2.1 (The quotient singularities @xmath-@xmath-@xmath).

The link of the normal hypersurface singularity described in Example
3.1.4 is the quotient of @xmath with the group action of @xmath . For
these singularities the Milnor fibre @xmath is diffeomorphic to the
resolution @xmath , however they are not biholomorphic, since @xmath
contains closed analytic curves (namely, the exceptional divisors @xmath
), while @xmath does not contain (in fact, @xmath is always a Stein
manifold). Their resolution graphs are the @xmath - @xmath - @xmath
graphs with @xmath and @xmath for each vertex, see [ 51 , 1.20.(b)-(f)]
.

###### Example 4.2.2 (The plane curve @xmath).

Let @xmath be the zero set of @xmath . Its link is @xmath , the two
components correspond to the irreducible components of @xmath . Each
@xmath is unknotted in @xmath and their linking number is @xmath , they
form a Hopf-link. Since @xmath , the Milnor fibre is diffeomorphic to
@xmath . In fact, the Milnor fibre @xmath ( @xmath ) can be parametrized
with @xmath as @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , where @xmath and
@xmath . We use this parametrization in Chapter 5 , where @xmath appears
as the transverse type of the non-isolated surfaces we study.

The embedded resolution of @xmath can be obtained by blowing up @xmath
once. It is easier to show this blowing up with the germ @xmath , which
is equivalent with @xmath , since we need only one chart for it. The
total transform on the @xmath -chart is @xmath , where @xmath is the
exceptional divisor, @xmath are the strict transforms of the components
of @xmath . The resolution graph is

[]

with the multiplicities @xmath .

###### Example 4.2.3.

The curve @xmath (where @xmath ) appears as the double point locus of
the family @xmath of finitely determined germs, see Subsection 5.5 . We
present here the calculation of its embedded resolution graph, it serves
as a model also for the other examples.

The irreducible decomposition of @xmath depends on the parity of @xmath
: it is @xmath for @xmath and @xmath for @xmath . After a blowing up the
total transform of @xmath is @xmath on the @xmath -chart, and @xmath on
@xmath . The exceptional divisor @xmath is defined by @xmath and @xmath
on the charts, the Euler number of its normal bundle is @xmath . The
strict transform of @xmath is @xmath on @xmath , and it is not visible
on @xmath , although one can write it as @xmath . @xmath is smooth and
intersects the exceptional divisor @xmath transversally.

The strict transform of the other component(s) @xmath is @xmath on
@xmath (and is not visible on @xmath ). It is not smooth, if @xmath ,
and for @xmath it is smooth, but its intersection with @xmath is not
transverse. We continue with the blow up of the point @xmath . Since it
is on @xmath , the Euler number of @xmath changes by @xmath , hence it
will be @xmath after the second blow up.

The strict transform of @xmath after @xmath blowing-ups is @xmath ,
where @xmath denotes the coordinates of the first chart of the @xmath
-th blow up. Moreover the strict transform intersects only the @xmath
-th exceptional divisor @xmath , if @xmath . The sequence of @xmath
blow-ups results a line of @xmath -vertexes (a ‘bamboo’) with a @xmath
-vertex at the end ( @xmath ).

Case 1 : @xmath .

For @xmath the process reaches to the strict transform @xmath after
@xmath steps, which is smooth, the components are disjoint and intersect
@xmath transversally. Hence the resolution graph is

[]

where the number of @xmath -vertices in the middle is @xmath . By (
4.2.1 ) the multiplicities are @xmath for all @xmath and @xmath .

Case 2 : @xmath .

For @xmath the process reaches to the strict transform @xmath after
@xmath steps, which is smooth, but its intersection with @xmath is not
transverse. The @xmath -th blowing up results the strict transform
@xmath on the second chart, which is smooth and intersects @xmath
transversally, but it intersects also the strict transform @xmath of
@xmath . One more blow-up is needed at @xmath , which is the
intersection point of @xmath and the strict transform of @xmath . The
new exceptional divisor @xmath intersects (the strict transforms of)
@xmath and @xmath , and their Euler number changes by @xmath , hence
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath . The resolution graph is

[]

where the number of @xmath -vertices in the middle is @xmath . By (
4.2.1 ) the multiplicities are @xmath for @xmath and @xmath , @xmath for
@xmath and @xmath , @xmath .

### 4.3. Non-isolated case

For a non-isolated singularity @xmath the link @xmath , the boundary
@xmath of the Milnor fibre and the boundary @xmath of a resolution are
three different spaces. Indeed, @xmath and @xmath are smooth manifolds,
while @xmath is not smooth. Moreover, any resolution @xmath of @xmath is
the resolution of the normalization of @xmath as well, thus it contains
only limited information about @xmath .

Let @xmath be a surface singularity, whose singular set @xmath has
dimension @xmath . The Némethi–Szilárd book [ 55 ] provides a general
algorithm to determine @xmath as a plumbed @xmath -manifold. Here we
just sketch the decomposition of @xmath as the union of two pieces. For
details see [ 55 , 2.3., 3.4.] , [ 62 ] and Section 5.3 in our special
case.

Let @xmath ( @xmath ) be the Milnor fibre of @xmath , its boundary is
@xmath . Let @xmath be a closed tubular neighbourhood of @xmath in
@xmath and let @xmath be its interior. Then the two parts mentioned
above are @xmath and @xmath . @xmath can be obtained from these pieces
by gluing them along their common boundary, which is a union of tori.

@xmath is diffeomorphic with @xmath , where @xmath is the link of @xmath
. The normalization map @xmath induces a diffeomorphism between @xmath
and @xmath , where @xmath is the link of @xmath . Hence this piece can
be inherited from the resolution graph of the normalization of @xmath .

@xmath is the disjoint union of the pieces @xmath , where @xmath is the
irreducible decomposition of @xmath . The projection of @xmath to @xmath
induces a bundle structure on @xmath over @xmath . Its fibre is the
Milnor fibre of the transverse curve singularity of @xmath . This is the
plane curve singularity defined as the zero set of @xmath , where @xmath
biholomorphic to @xmath is a @xmath –transverse slice at an arbitrary
point @xmath .

## Chapter 5 Boundary of the Milnor fibre

### 5.1. Preliminaries

#### 5.1.1.

This chapter contains the results of the article [ 54 ] . We assume that
@xmath is the image of a finitely determined complex analytic germ
@xmath . This means that @xmath is a stable immersion off the origin,
cf. Theorem 1.4.4 or [ 71 , 45 ] . From an other approach @xmath is a
non-isolated hypersurface singularity in @xmath such that the transverse
curve of the singular set has type @xmath and the normalization of
@xmath is smooth. Then its normalization map @xmath is a finitely
determined germ.

The main result of this chapter provides the plumbing graph of the
boundary @xmath of the Milnor fibre @xmath as a surgery, starting from
the embedded resolution graph of the double points @xmath . The needed
additional pieces, which will be glued to this primary object correspond
to certain fibre bundles over @xmath with fibres the local Milnor fibre
of the transverse singularity type (and monodromy the corresponding
vertical monodromy). The surgery itself is characterized by some
homologically determined integers combined with the newly defined
‘vertical index’ associated with the irreducible components of the
singular locus of @xmath .

This chapter is organized as follows. In this section we introduce the
notations, in Section 5.2 we describe by several characterizations the
surgery pieces associated with the components of the singular locus. In
Section 5.3 and in Section 5.4 we describe the gluing and its
invariants, while the last section contains several concrete examples.

The basic notions and properties of the Milnor fibre, resolution and
plumbing construction are introduced in Chapter 4 . For the properties
of a finitely determined germ @xmath we refer to Chapter 1 .

#### 5.1.2. Double point curves

Let @xmath be a complex analytic germ singular only at the origin. We
assume that @xmath is finitely @xmath -determined. This happens exactly
when @xmath is a stable immersion off the origin, that is, off the
origin it has only single and double values and at each double value the
intersection of the two smooth branches is transverse, cf. Example
1.2.17 .

Write @xmath and let @xmath be the reduced equation of @xmath . @xmath
can be determined by Fitting ideal method, as a generator of @xmath ,
cf. Section 1.3 . Note that @xmath is a non-isolated hypersurface
singularity, except when @xmath is a regular map, see Theorem 3.1.3 . We
denote by @xmath the reduced singular locus of @xmath (which equals the
closure of the set of double values of @xmath ), and by @xmath the
reduced double point curve @xmath . (In fact, the finite determinacy of
the germ @xmath is equivalent with the fact that the double point curve
is reduced; see Theorem 1.5.1 , [ 34 ] .)

Let @xmath be the @xmath –ball in @xmath centred at the origin, and
@xmath its boundary ( @xmath ). Then for @xmath sufficiently small
@xmath is a Milnor ball for the pair @xmath , and, furthermore, @xmath
is a (non–metric) @xmath ball in @xmath , which might serve as a Milnor
ball for @xmath , cf. 4.1.2 , [ 29 ] . We set @xmath , diffeomorphic to
@xmath , and we treat it as the usual Milnor–ball boundary 3–sphere.
Recall that the immersion associated with @xmath at the level of local
neighbourhood boundaries is @xmath , cf. Definition 1.1.3 and Theorem
1.4.6 .

#### 5.1.3. Components and links of @xmath and @xmath.

Let @xmath be the link of @xmath . It is exactly the set of double
values of @xmath . Let @xmath denote the set of double points of @xmath
, that is, @xmath is the link of @xmath . Assume that the reduced
equation of @xmath is @xmath , whose irreducible decomposition is @xmath
. The irreducible components of @xmath are denoted by @xmath and their
link components in @xmath by @xmath , @xmath . @xmath is equipped with
an involution @xmath which pairs the double points. @xmath induces a
permutation (pairing) @xmath of @xmath , such that @xmath . Moreover,
@xmath is a double covering with @xmath . If @xmath for some @xmath ,
then @xmath is a nontrivial double covering of its image, while above
the other components the covering is trivial. Let @xmath be the set of
pairs @xmath ( @xmath ), it is the index set of the components of @xmath
; they will be denoted by @xmath .

All link components are considered with their natural orientations.

For the good embedded resolution of @xmath and the corresponding
notations see Subsection 4.2.3 .

Note that @xmath is the number of non-trivially covered double point
curve components, its parity is the total twist of @xmath , cf. the end
of Subsection 2.3.3 . Since @xmath is an additive regular homotopy
invariant and its value for the complex Whitney umbrella is @xmath , by
Theorem 3.1.2 it follows that

###### Corollary 5.1.1.

@xmath .

### 5.2. The manifold @xmath

In the construction of the boundary of the Milnor fibre we will need a
special 3–manifold with torus boundary. Its several realizations and
properties will be discussed in this section.

In the sequel @xmath (as the boundary of the unit disc of @xmath ) and
the real interval @xmath are considered with their natural orientations;
@xmath denotes the complex conjugation of @xmath .

#### 5.2.1. The definition of @xmath

Consider the @xmath –action on @xmath defined by the involution @xmath ,
and define @xmath as the quotient

  --------- -- -------- --
  (5.2.1)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

@xmath is a @xmath –manifold with a boundary diffeomorphic with @xmath .
The projections to different components provide different ‘realizations’
of @xmath .

(1) The projection to the first coordinate @xmath gives a fibration

  --------- -- -------- --
  (5.2.2)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

where the base space @xmath is parametrized by @xmath , and the
monodromy diffeomorphism @xmath over the base space is @xmath .

(2) The projection to the first two coordinates @xmath realizes @xmath
as the total space of a fibration

  --------- -- -------- --
  (5.2.3)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

with fibre @xmath and base space @xmath , the Klein bottle. The
factorization @xmath is the orientation double cover of @xmath . In
particular, the fibration ( 5.2.3 ) is the segment bundle of the
orientation line bundle of @xmath , hence the orientation double cover
of @xmath is realized also by the restriction of the bundle map to the
boundary @xmath .

(3) The projection to the @xmath coordinates realizes @xmath as the
total space of a fibration

  --------- -- -------- --
  (5.2.4)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

over the base space @xmath , the Möbius band. In this way, @xmath
appears as the tangent circle bundle of @xmath , i.e. as the sub–bundle
of the tangent bundle @xmath consisting of unit tangent vectors. This
follows from the fact that both circle bundles have the same monodromy
map along the midline of @xmath , namely @xmath , @xmath .

(4) The projection to the @xmath coordinates realizes @xmath as the
total space of a projection

  --------- -- -------- --
  (5.2.5)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

to the base space @xmath , the 2–disc @xmath . Although the involution
@xmath has two fix points @xmath and @xmath , the quotient @xmath can be
smoothed. However, the projection @xmath is not a locally trivial
fibration: it is a Seifert fibration with two exceptional fibres sitting
above @xmath and @xmath . We will refer to this @xmath –fibration as the
canonical Seifert fibration of @xmath .

The Seifert invariants of the exceptional fibres can be calculated as in
p. 307 of [ 56 ] . The two exceptional fibres of the canonical Seifert
fibration ( 5.2.5 ) can be seen in the projection (3) as well: they
correspond to the tangent vectors of the midline. On the other hand, a
generic orbit consists of those unit tangent vectors of @xmath , which
form non–zero angle @xmath (with @xmath fixed) with the midline. Thus, a
generic fibre in a neighbourhood of an exceptional fibre goes around
twice and both Seifert invariants are @xmath . Hence, cf. [ 56 ] , a
plumbing graph of @xmath is:

[]

Here @xmath denotes a genus @xmath core-space with one disc removed. The
Euler number of the @xmath -bundle corresponding to the middle vertex is
irrelevant, the resulted @xmath -manifolds with boundary are
diffeomorphic with each other (hence with @xmath too). However, the
restriction of the canonical Seifert fibration to @xmath determines an
@xmath –fibration of the boundary. Moreover, @xmath admits a unique
closed Seifert @xmath –manifold @xmath , from which @xmath can be
obtained by omitting a tubular neighbourhood of a generic fibre (that
is, @xmath is obtained by extending the fibration of @xmath to an @xmath
–fibration without any new special Seifert fibres . In this way there is
a canonical choice for the Euler number of the ‘middle’ vertex, which is
the ‘middle’ Euler number of the plumbing graph of @xmath . We will
calculate it below. Using this Euler number, the graph also determines a
parametrization (framing) of @xmath .

#### 5.2.2. Homotopical properties of @xmath

In order to understand better the structure of @xmath we consider its
fundamental domain (in coordinates @xmath ):

[]

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . The original coordinates are @xmath
and @xmath . Then @xmath is obtained by the following identification of
the sides of the cube:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The boundary is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The @xmath -action determining the canonical Seifert fibration ( 5.2.5 )
is induced by the translation along the @xmath –axis. The exceptional
fibres are

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Any fixed @xmath determines a generic fibre in the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath are glued together with @xmath . For example, @xmath is a
generic fibre.

The base space @xmath of the canonical Seifert-fibration can be
represented as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Its boundary is the class of @xmath , a circle.

Next, we describe the fundamental group and the homology of @xmath .
@xmath is homotopically equivalent with the Klein bottle @xmath . Let us
choose the base point @xmath . All four vertexes of the rectangle
representing @xmath represent @xmath . Thus the fundamental group of
@xmath can be presented as

  --------- -- -------- --
  (5.2.6)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath denote also the class of @xmath and @xmath in
@xmath ; cf. with the description (2) from 5.2.1 ). A more precise
description can be given via the next diagrams, provided by the @xmath
subspace of @xmath (which can be identified with @xmath ).

[]

The first diagram shows homological cycles. In order to rewrite the
fundamental group, let @xmath be the closed path shown in the second
diagram by the dashed line. Then @xmath in @xmath . Note that @xmath ,
thus @xmath and this element commutes with @xmath . The fundamental
group can be also presented as

  --------- -- -------- --
  (5.2.7)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

according to the third picture above.

On the other hand, the fundamental group of the boundary is

  --------- -- -------- --
  (5.2.8)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

The @xmath embedding (which is homotopically the same as the orientation
covering @xmath ) induces a monomorphism @xmath . It is determined by
the images of the generators, which are

  --------- -- -------- --
  (5.2.9)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

A direct computation shows that @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that @xmath in @xmath , and analysing @xmath one obtains that
@xmath in @xmath . Hence the class of @xmath in @xmath has order 2, it
is exactly @xmath .

The next Lemma shows that the classes @xmath and @xmath in @xmath have
certain universal properties with respect to the inclusion @xmath .

###### Lemma 5.2.1.

(a) @xmath are the unique primitive elements of @xmath with the property
that their doubles vanish in @xmath .

(b) @xmath are the unique primitive elements of @xmath whose images in
@xmath are in the center of @xmath .

###### Proof.

(a) is clear. For (b) first note that any element of @xmath can be
written in the form @xmath for some @xmath , and then using this one
verifies that the center of @xmath is @xmath . ∎

#### 5.2.3. Homological properties of @xmath

The closed Seifert 3–manifold @xmath considered in 5.2.1 (4) is
constructed as follows. First we consider a new disc @xmath and the
trivial fibration @xmath . Then we paste @xmath with the boundary of
@xmath and we extend the canonical Seifert–fibration of @xmath above
this disc (as base space) of the trivial fibration @xmath . This leads
to the Seifert fibred closed manifold

  ---------- -- -------- --
  (5.2.10)      @xmath   
  ---------- -- -------- --

@xmath can be determined by the Mayer-Vietoris sequence of the
decomposition ( 5.2.10 ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath . Thus

  ---------- -- -------- --
  (5.2.11)      @xmath   
  ---------- -- -------- --

#### 5.2.4. A plumbing graphs of @xmath and @xmath

By [ 57 ] , @xmath has a plumbing graph @xmath of the form

[]

(see also the discussion from 5.2.1 (4)) and the Euler number @xmath
should be chosen such that @xmath (cf. ( 5.2.11 )). Here @xmath denotes
the plumbed @xmath –manifold associated with the graph @xmath , it is
the boundary of @xmath , the plumbed @xmath –manifold associated with
@xmath . This (via the long cohomological exact sequence of the pair
@xmath ) imposes the degeneracy of the intersection matrix of the
plumbing (cf. e.g. [ 55 , 15.1.3] ). Hence @xmath . In particular,
@xmath (without its Seifert fibration structure) is diffeomorphic to
@xmath (which also shows that @xmath admits an orientation reversing
diffeomorphism).

Furthermore, consider the graph

[]

The arrow denotes a knot @xmath , which is a generic @xmath –fibre
associated with the middle vertex by the plumbing construction of @xmath
. Let @xmath be an open tubular neighbourhood of @xmath in @xmath . Then
@xmath , and the induced (singular/Seifert) @xmath –fibration associated
with the middle vertex (by the plumbing construction) on @xmath agrees
with the canonical Seifert fibration of @xmath . The Euler number @xmath
of the middle vertex determines a parametrization (framing) of @xmath .

We can present @xmath also from the plumbing graph using the description
of [ 50 ] . Let @xmath , @xmath and @xmath be oriented @xmath –fibres
associated with the three vertices provided by the plumbing construction
(and extended by convenient connecting paths to a base point as in [ 50
] ). Next, let @xmath be the meridian of @xmath corresponding to the
arrowhead (and extended by a convenient path to the base point).

[]

Then, by [ 50 ] , there is a choice of the connecting paths such that
@xmath is generated by @xmath and @xmath , and they satisfies the
relations @xmath , and @xmath . This is compatible with the description
from Subsection 5.2.2 , cf. ( 5.2.6 ) and ( 5.2.9 ).

Note that by plumbing calculus (cf. [ 56 ] ) one has the equivalence of
plumbed manifolds (where @xmath is any graph):

[]

Hence, @xmath or @xmath spliced along @xmath to any 3–manifold give rise
to diffeomorphic manifolds.

### 5.3. The boundary of the Milnor fibre

#### 5.3.1.

Let @xmath be the Milnor fibre of @xmath , where @xmath , @xmath . We
wish to construct the @xmath –manifold @xmath as a surgery of @xmath
along the link @xmath .

Let @xmath be a sufficiently small tubular neighbourhood of @xmath in
@xmath . For each @xmath we define @xmath as

  --------- -- -------- --
  (5.3.1)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

where @xmath is the @xmath –manifold described in Section 5.2 . Recall
that @xmath .

###### Proposition 5.3.1.

One has an orientation preserving diffeomorphism

  --------- -- -------- --
  (5.3.2)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

where @xmath is a collection @xmath of diffeomorphisms

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

The decomposition follows from the general decomposition proved in [ 62
] , see also [ 55 , 2.3] . For the convenience of the reader we sketch
the construction. Recall that @xmath is the link of the component @xmath
of @xmath , @xmath . Consider a sufficiently small tubular neighbourhood
@xmath of it in @xmath . We can assume that @xmath . Furthermore, for
@xmath small, the intersection of @xmath with @xmath is transverse.
Therefore, for @xmath , the intersection of @xmath with @xmath is still
transverse in @xmath , and, in fact, @xmath is diffeomorphic with @xmath
. But, the former space can be identified via @xmath by @xmath . This is
the space in the first parenthesis of ( 5.3.2 ).

The second one is a union of spaces of type @xmath , which fibres over
@xmath . The fibre of the fibration is the Milnor fibre of the
corresponding transverse plane curve singularity (of @xmath ). Since the
transverse type is @xmath , this fibre is @xmath . The monodromy of the
fibration is the so-called geometric vertical monodromy of the
transverse type, it is orientation preserving self-diffeomorphism of
@xmath . If it does not permute the two components of @xmath then it
preserves the orientation of @xmath , hence of @xmath too, hence up to
isotopy it is the identity. If it permutes the components of @xmath then
up to isotopy it is @xmath , where @xmath . The two types of vertical
monodromies provide the two choices of @xmath in formula ( 5.3.1 ), cf.
description (1) of @xmath in Subsection 5.2.1 . ∎

#### 5.3.2. Preliminary discussion regarding the gluing

Our next aim is to describe the gluing functions @xmath . In both cases
two tori must be glued: if @xmath then basically one should identify
@xmath and @xmath , otherwise @xmath and @xmath . Up to diffeotopy an
orientation reversing diffeomorphism between tori is given by an
invertible @xmath matrix over @xmath with determinant @xmath . It turns
out that in our cases all these gluing matrices have the form

  --------- -- -------- --
  (5.3.3)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

hence its only relevant entry is the off–diagonal one.

This integer will be determined by a newly introduced invariant, the
vertical index , associated with each @xmath . This is done using a
special germ @xmath , which will have a double role. First, it provides
some kind of framing along @xmath , and also helps to identify
generators from the boundaries of @xmath and @xmath respectively
(constructed in two different levels: in the target and in the source of
@xmath ).

We will use three parametrizations of @xmath with the same meridian but
different longitudes. The topological longitude is the usual
knot–theoretical Seifert–framing of @xmath . The resolution longitude is
determined via a good embedded resolution of @xmath , it creates the
bridge with the decorations and the combinatorics of the resolution
graph. Finally, the sectional longitude depends on @xmath and it will be
used for describing the gluing. In fact, the sectional longitude allows
us to compare the source and the target of @xmath : being defined by the
geometry of @xmath , the function @xmath and its pull-back @xmath plays
the role of transportation of the invariants from @xmath level to @xmath
level.

#### 5.3.3. The local form of @xmath along @xmath

In the sequel we will use the notation @xmath and @xmath . Recall that
in a small neighbourhood (in @xmath ) of any point @xmath the space
@xmath has two local components, both smooth and intersecting each other
transversally.

A more precise local description along @xmath is the following. Let us
fix a point @xmath and let @xmath be a small neighbourhood of @xmath in
@xmath . In @xmath the function @xmath is a product @xmath , where both
@xmath are holomorphic, @xmath are smooth and intersect each other
transversally. (The intersection is @xmath ; later the fact that at
@xmath the local parametrization of @xmath together with @xmath and
@xmath might serve as local coordinates will be exploited further.)

@xmath and @xmath are well–defined up to a multiplication by an
invertible holomorphic function @xmath of @xmath ; that is, @xmath can
be replaced by @xmath . At any point @xmath the linear term of @xmath ,
@xmath , (say, in the Taylor expansion) is @xmath , where @xmath are the
fixed coordinates of @xmath . Let us code this in the non–zero vectors
@xmath . Hence, at any @xmath we have two vectors @xmath and @xmath
well–defined up to multiplication by @xmath (in the sense described
above). Their classes @xmath for @xmath are independent of the @xmath
–ambiguity, hence are well–defined elements. In particular, they
determine a global pair of elements @xmath and @xmath for @xmath ,
well–defined whenever @xmath , and well–defined up to permutation
whenever @xmath .

In fact, we can do even more: there exists a splitting of @xmath into
product @xmath along @xmath without any invertible element ambiguity
(but preserving the permutation ambiguity whenever @xmath ).

Indeed, assume that we are in the trivial covering ( @xmath ) case, and
let us cover @xmath by small discs @xmath such that on each @xmath we
can fix a splitting @xmath , @xmath . For any intersection @xmath the
two splittings can be compared: we define @xmath by @xmath . From this
definition follows that @xmath form a Čech 1–cocycle.

###### Lemma 5.3.2.

@xmath .

###### Proof.

From the exponential exact sequence @xmath over @xmath , we get that it
is enough to prove the vanishing @xmath , a fact which follows from
Cartan’s Theorem, since @xmath is Stein. ∎

Since @xmath , the cocycle @xmath is a coboundary. This means that we
can find invertible functions @xmath on each @xmath such that on @xmath
one has @xmath . This means that the local functions @xmath , @xmath on
@xmath provide a splitting (that is, @xmath , @xmath ), but in this new
situation the local splittings glue globally: @xmath . If @xmath then we
repeat the proof on @xmath .

#### 5.3.4. The special germ @xmath

Next, we treat the ‘aid’–germ @xmath .

###### Definition 5.3.3.

Let us fix @xmath as above. A germ @xmath is called transverse section
along @xmath if @xmath , @xmath at any point of @xmath is smooth and
intersects both local components of @xmath transversally.

We claim that transverse sections always exist.

###### Proposition 5.3.4.

There exist complex numbers @xmath such that @xmath is a transverse
section.

###### Proof.

For such @xmath one has @xmath . In particular, we have to show that for
certain coefficients @xmath the expressions @xmath (for @xmath ) have no
zeros for @xmath .

If @xmath is the Nash transform of @xmath , then @xmath is the set of
limits of tangent spaces of @xmath , it is an algebraic set of @xmath of
dimension @xmath (for details see e.g. [ 28 ] and references therein).
The existence of Nash transform guarantees that @xmath exist. Indeed,
the set @xmath is the intersection of @xmath with the strict transform
of @xmath . Then let @xmath be generic such that @xmath for @xmath .
With this choice @xmath for @xmath and in a small representative of
@xmath . ∎

Fix again @xmath , and let @xmath , @xmath , be a parametrization
(normalization) of @xmath . For any point @xmath and neighbourhood
@xmath the discussion from the second paragraph of 5.3.3 can be
repeated, in particular we have the holomorphic vectors @xmath ( @xmath
) (with the choice ambiguities described there). Additionally, choose
some @xmath as in Definition 5.3.3 . The assumption regarding @xmath
guarantees that @xmath for some holomorphic functions @xmath and @xmath
on @xmath . If we replace @xmath by @xmath then @xmath will be replaced
by @xmath , hence the product @xmath is independent of all the @xmath
and permutation ambiguities. It is a holomorphic function on @xmath
depending only on the equations @xmath and @xmath . This uniqueness also
guarantees that taking different points of @xmath and repeating the
construction, the output glues to a unique holomorphic function @xmath
on a small punctures disc of @xmath . Usually @xmath has no analytic
extension to the origin, however one has the following.

###### Lemma 5.3.5.

@xmath is a Laurent series on @xmath .

###### Proof.

The finiteness of the poles follows e.g. from the homological identities
from Theorem 5.3.9 , or from Corollary 5.3.17 combined with ( 5.3.9 ). ∎

We wish to emphasize that @xmath and its pole order usually depends on
the choice of @xmath .

###### Definition 5.3.6.

Let @xmath (for some @xmath ) be the non–zero monomial with smallest
power of @xmath in the Laurent series of @xmath . The integer @xmath is
called the vertical index of @xmath along @xmath with respect to @xmath
(or, the @xmath –vertical index).

#### 5.3.5. Computation of the gluing functions @xmath

We fix a transverse section @xmath (cf. 5.3.3 ). Then the divisor @xmath
is @xmath for some (not necessarily reduced) germ @xmath (such that
@xmath and @xmath have no common components). Let @xmath be the
(non–reduced) divisor associated with @xmath , and @xmath be a small
tubular neighbourhood of the reduced link @xmath in @xmath .

Let the Milnor fibre of @xmath (in @xmath ) be

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath and @xmath denote the components of the oriented intersection
@xmath and @xmath with the tubular neighborhood boundaries of @xmath and
@xmath respectively. ( @xmath might have several components, in this
notation we collect all of them.)

Furthermore, let @xmath be an oriented meridian of @xmath such that
@xmath and fix also (the oriented Seifert framing of @xmath ) @xmath
with @xmath . (Here the linking numbers are considered in oriented
3–sphere @xmath .)

###### Definition 5.3.7.

We call @xmath the topological longitude of the torus @xmath , while
@xmath the sectional longitude of @xmath associated with the transverse
section @xmath .

Clearly we have the following facts (where @xmath denotes the
corresponding homology class)

  --------- -- -- --
  (5.3.4)         
  --------- -- -- --

We want to express @xmath in terms of @xmath and @xmath .

###### Lemma 5.3.8.

Define @xmath , where @xmath denotes the intersection multiplicity of
@xmath and @xmath at @xmath . Then @xmath in @xmath .

###### Proof.

First note that @xmath . Write @xmath . Then @xmath . ∎

###### Theorem 5.3.9.

For any @xmath , the gluing functions @xmath from Proposition 5.3.1 is
characterized up to homotopy by the following identities

Case 1: @xmath . Identify the homology groups @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
via the natural homotopies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then in this homology group one has

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Case 2: @xmath .

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are the two generators of @xmath , see 5.2.2
(especially ( 5.2.8 ) and ( 5.2.9 )).

###### Proof.

Recall that @xmath is the normalization of @xmath . At any point @xmath
of @xmath one can consider @xmath as a local complex coordinate, which
can be completed with two other local complex coordinates @xmath (local
coordinates in a transverse slice of @xmath at @xmath ) such that @xmath
form a local coordinate system of @xmath , and locally @xmath . These
two local coordinates correspond to a splitting @xmath of @xmath .
According to the discussion from 5.3.3 , the splitting of @xmath can be
done globally along the whole @xmath , hence these coordinated @xmath
(corresponding to the components @xmath and @xmath ) can also be chosen
globally along @xmath (with the permutation ambiguity whenever @xmath ,
a fact which will be handled below).

Furthermore, in these coordinates, @xmath . Since @xmath have no zeros
and poles in the small representative of @xmath , @xmath are also local
coordinates, and in these coordinates the equations transform into
@xmath and @xmath .

If we concentrate on the points of @xmath , and its neighbourhood in
@xmath , then similarly as above, we have the real coordinate @xmath ,
and the two complex (transverse) local coordinates @xmath , with
equations @xmath and @xmath as before.

Case 1. The above local description globalises as follows (compare also
with the first part of the proof of Proposition 5.3.1 ). The space
@xmath has a product decomposition @xmath , where @xmath is the
parameter space of @xmath , and @xmath is the local Milnor fibre @xmath
, @xmath , diffeomorphic to @xmath . In other words, @xmath is the space
@xmath , @xmath (here we will use the same @xmath notation for the
parameter of @xmath ). Note that for @xmath , the boundary of @xmath is
‘very close’ to the two circles @xmath and @xmath of @xmath . Using
isotopy in the neighbourhoods of these two circles, @xmath can be
identified with these two circles (similarly as we identify via
Ehresmann’s fibration theorem the boundary of the Milnor fibre of an
isolated singularity with the link), and in order to simplify the
presentation, we will make this identification. Hence, the boundary
components of @xmath can be identified (by isotopy in @xmath ) with
@xmath and @xmath . (The choice of indices @xmath and @xmath is
arbitrary and symmetric.) These two tori are identified homologically
since they are boundary components of @xmath . In @xmath we have the
meridian @xmath , while in @xmath we have the meridian @xmath (both
naturally oriented as the complex unit circle). Since @xmath , the first
wished identity follows.

Now, we would like to study the intersection curve of @xmath and the
Milnor fibre of @xmath associated with a positive argument, that is
@xmath . This curve is homotopic with @xmath and also with @xmath in
@xmath , cf. the Definition 5.3.6 . Similarly, @xmath is homotopic with
@xmath in @xmath .

Thus @xmath is homotopic with @xmath and @xmath with @xmath . Hence
homologically @xmath is represented by the circle @xmath , which is
homologous in @xmath with @xmath . This is the second identity.
Obviously, these identities can be transferred from the boundary @xmath
of @xmath into similar identities in @xmath , via the diagram, where all
the maps are orientation preserving diffeomorphisms (cf. the proof of
5.3.1 ):

  --------- -- -------- --
  (5.3.5)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

Case 2. We use similar notations and conventions as in Case 1. Let us
parametrize @xmath as @xmath , @xmath . Then @xmath is @xmath , where by
@xmath we identify @xmath for all @xmath . Let us parametrize @xmath as
@xmath and @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath
. Denote @xmath . Then we can parametrize @xmath by @xmath , thus @xmath
is just @xmath , where by @xmath we identify @xmath . We regard this as
parametrization of @xmath by @xmath , cf. 5.2.2 .

Set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The are the two oriented meridians of @xmath , parametrized by @xmath .
In terms of @xmath they are

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

thus with the notations of 5.2.2 , @xmath and @xmath .

Similarly as in Case 1, by an isotopy in @xmath the boundary @xmath of
@xmath can be identified with @xmath , where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The two parts of @xmath are glued together along the image of the
oriented meridians

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(See also the description in 5.2.2 .) Since the oriented boundary @xmath
is @xmath , @xmath is homologous with @xmath in @xmath . On the other
hand @xmath is homologous with @xmath in @xmath , thus @xmath is an
order– @xmath element in @xmath .

Consider the closed curve @xmath obtained as union of @xmath and @xmath
, where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that @xmath connects the points @xmath with @xmath , while @xmath
connects the points @xmath with @xmath . Since @xmath and @xmath , they
form a closed curve. Note that @xmath in @xmath , see 5.2.2 .

Similarly as in Case 1, the function @xmath can be replaced by @xmath ,
hence its level set associated with a positive value determines the
curve @xmath . This consists of two parts, @xmath and @xmath , where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

while @xmath equals

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath has the same end–points as @xmath , hence @xmath and @xmath form
together a closed curve, as we expect. Furthermore, @xmath is homologous
in @xmath with @xmath .

The source and the target are connected by the restriction of @xmath ,
which gives the orientation preserving diffeomorphisms:

  --------- -- -------- --
  (5.3.6)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

Since @xmath identifies with @xmath and @xmath and @xmath with @xmath ,
@xmath follows. ∎

#### 5.3.6. The @xmath–independent description of the gluing. The
‘vertical index’

Recall that the sectional longitudes @xmath and the corresponding @xmath
–vertical indexes @xmath depend on the choice of @xmath . The goal of
this paragraph is to replace @xmath by the @xmath –independent @xmath
and @xmath by an @xmath –independent number.

###### Definition 5.3.10.

For any @xmath define @xmath by

  --------- -- -------- --
  (5.3.7)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

We call @xmath the vertical index of @xmath .

The next statement follows from 5.3.8 and 5.3.9 (see also 5.3.2 ).

###### Corollary 5.3.11.

For @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and for @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

hold in the sense described in 5.3.9 .

###### Corollary 5.3.12.

The integer @xmath does not depend on the choice of @xmath , thus it is
an invariant of @xmath and @xmath .

#### 5.3.7. The plumbing graph of @xmath

We construct a plumbing graph for @xmath by modifying a good embedded
resolution graph of @xmath . (For notations see Subsection 4.2.3 .) The
gluing of the plumbing construction uses different set of longitudes
(cf. [ 56 ] ). First we define them and then we rewrite the above
established identities regarding @xmath in this language.

We choose small tubular neighbourhoods @xmath of @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

after smoothing the corners of @xmath . The tubular neighbourhood @xmath
of @xmath is a @xmath (real 2–disk) bundle over @xmath with Euler number
@xmath . We can choose this bundle structure in such a way that @xmath
is one of the fibres of @xmath for each @xmath .

We choose another generic fibre @xmath of the bundle @xmath near @xmath
, and we set @xmath . By the choice of the bundle structure of @xmath
and by the choice of the fibre @xmath we can assume that @xmath .

###### Definition 5.3.13.

@xmath is called the resolution longitude of @xmath associated with the
resolution @xmath .

We fix a resolution longitude @xmath for each @xmath . Clearly,

  --------- -- -------- --
  (5.3.8)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

The following facts are well–known (cf. [ 6 ] ).

###### Proposition 5.3.14.

(a) @xmath .

(b) @xmath holds in @xmath .

###### Corollary 5.3.15.

@xmath holds in @xmath .

###### Definition 5.3.16.

For any @xmath define @xmath by:

  --------- -- -------- --
  (5.3.9)      @xmath   
  --------- -- -------- --

Then Theorem 5.3.9 and Corollary 5.3.15 give the following.

###### Corollary 5.3.17.

Case 1: For @xmath in @xmath the following identities hold:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Case 2: For @xmath in @xmath the following identities hold:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

#### 5.3.8. The construction of the plumbing graph.

From the embedded resolution graph @xmath of @xmath associated with the
resolution @xmath we construct a plumbing graph @xmath .

Recall that @xmath has @xmath arrowhead vertices representing the strict
transforms of @xmath , and the @xmath -th arrowhead is supported (via a
unique edge) by the vertex @xmath . We obtain the plumbing graph @xmath
from @xmath as follows.

(1) Fix @xmath and assume that @xmath . Then we identify the two
arrowheads and we replace it by a single new vertex of @xmath . We
define the Euler number of the new vertex by @xmath . Both two edges
(which in @xmath supported the arrowheads) will survive as edges of this
new vertex (connecting it with @xmath and @xmath respectively), however
one of them will have a negative sign, the other one a positive sign. By
plumbing calculus, cf. [ 56 , Prop. 2.1. R0(a)] , the choice of the edge
which has negative sign – denoted by @xmath – is irrelevant. (The edges
without any decorations, by convention, are edges with positive sign.)

(2) Fix @xmath such that @xmath . Then the arrowhead associated with
@xmath will be replaced by a new vertex and it will be decorated by
Euler number @xmath . Furthermore, to this new vertex we attach the
plumbing graph of @xmath (cf. 5.2.4 ) as indicated below. The edge
connecting the new vertex and the graph of @xmath will have a negative
sign @xmath .

(3) We do all these modification for all @xmath , otherwise we keep the
shape and decorations of @xmath .

More precisely, if the schematic picture of @xmath is the following,

[]

then the schematic picture of @xmath is

[]

In fact, by plumbing calculus (cf. Subsection 4.2.2 or [ 56 , Prop. 2.1.
R0(a)] ), whenever @xmath the edge sign from the newly created ‘branch’
(subtree) can be omitted, however at this point we put it since this is
the graph provided by the proof (which reflects properly the
corresponding base changes).

Note also that usually the graph @xmath (that is, the associated
intersection form) is not negative definite (or, it is not even
equivalent via plumbing calculus by a negative definite graph).

Above (when @xmath ) the coincidence @xmath might happen, in fact, in
all the cases we analysed this coincidence (on minimal graph) does
happen.

###### Theorem 5.3.18.

The plumbing @xmath -manifold associated with the plumbing graph @xmath
is orientation preserving diffeomorphic with @xmath .

###### Proof.

This follows from Corollary 5.3.17 and the relationships between this
base–change and the plumbing construction as it is described in [ 56 ] ,
pages 318–319. In the case @xmath the plumbing graph of @xmath from
5.2.4 should be also used. Note that in both cases Corollary 5.3.17
provides a base change matrix from the left hand side of ( 5.3.10 ),
this decomposes as a product as in the right hand side.

  ---------- -- -------- --
  (5.3.10)      @xmath   
  ---------- -- -------- --

This, according to [ 56 , pages 318–320] is interpreted as a ‘gluing’ by
a string (with length one), this is the new vertex (for each @xmath )
given by the construction of @xmath . ∎

### 5.4. The vertical index for @xmath type germs

#### 5.4.1. @xmath type germs

Assume that @xmath , where @xmath for some germ @xmath , such that
@xmath is not divisible by @xmath . In this case the equation of the
image is @xmath . These germs (more precisely, their @xmath -equivalence
classes) are labelled by the Boardman symbol @xmath , and they are
exactly the finitely determined corank– @xmath map germs with no triple
points in their stabilization, cf. Example 1.4.11 , see [ 43 , 33 ] for
details.

The set of double points is @xmath . It is equipped with the involution
@xmath , @xmath . The set of double values is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

There are several options for the choice of the transverse section.
E.g., Proposition 5.3.4 works with @xmath . Furthermore, one can also
take @xmath or @xmath .

If we take @xmath then the @xmath –vertical indexes @xmath are zero.
This fact follows directly from the product decomposition of @xmath .
(However, for different other choices it can be nonzero as well.)

###### Proposition 5.4.1.

For @xmath –type germs @xmath , where @xmath is the number of crosscaps
of a stabilization of @xmath , cf. Subsection 1.4.2 or [ 53 , 45 ] .

###### Proof.

With the choice of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . If @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

while for @xmath (see 5.3.6 ) one has

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Taking the sum for all @xmath we get the identity, once we verify

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here, the last identity follows from the algebraic definition of @xmath
, as the codimension of the Jacobian ideal of @xmath , see Subsection
1.4.2 and Example 1.4.10 . In our case this ideal is genereted by @xmath
and @xmath . ∎

### 5.5. Examples

In the next paragraphs we provide some concrete examples. The families
are taken from D. Mond’s list of simple germs [ 45 , Table 1] . In the
sequel we provide the resolution graph of @xmath and the plumbing graph
of @xmath . The computations are left to the reader. Example 4.2.3
serves as a model to determine the resolution graph of @xmath . By
Section 5.4 the equation of @xmath and all the gluing invariants can be
determined for @xmath type germs.

The last two examples are more special than the previous ones: they are
not of type @xmath . In the first family ( @xmath from the list [ 45 ,
Table 1] ) the calculation has some nontrivial steps, hence we provide
more details. The last example 5.5.8 is a corank @xmath map germ from [
31 ] , cf. Example 1.4.12 .

#### 5.5.1. Whitney umbrella, or cross–cap

@xmath and @xmath . The graph of @xmath is on the left, while our
algorithm provides the graph from the right for @xmath

[]

which after plumbing calculus (blowing down twice followed by a @xmath
-chain absorption, see Subsection 4.2.2 ) transforms into [] (Compare
also with Example 10.4.2 from [ 55 ] .)

#### 5.5.2. @xmath

Set @xmath , hence @xmath . The graph of @xmath is the first diagram,
while the other two equivalent graphs represent @xmath

[]

#### 5.5.3. The family @xmath, @xmath

One has @xmath and @xmath . Cf. Examples 1.4.10 , 3.5.1 .

Case 1 : @xmath .

[]

[]

Here the number of @xmath -vertices is @xmath .

Case 2 : @xmath .

[]

[]

where the number of @xmath -vertices on the left is @xmath .

#### 5.5.4. The family @xmath (@xmath)

@xmath and @xmath .

The graph of @xmath is

[]

where the number of @xmath -vertices is @xmath .

Note that the double point curve @xmath does not depend on the parity of
@xmath , however @xmath has one component, when @xmath is odd, and two
components, when @xmath is even. Thus the pairing @xmath changes the
components of @xmath in the odd case, and @xmath is the identity in the
even case.

Case 1 : @xmath .

[]

where the number of @xmath -vertices is @xmath .

Case 2 : @xmath .

[]

where the number of @xmath -vertexes on the left is again @xmath .

#### 5.5.5. The family @xmath (@xmath)

@xmath and @xmath . The resolution of @xmath is calculated in Example
4.2.3 .

Case 1 : @xmath .

[]

[]

where the number of @xmath -vertices in the middle is @xmath .

Case 2 : @xmath .

[]

and the graph of @xmath is

[]

where the number of @xmath -vertices in the middle is @xmath .

#### 5.5.6. @xmath

@xmath and @xmath .

[]

#### 5.5.7. The family @xmath, @xmath

In this case @xmath and the equation of the image is calculated as the
@xmath fitting ideal of @xmath in Example 1.3.4 , @xmath .

When @xmath , the local form of @xmath along @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . With the choice @xmath , one has @xmath
.

For @xmath one gets

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . In this case @xmath .

In all cases @xmath .

[]

[]

where the number of ( @xmath )-vertexes is @xmath .

In the special case @xmath the germs @xmath and @xmath are analytic
@xmath -equivalent.

#### 5.5.8. A corank @xmath map germ

In this case @xmath and @xmath .

[]

[]
