The statistical rank tests play important roles in univariate
non-parametric data analysis. If one attempts to generalize the rank
tests to a multivariate case, the problem of defining a multivariate
order will occur. It is not clear how to define a multivariate order or
statistical rank in a meaningful way. One approach to overcome this
problem is to use the notion of data depth which measures the centrality
of a point with respect to a given data set. In other words, a data
depth can be applied to indicate how deep a point is located with
respect to a given data set. Using data depth, a multivariate order can
be defined by ordering the data points according to their depth values.
Various notions of data depth have been introduced over the last
decades. In this thesis, we discuss three depth functions: two
well-known depth functions halfspace depth and simplicial depth, and one
recently defined depth function named as @xmath -skeleton depth, @xmath
. The @xmath -skeleton depth is equivalent to the previously defined
spherical depth and lens depth when @xmath and @xmath , respectively.
Our main focus in this thesis is to explore the geometric and
algorithmic aspects of @xmath -skeleton depth. For the geometric part,
we study the arrangement of circles and lenses as the influence regions
of @xmath -skeleton depth. The combinatorial complexity of such
arrangement is computed in this study. For the algorithmic part, we
develop some algorithms to solve the problem of computing the planar
@xmath -skeleton depth and halfspace depth. The lower bound for the
complexity of computation of planar @xmath -skeleton depth is also
investigated. Finally, we determine some relationships among different
depth functions, and propose a method to approximate one depth function
using another one. The obtained theoretical results are supported by
some experimental results provided in the last chapter of this thesis.
