## Chapter 1 Introduction

Matroids generalize the notion of linear independence in linear algebra.
Matroid axioms were first developed for finite matroids. Finite matroids
have been extensively studied since 1935. Many examples of finite
matroids come from finite graphs and these have been extensively
studied. It is natural to ask whether there is a good notion of a
matroid that works for infinite graphs and other infinite structures.
For a long time, there were several reasonable proposed axiomatizations
of infinite matroids. None of them seemed to cover every important
aspect of finite matroid theory. It seemed hard to have one notion of
infinite matroids which has bases, circuits, and duality familiar from
finite matroids. Let us review the axioms for finite matroids.

For a set @xmath and @xmath , we write @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath for
@xmath , @xmath , and @xmath respectively.

###### Definition 1.0.1.

Let @xmath be some finite set. A finite matroid @xmath is a pair @xmath
with @xmath satisfying the following properties:

-    1: @xmath .

-    2: If @xmath and @xmath , then @xmath .

-    3: If @xmath and @xmath , then there exists @xmath such that @xmath
    .

The simplest way to generalize this construction is to allow @xmath to
be infinite and leave axioms @xmath to @xmath unchanged. In 1976, Welsh
introduced this generalization as a . Welsh’s definition of
pre-independence spaces can be found in [ Wel10 ] .

Pre-independence spaces do not necessarily have maximal independent
sets. For example, consider @xmath with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We can check that @xmath satisfies axioms @xmath to @xmath and gives a
pre-independence space. It is clear that any independent set must be a
proper and finite subset of @xmath and can be augmented to a larger
independent set by adding any additional element. Thus, no element of
@xmath is maximal with respect to set inclusion.

Thus, pre-independence spaces are unsatisfactory as an infinite
generalization of finite matroids.

Now, we introduce a set of matroid axioms developed in [ BDK @xmath 13 ]
in 2010 that captures essential aspects of finite matroid theory while
allowing for infinite matroids to be defined. Examples of these infinite
matroids that can be created from infinite graphs will be studied in
this thesis.

Now we let @xmath to be any set and possibly infinite.

###### Definition 1.0.2.

A matroid @xmath is a pair @xmath with @xmath satisfying the following
properties:

-    I1: @xmath .

-    I2: If @xmath and @xmath , then @xmath .

-    I3: If @xmath is a maximal element of @xmath and @xmath is a
    non-maximal element of @xmath , then there exists @xmath such that
    @xmath .

-    I4: If @xmath and @xmath , then the set @xmath has a maximal
    element.

Here, we use set inclusion as our partial ordering when we talk about
maximality and minimality. Elements of @xmath are called independent
sets. Maximal elements of @xmath are also called . These first two
axioms are familiar from finite matroids. The third axiom is different
from our third axiom for finite matroids because there could be infinite
independent sets. It may be possible to extend a countable independent
set by another countable independent set under these axioms. Thus,
cardinality does not give us enough information to determine whether we
can extend an independent set by another one. The fourth axiom ensures
that every matroid has a base and every matroid minor has a base. A
matroid minor will be defined later on.

Elements of @xmath are called . A minimal dependent set is called a . A
circuit with only one element is called a . It is possible to define a
matroid @xmath by specifying a suitable set of circuits and taking the
independent sets to be subsets of @xmath that contain no circuit. Any
pair @xmath that satisfies the first two axioms is called an
independence system. Although infinite matroids were studied for several
decades, this axiom system was formulated as recently as 2010. Under
these axioms, every matroid has a base and a dual. Let @xmath be a
matroid. We define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the set of bases of @xmath . Then @xmath is the of
@xmath . The authors who developed this axiom system showed that this
dual is indeed a matroid. In fact, this duality is an involution and
@xmath . A circuit of @xmath is called a of @xmath . A loop of @xmath is
also known as a of @xmath . Equivalently, a coloop is an element of
@xmath that is not contained in any circuit of @xmath and thus contained
in every base of @xmath .

We will now define matroid minors.

Let @xmath be a matroid. Let @xmath . Define @xmath . We define @xmath
as the @xmath . It is also called the @xmath . We define @xmath and name
it the @xmath . We also call @xmath the @xmath . Independent sets of
@xmath are the sets @xmath such that @xmath for every independent set
@xmath of @xmath . Each of these constructions were shown to be matroids
in [ BDK @xmath 13 ] . The result of any sequence of contractions and
restrictions of some matroid @xmath is called a of @xmath .

There are several different ways to axiomatize these structures. Another
equivalent axiomatization we will find useful is the following. Consider
@xmath with @xmath and let @xmath be alternative notation for the set of
maximal elements of @xmath . @xmath is also known as the set of bases of
@xmath . A set @xmath is called @xmath -independent if there is some
@xmath with @xmath . If @xmath satisfies the following properties, then
@xmath is a matroid in the above sense.

-   B1: @xmath .

-   B2: Whenever @xmath and @xmath , there is an element @xmath of
    @xmath such that @xmath .

-   B3: The set of @xmath -independent sets satisfies axiom I4.

Axiom B2 is also known as the base exchange axiom. The following review
of historical development borrows from [ BDK @xmath 13 ] .

In the 1960s and 1970s, Higgs [ Hig69b ] and Oxley [ Oxl78a , Oxl78b ,
Oxl92 ] developed a different axiom system that described the same class
of structures as this one. They named these structures ‘ @xmath
-matroids’. Although Oxley found a set of axioms for these ‘ @xmath
-matroids’ resembling a mixture of independence and base axioms, it
remained an open problem whether an axiom set exists for infinite
matroids which allows for minors and duality familiar from finite
matroids.

###### Definition 1.0.3.

A set system @xmath with @xmath is a @xmath -matroid if it satisfies the
following axioms.

-    I1: @xmath

-    I2: If @xmath and @xmath , then @xmath .

-    B2: Whenever @xmath and @xmath , there is an element @xmath of
    @xmath such that @xmath .

-    I4: If @xmath and @xmath , then the set @xmath has a maximal
    element.

A proof that a set system @xmath gives a matroid if and only if it gives
a @xmath -matroid can be found in [ BDK @xmath 13 ] .

A special class of matroids which are known as the finitary matroids are
better understood than general infinite matroids.

###### Definition 1.0.4.

A matroid @xmath is if a set @xmath is independent in @xmath if and only
if all finite subsets of @xmath are independent.

For every matroid @xmath , there exists an associated finitary matroid
@xmath whose independent sets are subsets @xmath of @xmath such that
every finite subset of @xmath is independent in @xmath . The proof of
this relies on Zorn’s lemma and can be found in [ BDK @xmath 13 ] .
@xmath is also known as the of @xmath .

To understand finitarization, consider the matroid @xmath where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since all finite subsets of @xmath are independent in @xmath , @xmath .
Here, @xmath has more independent sets than @xmath . We can make this
precise in the following way.

Every base @xmath of @xmath extends to a base @xmath of @xmath . To see
why, note that any base @xmath is independent in @xmath . Because of our
fourth independence axiom for matroids, the set @xmath has a maximal
element @xmath . This maximal element is a base of @xmath .

Conversely, every base @xmath of @xmath contains a base @xmath of @xmath
. To see why, consider @xmath . Then @xmath is a base of @xmath .
Independent sets of @xmath are also independent in @xmath . So @xmath
extends to some base @xmath in @xmath by the fourth independence axiom.
@xmath is then a base in @xmath and @xmath contains @xmath .
Unfortunately, the class of finitary matroids is not closed under
duality. The authors of [ AHCF11 ] define the class of nearly finitary
matroids which is still not closed under duality but extends the class
of finitary matroids. For more general independence systems,
finitarization is still defined but will not necessarily give you a
matroid. For example, consider @xmath where a set is defined to be
independent if it is a subset of @xmath or a subset of @xmath . @xmath
is not a matroid. It is possible to have an independence system @xmath
that is not a matroid but whose finitarization is nonetheless still a
matroid. See Section 4.1 of Chapter 4 for such an example.

The authors of [ AHCF11 ] introduced the class of nearly finitary
matroids and the class of @xmath -nearly finitary matroids.

###### Definition 1.0.5.

A matroid @xmath is called nearly finitary if whenever a base @xmath in
@xmath contains a base @xmath in @xmath , their set difference is a
finite set.

###### Definition 1.0.6.

For an integer @xmath , a matroid is called @xmath -nearly finitary if
whenever a base @xmath in @xmath contains a base @xmath in @xmath ,
their set difference has cardinality bounded by @xmath .

###### Definition 1.0.7.

We say that a matroid is exactly @xmath -nearly finitary if it is @xmath
-nearly finitary but not @xmath -nearly finitary.

Note that no matroid is @xmath -nearly finitary. Finitary matroids are
exactly @xmath -nearly finitary. Since matroids are closed under
duality, the dual of a finitary matroid is a matroid. However, this dual
does not need to be finitary. So finitary matroids are not closed under
duality.

We can extend the concepts of nearly finitary and @xmath -nearly
finitary to independence systems in the natural way as follows.

###### Definition 1.0.8.

An independence system @xmath is called nearly finitary if whenever a
base @xmath in @xmath contains a base @xmath in @xmath , their set
difference is a finite set.

###### Definition 1.0.9.

For an integer @xmath , a independence system is called @xmath -nearly
finitary if whenever a base @xmath in @xmath contains a base @xmath in
@xmath , their set difference has cardinality bounded by @xmath . We say
that an independence system is exactly @xmath -nearly finitary if it is
@xmath -nearly finitary but not @xmath -nearly finitary.

If an independence system @xmath is @xmath -nearly finitary for some
@xmath , we sometimes write “ @xmath is @xmath -nearly finitary” for
shorthand. Likewise, if an independence system @xmath is not @xmath
-nearly finitary for any @xmath , we sometimes write “ @xmath is not
@xmath -nearly finitary” for shorthand.

We remark that our definitions of nearly finitary and @xmath -nearly
finitary are slightly different from the ones that appear in [ AHCF11 ]
. The authors of [ AHCF11 ] define an independence system @xmath to be
nearly finitary if every base @xmath in @xmath contains a base @xmath in
@xmath such that their set difference is a finite set. For an integer
@xmath , they define an independence system to be @xmath -nearly
finitary if every base @xmath in @xmath contains a base @xmath in @xmath
such that their set difference has cardinality bounded by @xmath .
Before Section 3.1 of Chapter 3, we will show that our definitions of
nearly finitary and @xmath -nearly finitary are equivalent to the
definitions in [ AHCF11 ] for matroids. For general independence
systems, our definitions are different from those in [ AHCF11 ] . In
Section 4.1 of Chapter 4, we will show an example of an independence
system that is @xmath -nearly finitary using the definition in [ AHCF11
] but is not @xmath -nearly finitary in our sense.

In this thesis, we primarily study the problem about whether every
nearly finitary matroid is @xmath -nearly finitary as introduced in [
AHCF12 ] . We henceforth will refer to this problem as problem @xmath .
A priori, there could be some nearly finitary matroid with no uniform
bound @xmath . However, all known examples of nearly finitary matroids
are @xmath -nearly finitary. There is no known proof that all nearly
finitary matroids are @xmath -nearly finitary. The motivation for
studying problem @xmath comes from Halin’s theorems for infinite graphs
in [ Hal65 ] .

Before we state Halin’s theorems, let us review some terminlogy. A graph
@xmath is a pair of sets with @xmath where @xmath is defined by @xmath .
In other words, we do not care about the order of the pair of vertices.
We say that @xmath is the vertex set of @xmath and @xmath is the edge
set of @xmath . Let @xmath . We will denote this edge by @xmath for a
shorthand notation. A ray @xmath is an infinite sequence of edges of the
form @xmath such that @xmath if @xmath and @xmath are two different
integers. We say that two rays @xmath and @xmath are if they do not
share a vertex. We say that a set of rays @xmath is if every pair of
rays in @xmath is vertex-disjoint. Similarly, we say that two rays
@xmath and @xmath are if they do not share an edge. We say that a set of
rays @xmath is if every pair of rays in @xmath is edge-disjoint. If a
set of rays is vertex-disjoint, then it is edge-disjoint. It is possible
for a pair of rays to be edge-disjoint without being vertex-disjoint.
Consider the graph @xmath where @xmath . Then @xmath is edge disjoint
from @xmath . However, these two rays share the vertex @xmath . Halin’s
vertex-disjoint theorem states that if an infinite graph @xmath contains
some set of @xmath vertex-disjoint rays for every @xmath , then @xmath
contains some set of infinitely many vertex-disjoint rays. Halin’s
edge-disjoint theorem states that if an infinite graph @xmath contains
some set of @xmath edge-disjoint rays for every @xmath , then @xmath
contains some set of infinitely many edge-disjoint rays.

To see an example demonstrating Halin’s theorems, consider the graph
@xmath in Figure 1.1 on page . For all @xmath , @xmath has some set of
@xmath edge-disjoint rays starting from point @xmath . By Halin’s
edge-disjoint theorem, @xmath has some set of infinitely many
edge-disjoint rays. By removing edges adjacent to point @xmath , we can
find a set of @xmath vertex-disjoint rays in @xmath for all @xmath . By
Halin’s vertex-disjoint theorem, @xmath has some set of infinitely many
vertex-disjoint rays. We can also verify the conclusions of Halin’s
theorems directly in these examples.

In [ AHCF12 ] , the authors solve problem @xmath for two special
subclasses of infinite matroids. All nearly finitary algebraic cycle
matroids and nearly finitary topological cycle matroids are @xmath
-nearly finitary for some @xmath . The main tool used to prove this was
Halin’s theorem for vertex disjoint rays. It is in this sense that
problem @xmath is a possible generalization of Halin’s infinite grid
theorem. Problem @xmath has also been solved affirmatively for several
other classes of matroids. In [ SHAB16 ] , the authors prove that every
nearly finitary gammoid and every nearly finitary transversal matroid
are @xmath -nearly finitary.

Suppose @xmath and @xmath are bases of some matroid @xmath and suppose
@xmath . If @xmath , then they have the same cardinality. If not, then
neither base is a proper subset of the other. So there is some @xmath .
Then by using the base exchange axiom B2, there is some @xmath such that
@xmath is a base in @xmath . It is clear that @xmath . If @xmath , we
stop and we know that @xmath . Otherwise, we continue this process to
get a new base @xmath . Since @xmath , this process will stop after a
finite number of steps and we get @xmath for some finite integer @xmath
. Thus, all bases of a matroid either have the same finite cardinality
or are all infinite in cardinality.

For a matroid @xmath , we define @xmath where @xmath . We consider all
infinite cardinalities equal to make this rank operation well defined.

Before the modern axiom system in [ BDK @xmath 13 ] was introduced,
there was a different way to axiomatize finitary matroids. As appears in
[ BDK @xmath 13 ] , we will define classical finitary matroids.

###### Definition 1.0.10.

A classical finitary matroid @xmath is a pair @xmath with @xmath
satisfying the following properties:

-    F1: @xmath .

-    F2: If @xmath and @xmath , then @xmath .

-    F3: If @xmath and @xmath , then there exists @xmath such that
    @xmath .

-    F4: @xmath if and only if all finite subsets of @xmath are in
    @xmath .

A proof that classical finitary matroids are matroids in our sense
appears in [ BDK @xmath 13 ] . This proof crucially relies on Zorn’s
lemma and thus the Axiom of Choice. Those authors even show that these
classical finitary matroids are precisely our finitary matroids assuming
the Axiom of Choice.

To help us study problem @xmath , we propose a notion of spectrum for
matroids. Let @xmath be a matroid and @xmath be its finitarization. We
define the following:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A nearly finitary matroid is @xmath -nearly finitary if and only if its
spectrum has finite size. In Chapter 3, we will construct nearly
finitary matroids with spectrums of arbitrarily large finite size. We
also have an example of a matroid with an infinitely large spectrum that
is not nearly finitary. Our examples are all based on the algebraic
cycle matroid of the one way infinite ladder. It is a matroid with
spectrum @xmath . We consider the matroid sum of @xmath copies of this
matroid for some examples of nearly finitary matroids with large finite
spectrums. We consider the matroid sum of infinitely many copies of this
matroid for an example of a matroid with infinitely large spectrum.

We also found a sufficient condition for nearly finitary matroids to be
@xmath -nearly finitary. We prove that a special class of nearly
finitary matroids satisfies this condition in Chapter 3.

On the next page there are two graphs of various classes of matroids in
Figure 1.2 and Figure 1.3. Arrows indicate class inclusion with smaller
classes pointing towards larger classes. Several of these classes are
studied extensively in this dissertation.

With an existing matroid @xmath , we can generate new matroids in
several different ways. These new matroids will give us more examples to
consider when we ask whether every nearly finitary matroid is @xmath
-nearly finitary. One way to generate new matroids will be through the
matroid union theorem introduced in [ AHCF11 ] . Let @xmath and @xmath
be nearly finitary matroids. Then we can define

###### Definition 1.0.11.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The theorem tells us that @xmath is a matroid. This gives us a way to
generate large families of nearly finitary matroids from known examples
of matroids.

Since we are studying infinite matroids as a generalization of finite
matroids, we will also introduce infinite graph theory as a
generalization of finite graph theory. Much of our discussion on this
matter comes from [ BD11 ] .

Just as finite graphs give us many examples of finite matroids, infinite
graphs will give us many examples of infinite matroids. First, we review
one way to get a finite matroid from a finite graph. Let @xmath be a
finite graph with finitely many edges and finitely many vertices. We can
define a matroid @xmath where @xmath is the set of edges of @xmath and
@xmath consists of sets of edges that contain no cycle of @xmath . Since
@xmath is finite, all cycles are finite cycles. This is the of @xmath .
Another kind of matroid we can define is the bond matroid of @xmath .
Since @xmath is finite, it has some finite number @xmath of connected
components. Let @xmath where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We call @xmath the of @xmath . It turns out that @xmath and @xmath are
dual matroids in this case.

Now we allow @xmath to be some infinite connected graph and make no
assumptions about the cardinalities of the edge and vertex sets. We can
define a finitary matroid @xmath where @xmath consists of sets of edges
that contain no finite cycle of @xmath . Then @xmath is a finitary
matroid known as the of @xmath . However, because @xmath is infinite
there are several possible notions of infinite cycles. One of these
notions is known as an algebraic cycle of a graph. We say that a
non-empty set of edges @xmath is an if each vertex of the graph @xmath
has even degree. This is a generalization of a finite cycle since all
finite cycles are algebraic cycles. For an example of an algebraic cycle
that is not a finite cycle, consider the graph @xmath where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Clearly, @xmath is a nonempty set of edges where each vertex has degree
@xmath . So @xmath is an algebraic cycle but it is not a finite cycle.
For arbitrary graphs @xmath , the independence system @xmath where
@xmath consists of sets of edges that contain no algebraic cycle of
@xmath . Unfortunately, @xmath is not always a matroid. However, in
1969, Higgs gave a necessary and sufficient condition for when @xmath is
a matroid in [ Hig69a ] . Recall that it is possible to define an
independence system by specifying its set of circuits. The set of
circuits of an algebraic cycle system of a graph @xmath consists of the
elementary algebraic cycles of @xmath . An @xmath is an algebraic cycle
such that if you remove any edge from @xmath , the new edge set no
longer contains an algebraic cycle. We use the term ’elementary’ in this
way for other kinds of cycles too.

###### Theorem 1.0.1.

( [ Hig69a ] Theorem 5.1) The elementary algebraic cycles of an infinite
graph @xmath are the circuits of a matroid on its edge set @xmath if and
only if @xmath contains no subdivision of the Bean graph.

Figure 1.4 is a picture of the Bean graph mentioned in Higgs’ theorem
and seen in [ BD11 ] .

Let us denote the Bean graph by @xmath . To see why @xmath is not a
matroid, consider the following. Let @xmath be the set of horizontal
edges of @xmath . @xmath is a maximal independent set in @xmath . Let
@xmath . This is another maximal independent set of @xmath . Now
consider the set @xmath which consists of all top horizontal edges of
@xmath and all non horizontal edges of @xmath . @xmath is a maximal
independent set of @xmath . @xmath is non maximal. You cannot add any
edge of @xmath to @xmath to get another independent set of @xmath . So
our third independence axiom fails. Higgs’ theorem shows that this is
essentially the only example of a graph whose algebraic cycle system is
not a matroid. Knowing when an independence system is a matroid is
important to the study of problem @xmath . After all, problem @xmath
only concerns matroids and not other independence systems.

Another possible notion of an infinite cycle is known as a topological
cycle and was studied in [ Car17 ] . Before we define the notion of
topological cycle, we will define what an end @xmath of an infinite
graph is.

Let @xmath and @xmath be two rays of some graph @xmath . We say that
@xmath if for every finite set @xmath of edges of @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath are in the same connected component of @xmath . This induces an
equivalence relation on the set of rays of @xmath . An end @xmath is
then defined to be an equivalence class of rays under @xmath . For each
end @xmath of @xmath , we add a point at infinity corresponding to that
end. This is known as the (or ) of @xmath . Given a graph @xmath ,
together with an end boundary, a is a homeomorphic image of the unit
circle in the topological space consisting of the graph together with
the boundary. This topological space will be denoted by @xmath .

A double ray is a two way infinite sequence of edges @xmath such that
@xmath if @xmath and @xmath are two different integers. Removing one
edge from a double ray will give you a pair of vertex-disjoint rays.

Let @xmath be a double ray and let @xmath be an edge of @xmath . We say
that @xmath belongs to an end @xmath if the two rays of @xmath are each
an element of @xmath . The of @xmath are elementary finite cycles and
double rays belonging to some end of @xmath .

The question about when the elementary topological cycles form the
circuits of a matroid was explored in [ Car17 ] . There, Carmesin proves
that topological cycles of @xmath induce a matroid if and only if @xmath
does not have a subdivision of the dominated ladder as shown in Figure
1.5.

We will introduce other possible notions of cycles in Chapter 5.

One well known way to construct finite matroids on some finite ground
set @xmath is to use the well known notion of representability. Let
@xmath be a vector space and consider a function @xmath . Then we can
define a matroid @xmath where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We call @xmath a representable matroid. If @xmath is a vector space over
the field @xmath , we say that @xmath is @xmath -representable. Many
examples of finite matroids turn out to be representable. The cycle and
bond matroids of a finite graph are both representable. In fact, the
cycle matroid of a finite graph @xmath is dual to the bond matroid of
@xmath . More generally, the class of finite representable matroids is
closed under duality.

This notion of representability still works using algebraic linear
independence if we allow @xmath to be infinite and @xmath to be infinite
dimensional. However, the sums considered in algebraic linear
independence are only defined if there are finitely many nonzero
summands. Thus, a set @xmath of vectors is linearly independent in the
algebraic sense if and only if all of its finite subsets are
independent. Thus, representability is an inherently finitary concept.
Moreover, the dual of a representable infinite matroid need not be
representable. To see this, consider the matroid @xmath where @xmath and
@xmath for all @xmath . Then @xmath is a representable matroid by
construction. Its independent sets are the subsets of size one. Thus, we
have:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here, @xmath is not independent but all of its finite subsets are
independent. So @xmath is not finitary and thus not representable.

To study non-finitary matroids, we will need to use the more general
notion of thin representability that was introduced in [ BD11 ] and
studied in [ AB15 ] . Our discussion of thin sums systems is based on
the work in [ AB15 ] .

We denote the set of functions from @xmath to @xmath by @xmath . Let
@xmath be a family of functions from @xmath to @xmath indexed by @xmath
. We say that the family @xmath is if for each @xmath , there are only
finitely many @xmath such that @xmath . Let @xmath be a set and consider
a function @xmath that gives us a family of functions @xmath . We say
that a set @xmath is thin if @xmath is a thin family. A of @xmath is a
map @xmath such that for each @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Even if there are only finitely many nonzero summands for each
particular @xmath , there could be infinitely many @xmath such that
there is some @xmath with @xmath . In that case, the sum @xmath would
not be well defined even though it is defined pointwise. Thus, this new
notion of thin dependence is not the same as linear dependence. We also
say that @xmath is a thin dependence of a subset @xmath of @xmath if
@xmath is the zero outside of @xmath . The trivial thin dependence on
@xmath has @xmath for all @xmath . A subset @xmath is called if there is
no nontrivial thin dependence of @xmath . Note that a thinly independent
set @xmath does not necessarily induce a thin family of functions. We
say that @xmath is if it is not thinly independent. We can define an
independence system @xmath with @xmath where @xmath consists of the
thinly independent subsets of @xmath . We say that @xmath is a . When
@xmath is a matroid, we say @xmath is a .

The infinite independence systems we get from a graph’s algebraic and
topological cycles are thinly representable over any field in the
following ways.

Let @xmath be a graph and consider the algebraic cycle system @xmath .
Put an arbitrary orientation on each edge to make @xmath a digraph. Let
@xmath be any field. For each @xmath , we can define a function @xmath
defined as follows. Set @xmath if @xmath originates from @xmath , @xmath
if @xmath terminates at @xmath , and @xmath if @xmath does not touch
@xmath . Then we get an independence system @xmath using the thinly
independent subsets of @xmath .

###### Theorem 1.0.2.

( [ AB15 ] Proposition 2.9) @xmath .

###### Proof.

We want to show that @xmath is dependent in @xmath if and only if it is
dependent in @xmath . Suppose @xmath is dependent in @xmath . Then
@xmath contains an elementary algebraic cycle. That is, @xmath contains
an elementary finite cycle or double ray. Let @xmath be the edge set of
this cycle or double ray. Give a direction to @xmath . For any edge
@xmath , define @xmath to be @xmath if @xmath is an edge of @xmath and
the direction given to @xmath by the digraph @xmath is the same as the
direction given to @xmath by the direction of @xmath , @xmath if @xmath
is an edge of @xmath and the two directions given to @xmath are
opposites, and @xmath if @xmath . For every vertex @xmath , @xmath , so
@xmath is a thin dependence of @xmath . Conversely, suppose that @xmath
is dependent in @xmath . Whenever a vertex @xmath is an end of an edge
in @xmath , it has to be the end of at least two edges in @xmath . For
each vertex @xmath that touches some edge in @xmath , pick two edges in
@xmath that touch @xmath to get a subset @xmath . @xmath is an algebraic
cycle. ∎

In [ AB15 ] , the authors show that matroids thinly representable by a
thin family are dual to a representable matroid that is finitary. Since
we are studying nearly finitary matroids, it is natural to ask if there
is a dual notion of nearly thin families for thin sum matroids. We
define a family of functions @xmath from @xmath to @xmath to be @xmath -
if there are at most @xmath elements @xmath such that there are
infinitely many @xmath such that @xmath . In Chapter 6, we will
introduce examples of matroids from @xmath -nearly thin families that
are dual to @xmath -nearly finitary matroids. We conjecture that
matroids from @xmath -nearly thin families are dual to @xmath -nearly
finitary matroids. We also conjecture if we have a thin sums matroid
that is not thinly representable by an @xmath -nearly thin matroid, then
it is not dual to a nearly finitary matroid.

Finally, we introduce a new notion of representability related to thin
sums and study it in the end of Chapter 6.

## Chapter 2 Summary of Main Results

In Chapter 3, we study nearly finitary matroids in various ways. We
first introduce a notion of finitarization spectrum and figure out a few
results pertaining to this notion. Later on, we find a condition that
guarantees a nearly finitary matroid is @xmath -nearly finitary when
satisfied. We were unable to find nearly finitary matroids that do not
satisfy this condition. We study this condition in detail and prove some
results related to this condition. In particular, @xmath from below is
sometimes the same as @xmath from below. Then, we assume the existence
of a nearly finitary matroid that is not @xmath -nearly finitary. From
this assumption, we derive the existence of several families of nearly
finitary matroids that are not @xmath -nearly finitary. Finally, we show
that the union of a finite rank matroid with any other matroid gives us
a matroid.

###### Theorem 3.2.1.

There exists nearly finitary matroids with finitarization spectrum of
arbitrarily large finite size.

###### Theorem 3.4.1.

Let @xmath and @xmath be a matroid and its finitarization respectively.
Define @xmath where @xmath if there exists a base @xmath in @xmath and a
base @xmath in @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath .

If @xmath is a nearly finitary matroid such that @xmath is a matroid,
then @xmath is @xmath -nearly finitary.

###### Theorem 3.4.3.

Suppose @xmath is a nearly finitary and nearly cofinitary matroid. Then
@xmath is a matroid.

We propose the following independence system. Let @xmath be a nearly
finitary matroid and define the following

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We then define @xmath to be the minimal elements of @xmath with respect
to set inclusion.

###### Theorem 3.4.4.

@xmath is non-empty if @xmath is a @xmath -nearly finitary matroid.

The rank of a matroid @xmath is the cardinality of a base in @xmath .
For a matroid @xmath with rank at least @xmath , a related matroid
@xmath is defined in the beginning of Section 3.3. This definition is
originally from [ AHCF11 ] .

###### Theorem 3.4.5.

Suppose that there exists some matroid @xmath that is nearly finitary
but not @xmath -nearly finitary. Then @xmath is also nearly finitary but
not @xmath -nearly finitary.

###### Theorem 3.4.6.

Let @xmath be a nearly finitary matroid with @xmath disjoint from @xmath
. By the nearly finitary matroid union theorem in [ AHCF11 ] , the
matroid union @xmath is a nearly finitary matroid. Moreover, it is not
@xmath -nearly finitary.

###### Theorem 3.5.1.

Suppose that @xmath is a finite rank matroid and @xmath is any matroid.
Then the union @xmath is a matroid.

In Chapter 4, we introduce a notion of near-finitarization. More
importantly, we answer a certain generalization of problem @xmath
negatively.

###### Theorem 4.2.1.

There exists a nearly finitary independence system that is not @xmath
-nearly finitary.

In Chapter 5, we study @xmath -independence systems from [ BC13 ] . We
define @xmath -matroids which generalize @xmath -matroids and prove the
following theorem.

###### Theorem 5.2.1.

Suppose @xmath is a nearly @xmath -matroid on a graph @xmath with
finitely many disjoint rays. Then @xmath is @xmath -nearly finitary.

We also study @xmath -finite tree systems from [ BC13 ] . Under the
axiom of determinacy, all @xmath -finite tree systems are matroids.

###### Theorem 5.3.1.

It is impossible to pick an axiom system such that all @xmath -finite
tree systems are matroids and all classical finitary matroids are
matroids.

In Chapter 6, we introduce the notion of a nearly thin family and
speculate that it is in some sense dual to the notion of nearly
finitary. We introduce an example showing why we believe this. Finally,
we introduce a new kind of independence system inspired by thin sums
representability and we give a condition for when an independent set in
this kind of system is maximal.

###### Theorem 6.2.1.

Let @xmath be a topological independence system. An independent set
@xmath of @xmath is maximal if and only if for all @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

## Chapter 3 Finitarization Spectrum

### 3.1. Definitions and Motivation

Earlier, we introduced a notion of finitarization spectrum for matroids.
Recall that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For our considerations, we consider all infinite cardinalities equal.

We can also define a dual notion of spectrum with @xmath .

A nearly finitary matroid is @xmath -nearly finitary if and only if its
spectrum has finite size. This leads us to consider what possible sizes
a matroid spectrum can have. We construct nearly finitary matroids with
spectrums of any finite cardinality. We also construct a matroid with an
infinitely large spectrum that is not nearly finitary. We will start by
reviewing a matroid that inspired our definition of spectrum since its
spectrum is not a singleton set. Consider the algebraic cycle matroid
@xmath of the one way infinite ladder graph @xmath that will be drawn
below in Figure 3.1.

Recall that a of a graph is a connected set of edges that touch every
vertex and contains no finite cycle. For any infinite graph @xmath , we
can construct a topological space @xmath associated to @xmath where
@xmath is a totally disconnected subspace of @xmath . For each edge
@xmath , we have a homeomorphism @xmath from the interval @xmath to
@xmath given by @xmath and @xmath . Any edge set @xmath of @xmath
corresponds to the topological subspace @xmath of @xmath that includes
the vertices of @xmath and points in between @xmath and @xmath if @xmath
. To help us define an algebraic spanning tree, we consider the one
point compactification of @xmath by adding a point @xmath at infinity if
necessary. We denote this space by @xmath . Each edge set @xmath of
@xmath corresponds to some topological subspace @xmath of @xmath . If
@xmath contains no ray, then @xmath . If @xmath contains any ray, then
@xmath . In other words, any ray in @xmath touches @xmath . We define a
set of edges @xmath to be algebraically connected if the topological
space @xmath is connected. Thus, any set of two vertex-disjoint rays
would be algebraically connected in this graph. We define an to be an
algebraically connected set of edges that touch every vertex and
contains no algebraic cycle. Bases of this matroid are algebraic
spanning trees of @xmath . The finitarization of @xmath is the finite
cycle matroid of @xmath whose circuits are elementary finite cycles of
@xmath . Bases of @xmath are ordinary spanning trees.

The following theorem is inspired by an exercise left to readers.

###### Theorem 3.1.1.

(See [ AHCF11 ] page 2) Let @xmath be a base in @xmath . Suppose @xmath
and @xmath are bases in @xmath that contain @xmath . Then @xmath .

###### Proof.

We will use proof by contradiction. Without loss of generality, assume
that @xmath . Since we consider all infinite cardinalities equal, this
means that @xmath is finite. @xmath is a matroid and thus satisfies the
base exchange axiom. Since @xmath has more elements outside @xmath than
@xmath , there exists @xmath . Since @xmath , @xmath . By basis
exchange, there is some @xmath such that @xmath is a base in @xmath .
@xmath still contains @xmath since @xmath . Moreover,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So we can continue inductively using base exchange to get new bases of
@xmath . Also notice that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath is finite, we can continue this process and eventually have
some base @xmath of @xmath with @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So @xmath must be a proper subset of @xmath but this contradicts the
maximality of @xmath . We conclude that @xmath and we see that any base
@xmath in @xmath can contribute at most one element to the spectrum of
@xmath . ∎

We can also fix a base @xmath of @xmath and vary bases of @xmath to get
a similar theorem.

###### Theorem 3.1.2.

Suppose that @xmath is a base in @xmath and suppose that @xmath and
@xmath are bases in @xmath contained in @xmath . Then @xmath .

###### Proof.

Without loss of generality, assume that @xmath . Like before, this means
that @xmath is finite. Since @xmath has more elements inside @xmath than
@xmath , there exists @xmath . So there is some @xmath such that @xmath
is a base in @xmath . @xmath is still contained in @xmath since @xmath .
Moreover,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So we can continue inductively using base exchange to get new bases of
@xmath . Also notice that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So we can continue this process and eventually have some base @xmath of
@xmath with @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So @xmath must be a proper subset of @xmath but this contradicts the
maximality of @xmath . So @xmath and we see that any base @xmath of
@xmath can contribute at most one element to the spectrum of @xmath .
This also shows that our definitions of nearly finitary matroid and
@xmath -nearly finitary matroid coincide with the definitions in [
AHCF11 ] . ∎

### 3.2. Ladders

Let @xmath be the set of all top edges and all middle edges of the one
way infinite ladder. Then @xmath contains no algebraic cycle and is an
algebraic spanning tree. @xmath is also a spanning tree. Thus, @xmath is
a base in both @xmath and its finitarization. This shows that @xmath .
Now let @xmath be the set of all top edges and all bottom edges. Because
of the point at infinity, @xmath is algebraically connected. It contains
no algebraic cycle and is an algebraic spanning tree. However, @xmath is
not connected in the usual sense so it is not a spanning tree. Thus,
@xmath is not a base of @xmath . Adding any middle edge to @xmath will
make it a spanning tree and a base in @xmath . This shows that @xmath
contains @xmath . Suppose there is some algebraic spanning tree @xmath
that is not a spanning tree. Since @xmath is a base in @xmath , adding
any edge to @xmath will make the new set contain an algebraic cycle.
Suppose there is a spanning tree @xmath that contains @xmath and at
least two additional edges @xmath and @xmath . @xmath will contain an
infinite algebraic cycle (i.e. a double ray) since it cannot contain any
finite cycle. @xmath will contain a different double ray. @xmath will
contain both double rays. In this particular graph @xmath , the union of
any two double rays contains a finite circuit. Thus, @xmath cannot
contain @xmath or any other larger number. We conclude that @xmath . We
use this basic example to prove the following.

###### Theorem 3.2.1.

There exists nearly finitary matroids with finitarization spectrum of
arbitrarily large finite size.

###### Proof.

Consider a graph @xmath of @xmath parallel one way infinite ladders as
shown above in Figure 3.2 for @xmath .

Let @xmath be the algebraic cycle matroid of @xmath . Bases of @xmath
are algebraic spanning forests of @xmath . Let @xmath be the set of all
top edges and middle edges of the @xmath -th connected component of
@xmath . Index the connected components of @xmath by @xmath where @xmath
. Let @xmath be the set of all top edges and bottom edges of the @xmath
-th connected component of @xmath . Let @xmath . Let @xmath and @xmath .
@xmath and @xmath are defined to be empty. Then @xmath is a base in
@xmath . Add an edge to each connected component of @xmath to get a new
set @xmath . Connected components of @xmath do not need any added edges
since any such added edge will create a finite cycle. So @xmath is a
base in the finitarization of @xmath . This shows that @xmath is in the
spectrum for @xmath . So @xmath contains @xmath . For each connected
component of @xmath , an algebraic spanning tree has at most one edge
missing from a spanning tree. Thus, any base of @xmath can be extended
to a base in the finitarization by adding at most @xmath elements. So
@xmath . ∎

We can also construct these examples involving multiple ladders using
the Nearly Finitary Matroid Union Theorem in [ AHCF11 ] and the example
involving a single ladder from Section 3.1.

Given a matroid @xmath , a natural question to consider is the
following. Suppose you have two bases @xmath and @xmath of @xmath that
are respectively contained in bases @xmath and @xmath of @xmath with
@xmath . Must there exist some base @xmath of @xmath that contains both
@xmath and @xmath ? The examples that we have considered in this section
answer this question negatively. Consider @xmath . Consider @xmath and
@xmath . @xmath and @xmath are both bases in @xmath contained
respectively in bases @xmath and @xmath of @xmath with @xmath . However,
no base @xmath of @xmath contains both @xmath and @xmath .

Conversely, we can also show that there are two bases @xmath and @xmath
of @xmath that respectively contains @xmath and @xmath with @xmath such
that no base @xmath of @xmath is contained in both @xmath and @xmath .
Let @xmath and @xmath where @xmath is the left-most middle edge of the
@xmath -th connected component of @xmath . Then @xmath and @xmath are
bases in @xmath that show that @xmath . However, @xmath cannot contain
any algebraic spanning forest of @xmath . Thus, no base of @xmath is
contained in both @xmath and @xmath .

Let us consider a graph @xmath of countably infinite parallel one way
infinite ladders. Since @xmath has no subdivision of the Bean graph, the
algebraic cycles of @xmath induce a matroid. Let @xmath be the algebraic
cycle matroid of @xmath . Like when we studied graphs consisting of
finitely many ladders, let @xmath be the set of all top edges and middle
edges of the @xmath -th connected component of @xmath and let @xmath be
the set of all top edges and bottom edges of the @xmath -th connected
component of @xmath . Define @xmath to be empty. Let @xmath . Let @xmath
and @xmath . Then like when we had finitely many ladders, @xmath gives
us a base of @xmath where you need to add @xmath elements to get a base
in the finitarization. This shows that @xmath is in the spectrum for any
natural number @xmath . Define @xmath . Then @xmath will be a base where
infinitely many edges must be added to get a base in the finitarization.
This shows us that @xmath is in the spectrum. Thus, @xmath . Although
the spectrum of @xmath is infinitely large, this matroid is not nearly
finitary.

### 3.3. More on Spectrum

It seems that all examples of nearly finitary spectrums we have
considered so far are either singleton sets or have a set of consecutive
integers starting from @xmath . This motivates us to construct matroids
with different kinds of spectrums.

Recall that the rank of a matroid @xmath is the cardinality of a base
@xmath in @xmath with infinite cardinalities considered equal. Let
@xmath be the class of matroids and let @xmath be a natural number. Let
@xmath be the class of matroids of rank at least @xmath . For @xmath ,
the authors of [ AHCF11 ] define a map @xmath from @xmath to @xmath that
sends @xmath to @xmath where:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Keep in mind that @xmath and @xmath .

###### Proposition 3.3.1.

( [ AHCF11 ] Proposition 4.13) If @xmath is a matroid of rank at least
@xmath , then @xmath is a matroid.

###### Proof.

Since @xmath , axioms @xmath and @xmath hold. For axiom @xmath , suppose
@xmath and @xmath are independent in @xmath with @xmath maximal and
@xmath non maximal. There is a set @xmath of size @xmath such that, in
@xmath , the set @xmath is not only independent but, by maximality of
@xmath , also a base. Similarly, there is a set @xmath of size @xmath
such that @xmath .

We claim that @xmath is non-maximal in @xmath for any such @xmath .
Suppose @xmath is maximal for some @xmath as above. By assumption,
@xmath is contained in some larger set of @xmath . Hence there is a set
@xmath of size @xmath such that @xmath is independent in @xmath .
Clearly @xmath is finite. So Lemma 3.3.1 implies that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In particular, @xmath , a contradiction.

Hence we can pick @xmath such that @xmath is maximal and, as @xmath is
non-maximal in @xmath , apply axiom @xmath in @xmath to obtain a @xmath
such that @xmath . This means @xmath . And @xmath follows, as @xmath by
our choice of @xmath . To show axiom @xmath , let @xmath with @xmath be
given. By the final axiom for @xmath , there is a @xmath which is
maximal subject to @xmath . We may assume that @xmath has at most @xmath
elements; for otherwise there is a superset @xmath of @xmath such that
@xmath and it suffices to find a maximal set containing @xmath instead
of @xmath .

We claim that for any @xmath of size @xmath the set @xmath is not in
@xmath . For a contradiction, suppose it is. Then in @xmath , the set
@xmath is a base and @xmath is independent and as @xmath is finite,
Lemma 3.3.1 implies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This means @xmath , a contradiction. So by successively adding single
elements of @xmath to @xmath as long as the obtained set is still in
@xmath , we arrive at the wanted maximal element after at most @xmath
steps. ∎

We now prove the lemma that was used in the above proof.

###### Lemma 3.3.1.

( [ AHCF11 ] Lemma 4.14) Let @xmath be a matroid and @xmath , @xmath
with @xmath maximal and @xmath finite. Then, @xmath .

###### Proof.

The proof is by induction on @xmath . For @xmath we have @xmath and
hence @xmath by maximality of @xmath . Now suppose there is @xmath . If
@xmath then by induction

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and hence @xmath . Otherwise there exists a unique circuit @xmath of
@xmath in @xmath . Clearly @xmath cannot be contained in @xmath and
therefore has an element @xmath . Then @xmath is independent, so by
induction

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and hence @xmath . ∎

###### Proposition 3.3.2.

Consider the matroid @xmath where @xmath is the graph of @xmath parallel
ladders from Section 3.2. We claim that @xmath .

###### Proof.

First notice that @xmath and @xmath have the same finite independent
subsets and so they have the same finitarization. Let @xmath . Suppose
that @xmath is some base in @xmath that shows that @xmath . Deleting
@xmath elements from @xmath will give you a base @xmath of @xmath . It
is easy to see that @xmath extends to some basis @xmath of @xmath by
adding @xmath elements. ∎

A similar argument shows that @xmath .

###### Question 3.3.1.

Does there exist a matroid @xmath and natural numbers @xmath such that
@xmath and @xmath ?

###### Question 3.3.2.

Does there exist a matroid @xmath and natural numbers @xmath such that
@xmath and @xmath ?

### 3.4. Nearly Finitary Matroids

We now introduce a sufficient condition that forces a nearly finitary
matroid to be @xmath -nearly finitary.

###### Theorem 3.4.1.

Let @xmath and @xmath be a matroid and its finitarization respectively.
Define @xmath where @xmath if there exists a base @xmath in @xmath and a
base @xmath in @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath .

If @xmath is a nearly finitary matroid such that @xmath is a matroid,
then @xmath is @xmath -nearly finitary.

###### Proof.

Suppose @xmath is a matroid such that @xmath is a matroid and @xmath is
not @xmath -nearly finitary. Since @xmath is a matroid, it has a base.
Suppose there is a base @xmath in @xmath such that @xmath . Since @xmath
is not @xmath -nearly finitary, there exists @xmath such that @xmath .
By the basis exchange property of matroids, all bases of a matroid
either have the same finite cardinality or are all infinite in
cardinality. Since @xmath is independent, it is a subset of a base
@xmath with cardinality @xmath . That is impossible. Thus, bases in
@xmath must have infinite cardinality. Since @xmath has an independent
set of infinite size, @xmath is not nearly finitary. ∎

For an example of a class of matroids where this structure is a matroid,
suppose @xmath is a finitary matroid of infinite rank. Let @xmath . Then
@xmath is the matroid whose independent subsets are independent sets in
@xmath with rank at most @xmath .

Our @xmath is suggestive of a difference structure. Let @xmath and
@xmath be matroids on the same ground set with @xmath . We define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We then define @xmath . It is easy to see that @xmath .

###### Theorem 3.4.2.

If @xmath and @xmath are matroids on finite ground sets satisfying the
conditions for @xmath to be defined, @xmath . ¹ ¹ 1 We thank Nathan
Bowler and Ann-Kathrin Elm from the University of Hamburg for suggesting
this construction in private discussions.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be a base of @xmath . By assumption, @xmath is independent in
@xmath and is thus contained in some base @xmath of @xmath . So @xmath
is disjoint from @xmath . So @xmath is a maximal independent subset of
@xmath . The complement of @xmath with respect to @xmath is @xmath and
is a base of @xmath . Conversely, bases of @xmath are of the form @xmath
where @xmath and @xmath are bases of @xmath and @xmath respectively with
@xmath . We know it is possible to make @xmath and @xmath disjoint since
@xmath . Then @xmath is a base of @xmath that contains the base @xmath
of @xmath . We then have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We thus see that the bases of @xmath are precisely the bases of @xmath .
∎

We remark that the assumption that @xmath is a finite set is crucial.
For infinite matroids, there exists examples of nearly finitary matroids
@xmath and @xmath on a common ground set such that there are disjoint
bases @xmath and @xmath of @xmath and @xmath respectively with @xmath
non maximal in @xmath . This kind of phenomenon was first observed in [
AHCF11 ] .

We present an example different from the one in [ AHCF11 ] . Suppose
@xmath is the algebraic cycle matroid of the one way infinite ladder
graph @xmath and suppose @xmath . As before, our one way infinite ladder
starts from the left and extends infinitely far to the right. Then
@xmath and @xmath satisfy the condition that allows us to define @xmath
. Since the @xmath , @xmath has rank @xmath . All rank @xmath
independence systems are matroids since every non empty independent set
is maximal. We can show that every singleton edge set is independent in
@xmath . Consider the set @xmath of top edges and the set @xmath of
bottom edges of @xmath . Then @xmath is a base in @xmath but not a base
in @xmath . We get a base in @xmath by adding any middle edge. This
shows that singleton sets of middle edges are independent in @xmath .
Finally consider @xmath where @xmath is the left most middle edge.
@xmath is a base in @xmath . Removing any single edge from @xmath gives
us a base in @xmath . Thus, all singleton sets of top or bottom edges
are independent in @xmath . Thus, independent sets of @xmath consist of
the empty set and all singleton edge sets. Since @xmath , pick a base
@xmath of @xmath that is also a base of @xmath . With @xmath , we have
that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus, @xmath has only the empty set as its independent set. It is clear
that @xmath . Now consider @xmath from before. Define @xmath to be set
of all middle edges excluding the left-most middle edge. Then @xmath is
a base in @xmath disjoint from @xmath which is a base in @xmath .
However, @xmath is a proper subset of @xmath and @xmath . Thus, a
disjoint union of a base in @xmath and a base @xmath is not necessarily
a base in @xmath . @xmath being disjoint from @xmath means that @xmath
contains @xmath . So @xmath can have bases that are strictly smaller
than @xmath .

Another issue that arises is that @xmath is not always going to be a
matroid. An example of two matroids whose union is not a matroid is
shown in [ AHCF11 ] . By the Nearly Finitary Matroid Union theorem,
@xmath is a matroid when @xmath and @xmath are both nearly finitary. It
may still be the case that @xmath is always a matroid but we have no
proof of this as of now. This motivates the following theorem:

###### Theorem 3.4.3.

Suppose @xmath is a nearly finitary and nearly cofinitary matroid. Then
@xmath is a matroid.

###### Proof.

Since we already have that @xmath is nearly finitary, it remains to show
that @xmath is nearly finitary. Let @xmath be a base in @xmath . Then
@xmath is a base in @xmath and contains some base @xmath of @xmath .
Since @xmath is nearly finitary, @xmath is finite. Also @xmath is a base
of @xmath which contains @xmath . Note that @xmath . Since @xmath is
nearly cofinitary, @xmath can be extended to some base in the
finitarization of @xmath by adding finitely many elements. It follows
that we can extend a base @xmath of @xmath to a base in the
finitarization of @xmath by adding finitely many elements. Observe that
bases in the finitarization of @xmath are contained in bases of @xmath .
So we can extend @xmath to some base in @xmath by adding finitely many
elements. This shows that @xmath is nearly finitary. Now, we can apply
the Nearly Finitary Matroid Union theorem to conclude that @xmath is a
matroid. Since the dual of a matroid is a matroid, the claim is proven.
∎

We propose the following independence system. Let @xmath be a nearly
finitary matroid and define the following

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We then define @xmath to be the minimal elements of @xmath with respect
to set inclusion. From before, bases of @xmath are the maximal elements
of @xmath with respect to set inclusion. We speculate that @xmath is the
set of bases of some matroid @xmath and that @xmath . As of now, we do
not even have proof that @xmath is necessarily non-empty. However, we
can prove the following.

###### Theorem 3.4.4.

@xmath is non-empty if @xmath is a @xmath -nearly finitary matroid.

###### Proof.

Suppose that @xmath properly contains @xmath with @xmath and @xmath
being bases of @xmath and @xmath respectively and @xmath for each @xmath
. Then @xmath properly contains @xmath . @xmath where @xmath and @xmath
. Since @xmath is @xmath -nearly finitary, @xmath . We thus see that any
chain of containments of elements of @xmath must be finite. So @xmath is
non-empty.

In her master’s thesis [ Elm16 ] , Elm proved that every nearly finitary
matroid @xmath that is also cofinitary must be @xmath -nearly finitary
for some @xmath . From our previous theorem, this shows that every
cofinitary nearly finitary matroid @xmath has a non-empty @xmath . ∎

We have been considering matroids that we can construct so far. Let us
now consider a hypothetical counterexample that would solve problem
@xmath .

###### Theorem 3.4.5.

Fix a @xmath . Suppose that there exists some matroid @xmath that is
nearly finitary but not @xmath -nearly finitary for all @xmath . Then
@xmath is also nearly finitary but not @xmath -nearly finitary for all
@xmath .

###### Proof.

First, we show that @xmath is nearly finitary. Any base @xmath of @xmath
can be extended to a base @xmath of @xmath by adding @xmath elements
which can then be extended to a base of @xmath by adding another finite
set of elements. Since @xmath is not @xmath -nearly finitary there is
some base @xmath of @xmath containing some base @xmath of @xmath with
@xmath . @xmath contains a base @xmath in @xmath and @xmath . ∎

###### Theorem 3.4.6.

Let @xmath be a nearly finitary matroid that is not @xmath -nearly
finitary for any @xmath and let @xmath be a nearly finitary matroid with
@xmath disjoint from @xmath . Then @xmath is a nearly finitary matroid
that is not @xmath -nearly finitary for any @xmath .

###### Proof.

By the nearly finitary matroid union theorem in [ AHCF11 ] , the matroid
union @xmath is a nearly finitary matroid. Moreover, we show that it is
not @xmath -nearly finitary. For any @xmath pick a base @xmath of @xmath
and a base @xmath of @xmath such that @xmath contains @xmath and @xmath
. We can do this since @xmath is not @xmath -nearly finitary. Let @xmath
be any base of @xmath and let @xmath be a base of @xmath containing
@xmath . Then @xmath is a base of @xmath contained in @xmath . The
difference between these two sets must at least contain @xmath since
@xmath is disjoint from @xmath . Moreover, @xmath is a base in @xmath .
By Proposition 4.12 in [ AHCF11 ] , @xmath so @xmath is a base of @xmath
. So we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus, @xmath is not @xmath -nearly finitary as claimed earlier. ∎

We have thus showed that if there is even one counterexample to this
conjecture, there is quite a large family of counterexamples. One
natural question that arises is whether there is some refinement of our
assumption that @xmath is disjoint from @xmath such that we can generate
even more counterexamples.

Consider the finitary matroid @xmath with @xmath disjoint from @xmath .
Then @xmath is a nearly finitary matroid that is not @xmath -nearly
finitary. Moreover, @xmath has infinitely many coloops.

Note that if we completely drop the assumption that @xmath is disjoint
from @xmath , this statement is no longer true. Let @xmath be a nearly
finitary matroid that is not @xmath -nearly finitary and let @xmath . By
the nearly finitary matroid union theorem, @xmath is a nearly finitary
matroid. Since @xmath is not finitary, it has infinite rank and @xmath
must have infinite cardinality. Bases of @xmath have infinite
cardinality and are thus non-empty. Let @xmath be an element of some
base in @xmath . Then @xmath is independent in @xmath . @xmath is
independent in @xmath and @xmath is independent in @xmath . So @xmath .
Consequently, @xmath is exactly @xmath -nearly finitary but @xmath is
finitary.

We can further extend this family using deletion and contraction
operations defined earlier.

###### Theorem 3.4.7.

Suppose that @xmath is a nearly finitary matroid that is not @xmath
-nearly finitary for any natural number @xmath . Furthermore, suppose
that @xmath is a finite set. Then @xmath is a nearly finitary matroid
that is not @xmath -nearly finitary for any natural number @xmath .

###### Proof.

First, we show that @xmath . Suppose that @xmath . Then @xmath with
@xmath . Then all finite subsets of @xmath are independent in @xmath and
also independent in @xmath . So @xmath . So @xmath . Conversely, suppose
that @xmath . Then all finite subsets of @xmath are independent in
@xmath and thus independent in @xmath . So @xmath . Also, @xmath . So
@xmath and we conclude that @xmath .

Now @xmath is clearly nearly finitary since @xmath is. Since @xmath is
not @xmath -nearly finitary by assumption, suppose that @xmath , @xmath
such that @xmath and @xmath . Then @xmath can be extended to a base
@xmath of @xmath by adding at most @xmath elements. Similarly, @xmath
can be extended to a base @xmath of @xmath by adding at most @xmath
elements from @xmath . So we still have @xmath . It is clear that @xmath
. So @xmath is not @xmath -nearly finitary. ∎

We still can further extend this result using special contractions.

From before, we used the nearly finitary matroid union theorem of [
AHCF11 ] and a hypothetical existing example to construct examples of
matroids that are nearly finitary but not @xmath -nearly finitary. We
constructed such an example with infinitely many coloops. We can use
this example with coloops and contractions to get more examples.

###### Theorem 3.4.8.

Suppose @xmath is a nearly finitary matroid that is not @xmath -nearly
finitary for any natural number @xmath and has some coloops. Let @xmath
be a set of coloops of @xmath . Then the contraction @xmath is a nearly
finitary matroid that is not @xmath -nearly finitary for any natural
number @xmath .

###### Proof.

We first want to show that @xmath is nearly finitary. Since @xmath is a
set of coloops, @xmath . Also, @xmath . Bases of @xmath are of the form
@xmath where @xmath is a base in @xmath . All bases of @xmath contain
@xmath and thus all bases of @xmath also contain @xmath . Since @xmath
is nearly finitary, for all pairs @xmath such that @xmath , @xmath with
@xmath , @xmath . Since @xmath and @xmath both contain @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath is not @xmath -nearly finitary, there exists a base @xmath
of @xmath contained in a base @xmath of @xmath such that @xmath . Again,
@xmath and @xmath both contain @xmath . So

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So @xmath is not @xmath -nearly finitary. ∎

The @xmath map in [ AHCF11 ] was constructed to generate @xmath -nearly
finitary matroids from infinite rank finitary matroids. Earlier, we
defined what it means for a matroid @xmath to be exactly @xmath -nearly
finitary. Recall that @xmath is exactly @xmath -nearly finitary if it is
@xmath -nearly finitary but not @xmath -nearly finitary. Here, we
discuss a small refinement of what the authors of [ AHCF11 ] meant. It
is rather clear that if @xmath is a finitary matroid of infinite rank,
then @xmath is exactly @xmath -nearly finitary. Also, if @xmath is
exactly @xmath -nearly finitary and of infinite rank, then @xmath is
exactly @xmath -nearly finitary.

Suppose that @xmath is exactly @xmath -nearly finitary and @xmath is
exactly @xmath -nearly finitary with @xmath disjoint from @xmath . Then
the matroid union @xmath is exactly @xmath -nearly finitary. This @xmath
map motivates us to consider possible @xmath maps where @xmath is a
natural number. Let @xmath . Let @xmath be exactly @xmath -nearly
finitary and of infinite rank.

###### Question 3.4.1.

Does there exist a @xmath map s.t. @xmath and @xmath are both exactly
@xmath -nearly finitary for all @xmath ?

### 3.5. Unionable Matroids

The Nearly Finitary Matroid Union theorem in [ AHCF11 ] gives us a
matroid union theorem for a pair of nearly finitary matroids. This
motivates us to consider other pairs of matroids. We will show that the
union of a finite rank matroid and an arbitrary matroid is again a
matroid. We define a matroid @xmath to be if @xmath is a matroid for any
given matroid @xmath .

###### Theorem 3.5.1.

Finite rank matroids are unionable.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be a finite rank matroid and let @xmath be any matroid. From
[ AHCF11 ] , @xmath satisfies axioms @xmath through @xmath . For axiom
@xmath , we will use proof by contradiction. Let @xmath and suppose
@xmath is an independent set in @xmath . By definition, there exists
@xmath and @xmath such that @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath is a matroid, the set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

has some maximal element @xmath . Clearly, @xmath is independent in
@xmath and is an element of the set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Suppose there exists some independent set @xmath of @xmath such that
@xmath and @xmath . We know that @xmath for some @xmath and @xmath .
Then @xmath and we get @xmath . Since @xmath is a matroid, the
restriction @xmath is also a matroid. By construction, @xmath is a base
of @xmath . @xmath is contained in some base @xmath of @xmath . It is
clear that @xmath . By base exchange property, for all @xmath , there is
@xmath such that @xmath . Clearly, @xmath . Iterating this process
finitely many times will give us some base @xmath such that @xmath and
@xmath . This shows that @xmath is a proper subset of the base @xmath of
@xmath . Contradiction.

We thus can find a maximal element of @xmath by adding at most @xmath
elements to @xmath . ∎

## Chapter 4 Near Finitarization

### 4.1. Near Finitarization

Let @xmath and @xmath be a matroid and its finitarization respectively.
Define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We define @xmath . We call this the near finitarization of @xmath .

###### Theorem 4.1.1.

@xmath is a finitary matroid if and only if @xmath is nearly finitary.

###### Proof.

Suppose @xmath is a nearly finitary matroid. Pick @xmath . Then there
exists a base @xmath in @xmath with @xmath . Since @xmath is nearly
finitary, there exists a base @xmath in @xmath with @xmath and @xmath .
Then @xmath is a subset of @xmath in @xmath that removes finitely many
elements of @xmath . Thus, @xmath . So @xmath . By construction, @xmath
. Thus, @xmath . So @xmath is a finitary matroid. Conversely, suppose
@xmath is a matroid that is not nearly finitary. Then there exists a
base @xmath in @xmath and a base @xmath in @xmath such that @xmath and
@xmath . Then the set @xmath has no maximal element. This violates the
fourth matroid axiom so @xmath is not a matroid. ∎

###### Conjecture 4.1.1.

If @xmath is not @xmath -nearly finitary, then @xmath is not a matroid.

###### Theorem 4.1.2.

The above conjecture is equivalent to the conjecture that every nearly
finitary matroid is @xmath -nearly finitary.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be a matroid. Suppose every nearly finitary matroid is @xmath
-nearly finitary for some @xmath . If @xmath is not @xmath -nearly
finitary for all @xmath , then @xmath is not nearly finitary and so
@xmath is not a matroid by Theorem 4.1.1. Conversely, suppose that
@xmath is not a matroid whenever @xmath is a matroid that is not @xmath
-nearly finitary for all @xmath . Suppose @xmath is not @xmath -nearly
finitary for all @xmath . Then @xmath is not a matroid by assumption.
Applying Theorem 4.1.1 shows that @xmath is not nearly finitary. ∎

Conjecture 4.1.1 may give us a new way to study problem @xmath .

In [ BCP15 ] , the authors prove a longstanding conjecture by Andreae on
graphs. In [ Hal70 ] , Halin himself extended his theorem in the
following way. If, for all @xmath , a graph @xmath has a set of @xmath
vertex-disjoint double rays, then it has some set of infinitely many
vertex-disjoint double rays. Andreae extended Halin’s theorem for edge
disjoint rays and further conjectured that an analogous result would
hold for edge-disjoint double rays.

The motivation for studying problem @xmath comes from trying to
generalize Halin’s theorem. Here, we explore some other possible ways to
generalize Halin’s theorem.

Now double rays are infinite circuits of algebraic cycle matroids. Thus,
we further conjecture the following.

###### Conjecture 4.1.2.

If, for all @xmath , a matroid @xmath has some set of @xmath disjoint
infinite circuits, then @xmath has some set of infinitely many disjoint
infinite circuits.

The ground set of an algebraic cycle matroid of a graph @xmath is the
edge set of @xmath . So this conjecture extends the edge-disjoint double
ray result recently found.

We also present the following conjecture related to Conjecture 4.1.2.

###### Conjecture 4.1.3.

If, for all @xmath , a matroid @xmath has some set of @xmath disjoint
infinite circuits whose union is independent in @xmath , then it has
some set of infinitely many disjoint infinite circuits whose union is
independent in @xmath .

Now any union of vertex disjoint double rays of a graph @xmath is
independent in the finitarization of the algebraic cycle matroid of
@xmath . So this conjecture extends the vertex-disjoint double ray
result found in 1981 by Andreae.

### 4.2. Independence System Example

In the introduction, we showed that the notion of finitarization can
also be extended to independence systems that are not matroids. We also
defined what it means for an independence system to be nearly finitary
and @xmath -nearly finitary. We will now show by an explicit
construction that not every nearly finitary independence system is
@xmath -nearly finitary.

###### Theorem 4.2.1.

There exists a nearly finitary independence system that is not @xmath
-nearly finitary.

###### Proof.

Consider the set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Consider the following:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then @xmath gives us our desired independence system. It is clear that
the empty set is independent and that subsets of independent sets are
independent. It is nearly finitary since @xmath whenever @xmath is a
base of @xmath that contains @xmath and @xmath is a base of @xmath . In
fact, the only base of @xmath is @xmath . Every base of @xmath is
missing only finitely many elements from @xmath . However, there is no
finite bound on how many elements a base of @xmath can miss so @xmath is
not @xmath -nearly finitary for any @xmath . ∎

However, @xmath is not a matroid. To see why, consider @xmath and @xmath
. @xmath is a maximal independent set in @xmath and @xmath is not.
@xmath is not in @xmath and @xmath is not independent. Thus, axiom
@xmath is not satisfied. However, every finite subset of @xmath is
independent so it is clear that @xmath satisfies axiom @xmath . @xmath
also satisfies axiom @xmath . To see why, let @xmath be some subset of
@xmath . Let @xmath be an independent set of @xmath contained within
@xmath . Since @xmath is independent, there is some set @xmath such that
@xmath . If @xmath is independent in @xmath , then @xmath is the largest
subset of @xmath that is independent in @xmath . If @xmath is not
independent in @xmath , then @xmath is a subset of @xmath independent in
@xmath and containing @xmath . Since @xmath is finite, there must be
some maximal independent subset of @xmath which contains @xmath . So
@xmath seems to almost be a matroid.

Since all finite subsets of @xmath are independent in @xmath , @xmath .
The only base of @xmath is @xmath . A set @xmath is a base of @xmath if
and only if there is some @xmath with @xmath . Let @xmath be some base
in @xmath with @xmath . Since @xmath for all @xmath , @xmath . So @xmath
is a nearly finitary independence system. However, for all @xmath ,
there is some @xmath with @xmath . So we can get a base @xmath with
@xmath . So @xmath is not a @xmath -nearly finitary independence system
with our definitions. We have thus shown that not every nearly finitary
independence system is @xmath -nearly finitary. We remark that @xmath is
@xmath -nearly finitary under the definition of @xmath -nearly finitary
in [ AHCF11 ] . This alternate definition can be found on page 6 of our
introduction. So although our definitions of nearly finitary and @xmath
-nearly finitary agree with the definitions in [ AHCF11 ] for matroids,
they do not agree for more general independence systems. We use our
definitions of nearly finitary and @xmath -nearly finitary over the ones
in [ AHCF11 ] because this choice makes our example independence system
@xmath interesting.

The previous example already shows that our definition of @xmath -nearly
finitary is different from the definition in [ AHCF11 ] . Our next
example will show that our definition of nearly finitary is different
from the one in [ AHCF11 ] . Consider the following set:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Consider the following:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then @xmath is an independence system. Every finite subset of @xmath is
independent in @xmath so @xmath . @xmath satisfies the definition of
@xmath -nearly finitary in [ AHCF11 ] since the only base @xmath of
@xmath contains a base @xmath in @xmath such that @xmath . So @xmath is
nearly finitary in the sense of [ AHCF11 ] . However, @xmath is a base
in @xmath with @xmath . Since @xmath does not have finite cardinality,
@xmath is not nearly finitary in our sense.

Finally, this does not contradict the matroid equivalence of our
definitions of nearly finitary and @xmath -nearly finitary with the
definitions in [ AHCF11 ] . To see why @xmath is not a matroid consider
the independent set @xmath and the base @xmath . No element of @xmath
can be added to @xmath to get a new independent set in @xmath . So
@xmath does not satisfy axiom @xmath and is not a matroid.

## Chapter 5 @xmath-Matroids and Related Constructions

### 5.1. @xmath-Matroids

Bowler and Carmesin studied @xmath -matroids in [ BC13 ] . Every graph
@xmath has an End compactification @xmath obtained by adding
compactification points for each end of a graph. We will define @xmath
later. We define a graph @xmath to be locally finite if each vertex in
@xmath has finitely many adjacent edges. When @xmath is an infinite,
locally finite, and connected graph, @xmath can be given a compact
topology. So this End compactification can often give us
compactifications in the topological sense. Let @xmath be the set of
ends of a graph. Let @xmath be a subset of @xmath . Then you can
partially compactify @xmath by adding compactification points associated
to each end in @xmath . This new structure will be denoted by @xmath .

We review the End compactification of a graph as shown in [ BC13 ] . Let
@xmath be a graph and let @xmath be its set of ends. Let @xmath be the
disjoint union binary operation on sets. Let @xmath be the distance
function on @xmath . Here, @xmath is the ground set of the simplicial
1-complex formed from the vertices and edges of @xmath . We define a
topology @xmath on the set @xmath by taking basic open neighbourhoods as
follows:

-   1: For @xmath , the basic open neighborhoods of @xmath are @xmath
    -balls @xmath for @xmath .

-   2: For @xmath we say @xmath is an interior point of @xmath , and
    take the basic open neighborhoods to be @xmath -balls about @xmath
    with @xmath .

-   3: For @xmath , the basic open neighborhoods of @xmath will be
    parametrized by the finite subsets @xmath of @xmath . Given such a
    subset, we let @xmath be the unique component of @xmath that
    contains a ray from @xmath , and let @xmath be the set of all
    vertices and inner points of edges contained in or incident with
    @xmath , and of all ends represented by a ray in @xmath . We take
    basic open neighborhoods of @xmath to be the sets @xmath .

The topological space obtained in this way is @xmath mentioned earlier.

For any set @xmath of ends in @xmath , we set @xmath and @xmath .

Bowler and Carmesin show that the topological space @xmath derived from
the graph @xmath almost fits the notion of a graph-like space that
appears in [ CT08 ] in the following sense.

###### Definition 5.1.1.

( [ BC13 ] Definition 3.2) An almost graph-like space @xmath is a
topological space (also denoted @xmath ) together with a vertex set
@xmath , an edge set @xmath and for each @xmath a continuous map @xmath
such that:

-    1: The underlying set of @xmath is @xmath .

-    2: For any @xmath we have @xmath .

-    3: @xmath and @xmath are vertices (called the endvertices of @xmath
    ).

-    4: @xmath is an open map.

They then give @xmath the structure of an almost graph-like space, with
edge set @xmath and vertex set @xmath . By definition, such an almost
graph-like space is a if in addition for any @xmath with @xmath , there
are disjoint open subsets @xmath , @xmath of @xmath partitioning @xmath
and with @xmath and @xmath . This ensures that @xmath , considered as a
subspace of @xmath , is totally disconnected, and that @xmath is
Hausdorff. Bowler and Carmesin go on to define an equivalence relation
@xmath such that @xmath defines a graph like space. Denote @xmath as
@xmath . They then consider topological circles of @xmath as circuits of
a @xmath -system @xmath where independent sets of @xmath are subsets of
@xmath that do not contain any of these topological circles from @xmath
. Then they consider the question about when this @xmath is a matroid.
When @xmath is a matroid, we say that it is a @xmath -matroid. Bowler
and Carmesin prove that if @xmath is a locally finite graph, and @xmath
a Borel set of ends of @xmath , then @xmath is a matroid. Recall that a
Borel set of a topological space is any set that can be formed from open
sets through the operations of countable union, countable intersection,
and relative complement.

###### Definition 5.1.2.

@xmath if for every two disjoint open subsets @xmath , @xmath of @xmath
partitioning @xmath , either @xmath or @xmath . In other words, the two
vertices are always in the same part of this kind of bipartition of
@xmath .

Under this definition, two distinct vertices of a finite graph @xmath
are not equivalent. Consider the topological space @xmath and let @xmath
and @xmath be two distinct vertices of @xmath . Then the sets @xmath and
@xmath form a bipartition of @xmath and are two disjoint open subsets of
@xmath separating @xmath and @xmath .

To see an example of a graph-like space @xmath and a pair @xmath of
distinct vertices such that @xmath , consider the Bean graph as shown on
page 1.4 of this thesis. For the reader’s convenience, we also include a
picture of the Bean graph in Figure 5.1. See [ BD11 ] to learn more
about the Bean graph.

Here, the vertex @xmath ’dominates’ the end @xmath on the right. The
following definition is from [ BC13 ] .

###### Definition 5.1.3.

We say a vertex @xmath dominates a ray @xmath if there are infinitely
many paths from @xmath to @xmath . We say a vertex @xmath dominates an
end @xmath if it dominates some ray (or equivalently, all rays)
belonging to @xmath .

Bowler and Carmesin have shown that if @xmath dominates some end @xmath
, then @xmath and @xmath are equivalent as vertices of @xmath . To see
why this is true, suppose that we bipartition the vertices of @xmath
with two disjoint open sets. Any open set that contains @xmath contains
all but finitely many of the infinitely many paths from @xmath to a ray
@xmath of @xmath . Thus, an open set containing @xmath must also contain
@xmath . Following Definition 5.1.2, @xmath and @xmath must be
equivalent.

###### Lemma 5.1.1.

Let @xmath and @xmath be matroids on a common ground set. If @xmath ,
then every base @xmath of @xmath extends to a base @xmath of @xmath .
Moreover, every base @xmath of @xmath contains a base @xmath of @xmath .

###### Proof.

Suppose that @xmath is a base in @xmath . Then it is independent in
@xmath and so it extends to some base in @xmath . Conversely, suppose
that @xmath is a base in @xmath . Observe that @xmath . Now @xmath is a
base of @xmath . Since it is independent in @xmath , it extends to some
base @xmath in @xmath . Since @xmath , @xmath contains the complement of
@xmath which is a base in @xmath . ∎

###### Lemma 5.1.2.

( [ AHCF12 ] Proposition 1.4) The algebraic cycle matroid @xmath is
nearly finitary if and only if @xmath has a finite number of vertex
disjoint rays.

###### Theorem 5.1.3.

Suppose @xmath is a @xmath -matroid on a graph @xmath with finitely many
vertex disjoint rays. Then @xmath is @xmath -nearly finitary.

###### Proof.

Consider the algebraic cycle matroid @xmath . Suppose you have an
independent set @xmath in @xmath . Then @xmath contains no finite cycle
of @xmath since it contains no algebraic cycle. It also contains no
double ray. An infinite circuit @xmath of @xmath is a non-empty set of
double rays between elements of @xmath such that @xmath is homeomorphic
to the unit circle. For example, you can connect an end to itself with a
double ray. So @xmath cannot contain an infinite circuit of @xmath .
Thus, @xmath has no circuit of @xmath and must be independent in @xmath
. So @xmath . @xmath and @xmath are the finite cycle matroids of @xmath
so they are the same. Suppose you have a base @xmath in @xmath . By our
Lemma 5.1.1, it contains some base @xmath in @xmath . Since @xmath is
@xmath -nearly finitary, you can add a set @xmath of @xmath or less
elements to @xmath to get a base in @xmath . Adding an appropriate
subset of @xmath to @xmath will give that same base. So @xmath is @xmath
-nearly finitary. ∎

### 5.2. @xmath-Matroids

Let us now consider a new but related construction. Recall that a @xmath
-system of a graph @xmath picks a subset @xmath of @xmath and constructs
a corresponding graph-like space. We want to consider other possible
graph-like spaces associated with @xmath .

Let @xmath be a fixed infinite, locally finite, and connected graph.
Recall that @xmath is a compactification of @xmath which adds ends to
@xmath . Here, we define a different class of compactifications of
@xmath using quotients of @xmath . This will allow us to construct
independence systems that are different from the @xmath -systems from
above. Let @xmath be a partition of @xmath . Consider the partition
@xmath of @xmath defined as follows. @xmath is the partition of
singletons on @xmath . Then @xmath induces an equivalence relation
@xmath on @xmath . We consider the quotient space @xmath . From this
@xmath , we can construct graph-like spaces. Then from these graph-like
spaces, we can construct independence systems similar to @xmath -systems
by picking a subset of @xmath .

It is easy to see that @xmath is compact. By Theorem 1.1 in [ Die11 ] ,
@xmath is compact and so is any quotient space of @xmath . We thus have
a class of compactifications that interpolates between one point
compactification and Freudenthal compactification.

For arbitrary graphs @xmath , we can still add points in this way.
Without our assumptions of local finiteness and connectedness, it is no
longer clear that @xmath is compact.

From an arbitrary graph @xmath , we have constructed spaces @xmath . Let
us name this the class of nearly- @xmath graphs. When @xmath agrees with
@xmath on @xmath and no end @xmath is identified with a point in the
topological subspace @xmath , we say it is a @xmath -graph. We can
follow the same construction as above and define an almost graph-like
space with edge set @xmath and vertex set @xmath .

Let @xmath be a subset of @xmath formed by the union of some subset of
elements of @xmath . We let @xmath be the partition of @xmath given by
the restriction of @xmath to @xmath . Set @xmath . Then @xmath is also
an almost graph-like space. We can get a graph-like space by taking
@xmath .

The spaces we have constructed are special cases of the one that appear
in [ CT08 ] . In [ BCC13 ] , Bowler et al. study matroids arising from
graph-like spaces. We thus see our constructions as intermediate classes
of spaces in the following sense:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So our classes seem to be a middle ground in terms of difficulty of
study. For these graphs we constructed, we can consider topological
circles of nearly- @xmath graphs and ask when these circles give the
circuits of a matroid. Regardless of whether they give a matroid, these
topological circles will always give us circuits of some independence
system. If the topological circles of a nearly- @xmath -graph forms a
matroid, we say that we have a @xmath . We use similar terminology for
@xmath -graphs and @xmath -matroids. We can extend our earlier theorem
to these new constructions.

###### Theorem 5.2.1.

Suppose @xmath is a nearly- @xmath -matroid on a graph @xmath with
finitely many disjoint rays. Then @xmath is @xmath -nearly finitary.

###### Proof.

It is just like the proof for @xmath matroids. Consider the algebraic
cycle matroid @xmath . Suppose you have an independent set @xmath in
@xmath . Then @xmath contains no finite cycle of @xmath since it
contains no algebraic cycle. It also contains no double ray. An infinite
circuit @xmath of @xmath is a non-empty set of double rays between
elements of @xmath such that @xmath is homeomorphic to the unit circle.
So @xmath cannot contain an infinite circuit of @xmath . Thus, @xmath
has no circuit of @xmath and must be independent in @xmath . So @xmath .
@xmath and @xmath are the finite cycle matroids of @xmath so they are
the same. Suppose you have a base @xmath in @xmath . By our Lemma 5.1.1,
it contains some base @xmath in @xmath . Since @xmath is @xmath -nearly
finitary, you can add a set @xmath of @xmath or less elements to @xmath
to get a base in @xmath . Adding an appropriate subset of @xmath to
@xmath will give that same base. So @xmath is @xmath -nearly finitary. ∎

Our results are small steps towards a larger question.

Question: When are nearly @xmath matroids nearly finitary and when are
they @xmath -nearly finitary.

Another interesting direction to pursue is to ask when our nearly @xmath
constructions give matroids. In the comment section of [ Bow ] , Bowler
asks the question of when a @xmath -independence system for a graph
@xmath gives a matroid in the case where @xmath is a bipartition of
@xmath . It does not seem to be clear that a bipartition of two Borel
sets will give a matroid.

### 5.3. Matroids and Axiom Systems

Bowler and Carmesin also introduce a different way to construct matroids
in the following sense:

Here, we allow trees to be infinite.

###### Definition 5.3.1.

( [ BC13 ] Definition 5.1) A tree @xmath of matroids consists of a tree
@xmath , together with a function @xmath assigning to each node @xmath
of @xmath a matroid @xmath on a ground set @xmath , such that for any
two nodes @xmath and @xmath of @xmath , if @xmath is nonempty then
@xmath is an edge of @xmath . For any edge @xmath of @xmath , we set
@xmath . We also define the ground set of @xmath to be @xmath . We shall
refer to the edges which appear in some @xmath but not in @xmath as
dummy edges of @xmath : thus the set of such dummy edges is @xmath .

###### Definition 5.3.2.

A tree @xmath of matroids is of overlap @xmath if, for every edge @xmath
of @xmath , @xmath . In this case, we denote the unique element of
@xmath by @xmath .

Given a tree of matroids of overlap @xmath as above and a set @xmath of
ends of @xmath , Bowler and Carmesin go on to define @xmath
-pre-circuits and @xmath -circuits of @xmath . A @xmath -pre-circuit of
@xmath consists of a subtree @xmath of @xmath together with a function
@xmath assigning to each vertex @xmath of @xmath a circuit of @xmath ,
such that all ends of @xmath are in @xmath and for any vertex @xmath of
@xmath and any vertex @xmath adjacent to @xmath in @xmath , @xmath if
and only if @xmath . The set of @xmath -pre-circuits is denoted @xmath .
Any @xmath -pre-circuit @xmath has an underlying set @xmath . Nonempty
subsets of @xmath arising in this way are called @xmath -circuits of
@xmath . The set of @xmath -circuits of @xmath is denoted @xmath . Such
@xmath -circuits are often circuits of a matroid in the following sense.

In Corollary 6.6 of [ BC13 ] , the authors show that the Axiom of
Determinacy is equivalent to the statement that every set @xmath of ends
of every tree of finite matroids of overlap @xmath induces a matroid.
Regardless of axiom system used, a set @xmath of ends of a tree of
finite matroids of overlap @xmath induces an independence system with
its @xmath -circuits. Let us name these independence systems @xmath
-finite tree systems. It may be tempting to think that the Axiom of
Determinacy strictly gives us more matroids because of their result.
However, it seems that we also lose some matroids when we assume the
Axiom of Determinacy. We will use the classical finitary matroids we
introduced earlier on page 8 in the introduction to show precisely what
we mean.

###### Theorem 5.3.1.

It is impossible to pick an axiom system such that all @xmath -finite
tree systems are matroids and all classical finitary matroids are
matroids.

###### Proof.

Suppose all @xmath -finite tree systems are matroids. Then the result in
[ BC13 ] shows that we are assuming the Axiom of Determinacy. Thus, the
Axiom of Choice is false. By the result of [ Bla84 ] , the Axiom of
Choice is equivalent to the statement that every vector space has a
basis. So we can deduce that there exists some vector space @xmath with
no basis. Consider @xmath where @xmath is the set of vectors of @xmath
and @xmath is the set of linearly independent subsets of @xmath . It is
quite clear that @xmath satisfies the axioms of a classical finitary
matroid that we introduced earlier. The empty set is linearly
independent. Subsets of linearly independent sets are linearly
independent. If @xmath and @xmath are linearly independent subsets of
@xmath with @xmath , then there is some @xmath such that @xmath is
linearly independent. A subset @xmath of @xmath is linearly independent
if and only if all finite subsets of @xmath are independent.

Now we show that @xmath violates our fourth independence axiom for
matroids. Note that @xmath and consider the set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath is the set of linearly independent subsets of @xmath . @xmath has
no maximal element since @xmath has no basis. ∎

It thus seems that the classes of matroids we have depend on the axiom
system we are using. Our argument also shows that the statement ”Every
classical finitary matroid is a matroid in our sense” is equivalent to
the Axiom of Choice.

Bowler and Carmesin’s @xmath -finite tree systems motivate us to
generalize their constructions using the same idea in our nearly- @xmath
constructions. They consider a subset @xmath of the ends of a tree
@xmath . It seems natural to consider partitions of @xmath .

## Chapter 6 Thin Sum Matroids

### 6.1. Nearly-Thin Families

In the introduction, we defined what it means for a family of functions
to be nearly thin. Recall that an indexed family of functions @xmath
from @xmath to @xmath is called @xmath -nearly thin if there are at most
@xmath elements @xmath such that there are infinitely many @xmath with
@xmath nonzero. Following [ BC14 ] , we define a matroid @xmath to be if
the intersection of any circuit of @xmath with any cocircuit of @xmath
is finite. We define a matroid to be if it is not tame. In [ AB15 ] ,
the authors show that the class of tame thin sums matroids over a field
@xmath is closed under duality in their Theorem 1.4. We will now list
some conjectures.

###### Conjecture 6.1.1.

If @xmath is a thin sums matroid and @xmath is the minimal number such
that @xmath is thinly representable by an @xmath -nearly thin family
then @xmath is an @xmath -nearly finitary matroid with @xmath being
minimal.

###### Conjecture 6.1.2.

If @xmath is a thin sums matroid that is not thinly representable by any
nearly thin family, then @xmath is not nearly finitary.

###### Conjecture 6.1.3.

If @xmath is an @xmath -nearly finitary tame thin sums matroid, then its
dual tame thin sums matroid is thinly representable by an @xmath -nearly
thin family.

Since every nearly thin family is @xmath -nearly thin for some @xmath ,
proving these conjectures could lead to a proof that nearly finitary
tame thin sums matroids are @xmath -nearly finitary for some @xmath .

We now introduce an example of a thin sums matroid over a @xmath -nearly
thin family whose dual is @xmath -nearly finitary. Let @xmath be any
field and let @xmath be a singleton set. Consider the family of
functions @xmath defined by the rule @xmath for all @xmath . Let @xmath
where @xmath consists of thinly independent subsets of @xmath . Then
@xmath is a matroid whose independent sets are sets of cardinality at
most @xmath . Independent sets in @xmath consists of subsets of @xmath
whose complement has cardinality at least @xmath . Every finite subset
of @xmath is independent in @xmath . So the finitarization of @xmath is
@xmath . @xmath is @xmath -nearly finitary and @xmath is a thin sums
matroid over a @xmath -nearly thin family. This example is consistent
with conjectures @xmath and @xmath . Possible future directions include
finding more substantial evidence for these conjectures.

### 6.2. Topological Matroids

Thin sums representability is an interesting generalization of
representability in matroids. Here, we introduce a new notion of
representability for matroids. Let @xmath be a countable set, @xmath be
a topological vector space over a field @xmath , and let @xmath . We
define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

When we say an infinite countable sum converges in a topology, we mean
that one of its sequences of partial sums converges absolutely.

We also define a function @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For @xmath , we define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We then define @xmath to be the restriction of @xmath to @xmath .

By construction, the above sum converges on the domain of @xmath . We
define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This gives us an independence system @xmath . We will refer to systems
constructed this way as . Whenever we have a topological independence
system that is also a matroid, we say that it is a . Let @xmath for some
set @xmath and consider the following topology on @xmath . We put the
discrete topology on @xmath and then we give @xmath the topology of
pointwise convergence. In this case, our construction becomes a thin
sums system as defined on page 15 of this thesis.

Without lost of generality, we can assume that @xmath . This motivates
us to consider the following:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We want to characterize maximal independent sets. In particular, we
guess that @xmath . Unfortunately, this will not always be the case. To
see why, consider the Bean graph @xmath as introduced on page 1.4 of the
introduction to this thesis. For the reader’s convenience, we include a
picture of the Bean graph in Figure 6.1.

Let @xmath be the set of vertices of this Bean graph. Let @xmath and
consider @xmath as a vector space. Follow the construction of @xmath on
page 14-15 of our introduction to define @xmath . From this @xmath
applied to our above construction with the discrete topology on @xmath
and the topology of pointwise convergece on @xmath , we get a
topological independence system that is also a thin sums system. By the
proof on pages 14-15 of our introduction, this is also the algebraic
cycle system of the Bean graph. Because the labelled vertex @xmath has
infinitely many adjacent edges, @xmath is the set of elements @xmath of
@xmath where @xmath has finite support on the set of edges adjacent to
@xmath . Consider the set @xmath of all top edges and all edges adjacent
to vertex @xmath labelled in the graph. This @xmath is a maximal
independent set since it is an algebraic spanning tree. However, @xmath
is not an element of @xmath since @xmath @xmath cannot contain any
element of @xmath whose support has infinitely many lower vertices.
Using an appropriate subset of the lower edges, it is possible to have
an element in @xmath whose support has infinitely many lower vertices.
Thus, @xmath cannot be all of @xmath .

The following theorem gives us a condition for when an indepedent subset
of @xmath is a base.

###### Theorem 6.2.1.

Let @xmath be a topological independence system. An independent set
@xmath of @xmath is maximal if and only if for all @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Suppose @xmath is independent and there is some @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This implicitly assumes that @xmath . Lets assume that @xmath is
dependent. Then any nontrivial dependence @xmath of @xmath must have
@xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Notice, @xmath can be written as an element of @xmath since the
coefficient of @xmath is @xmath . We conclude that @xmath . Thus, this
contradiction shows that @xmath must be an independent set as well. So
@xmath is not maximal.

Conversely, suppose that @xmath is independent and @xmath for all @xmath
. If @xmath , @xmath is obviously maximal. Otherwise, assume there is
some @xmath . Then there is some @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We define a function @xmath as follows. We set @xmath for all @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath for all @xmath . This @xmath is a nontrivial
dependence for @xmath . Thus, adding any new element to @xmath will give
us a dependent set. So @xmath is maximal. ∎
