Novel compact accelerating structures are highly favorable compared to
conventional devices for studies where high-energy bunches in small but
applicable charges are required. Increasing the operation frequency and
shrinking the accelerating devices is a suitable path for improving the
accelerators’ performance. For this purpose, energy transfer to
electrons can be realized in shorter distances, which in turn means
introducing higher accelerating gradients. Moreover, higher accelerating
gradients enable beams with higher quality due to lower emittance
growth. However, increasing the operation frequency from RF to optical
regimes introduces serious challenges in synchronization, stability and
acceleration of considerable charge amount. Consequently, THz
acceleration will likely serve as the optimal operation regime for
compact accelerators.

Despite the already-realized high power radiation sources enabling
ultrahigh electric fields, increasing the acceleration gradients above
the state-of-the-art values is hampered by the damage threshold of
materials. Recent studies on damage mechanisms in accelerators have
revealed the strong dependence of operation threshold on the time
duration over which fields are influencing the device. Therefore, fast
accelerating principles based on short excitations need to be developed
for further increasing the accelerating gradient. The main goal in this
habilitation thesis is conceptual developments and proof-of-principle
studies for THz acceleration using short pulses. The concepts developed
here pave the way towards the realisation of cheap and compact particle
accelerators with control of particles over ultrashort time scales.

The concepts in this thesis comprise three groups focusing on: (1) fast
electron sources, (2) THz injectors, and (3) THz linacs. First, the
feasibility of ultrafast, high-yield electron emitters based on
nanostructured cathodes is demonstrated. Benefitting from field
enhancement effects, namely tip-enhancement and plasmonic enhancement,
laser-induced field emission is realized over large, dense and highly
uniform field emitter arrays. The theoretical principles of these field
emitter arrays are studied and their suitability for pico-Coulomb charge
production over femtosecond time-scales is confirmed. In the framework
of THz injectors, two ground-breaking concepts including ultrafast
single-cycle THz guns and segmented THz electron accelerator and
manipulator (STEAM) devices are developed and tested. The possibility of
using transient fields to realize ultrahigh acceleration gradients close
to 0.5 GeV/m is confirmed. Specifically, a STEAM device capable of
performing multiple high-field operations on the 6D-phase-space of
ultrashort electron bunches is demonstrated. With this single device,
powered by few-micro-Joule, single-cycle, 0.3 THz pulses, we
demonstrated record THz-acceleration of @xmath keV, streaking with
@xmath fs resolution, focusing with @xmath kT/m strength, compression to
@xmath fs as well as real-time switching between these modes of
operation. Travelling wave THz linacs based on dielectric-loaded
metallic waveguides operating under few-cycle excitations are proposed.
Based on this concept, keV-level energy gain through a linear
accelerator using optically-generated THz pulses is demonstrated.
Moreover, the possibility of electron acceleration to tens of MeV with
millijoule level THz pulses is theoretically shown.

The final goal of the above studies is a fully THz-driven compact light
source facility, whose start-to-end simulation is fulfilled in this
thesis. The required THz pulses to excite the light source are
categorized under single-cycle and multi-cycle pulses that are generated
using laser-driven THz generation concepts. The single-cycle THz pulses
feed an ultrafast electron gun, whose output is delivered to a THz linac
fed by multi-cycle pulses. It is shown that 18 MeV beam energy can be
produced using two single-cycle THz beams with 400 µJ and one 0.5 ns
300 GHz beam with 20 mJ energy. This beam is then transported to an
Inverse Compton Scattering (ICS) section, where the 18 MeV electron beam
scatters off a 100 mJ 1 µm laser beam and generates an X-ray beam with
4 keV central photon energy and 6 @xmath 10 @xmath photons per shot.

\ihead

ZUSAMMENFASSUNG
