In systems biology, it is common to measure biochemical entities at
different levels of the same biological system. One of the central
problems for the data fusion of such data sets is the heterogeneity of
the data. This thesis discusses two types of heterogeneity. The first
one is the type of data, such as metabolomics, proteomics and RNAseq
data in genomics. These different omics data reflect the properties of
the studied biological system from different perspectives. The second
one is the type of scale, which indicates the measurements obtained at
different scales, such as binary, ordinal, interval and ratio-scaled
variables. In this thesis, we developed several statistical methods
capable to fuse data sets of these two types of heterogeneity. The
advantages of the proposed methods in comparison with other approaches
are assessed using comprehensive simulations as well as the analysis of
real biological data sets.

Fusing heterogeneous data sets
Yipeng Song

Fusing heterogeneous data sets
Yipeng Song
PhD thesis
ISBN: 978-94-6375-531-3

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced in
any form without written permission from the copyright owner.

Copyright © Yipeng Song, 2019

Fusing heterogeneous data sets

Academisch Proefschrift

ter verkrijging van de graad van doctor

aan de Universiteit van Amsterdam

op gezag van de Rector Magnificus

prof. dr. ir. K.I.J. Maex

ten overstaan van een door het College voor Promoties ingestelde

commissie, in het openbaar te verdedigen in de Aula der Universiteit

op vrijdag 27 september 2019 om 11.00 uur

door

Yipeng Song

geboren te Henan

Promotiecommisie
Promotor: Prof. dr. A. K. Smilde Universiteit van Amsterdam Co-promotor:
Dr. J. A. Westerhuis Universiteit van Amsterdam Overige leden: Prof. dr.
A.H.C. van Kampen Universiteit van Amsterdam Prof. dr. A.H. Zwinderman
Universiteit van Amsterdam Prof. dr. P.M.A. Sloot Universiteit van
Amsterdam Prof. dr. M.E. Timmerman Rijksuniversiteit Groningen Prof. dr.
ir. M.J.T. Reinders Technische Universiteit Delft Prof. dr. T. Naes
Nofima

Faculteit der Natuurwetenschappen, Wiskunde en Informatica

The research reported in this thesis was carried out at the Swammerdam
Institute for Life Sciences, Faculty of Science, University of
Amsterdam. Yipeng Song gratefully acknowledges the financial support
from China Scholarship Council (NO.201504910809).

To my mother Jin e
