## 1 Introduction

Einstein equations have been discovered for over a century now and found
many important applications [ 3 ] in experimental and theoretical
physics. Despite the long period they are being studied by the
scientific community, there are just a few exact solutions [ 3 , 4 ]
known so far and one class of them is called black hole (BH) metrics.
These solutions were one of the main discoveries of general relativity,
first of all, due to their astrophysical importance. Black holes are
assumed to be a final step in star evolution [ 5 , 6 , 7 ] , are
believed to make an important contribution in galaxy formation processes
[ 8 , 9 , 10 ] and are “blamed” to be responsible for a great amount of
high energy radiation [ 11 , 12 ] that we detect in the universe.
Although black holes have not been observed directly, their indirect
observations are overwhelming [ 13 , 14 , 15 ] and from general
considerations it is believed that they should be rotating objects with
almost no electric charge. The space-time of such a black hole is best
approximated by the Kerr metric [ 16 ] , which is a four-dimensional
stationary, asymptoticly flat vacuum solution of Einstein’s equations.
There exists higher dimensional generalization of Kerr space-time which
is called Myers-Perry black hole [ 81 ] . Just like Kerr black hole, it
is also a stationary, asymptoticly flat vacuum solution of Einstein’s
equations which describes a spinning black hole in an arbitrary
dimension.

An important special case of Kerr black hole is the so called extremal
Kerr solution which has the smallest possible mass for a given angular
momentum or charge. Some astrophysical black holes have been claimed to
be very close to the extremity bound, e.g. Cygnus X-1 [ 17 ] or
MCG-6-30-15 [ 18 ] , although other independent data analyses led to
opposite results [ 20 ] . If in the future, the measurements of high
angular momentum will be confirmed, extremal black holes will start to
represent real astrophysical interest.

Black hole geometries are also important objects in mathematical
physics. Many of them represent a background for integrable systems.
Some of these integrable systems have been unknown prior to their
discovery in black hole geometries. Particularly interesting is the
integrability of Hamilton-Jacobi equation as it describes the geodesics
of particles. Geodesics in the near horizon limit of Kerr black hole are
associated with black hole accretions which might be a source of Very
High Energy (VHE) gamma-ray bursts (for a review [ 21 ] ). Accretions
around black holes can also be the key to the first direct observation
of a black hole [ 63 ] (e.g. with the Event Horizon Telescope).

As it is known, the Killing vectors of a geometry are associated with
integrals of motion of a geodesic in that metric. In the case of the
near horizon metric of an extremal rotating black hole, the killing
vectors obey the structural relation of @xmath (2, 1) algebra. It has
been demonstrated (e.g. [ 66 , 74 , 45 , 43 ] ) that the Casimir element
of this @xmath (2, 1) algebra gives rise to a reduced Hamiltonian system
called spherical or angular mechanics, which contains all the specific
information about the near horizon geometry. By reformulating this
discussion one can say that a massive particle moving in the near
horizon geometry of an extremal rotating black hole possesses dynamical
conformal symmetry, i.e. defines “conformal mechanics” [ 41 , 51 , 52 ,
36 , 80 , 43 , 44 , 45 , 46 , 47 , 48 , 49 , 50 ] , whose Casimir
element can be viewed as a reduced Hamiltonian, which contains all the
necessary information about the whole system.

On the other hand this reduced Hamiltonian or the spherical mechanics
can be thought of as a separate system. Spherical mechanics associated
with near horizon extremal black hole geometries are relatively
unexplored. Latest works in this direction include [ 46 ] , where the
Hamiltonian of the spherical mechanics associated with Near Horizon
Extreme Myers-Perry (NHEMP) geometry has been constructed for the
special case when all rotation parameters of the black hole are equal.
In [ 51 , 52 ] the integrability of this system has been proven and the
integrals of motion were presented. Extremal Myers-Perry black holes
with nonequal nonvanishing rotation parameters in odd dimensions have
been studied in [ 36 ] where the integrability of such systems was
proven and separation of variables was carried out.

As we will see, the near horizon geometry of Myers-Perry black holes
contains integrable and superintegrable systems like Rosochatius and
Pöschl-Teller systems. Studies of these kind of systems is important as
they appear in many topics of theoretical physics. Another approach that
we have adopted here for investigating such systems is their
geometrization procedure. Geometrical counterparts of classical systems
have been studied extensively. They provide a new viewpoint to existing
and well-known classical systems and spread some light on their
underlying structure. An important approach for geometrization of
classical problems is the Jacobi metric approach [ 92 , 93 , 94 ] . This
is a procedure for producing a geodesic from a given Hamiltonian, which
has many important applications. In particular, Onge studied the
curvature of the the Jacobi metric for the Newtonian @xmath -body
problem [ 95 ] , which in @xmath case, reduces to the Kepler’s problem
of the relative motion.

We will propose a geometrization procedure for quantum systems. We are
mostly interested in problems which are superintegrable in higher
dimensions. Particularly interesting are the Higgs oscillator [ 102 ,
103 ] , which is a particle on a @xmath -sphere with a specific
potential and the superintegrable Rosochatius system - a direct
generalization of the Higgs oscillator. We will encounter the classical
superintegrable Rosochatius system in Section 3.4 as the angular
mechanics of near horizon limit of fully isotropic Myers-Perry black
hole. Separation of variables in Rosochatius system results into a
recursive family of one-dimensional Pöschl-Teller system.

Higgs oscillator, Rosochatius system and Pöschl-Teller system belong to
a class of quantum quantum systems where energy are quadratic functions
of the energy level number. After the geometrization procedure proposed
in Chapter 5 , these systems will result into Klein-Gordon equations
with eigenmode frequencies linear in the frequency level number. In
other words this means that the frequencies are highly resonant, which
itself has important consequences in the AdS stability problem (see [
108 ] for a review).

Another important class of solutions of Einstein’s equations are
gravitational waves. Compared to black holes, gravitational waves have
been directly detected in 2015 by two LIGO (Laser Interferometer
Gravitational-wave Observatory) detectors. The existence of
gravitational waves has been proven by indirect astrophysical
observations long before their detection. In particular, the presence of
gravitational waves was confirmed by monitoring the orbital parameters
of the binary millisecond pulsar PSR B1913+16 [ 19 ] . Because of the
gravitational radiation, the objects in the binary system lose energy
and angular momentum which was detected and corresponded to the
quantitative predictions of the theory. Besides being a real physical
phenomena and one of the most important predictions of the theory of
general relativity, gravitational waves will take an important role in
observational astronomy. Compared to other types of radiation, e.g.
photons, neutrinos and cosmic rays, gravitational waves don’t get
refracted by gas clouds and absorbed by cosmic bodies and can travel big
distances, pointing directly back to the source. The importance of
gravitational wave detectors will grow with their sensibility.

When a pair of inertial test particles encounter gravitational waves,
their relative positions get shifted permanently. This phenomena is
called the gravitational memory effect. It is known to be related to the
theory of soft gravitons and symmetries of null infinity of
asymptotically flat spaces and particularly black holes.

In Chapter 2 we are going to discuss this effect and suggest its
covariant formulation in frames of a model of impulsive gravitational
waves. This model assumes that the space-time is divided into two
domains by a hypersurface, which in general can contain a mixture of
gravitational waves and other material sources. There are many examples
of physical systems in nature which can be described in frames of this
model. Such systems may appear after cataclysmic astrophysical events,
such as a supernova or a collision of neutron stars. These systems are
used to simulate an exploding white hole, to model an impulsive null
signal from a system of neighboring test particles and have many other
applications. In general one can choose these two metrics to be either
continuous or discontinuous on the boundary hypersurface subject to the
condition that the induced metric is unique, but either way the metric’s
transverse derivative will not be continuous. This always leads to a
singularity in the form of a @xmath -function in the Riemann tensor.

Solutions to the Einstein equations give different results depending on
whether the boundary surface is taken to be null or timelike
(spacelike). In the first case, when the hypersurface is null, both Weyl
and Ricci parts of the Riemann tensor are singular. As it is known, the
Weyl part of the Riemann tensor is associated with gravitational waves,
whereas the Ricci tensor has non-zero value only in the presence of some
material source. Hence, in the case of null boundary hypersurface, both
a material source and an impulsive tidal wave can be present. When the
boundary surface is timelike, only the Ricci tensor is singular, giving
rise only to a matter stress-energy tensor. Depending on the matter
distribution, the discussed hypersurfaces are classified into two types:
shock waves or boundary surfaces, which arise when there is a jump
discontinuity in the density of the stress-energy tensor between the two
metrics that they divide and surface layers, otherwise called thin
shells, where the density becomes infinite.

There are two different approaches to describe singular hypersurfaces.
The first one is called the distributional method. In this case a common
set of coordinates is used for both sides of the hypersurface. The other
method is a generalization of the “cut and paste” approach of Penrose.
Here, the space-time coordinates on the two sides of the hypersurface
can be chosen independently from each other, so in this sense it is a
more general approach than the distributional algorithm. It was
introduced by Israel to describe timelike hypersurfaces [ 2 ] but it was
not suitable for the case of null hypersurfaces. In the timelike case,
the Israel approach uses the extrinsic curvature of the hypersurface to
describe the stress-energy tensor in it. When we move to the null case,
the intrinsic metric of the hypersurface space-time becomes degenerate,
because the normal vector becomes tangent and there is no
distinguishable transverse vector defined. Hence, the extrinsic
curvature, which is defined in terms of the metric, is no longer
uniquely definable, so it cannot be used to study the hypersurface. This
problem was solved and the approach was generalized for the lightlike
case by Barrabès and Israel [ 24 ] .

In this thesis we are going to discuss different problems related to
asymptotic flat spaces, integrable systems and mathematical physics
associated with black holes. First, we will study gravitational memory
effect which is known to have deep connections with soft gravitons and
symmetries of null infinity of asymptotically flat spaces. Then, we will
discuss Myers-Perry black holes, more particularly, the near horizon
geometry and associated integrable systems. Finally, we will propose a
geometrization procedure for a special class of quantum
(super)integrable systems, which appear in many topics of mathematical
physics ( including in near horizon geometry of Myers-Perry black hole).

This thesis is based on the papers [ 75 , 76 , 79 , 80 , 77 , 78 ] . The
research done in Chapter 2 was carried out under supervision of Martin
O’Loughlin. The problem addressed in Chapter 5 was suggested and solved
in cooperation with Oleg Evnin.

It is organized as follows.

In Chapter 2 we study the effects that an impulsive signal in a singular
hypersurface can have on a particle which encounters it. A similar
question has been discussed by Barrabès and Hogan in [ 33 ] for the case
of timelike particles, where they have constructed the geodesics
deviation vector in the first order approximation and found a relation
between the geodesic deviation vector, the stress-energy content and
gravitational wave components of the shell. We propose a new approach
for studying the effect of null shells on null geodesic congruences.
This is an exact method which allows one to easily calculate the change
in the expansion, shear and rotation of the congruence upon crossing the
shell and its evolution to the future of the shell. We find that the
effect of the shell on the congruence, as already observed in the
time-like case in [ 32 ] , is a discontinuity in the B-tensor (the
gradient of the geodesic vector). We call this the B-memory effect,
which is a more covariant way of describing the gravitational memory
effect. Gravitational memory effect has deep connections with soft
gravitons [ 28 ] , which in turn is linked to the symmetries of null
infinity of asymptotically flat spaces [ 26 , 27 ] . We found the
explicit relation of B-memory with the stress energy and gravitational
wave components of the shell. We consider the simplest case of a null
shell representing an outgoing gravitational wave and parametrized by a
general soldering transformation (a subclass of which are the BMS
supertranslations) in Minkowski space, but our method is applicable to
any geodesic congruence that crosses a null shell localized on a killing
horizon.

In Chapter 3 and Chapter 4 conformal mechanics associated with Near
Horizon geometry of Extremal Myers-Perry (NHEMP) black hole has been
studied. First, a unified description of an arbitrary odd and even
dimensional geometry and conformal mechanics has been proposed. Then,
the question integrability of special cases of fully non-isotropic and
fully isotropic cases has been addressed in this description. We have
found a non-trivial transformation from non-isotropic NHEMP conformal
mechanics to its isotropic case. Furthermore, the general case, when
groups of equal and non-equal rotation parameters exist, has been
studied and shown that this problem reduces to its special cases of
fully non-isotropic and fully isotropic NHEMP conformal mechanics. At
the end of the Chapter 4 another non-trivial near-horizon geometry has
been discussed. The so-called Near Horizon Extremal Vanishing Horizon
Myers-Perry black hole (NHEVHMP) is obtained when one of the rotation
parameters of the Myers-Perry black hole vanishes. We studied the
integrability properties of NHEVHMP in higher dimensions in fully
isotropic, fully non-isotropic and general cases.

In Chapter 5 we propose a geometrization procedure which associates to a
non-relativistic quantum particle in a potential on a curved spacetime a
purely geodesic motion in another spacetime. In other words, we propose
a correspondence between the solutions of Schroedinger equation and
Klein-Gordon equation on a corresponding manifold, which itself, as it
is well known, reduces to a geodesic equation through quasi-classical of
Eikonal approximation. We will explain this procedure on the example of
the Higgs oscillator and superintegrable Rosochatius system.
