##### Abstract

Dans cette thèse, notre première motivation est de construire une
théorie de gravité massive qui soit invariante sous transformations de
coordonnées et ne fasse pas appel à une métrique extérieure de
référence, ce qui est possible si l’on a recours à des termes
non-locaux. Cependant, les contraintes phénoménologiques nous mèneront à
des modifications non-locales de la Relativité Générale dans lesquselles
la gravité n’est pas forcément massive, mais où la cosmologie reproduit
les observations actuelles.

La structure dynamique d’une théorie des champs non-locale présente
quelques subtilités par rapport aux théories locales, et ne pas en tenir
compte peut nous mener à conclusions erronées. Nous commençons donc par
l’étude de la dynamique des théories de jauge massives, linéaires et
locales, sous plusieurs angles différents, afin de mettre en avant les
propriétés qui ne seront pas exportables dans le cas non-local. Nous en
profitons pour discuter un aspect intéressant de la théorie linéaire
d’un champ massif de spin-2, qui consiste en une symétrie de jauge
cachée dans le secteur scalaire. Elle n’apparaît que lorsque les champs
non-dynamiques sont éliminés à travers leur équations du mouvement et,
en ce sens, elle correspond à une symétrie de la physique, mais pas à
une symétrie de l’action.

Nous terminons l’étude des théories massives locales linéaires en les
reformulant en tant que théories massives non-locales mais invariantes
de jauge, à travers le formalisme de Stückelberg. Ceci constitue notre
premier pas dans les théories non-locales, même si en l’occurrence la
non-localité n’est qu’apparante et disparaît avec un choix de jauge
approprié. Cependant, la technologie ainsi développée nous permet de
définir une théorie d’un champ spin-2 massif linaire réellement
non-locale et invariante de jauge.

Suite à cela nous faisons une pause pour discuter en profondeur les
subtilités des théories non-locales susmentionnées. La première est que
des équations non-locales et causales ne peuvent pas être obtenues à
travers le principe variationnel standard appliqué à une action
non-locale, mais qu’il existe cependant un principe variationnel plus
général qui fait l’affaire. Ensuite, à travers un processus de
localisation, qui consiste à réécrire les équations sous forme locale en
introduisant des champs auxiliaires, nous voyons que le contenu
dynamique de ces théories est plus large qu’il n’y paraît. Ces champs
obéissent des équations dynamiques, mais leurs conditions initiales sont
contraintes par le choix de définition de nos opérateurs non-locaux dans
la théorie originale. Ce dernier fait implique que nous ne pouvons pas
quantifié de manière consistante les théories non-locales et donc que
ces dernières ne peuvent être interprétées qu’en tant que théories
classiques effectives.

Le contenu original de cette partie consiste à clarifié une certaine
confusion qui a lieu dans la littérature concernant l’impact de ces
champs auxiliaires sur la stabilité des solutions d’intérêt. En effet,
il se trouve que dans la plupart des modèles non-locaux étudiés, ces
champs sont des “ghosts”, c’est-à-dire des champs dont l’énergie
cinétique est négative. Cependant, le fait que leur conditions initiales
soient contraintes a mené certains à déduire que leur effet sur la
stabilité classique est automatiquement nul. Nous montrons que cet
argumentation est justement le fruit d’un raisonnement de théorie des
champs locale ne s’appliquant pas aux théories non-locales. En
conclusion, les champs auxiliaires sont tout autant capables de
déstabiliser une solution que n’importe quel champ dynamique
non-contraint. Cependant, contrairement au cas quantique, la présence de
“ghosts” n’invalide pas nécessairement la théorie, car les divergences
peuvent être assez lentes ou même contrées par des effets non-linéaires.
C’est pourquoi, une étude de stabilité classique est nécessaire dans
chaque cas.

Une fois ces quelques points clarifiés, nous reprenons la théorie de
spin-2 linéaire non-locale que nous avions construite et tentons de la
généraliser en une théorie de gravité non-locale, c’est-à-dire, nous
construisons des extensions non-linéaires. Pour ce faire, nous
empruntons deux procédés différents: un qui se base sur une action
non-locale et un qui opère directement au niveau des équations du
mouvement à l’aide de projecteurs transverses. Nous obtenons ainsi une
classe de modèles non-linéaires que nous soumettons à certaines
contraintes phénoménologiques. Celles-ci réduisent les modèles à deux
extensions à un paramètre des modèles de Maggiore (M) et de Maggiore -
Mancarella (MM) récemment proposés, qui les relient continument à la
Relativité Générale avec une constante cosmologique.

Ces modèles contiennent un “ghost” ultra-léger, mais des études
numériques récentes et complètes des perturbations cosmologiques
montrent que les modèles M et MM sont statistiquement équivalents à
@xmath CDM, dans les marges d’erreurs des données actuelles. Cela
suggère que les extensions le sont également, puisqu’elles ne font que
nous rapprocher de @xmath CDM. Ceci les rends intéressantes, malgré le
fait qu’un paramètre de plus diminue le pouvoir prédictif d’une théorie.
Pour finir, nous étudions numériquement et analytiquement l’arrière-plan
cosmologique de ces modèles.

###### Abstract

En premier lieu je souhaiterais remercier mon superviseur et directeur
de thèse, Michele Maggiore, pour m’avoir offert l’opportunité
d’apprendre le métier de chercheur/enseignant en physique théorique.
J’ai toujours pu compter sur ses conseils avisés et profiter de son
expérience dans toutes les facettes de l’activité académique, tout en
bénéficiant d’une grande liberté pour mes recherches personnelles.
Au-delà de ses compétences de chercheur, j’ai pu également apprécier son
attitude positive ainsi que sa fascination contagieuse pour les mystères
de la physique. Je le remercie aussi pour sa lecture attentive de la
présente thèse, ses commentaires et ses corrections.

En second lieu j’aimerais remercier les personnes avec qui j’ai eu le
plaisir de collaborer ces quatre dernières années, à savoir, Maud
Jaccard, Lukas Hollenstein, Stefano Foffa, Yves Dirian et évidemment
Michele. Notre interaction a été une composante incontournable de mon
doctorat, tant dans son impact sur ma formation et évolution en tant que
chercheur, que sur le plan humain. Je pense avoir eu de la chance
d’interagir avec toutes ces différentes personnalités qui constitueront
sans aucun doute des références de qualité dans mon parcours
professionnel.

Aux membres de notre groupe de cosmologie je veux dire un grand merci
pour les échanges, d’ordre académique ou pas, pour les sessions de
“crap-coffee”, pour leur humeur joviale et pour l’ambiance chaleureuse
qu’ils génèrent dans notre communauté. Je souhaiterais adresser un
remerciement particulier à Ruth Durrer, Stefano Foffa et Michele pour
leur influence, leurs conseils, ainsi que leur soutien dans mes
recherches de travail. Un énorme merci également aux secrétaires du
groupe, Cécile Jaggi-Chevalley et Francine Gennai-Nicole, pour leur
disponibilité et leur aide dans les tourments administratifs, ainsi qu’à
Andreas Malaspinas pour son assistance technique, sa disponibilité et
les échanges au deuxième étage de l’école de physique qui durent
toujours un peu plus long que prévu.

J’ai également l’immense plaisir de remercier les hurluberlus du bureau
205 du Pavillon de physique I, David Daverio et Yves Dirian, pour les
braves types qu’ils sont, les pauses café-clope qui ont révolutionné la
physique, les pizzas toujours trop grasses et leurs caractères bien
trempés. A David je dédicace en partie cette thèse, pour son amitié, sa
complicité et en souvenir de ces débats interminables et bruyants sur la
physique fondamentale, entre-autres. Ce doctorat n’aurait clairement pas
été le même sans lui.

Je pense également à mes amis de toujours, Bryan, Chris, Fab, Ivàn, Jon,
Kevin et Yannick qui me soutiennent (et me supportent) depuis tant
d’années. A mes colocataires, mes “honey”, je leur dis merci pour
l’ambiance sereine et agréable qu’ils procurent à notre “coulouc”. Merci
à mes parents qui m’ont toujours soutenu dans mes ambitions et m’ont
donné les moyens de les réaliser. Je remercie aussi mon frère Olivier
pour son soutien et lui dédicace en partie ce travail en gage de
reconnaissance de son courage et de sa determination.

Pour finir, ma plus grande pensée va vers ma femme, mon amour, Julie,
qui m’a toujours aimé, soutenu et compris. Je lui suis le plus
reconnaissant du monde pour tout cela, ainsi que pour son courage, sa
passion de vivre et cette force subtile qui l’habite. Je suis heureux
qu’elle nous ait accordé sa confiance pour ce premier pas vers notre
avenir. C’est un pas rempli d’espoir malgré l’incertitude des chemins où
nous mènent nos ambitions. Ce travail porte les traces de l’énergie
qu’elle m’insuffle et c’est pourquoi il lui est naturellement dédicacé
en premier lieu.

###### Jury de thèse

-   Professeur Michele Maggiore, Université de Genève, Suisse (directeur
    de thèse).

-   Professeure Ruth Durrer, Université de Genève, Suisse.

-   Professeur Pedro G. Ferreira, Université d’Oxford, Royaume-Uni.

-   Professeur Thomas Sotiriou, Université de Nottingham, Royaume-Uni.

Je tiens évidemment à remercier les membres du jury pour la
considération, la lecture et l’évaluation de la présente thèse, ainsi
que pour leurs corrections et leurs suggestions.

Aspects of Infrared Non-local Modifications of General Relativity

THÈSE

présentée à la Faculté des sciences de l’Université de Genève

pour obtenir le grade de Docteur ès sciences, mention physique

par

Ermis MITSOU

de

Brot-Dessous (NE)

Thèse N @xmath 4770

GENÈVE

Atelier d’impression ReproMail

2015

à Poinpon,
et à tous ceux qui m’ont prêté un crayon et une feuille quand j’en avais
besoin…

###### Contents

-    1 Introduction
    -    1.1 Background
    -    1.2 The quantum vacuum problem
    -    1.3 Massive gravity
    -    1.4 Non-local gravity
    -    1.5 Thesis summary
    -    1.6 Notation & conventions
-    2 Linear massless/massive gauge theories
    -    2.1 Technical preliminaries
    -    2.2 Standard Lagrangian approach
    -    2.3 Canonical formalism
    -    2.4 Harmonic formalism
    -    2.5 Propagator
    -    2.6 Stückelberg formalism
    -    2.7 Non-local formulation
-    3 Subtleties of non-local field theory
    -    3.1 Non-local actions
    -    3.2 Localization
    -    3.3 Constrained dynamical fields and classical stability
-    4 Non-local gravity
    -    4.1 Constructing generally-covariant equations of motion
    -    4.2 Action-based models
    -    4.3 Projector-based models
    -    4.4 Solar system constrains
    -    4.5 The effect of @xmath
-    5 Cosmology
    -    5.1 Background equations
    -    5.2 Numerical analysis
    -    5.3 Analytic approximations
    -    5.4 Stability
-    6 Conclusions
-    A Bi-tensors
    -    A.1 Definition
    -    A.2 Bi-tensor distributions
    -    A.3 Green’s bi-tensor properties

## Chapter 1 Introduction

During my PhD, the research that I have conducted within the group of my
PhD advisor Prof. Maggiore has focused on several aspects of the problem
of dark energy in late-time cosmology. Here are the resulting
publications:

-    “Stability analysis and future singularity of the @xmath model of
    non-local gravity”
    with Yves Dirian
    JCAP 10  (2014) 065

-    “Cosmological dynamics and dark energy from non-local infrared
    modifications of gravity”
    with Stefano Foffa and Michele Maggiore
    Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 29  (2014) 1450116

-    “Apparent ghosts and spurious degrees of freedom in non-local
    theories”
    with Stefano Foffa and Michele Maggiore
    Phys. Lett. B 733  (2014) 76-83

-    “A non-local theory of massive gravity’ ’
    with Maud Jaccard and Michele Maggiore
    Phys. Rev. D 88  (2013) 044033

-    “Bardeen variables and hidden gauge symmetries in linearized
    massive gravity ”
    with Maud Jaccard and Michele Maggiore
    Phys. Rev. D 87  (2013) 044017

-    “Zero-point quantum fluctuations in cosmology”
    with Lukas Hollenstein, Maud Jaccard and Michele Maggiore
    Phys. Rev. D 85  (2012) 124031

-    “Early dark energy from zero-point quantum fluctuations”
    with Lukas Hollenstein, Maud Jaccard and Michele Maggiore
    Phys. Lett. B 704  (2011) 102-107

An important part of this work consisted in the construction and study
of a non-local theory of massive gravity and related non-local
modifications of General Relativity that would produce a dark energy
effect in accordance with observations. This is the subject on which I
would like to focus my PhD thesis.

### 1.1 Background

In the last decades the field of cosmology has witnessed an
effervescence which could be compared to the one that permeated particle
physics in the 60’s and the 70’s, resulting in the birth of the Standard
Model (SM). As often in science, it is the development of the
experimental/observational branch of the discipline that allows the
theoretical research to blossom. Indeed, the important activity in
observational cosmology during the last two decades turned the
discipline into a precise quantitative science, with more and more
satellite, balloon and ground-based missions coming to enrich and refine
the data pool. This allowed theorists to converge on a six-parameter
concordance model, dubbed “ @xmath CDM”, whose statistical predictions
fit the data within the current error bars. These two factors, the
rich/accurate data and the theoretical concordance model, constitute a
solid basis for modern cosmology. This is still a very active area of
research, as many more missions will take place in the future, thus
providing more accurate input that will allow discriminating between
models.

An important aspect of the concordance model, on top of the fact that it
matches observations in a satisfying way, is that it mostly relies on
well-understood physics. Indeed, on one side there is General Relativity
(GR), which determines the dynamics of space-time in the presence of
matter, and on the other hand there is the SM, which determines the
content and microscopic dynamics of that matter. It is remarkable that
the combination of these two pillars of modern theoretical physics
suffices to describe already many aspects of the observed cosmology.

Nevertheless, there are also important parts of the concordance model
which still remain unaccounted for from the theoretical point of view.
The two outstanding ones in late-time cosmology are referred to as the
“dark matter” and “dark energy” problems. These are significant extra
elements compared to what GR and the SM alone would predict. They have
therefore greatly contributed to the enthusiasm for theoretical
cosmology and in setting-up further observational missions.

Before we discuss these two issues, let us also briefly mention the
other important challenge in cosmology that is the understanding of its
very early stages. The currently dominating paradigm, and by far, is the
theory of inflation [ 1 , 2 ] (see [ 3 ] for a review), which consists
in the universe undergoing a period of accelerated expansion. This is
theoretically appealing because it naturally leads to an approximately
homogeneous, isotropic and spatially flat universe, as the one we
observe. Most importantly, however, it explains the large-scale
structure by relating it to primordial quantum fluctuations generated
during this inflationary phase.

##### Dark matter

On Earth and solar-system scales the dynamics of GR and the matter
content of the SM suffice to explain the observed phenomena, at least at
the level of accuracy reached by experiment ¹ ¹ 1 A possible exception
to this statement would be the neutrino masses, which are taken to be
zero in the SM, while it has been discovered that @xmath from
measurements of neutrino oscillations. . Unfortunately, this success
story does not apply to larger scales such as the galactic,
extragalactic and cosmological ones.

On astrophysical scales, the rotation curves of galaxies and the motions
of galaxies in galaxy clusters cannot be explained by the masses that we
see in the telescope. Rather, the observed motions correspond to the
gravitational forces one would have had in the presence of a larger
amount of non-relativistic matter. On cosmological scales, it seems that
non-relativistic matter constitutes nearly 30% of the critical density
today, while the observed baryonic matter, which matches the expected
abundance from SM Big-Bang nucleosynthesis, can only account for @xmath
.

Therefore, the simplest modification one can think of, that would
correct this discrepancy, is to include a speculative type of particle
with the following properties. It should not interact (or very weakly)
with light, thus making it practically invisible, it should be rather
massive so that it scales as non-relativistic matter and also stable on
a time-scale of the age of the universe. Cosmological structure
formation also suggests that it is non-relativistic at the time at which
it decouples from the original plasma, and that its interactions are
dominated by gravity. This way that matter can clump into halos, which
then provide the necessary gravitational potential for ordinary matter
to agglomerate into the galaxies, clusters, filaments we see today ² ² 2
Indeed, in the absence of that effect, it would have taken longer for
ordinary matter to form the large scale structures, in contradiction
with observations. . Furthermore, the fact that no such new particle has
been detected in accelerators yet, along with the fact that Big-Bang
nucleosynthesis should not be disturbed too much, implies that it should
interact very weakly with SM matter. This is what one refers to as “Cold
Dark Matter”, making the last three letters of “ @xmath CDM’’, ³ ³ 3
“Cold” because it is massive, weakly interacting, and “Dark” because it
does not interact with light. Note that a more appropriate term would be
“cold transparent matter” because a dark object does interact with light
since it absorbs it. For example, a black hole is “dark”, dark matter is
not, although the name is certainly more catchy. .

##### Dark energy

Another important effect which is theoretically puzzling lies in the
trend of the late-time expansion of the universe. In the late 90’s, two
independent groups [ 4 , 5 ] analyzed the light-curves of type Ia
supernovae and reported that the data imply an accelerated expansion of
the universe at late times. This behaviour has been confirmed by many
satellite and ground-based observations and will be further studied by
missions planned for the future. The main complementary evidence comes
from the Cosmic Microwave Background radiation anisotropies (CMB) and
the Baryon Acoustic Oscillations in the large scale structure of matter
(BAO) ⁴ ⁴ 4 It should be noted however that what is actually being
measured in all of these three independent observations is the
distance-redshift relation @xmath , [ 6 ] . Thus, the possibility
remains that the inferred acceleration is only an apparent effect of
physics which influence @xmath , [ 6 ] . .

This observation was surprising because ordinary fluids such as matter
and radiation can only produce a decelerating expansion. Indeed, from
the second Friedmann equation it follows that acceleration implies a
negative pressure @xmath , since the energy density @xmath must be
positive. In the case of dark matter, although its precise nature still
eludes us, the most probable scenario is that it corresponds indeed to
some massive particle(s) that could one day be detected in a collider.
On the other hand, because of its negative pressure, dark energy seems
to lie one step beyond in the scale of mysteriousness. Indeed, its
properties are not the ones of a fluid made of standard particles and
the speculations about its fundamental nature are much more variable.
This discovery was rewarded with the Nobel prize of physics in 2011,
given the astonishing implications for our understanding of the
universe.

Clearly, there are two, not mutually exclusive possibilities in order to
explain this effect: either one must postulate the existence of a new
source on the right-hand side of the Einstein equation that would
support this expansion, or one must modify GR in the infra-red so that
acceleration is obtained by altering the behavior of gravity itself ⁵ ⁵
5 It is interesting to note however that in most cases this distinction
may not be clear, as it is often possible to reproduce the phenomenology
of modified gravity models with appropriate dark energy sources [ 7 ] .
. The degrees of freedom or mechanism which are responsible for this
late-time acceleration being yet unknown, the community refers to them
generically as “dark energy”. This energy would then account for nearly
70% of today’s total energy of the universe.

From the theoretical point of view, quite remarkably, the best dark
energy candidate for fitting the data [ 8 ] is also the simplest term
one could think of in the Einstein equation, namely, a positive
cosmological constant

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.1.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This “ @xmath ” is the one which is found in “ @xmath CDM” so that the
name of the model reflects how it describes the “dark” sector. A very
revealing plot is the one which combines constraints from type Ia
supernovae, CMB and BAO observations, on the @xmath plane, where @xmath
is the energy fraction corresponding to non-relativistic matter (dark
and ordinary) today and @xmath is the equation of state of the dark
energy component. Assuming a spatially flat universe we have that the
fraction corresponding to dark energy today is @xmath , and also
assuming a constant @xmath in time one gets figure 1.1 , [ 8 , 9 ] .
Indeed, one directly sees that dark energy makes up approximately 70% of
today’s energy budget and is consistent with the time-evolution of a
cosmological constant since @xmath .

Now if we rather put this @xmath term on the right-hand side and
interpret it as a constant source, we have that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.1.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Thus, this energy-momentum tensor has a non-diluting (constant) energy
density and negative pressure. These are both counter-intuitive
properties for fluids made of particles, but might be accounted for if
we resort to a more “microscopic” interpretation. Indeed, a constant
source could typically correspond to the contribution of a potential
term @xmath in the quantum effective action of some Higgs-like field in
a broken symmetry phase. This kind of dark energy is known as
“quintessence” and, along with its generalizations (“ @xmath -essence”,
etc.), represent one of the most studied alternatives to the
cosmological constant. An important difference with the latter is that
@xmath is not necessarily constant in time and that the new field brings
in additional degrees of freedom in cosmological perturbation theory.

On the other hand, if we interpret ( 1.1.1 ) as a modification of
gravity, i.e. on the left-hand side of ( 1.1.1 ), involving just another
constant of nature @xmath , then this seems the most economic,
conservative and also natural solution. Unfortunately, it is the quantum
side of physics which will disagree with this interpretation. In the
following section we will review succinctly the main arguments of the
so-called “cosmological constant problem”.

### 1.2 The quantum vacuum problem

We may start by noting that the cosmological constant term plays exactly
the role of the vacuum energy of field theory on flat space-time.
Indeed, the @xmath term in the Einstein equation corresponds to a
constant term in the Einstein-Hilbert action

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.2.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In the case @xmath this is just a constant that produces an overall
energy shift. This does not mean that a vacuum energy has no observable
effects, as is clearly demonstrated by the Casimir effect in QFT for
instance, but that only energy differences are relevant, not absolute
values ⁶ ⁶ 6 See [ 10 ] for a review of the Casimir effect. . In GR
however, every kind of energy gravitates, since this is what we find by
definition on the right-hand side of the Einstein equation, and the
physics therefore depends on the absolute value of @xmath . For energies
way below the Planck scale, since the interactions with gravitons are
heavily suppressed, the gravitational dynamics can be treated in very
good approximation semi-classically. This means that gravity can be
described classically, but sourced by the vacuum expectation value of
quantum matter fields. Formally, we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.2.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

although the vacuum state @xmath may not be unique or easy to define. In
any case, the quantum vacuum energy of matter is expected to appear as a
cosmological constant on the right-hand side. In QFT on flat space-time,
each bosonic field mode brings in a vacuum energy contribution which is
formally diverging

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.2.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and must thus be regularized by inserting some infra-red cut-off length
@xmath . The total vacuum energy is then the integral over all the
modes, which must also be regularized but with an ultra-violet cut-off
@xmath

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.2.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the dots are lower-order terms in @xmath . Finally, the vacuum
energy density is simply

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.2.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

so the infra-red regulator is irrelevant for this “local” quantity. This
computation can also be performed for the rest of the @xmath components
and on less trivial backgrounds, if the latter have enough isometries,
such as in cosmology for instance. Bearing some subtleties, one gets
that @xmath for the leading order term ⁷ ⁷ 7 If one uses a cut-off on
momentum space then the result for the leading term @xmath is actually
@xmath , whereas if @xmath then one should rather find @xmath . The
@xmath ratio is the one obeyed by radiation and is inconsistent with a
constant @xmath because then the continuity equation @xmath is not
satisfied, so this result is in contradiction with general covariance.
This apparent problem arises because these cut-off-dependent (“bare”)
quantities are not the physical (“renormalized”) quantities. Since the
cut-off is imposed on the @xmath -momenta, it breaks covariance and thus
so does the resulting energy-momentum tensor. The freedom in choosing
the counter-terms then allows one to impose the correct relation for the
renormalized quantities @xmath . As a matter of fact, had we started
with a regularization that preserves covariance, such as dimensional
regularization, this is the result we would have obtained. Thus, the
apparent @xmath ratio is an artefact of our regularization scheme, and
the physics cannot depend on it [ 11 , 12 , 13 ] . , so this takes
indeed the form of a cosmological constant.

For fermionic fields, we have the same result but with the opposite
sign. Thus, as soon as the number of bosons and fermions is not equal,
we have that the “natural” value of @xmath is as high as the cut-off of
this theory, from the effective field theory point of view. For the SM,
where we know that effective theory to hold at least up to the scale
where it has been tested ( @xmath TeV), we have at least @xmath . As a
matter of fact, since the SM has more fermionic degrees of freedom than
bosonic ones, we should even expect a negative result. What is known as
the “cosmological constant problem” [ 14 , 15 ] is that what we observe
in cosmology is rather a tiny positive value @xmath , that is, a
difference of at least sixty orders of magnitude!

##### Renormalization group viewpoint

Although the above description of the “quantum vacuum catastrophe” is
probably the standard point of view on the dark energy problem in the
community, it must be stressed that it relies more on theoretical
hand-waving arguments than experimentally tested physics. Indeed, the
vacuum energy is a feature of perturbative QFT whose absolute value is
not observable in that theory, i.e. it is not an aspect of the theory
which is checkable. Therefore, we do not know if it has any physical
validity for us to take into account as such when generalizing to
generally-covariant physics. Moreover, even in QFT the absolute value of
the vacuum energy is an ill-defined notion since one can get rid of it
by choosing the so-called ‘‘normal ordering’’ for the Hamiltonian
operator ⁸ ⁸ 8 This is usually expressed in terms of creation and
annihilation operators, but in terms of @xmath and its conjugate
momentum @xmath it amounts to adding a singular term @xmath in @xmath
which of course vanishes classically. , i.e. this issue is related to
the ordering ambiguity of quantum mechanics. And this is not the only
argument which casts doubt on the effect of vacuum energy within the QFT
framework.

Indeed, an important remark is that this is merely a “naturalness”
argument, not a prediction [ 11 , 12 , 13 , 16 ] . In QFT the parameters
of the Lagrangian cannot be predicted, only their dependence on the
probing scale can, i.e. their running under the renormalization group.
Thus, one can a priori fix them at any value suggested by experiment at
some scale, and only then will their values at other scales be
predicted. In the case of the leading part of the cosmological constant,
there is no dependence on the probing scale, since it is a constant, and
it can thus be chosen arbitrarily small at all scales. The apparent
unnaturalness of this choice is then due to the fact that the observed
tiny magnitude corresponds to a huge precision compared to the expected
value. If what we expect is of order one, then the value we wish to give
is of order @xmath , i.e. 60 digits of precision with respect to the
natural scale. The unnaturalness argument thus corresponds to this
incredibly fine tunning that must be performed. However, from the
renormalization group point of view, only the running is physical, not
the absolute values of the cut-off dependent quantities, so the above
mentioned fine-tunning is not between physical quantities.

##### Effective field theory viewpoint

So why should one continue taking the cosmological constant problem so
seriously? The point is that in the effective field theory viewpoint of
QFT [ 17 , 18 , 19 , 20 , 21 , 22 ] , which is its modern
interpretation, the cut-off-dependent quantities do acquire some
physical substance. Indeed, the cut-off scale is usually related to the
strong-coupling scale for perturbatively non-renormalizable theories,
i.e. the energy at which the perturbative expansion breaks down. For
instance, in the case of GR this scale would be the Planck mass. In
practical examples of effective theories with known ultra-violet
completions, the cut-off is related to the mass of some new particle,
which is thus not seen in the effective theory, and which softens the
interaction by being produced precisely near the cut-off. This allows us
to access higher energy scales perturbatively, but with a larger theory
encompassing the heavy particles. This is for example the case of the
Higgs field when the effective theory is a massive Yang-Mills theory
with fixed mass, or of the @xmath bosons when the effective theory is
Fermi’s theory of four-fermion weak interactions, or the radial mode in
the effective theory of the Goldstone modes of a sigma model. In all
these cases, the cut-off of the effective theory is related to the
activation of some new degrees of freedom.

The question that now arises is whether this effective field theory
logic applies to vacuum energy. Indeed, by definition, the vacuum has
nothing to do with particles nor interaction scales. Thus, as long as we
are within the QFT framework, it appears that we should keep adding-up
the vacuum energies of higher and higher momenta. This would then end
only at a scale where the mathematical description is not QFT anymore ⁹
⁹ 9 An analogous case is the theory of fluids, which is an effective
theory of space-time fields whose underlying ultra-violet completion is
not a field theory but the dynamics of a large number of constituent
elements. In that case, one also finds that the orders of magnitude of
the parameters of the fluid are related to the fundamental scales
arising in the microscopic element interactions. . We are aware of such
a scale, the Planck scale. Indeed, there the graviton interactions are
strong and thus the structure of space-time becomes ambiguous, so that
the local Minkowski approximation of QFT stops making sense. Thus, from
the effective field theory point of view, we get an even larger estimate
of the quantum vacuum energy, that is @xmath , giving a difference of
@xmath orders of magnitude with the observed value!
From the above paragraphs we understand that the issue of the quantum
vacuum in GR is not so well defined and is rather complicated, to say
the least. Nevertheless, it is always a good theoretical exercise to
look for alternative ways to describe a given phenomenon, even when what
keeps us from choosing the simplest solution could be a matter of
“semantics”. Moreover, with increasing observational data, these
alternatives can be tested. Thus, even if @xmath CDM turns out to still
be a good fit in ten or twenty years, the strength of this statement
would be much more important if several alternatives had also been
considered.

To summarize, the problem of dark energy is two-fold. First one has to
come up with a mechanism/argument for taming the quantum vacuum. In most
cases, this is achieved only at the cost of making @xmath vanish exactly
(e.g. supersymmetry), unless there is some fine-tunning. If @xmath ,
then one must also come up with a mechanism for producing some form of
dark energy.

### 1.3 Massive gravity

As already mentioned, in this thesis we are going to explore the
possibility of modifying gravity in the infrared in order to account for
the dark energy effect, instead of considering some extra source on the
right-hand side of the Einstein equation. One of the most studied
modifications of the gravitational Lagrangian, motivated by both
ultra-violet and infra-red physics, is the one where the Ricci scalar is
replaced by an arbitrary function @xmath . Among other modifications
involving also tensor curvature invariants, this class is distinguished
by the fact that it has no ghosts (see [ 23 ] for a review). Another
much studied model of infrared modified gravity is the
Dvali-Gabadadze-Porrati (DGP) brane-world model [ 24 ] . Although it has
been shown to be non-viable, its theoretical by-products, such as the
Galileon theory [ 25 ] , have been instrumental in the development of
massive gravity.

Since GR describes a massless particle, when interpreted as a QFT on
flat space-time, the simplest modification one can think of that
hopefully alters only the infrared physics is giving a mass to that
particle. The resulting theory of “massive gravity” has been both an
inspiration and a (chronologically) starting point for our work on
non-local modifications of gravity, so we find appropriate to summarize
some of its important features.

##### Expected advantages

By (Lorentz-invariant) “massive gravity” is commonly meant a deformation
of GR having the following properties:

-   In the absence of matter fields, Minkowski space-time is a linearly
    stable solution.

-   The theory is Lorentz-invariant over that background.

-   The spectrum of its linearized QFT over that background is a massive
    spin-2 particle.

It is not surprising that Minkowski space-time plays a privileged role
in defining massive gravity, since the notions of particle, and thus
mass, are well-defined only through the isometries of that background,
i.e. the Poincaré group. A formulation of “massiveness” which would be
applicable to more general backgrounds would involve the notion of gap,
that is, that the field quanta have a minimal amount of energy @xmath .
Classically, whenever the background is symmetric enough so that a
dispersion relation of the perturbations @xmath can be defined, we would
have that @xmath .

Following the general wisdom of weakly interacting theories on Minkowksi
space-time, a mass usually makes the field both insensitive to, and of
little influence on, energy-momentum scales obeying @xmath . Indeed,
this is merely the fact on which effective field theory is based.
Extrapolating these assumptions, as such, to the case of a fully
non-linear theory of massive gravity would have the following
consequences.

First, massive gravity would be insensitive to a cosmological constant,
since the latter is the most extreme example of infrared source. Second,
the deceleration of the expansion of the universe should decrease as the
background curvature approaches the @xmath scale, since the
gravitational interaction would be cut-off at energies lower than @xmath
. This would suggest that the mass @xmath should be of the order of the
Hubble parameter today @xmath .

Any mechanism that would screen the cosmological constant, or more
generally infrared sources, from gravity goes by the name
“degravitation”, an idea that has been first considered independently of
any massive theory of gravity [ 26 , 27 , 28 , 29 ] . This provides a
very elegant resolution of the cosmological constant problem, by
revealing that the true question is not why is @xmath so small, but
rather why it affects gravity so little.

Finally, another expected advantage of massive gravity is that, unlike
the cosmological constant, a small value of the graviton mass would be
“technically natural”, in the following sense. Indeed, a naive
dimensional analysis would first suggest that, under radiative
corrections, @xmath , which is not that much of an improvement compared
to @xmath . However, as in any gauge theory, adding a fixed mass
necessarily breaks the gauge symmetry, here diffeomorphisms. In the
massless case that symmetry protects the mass from being generated by
loop corrections, so as @xmath , the corrections should tend to zero as
well. This is the naturalness argument of ’t Hooft [ 30 ] , which
implies that @xmath and thus, by dimensional analysis, @xmath . In
conclusion, the renormalized mass would be close to the bare one even
for huge values of @xmath .

Thus, following these naive expectations for a massive theory, one could
obtain both a solution to the cosmological constant problem and possibly
a naturally small dark energy. Of course, as stressed, these are
hand-waving arguments that have no reason to apply in the case of
non-linear theories over non-trivial backgrounds such as GR in
cosmology. Nevertheless, they are certainly enough to tickle one’s
curiosity about what kind of phenomenology a theory of massive gravity
would imply. This has indeed been the case recently, as the passed few
years have witnessed an important excitement in this area. However,
massive gravity has a much longer history that dates back to the late
30’s.

##### Brief history

Since Minkowski space-time plays a privileged role in defining massive
gravity, in order to conceptually appreciate the theory it is convenient
to adopt the particle physics interpretation of GR: the latter is the
unique theory, under some reasonable assumptions, of a massless spin-2
particle with consistent interactions [ 31 , 32 ] . Indeed, GR can be
expressed as a special relativistic gauge theory in terms of the
perturbation around Minkowski space-time @xmath

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.3.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the indices are displaced using @xmath , i.e. the special
relativistic convention. Here @xmath (in natural units @xmath ) is the
reduced Planck mass and @xmath is the reduced Planck length playing the
role of the small coupling constant. The diffeomorphisms now act as a
non-abelian gauge symmetry on @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (1.3.2)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

whose ‘‘global’’ subgroup ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 That is, the subgroup inducing a
homogeneous transformation for @xmath . are the isometries of Minkowski
@xmath , i.e. the Poincaré group. This is a derivatively coupled
effective field theory whose cut-off, or strong-coupling scale, is given
by the Planck scale.

Since @xmath is a two-tensor one can form two Lorentz-invariant
quadratic combinations to form a mass term, these being @xmath and
@xmath . At the linearized level, the only combination which yields a
linearly stable theory was found by Fierz and Pauli (FP), in 1939, to be
[ 33 ]

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.3.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The linear theory describes a massive spin-2 excitation, so by one of
Wigner’s theorems, there are five degrees of freedom. Any other mass
term will necessarily introduce a sixth degree of freedom which is a
Lorentz scalar but is also a ghost, i.e. it has a negative kinetic
energy and thus makes the total energy unbounded from below.

Quite later, in 1970, it was independently realized by van Dam and
Veltman [ 34 ] , and Zakharov [ 35 ] , that unlike spin-1 massive gauge
theories, the spectrum of the spin-2 one is discontinuous in the
massless limit, a feature that is known as the “vDVZ” discontinuity.
Indeed, inverting the quadratic form of the graviton Lagrangian to
obtain the propagator and saturating it with conserved sources one gets

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.3.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

whereas in the massless case the last factor is @xmath instead of @xmath
. This implies that in the massless limit one obtains the GR result plus
an extra scalar pole, i.e. a “fifth force” between the sources

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.3.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This means that however small the mass may be, there will be @xmath
differences with GR. For instance, if one fixes the normalization of
@xmath by requiring the correct Newtonian limit, then the bending of
light by a massive object deviates by @xmath from the GR prediction [ 31
, 32 ] . Moreover, if the limit @xmath is not continuous, the argument
that makes the mass “natural” under radiative corrections does not
necessarily hold anymore. Most importantly however, this discontinuity
suggests that giving a mass to gravity does not only modify its
infra-red behaviour!

Nevertheless, this is an artefact of the linearized theory and no
discontinuity appears if one considers the fully non-linear kinetic
term. In 1972 Vainshtein [ 36 ] computed the spherically symmetric
stationary solution perturbatively, both close to and far away from the
source. In the latter case, he found that the zero-order part was not
the Schwarzschild solution, a mark of the vDVZ discontinuity, and that
the expansion parameter was @xmath , with @xmath now known as the
“Vainshtein radius” ( @xmath is the mass of the source). This implies
that the region of validity of this solution @xmath is pushed to
infinity in the massless limit since then @xmath . Moreover, as one
approaches from infinity, the non-linearities become important at @xmath
. On the other hand, close to the source the expansion parameter is
@xmath and the zero-order part is the Schwarzschild solution ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 A
solution extending to all of space-time and matching the two asymptotic
behaviours has been very difficult to find and its existence was first
established numerically only in 2009 [ 37 ] . See [ 38 ] for an
introduction to the Vainshtein mechanism and the modern approach to the
subject. . Thus, GR is recovered close to the source and in the massless
limit, but this cannot be seen in a perturbative expansion from the
linear regime (far away from the source). This is now known as the
“Vainshtein mechanism” and consists in the discontinuity of the
linearized theory being “cured” by strong non-linear effects. The fifth
force that appears in the propagator ( 1.3.5 ) is indeed present in the
linear regime, but is then screened by non-linear effects at small
scales.

Soon after Vainshtein’s work, still in 1972, Boulware and Deser showed [
39 ] that, unlike non-linear spin-1 gauge theories, considering the
fully non-linear kinetic term of GR while keeping only the FP quadratic
potential reactivated the sixth ghost mode which was precisely avoided
with the FP tuning ( 1.3.3 ) in the linearized theory. Three decades
later, in 2002, it was shown that this could still make sense as an
effective field theory of an interacting massive graviton [ 40 ] .
Indeed, the ghost’s mass lies above the cut-off @xmath and the later is
parametrically larger than @xmath . However, for a mass of the order of
the Hubble scale today @xmath one gets the very large scale @xmath km,
i.e. way larger than the millimeter scale down to which gravity has been
tested. By adding higher powers to the Fierz-Pauli potential one can
push the cut-off down to @xmath , giving @xmath km, which is however
still quite large [ 40 ] . Moreover, around a heavy source the effective
theory breaks down at a distance that is parametrically larger than
@xmath and also @xmath , so that one has no access to the region where
GR is recovered [ 40 ] .

The resolution of the ghost problem came only in 2010 in the works of de
Rham, Gabadadze and Tolley (dRGT) [ 41 , 42 ] which showed, in some
special limit, that adding appropriately tuned higher-order terms in the
potential removes the ghost at all orders in perturbation theory ¹² ¹²
12 Moreover, this special structure of the potential has been shown to
be stable enough under quantum corrections, in the sense that it does
deviate from its ghost-free form, but that the resulting ghost has a
mass lying above the cut-off [ 43 ] . . Shortly after that, it was shown
that the degree of freedom count is indeed five without having
considered any limit and non-perturbatively [ 44 , 45 ] , ¹³ ¹³ 13 Note
however that this does not necessarily imply that the Minkowski solution
is stable in the fully non-linear theory. Indeed, it is already a
remarkably difficult task to demonstrate this in the case of GR [ 46 ] .
. Another advantage is that in the presence of a heavy source with mass
@xmath , the corresponding Vainshtein radius @xmath is now larger than
the distance at which the effective theory breaks down, so that there
exists a region where GR is recovered [ 31 , 32 , 47 ] .

Unfortunately however, the cut-off is still @xmath , although it has
been argued that the actual region of validity of the theory could
extend to higher energies [ 47 ] . Most importantly, it turns out that
the theory admits only approximately (spatially flat) homogeneous and
isotropic solutions [ 48 ] (for non-trivial @xmath ), an important
drawback for cosmology. One can have spatially open, or Bianchi type
anisotropic solutions, but these are plagued by ghost instabilities [ 49
, 50 ] . Even so, the successful construction of an effective theory of
a massive graviton with the above properties is a remarkable theoretical
achievement.

A review and discussion of the theoretical and phenomenological
properties of the dRGT theories, can be found in the reviews [ 31 , 32 ,
47 ] . In the present thesis, the aspect of massive gravity which
interests us is of a more conceptual nature. Indeed, when trying to
express this theory in terms of the full metric @xmath one inevitably
ends up with @xmath in the mass term as well, since the latter is not
generally covariant. This leads to the following conceptual issues.

##### Conceptual shortcomings of the dRGT approach

The first source of discomfort is of course the lack of invariance. To
deal with it one can still reinterpret the theory as a generally
covariant one where there exists a privileged set of coordinates in
which the tensor @xmath takes the form @xmath . A related alternative,
which practically amounts to the same situation, would be to consider
this trivial metric @xmath as a dynamical field as well through a
version of the so-called “Stückelberg trick”. One introduces four
auxiliary scalars @xmath through the replacement

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.3.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

so that now @xmath does transform like a tensor (while @xmath is an
“internal” metric) and takes its trivial form in the @xmath coordinates.

The Stückelberg trick is often cited as the prime example that any
theory can be made gauge-invariant by simply introducing auxiliary
fields patterned on the gauge transformation, a fact which is obviously
true. However what cannot be retrieved after breaking diffeomorphism
invariance with a mass is one of the founding principles of the theory:
relativity. Indeed, the theory may be generally covariant but there
exists a privileged set of coordinates, a preferred frame of reference,
the one in which @xmath becomes trivial. It must be emphasized that this
preferred frame is determined at the theory level, i.e. it is
independent of the specific solution we are interested in. This should
be contrasted with the dynamically privileged frames that arise in many
situations, such as the rest frame of the CMB in cosmology, or the
rest-frames of the sun in solar-system physics.

Another source of conceptual discomfort is the problem of choice: why
@xmath ? Indeed, in principle one could, and actually one does [ 51 , 52
] , consider other choices for this “reference metric”, which is usually
denoted by @xmath , ¹⁴ ¹⁴ 14 In this case Minkowski space-time is not
guaranteed to exist as a stable solution. If the background is @xmath ,
and not necessarily @xmath , then the field @xmath transforms
homogeneously only when the diffeomorphism generator @xmath is a Killing
vector of @xmath . Thus, the global space-time transformations are not
the Poincaré group any more and the notion of a massive particle becomes
ill-defined. . But even if the phenomenology privileges one of these
metrics, we would still be left with a “God-given” non-dynamical field.
One way to solve this issue is bimetric gravity, first proposed in [ 53
] and recently extended to a ghost-free theory of massive bigravity [ 54
, 55 ] , in which case one considers an Einstein-Hilbert kinetic term
for the reference metric as well, making it dynamical and restoring
explicit general covariance and relativity. A second dynamical metric
opens a whole new window for the above mentioned conceptual issues and
actually does exhibit a stable flat Friedmann-Lemaître-Robertson-Walker
(FLRW) solution [ 56 ] . This has also been an active area of research
lately, but unfortunately it is seems hard to obtain models where all
perturbations are bounded on the backgrounds of interest [ 57 , 58 , 59
] .

The above considerations lead us to wonder whether there might be a way
to construct a theory of massive gravity in terms of a single metric
@xmath that is both explicitly covariant and privileges no reference
frame. It turns out that this is possible, but that the price to pay is
the loss of space-time locality.

### 1.4 Non-local gravity

A non-local theory is a theory in which the equations of motion are not
differential but integro-differential, with both space and time
integrations. Therefore, the dynamics of the field at @xmath do not only
depend on the values of this field in the infinitesimal neighborhood of
@xmath , but on a finite or infinite region of space-time. In
particular, in the case of time non-localities the corresponding physics
exhibit memory effects. Since the field value at @xmath depends on the
field values on a finite past interval @xmath , the field “remembers”
its history. Here we will restrict to non-local operators that are the
inverses of some differential operators. Then, general covariance will
imply that space and time non-localities come together.

Non-local modifications of GR have been considered in the early attempts
to construct degravitating mechanisms [ 28 , 29 ] . Moreover, they also
appear from loop corrections to the quantum effective action for the
metric, i.e. the action for the expectation value @xmath [ 60 , 61 , 62
, 63 , 64 ] . Based on this justification, phenomenological non-local
modifications of GR have already been considered as possible
explanations of dark energy, with [ 65 ] being the pioneering one. More
generally, non-local effects may appear in many classical effective
descriptions where dissipative effects or subsystems are considered [ 66
, 67 ] .

In our work during my PhD we have first started by trying to construct a
generally-covariant theory of massive gravity at the price of
non-locality [ 68 ] , based on an earlier construction [ 29 , 69 ] which
rather focused on its degravitation properties. The corresponding
cosmology not being viable, we proceeded with the study of non-local
modified gravity models that are still controlled by a fixed mass
parameter, but in which the graviton remains massless [ 70 , 71 ] .
These theories contain ghost modes, i.e. fields with negative kinetic
energy, and we have spent some time understanding their effects both at
the classical and quantum levels [ 68 , 71 , 72 ] . Independent of the
work in which I have been involved, the group has been very productive
on the phenomenological analysis of these models [ 73 , 74 , 75 , 76 ,
77 , 78 ] .

### 1.5 Thesis summary

In this thesis we will describe part of the above-mentioned work and
will also try to extend a bit further some of its concepts,
constructions and conclusions. In the second chapter, we will start by
revisiting linear massive gauge theories, since manipulating them will
be important in understanding how to construct and especially analyze
non-local theories. In particular, we will see how the field components
of these theories split into dynamical/non-dynamical modes and the
relation to the constraints of gauge theory, an identification which
will be crucial in the non-local case. Part of this analysis will also
cover a study that we carried out in [ 79 ] before we started the
research on non-local gravity. It concerns a hidden symmetry in massive
linearized gravity and the thorough analysis we will perform here will
hopefully allow us to understand that feature better. The chapter will
end with a non-local formulation of these local theories and a
construction of a more general, genuinely non-local, theory of a linear
massive graviton, with a scalar mode that is not necessarily a ghost.
The latter part contains unpublished original material.

This will bring us to the subject of non-local field theory, so in the
third chapter we will discuss the many subtleties that arise when
considering non-localities. Indeed, a first feature is that the
variational principle has to be generalized in order to provide causal
equations of motion. Moreover, non-local theories cannot be quantized
without enlarging their set of solutions in the classical limit, so that
they can only be interpreted as classical effective theories.

Most importantly however, their dynamical structure must be clarified in
order to properly settle classical stability issues. This is a subject
that has not been treated rigorously enough in some important part of
the related literature, in my opinion. An original part of this thesis
consists in unveiling the misunderstanding that lies at the origin the
confusion. Indeed, as we shall see, one has to separate the notion of
degree of freedom and dynamical field (or “radiative”, “propagating”
field). Whereas the two notions are equivalent in local field theory,
this is no longer true in the presence of non-localities. If some field
has its initial conditions constrained, and thus does not represent a
degree of freedom, this does not necessarily mean that it does not
propagate.

Then, in the fourth chapter we will come back to the linear non-local
theory constructed in chapter 2 and we will try to extend it to a
generally-covariant non-local theory of massive gravity. There are two
possible procedures, the “action-based” one and the “projector-based”
one, whose resulting theories can be very different. After having
constructed a class of models in both cases, we will apply some
phenomenological constraints in order to reduce the number of free
parameters. For the projector-based model the result will be that the
tensor modes cannot be massive, while in the action-based model they
can, but the corresponding mass term is irrelevant for the cosmological
background. Since this is the part that will interest us here, the
action-based model can also be taken with zero tensor mass. What is then
left is the mass of the scalar mode, and the two models are
one-parameter extensions of the models proposed by Maggiore [ 73 ] and
Maggiore and Mancarella [ 75 ] . The extensions continuously interpolate
between these models and GR with a cosmological constant, so that the
phenomenological successes of the former should remain valid for the
extended models as well.

In the last chapter we will analyze the background cosmology, using both
numerical simulations and analytical approximations. The analysis of the
one-parameter extensions is an original part of this thesis and confirms
that they become indistinguishable from @xmath CDM for large values of
the extension parameter. We will finish with a discussion of the fact
that these solutions are phenomenologically viable, despite the presence
of a ghost mode.

Finally, in the appendix A we have tried to provide a more or less
rigorous mathematical support for the non-local operators that are
invoked in generally-covariant non-local theories. These correspond to
the generalization of the integration kernels of Green’s theory, which
are convolved with functions, to “bi-tensors” in differential geometry,
that are convolved with tensors. The appendix also contains derivations
of the properties of these operators that are most useful to us. For the
reader who is less interested in these technicalities, rest assured that
whenever some property or definition will be used, on top of referring
to sections of this appendix we will also give lighter explanations that
should satisfy (but not bore) a more physically-oriented mind.

I acknowledge the use of Mathematica and especially of the “xACT”
package for symbolic tensor computations [ 80 ] .

### 1.6 Notation & conventions

We work on a @xmath -dimensional manifold @xmath , also define @xmath
and we focus on the case @xmath . The manifold @xmath is equipped with a
Lorentzian metric @xmath , that is, a symmetric covariant tensor of rank
@xmath whose component matrix @xmath in some local coordinates has
eigenvalues with the sign signature @xmath and thus @xmath . We denote
by @xmath the Minkowski metric @xmath and use the convention @xmath for
the Levi-Civita symbol, so that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.6.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

is the volume @xmath -form. For the Riemann and Ricci tensors the
conventions are

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.6.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and for the Christoffel symbols

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.6.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We use @xmath to denote the d’Alembertian and @xmath to denote the
Laplacian on flat space-time. The space-time Fourier transform
convention is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.6.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

so for consistency the spatial Fourier transform is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.6.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We use natural units @xmath and also the following reduced Planck masses
@xmath and @xmath , which are actually masses only in @xmath .

## Chapter 2 Linear massless/massive gauge theories

In this chapter we propose to study the massive and massless theories of
spin-1 and spin-2 fields through several approaches, each one of them
providing a complementary viewpoint. As already mentioned in the
introduction, the notions of degree of freedom and of dynamical field
are not equivalent in non-local field theory. It is therefore important
to first understand their equivalence in local field theory, and
especially gauge theory, where not all fields propagate. We will thus
see, in many different ways, how the field content splits into dynamical
and non-dynamical fields and how this is related to the degrees of
freedom of the theory. This will then allow us to understand the
spectrum of non-local gauge theories, without making any confusion
between the constraints that are due to non-locality and the ones that
are due to gauge symmetry. Finally, this analysis will also bring us
useful by-products that will allow us to construct linear non-local
massive spin-2 gauge theories.

Although our main interest is in gravity and thus the spin-2 field, the
spin-1 case will be very helpful in facilitating our intuition and
argumentation. Indeed, it shares many properties with the spin-2 case,
but at the same time has less fields, thus simplifying our analysis. On
top of this, the spin-1 theory stands as exceptional, regarding some
important properties, when compared with higher spin theories @xmath .
Thus, the study of the spin-1 case will turn out to be essential in
contrasting with some peculiarities of the spin-2 case.

For the kinetic term of the theory, in each case, we will consider the
only one that is stable, i.e. the one that exhibits the highest gauge
symmetry. These are the kinetic terms of electrodynamics and of
linearized GR. For the mass terms however we will consider the most
general quadratic Lorentz-invariant potential, which in the case of the
spin-2 field usually activates a ghost mode. Indeed, that ghost will be
a recurrent subject in this thesis, so it is important that we include
these actions as well in our study. Moreover, considering this general
case will lead us to the definition of projectors that are going to be
very useful for constructing a genuinely non-local ghost-free theory.
This chapter is based on, and extends, the following papers [ 68 , 79 ]
.

### 2.1 Technical preliminaries

#### 2.1.1 Inverse differential operators

In this chapter we will consider only spatially localized fields, that
is, fields which tend to zero sufficiently fast at infinity and which
can therefore be represented by their spatial Fourier transform. On this
space of fields the operator @xmath , where @xmath is the Laplacian, is
negative-definite, as is obvious in its Fourier representation. It has
therefore zero kernel when acting on fields whose values and first
spatial derivatives tend to zero at spatial infinity. This means that it
admits a unique (right and left) inverse @xmath , and actually a unique
power @xmath for @xmath , which can again be obtained through its
Fourier representation. These operators commute among themselves and
with spatial derivatives.

These nice properties do not generalize to the Klein-Gordon operator
@xmath because it has a non-trivial kernel, the vector space generated
by the plane-wave solutions (see appendix A.2.2 for detailed
properties). It therefore admits more than one right-inverse @xmath and
no left-inverse in general. The space of inverses is parametrized by the
elements of the kernel since any two inversions are related by a
homogeneous solution

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.1.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Thus, if one picks a @xmath once and for all, all other inversions are
found by adding a homogeneous solution, as we know from calculus. Here
we will denote by “ @xmath ” the inverses of @xmath that are also @xmath
-linear operators

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.1.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which must be contrasted with the general inverse operator which is
affine

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.1.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath independent of @xmath . The operators @xmath can then be
represented by the convolution with a Green’s distribution

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.1.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which by Poincaré covariance must be of the form @xmath . The quantity
@xmath is also called a “propagator” depending on the context. The
different choices of @xmath now correspond to the different time
boundary conditions of @xmath , which in turn correspond to the time
boundary conditions of @xmath , ¹ ¹ 1 Given the set of fields we
consider, the spatial boundary conditions are zero at infinity. .

Two Green’s functions are of particular relevance for physics on flat
space-time, the retarded one in classical field theory and the Feynman
one in perturbative QFT. Imposing trivial initial conditions

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.1.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

gives the retarded propagator

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.1.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

while imposing no positive-frequency ingoing waves and no
negative-frequency outgoing waves

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.1.7)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.1.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

gives the Feynman propagator

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.1.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Indeed, by writing ( 2.1.4 ) in Fourier space, and using the converging
contour integrals with the residue theorem, we get that @xmath obeys the
above mentioned boundary/initial conditions in each respective case. The
domains of definition of the corresponding operators @xmath and @xmath
are the fields obeying the same boundary conditions as @xmath in each
respective case. On their respective domains of definition, both
operators commute with partial derivatives and are also left-inverses ²
² 2 See appendices A.3.2 and A.3.3 where we show this for @xmath in real
space and on arbitrary globally hyperbolic space-times. It can also be
worked-out in Fourier space for both @xmath and @xmath , since if the
Fourier representation gives a finite result, i.e. if the operators are
defined, then it is obvious that they commute with the derivatives and
are also left-inverses. . In practice the @xmath may act after some
derivatives, in which case it is convenient to have a stronger condition
for its applicability. At the bottom of appendix A.2.2 we provide such a
condition which we call “having finite past”. Loosely speaking, it
amounts to @xmath being non-zero only after a finite time.

The retarded Green’s function arises in situations where one wants to
solve a sourced equation

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.1.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

in a causal way, i.e. such that @xmath depends only on @xmath with
@xmath in the past light-cone of @xmath . This is indeed the case as we
can see by the real space representation in @xmath given in equation (
A.2.22 ) of appendix A.2.2 . Flipping the sign of @xmath in ( 2.1.6 )
amounts to flipping the sign of @xmath , after having redefined @xmath ,
so this gives us the advanced propagator @xmath which is supported on
the future light-cone and is thus anti-causal. We thus have

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.1.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

while @xmath is symmetric under the individual sign flip of spatial
arguments. In perturbative QFT it is rather the Feynman propagator which
is relevant because it is the one that arises in the computation of the
scattering amplitudes. More precisely, it represents the particles of
@xmath which mediate the interaction between sources @xmath at different
space-time points. To see this one can invoke the corresponding action

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.1.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which has been regularized with an @xmath factor that ensures the
convergence of the corresponding path integral. Thus, unitarity of
@xmath forces upon us this choice for the sign of @xmath . We then have
that by integrating-out @xmath

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.1.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Differentiating twice ( 2.1.12 ) with respect to the source one gets
that the Feynman propagator is the two-point function

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.1.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Actually, this path integration has been performed a bit formally since
we have not specified its boundary conditions @xmath . However, these
are already fixed for consistency reasons and there are several
instructive ways to see this that will be useful for us at some point
later on. First, note that the path integral is dominated by the
classical solutions, which in this case are given by free wave-packets
at infinity (where @xmath ) with dispersion relation

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.1.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Thus, positive-frequency modes diverge at past infinity, while
negative-frequency modes diverge at future infinity. This means that the
only boundary conditions for which the path integral makes sense around
classical solutions are the Feynman ones ( 2.1.8 ), i.e. only
negative-frequency waves at past infinity and only positive-frequency
waves at future infinity. Conversely, if one imposes these boundary
conditions but sets @xmath , then the result of integrating-out @xmath
is the Feynman propagator. One can also understand these boundary
conditions from the point of view of the canonical quantization. One
simply needs

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.1.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the vacuum state at past infinity and @xmath is the one
at future infinity. We then have that @xmath , where @xmath is the free
annihilation operator corresponding to the amplitude of the modes with
positive frequency, while @xmath , where @xmath is the creation operator
corresponding to the amplitude of the modes with negative frequency.

Finally, note that since @xmath is a function of @xmath , we have that
@xmath is symmetric under the individual flip of any of its arguments,
so it is symmetric under time-reversal in particular. As a consequence
it has both retarded @xmath and advanced @xmath parts. This is expected
because in a scattering process the information of the whole interval
@xmath is required, so that for finite @xmath the dependence is acausal.

#### 2.1.2 Degrees of freedom, dynamical and non-dynamical fields

In non-local theories the question of degrees of freedom of a theory can
be a subtle issue, so it is important that we define clearly the words
we will be using. The number of degrees of freedom of a field theory,
denoted by @xmath , is the number of initial field configurations that
we are free to choose in order to evolve the system uniquely in time. In
the theories we are going to study below we will find two types of
fields. The “dynamical” (or “radiative”) ones are those obeying a
second-order equation in time

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.1.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

while the “non-dynamical” (or “non-radiative”) ones are those that obey
a purely spatial differential equation

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.1.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In the dynamical case ( 2.1.17 ) the solution for a @xmath which is
solely excited by @xmath takes the form ( 2.1.10 ). This means that, by
measuring @xmath at some @xmath , one can deduce some information about
the excitations of @xmath at some other @xmath (as long as @xmath is in
the future light-cone of @xmath ). We thus say that the field
“propagates” the information of the source. This is how one can gain
information about a distant object, by detecting the waves it emits in
some dynamical field. Going even further, this is how two “sources” at
different space-time points are going to interact through the “force”
mediated by @xmath . Note that this scenario does not focus on the
initial conditions that would have been given to @xmath . These are
actually trivial since @xmath is solely excited by the source. Thus, the
forces that are present in the theory correspond to the dynamical
fields, independently of whether these are degrees of freedom or not.
Finally, since the dynamical fields induce poles in the propagator, and
“propagate” the information of sources, one can equivalently refer to
them as “propagating” fields.

In the non-dynamical case ( 2.1.18 ) the equation seems to be in
conflict with relativity since it is not Lorentz invariant and implies
an action at a distance, i.e. @xmath reacts instantaneously to the
source @xmath . As we will see however, in these cases, either @xmath
will not be physically observable (gauge-dependent), or it will itself
be a spatially non-local functional of the fundamental fields. In the
latter case the measurement of @xmath is spatially non-local to begin
with and can thus not be performed at a single time, so there is no
contradiction with relativity. In that case, the information of the
source does not propagate but is instead communicated simultaneously, to
an unphysical or non-local field. Thus, non-dynamical fields do not
allow us to gain local information on the source’s dynamics nor do they
mediate any interaction.

Now, in the dynamical case, we have that one needs to provide the
initial conditions @xmath and @xmath on @xmath in order to evolve the
field in time, so that it corresponds to @xmath . In the non-dynamical
case we have that the field is totally determined by the source at every
time and, in particular, at the initial condition surface, so that
@xmath . In the dynamical case the solutions for @xmath are linear
superpositions of plane-waves, whose vector space is isomorphic to the
initial data space, while in the non-dynamical case the source-free
solution is @xmath .

It therefore seems obvious that, if one denotes the number of dynamical
fields by @xmath , then @xmath , ³ ³ 3 If the dynamical equations where
of order @xmath in the time-derivatives, this would give @xmath . . This
appears as a trivial statement in local field theory, but does not hold
at all for non-local theories. It is thus important to stress in advance
that the notion of dynamical field and degree of freedom should be
considered separately.

### 2.2 Standard Lagrangian approach

#### 2.2.1 Spin 1

##### Massive

So let us start by considering the case of massive electrodynamics, that
is, the Proca action

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.2.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a conserved external source, i.e. @xmath , and the mass
parameter @xmath breaks the U @xmath gauge symmetry ⁴ ⁴ 4 In realistic
cases where @xmath is also made of fundamental fields, the argument that
the @xmath action is gauge-invariant because @xmath no longer holds.
Indeed, conservation equations can only hold for some field
configurations, namely the on-shell ones, whereas a symmetry should hold
for all field configurations in the action. There are then two
possibilities. Either the @xmath term corresponds to non-minimal
couplings to other fields through @xmath , in which case it is itself
gauge-invariant, or it emerges through minimal couplings that involve
the covariant derivative @xmath , in which case its variation is
compensated by a non-trivial variation of @xmath -independent terms.
Then, because of that gauge symmetry, by Noether’s theorem for local
symmetries we have that @xmath on-shell. In the massive case, if the
matter sector is unchanged, then we still have a global U @xmath
symmetry and it is thus Noether’s theorem for global symmetries which
implies @xmath .

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.2.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The equations of motion are

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.2.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and taking the divergence one gets

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.2.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

so we can rewrite them as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.2.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Thus, as soon as @xmath , and therefore the gauge symmetry is lost, the
usual Lorentz gauge condition of massless electrodynamics @xmath appears
as the scalar part of the equations of motion. The latter along with the
@xmath components of the Klein-Gordon equation imply that @xmath is
non-dynamical

  -- -- -- ---------
           (2.2.6)
  -- -- -- ---------

and that its initial conditions are totally determined in terms of the
ones of @xmath and @xmath . We are then left with

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.2.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

that is, @xmath unconstrained fields transforming in the vector
representation of SO @xmath and obeying a massive Klein-Gordon equation.
This amounts to @xmath degrees of freedom, corresponding to the initial
conditions of @xmath and @xmath . In @xmath this gives @xmath .

##### Massless

In the case where @xmath , we have the gauge symmetry ( 2.2.2 ), so the
Lorentz gauge @xmath can be reached by performing a gauge
transformation, the result being again ( 2.2.6 ) and ( 2.2.7 ), but with
@xmath . Now however these equations have a residual gauge symmetry
given by the gauge parameters satisfying @xmath . To see what we can do
with it, we can consider the general solution of the divergence of (
2.2.7 )

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.2.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a homogeneous solution @xmath . Remember that for the
action of @xmath to be defined the source @xmath must have finite past.
Using the residual gauge transformation on that equation we get

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.2.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

It is thus possible to cancel @xmath by choosing

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

so that @xmath is totally determined by the source and its initial
conditions are thus fixed. The degrees of freedom are therefore the
@xmath components of the transverse part @xmath , i.e. @xmath , and its
first derivatives.

It may appear however that the longitudinal part @xmath is still a
dynamical field, since it obeys a dynamical equation @xmath , even
though it does not correspond to a degree of freedom. This would be in
contradiction with @xmath . As it turns out, this is only an artefact of
our choice of gauge, which is the natural one from the point of view of
the massive theory, since then @xmath holds continuously with @xmath .
Indeed, one can always introduce a @xmath term in the gauge parameter to
make it appear as a source of a gauge-dependent component. We can
therefore choose a different gauge to start with, such as the one which
precisely eliminates the longitudinal mode

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This choice is more natural from the Hamiltonian point of view, as we
will see soon. The equation of motion of @xmath then reads

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and we have that the divergence of the equation of @xmath is
automatically satisfied. We thus have that the initial conditions of
both @xmath and @xmath are fixed and that these fields are
non-dynamical. We can therefore conclude that in the massless theory we
have indeed @xmath , which for @xmath gives @xmath .

#### 2.2.2 Spin 2

Let us know consider linearized GR along with the most general quadratic
potential

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.2.13)
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

where @xmath is known as the “Lichnerowicz operator”

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The Fierz-Pauli theory corresponds to the choice @xmath . Here @xmath is
some external conserved source @xmath and the mass term breaks the
following linear gauge symmetry

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The equations of motion are

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

their divergence is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and their trace is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Taking the double divergence, we can simplify the trace equation to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.19)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which is a dynamical equation for @xmath only when @xmath . In the
following sections we will see that in this case the kinetic term of
@xmath has the wrong sign with respect to the rest of the fields, so
that @xmath is a ghost. For the moment, we can already say that if
@xmath then @xmath is massless, because the mass term solely depends on
the traceless part @xmath , while if @xmath then @xmath is also a
tachyon. In particular, for @xmath it is a tachyon with mass @xmath . On
the other hand, if @xmath , then ( 2.2.19 ) becomes an algebraic
equation for @xmath and the latter gets totally determined by the source

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.20)
  -- -------- -- ----------

so that it is no longer a degree of freedom, nor a dynamical field.
Another peculiarity of this choice for @xmath is that the double
divergence of the equation of motion, i.e. the divergence of ( 2.2.17 ),
is gauge-invariant ⁵ ⁵ 5 It is actually the linearization of the Ricci
scalar. . This suggests that, although @xmath , there is some kind of
leftover gauge symmetry in the equations of motion, in contrast with
massive electrodynamics where both the equation and its divergence are
not gauge-invariant. However, the equations of motion are not invariant
under any gauge transformation ( 2.2.15 ), even a pure-scalar one @xmath
. We will understand this point better in the following sections, when
we will have the appropriate technology at our disposal. For the moment
we can simply note the interesting fact that for a pure-scalar
transformation

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.21)
  -- -------- -- ----------

the action varies by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.22)
  -- -------- -- ----------

so for @xmath this is proportional to the divergence of ( 2.2.17 ) and
therefore vanishes for on-shell @xmath configurations ⁶ ⁶ 6 This
corresponds to the well-known fact that, when @xmath takes the form
@xmath for some function @xmath , the Fierz-Pauli mass term is a total
derivative. The generalization of this property to terms of cubic and
higher order in @xmath gives rise to the Galileon family of operators [
25 ] . . Thus, if @xmath is a solution, then

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.23)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Clearly, something special happens at the Fierz-Pauli point @xmath ,
although it is not a gauge symmetry. So let us start with this @xmath
case.

##### Massive @xmath

Using ( 2.2.20 ) and ( 2.2.17 ) the system of equations simplifies to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.24)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.25)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.26)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

The latter allows us to fix @xmath

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.27)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The @xmath component of ( 2.2.25 ), along with the @xmath component of (
2.2.24 ), fix @xmath

  -- -- -- ----------
           (2.2.28)
  -- -- -- ----------

Using the @xmath component of ( 2.2.25 ) and the trace of the spatial
part of ( 2.2.24 ), we get

  -- -- -- ----------
           (2.2.29)
  -- -- -- ----------

We finally split @xmath into its trace @xmath and traceless part @xmath
, and isolate @xmath in the above equations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.30)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.31)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.32)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.33)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

so the corresponding initial conditions are determined by the ones of
@xmath and @xmath and these fields are non-dynamical. We are thus left
with only @xmath being unconstrained, obeying a massive Klein-Gordon
equation (the spatial traceless part of ( 2.2.24 ))

  -- -- -- ----------
           (2.2.35)
  -- -- -- ----------

and transforming in the tensor representation of SO @xmath . We thus
have @xmath , which in @xmath gives @xmath .

##### Massive @xmath

Let us now move on to the @xmath case. As we have seen already in the
@xmath case, the equations for the @xmath components can easily become
lengthy in the process of spotting the non-dynamical fields and their
precise form is not particularly illuminating. This is even worse here
because of the undetermined @xmath parameter. We therefore propose to
simply sketch the procedure for generic @xmath and then give the precise
equations for the case @xmath which is considerably simpler. In the
subsequent sections where the method of analysis will be more suited, we
will treat the generic case explicitly to see that it is not
qualitatively different from @xmath .

So let us sketch the procedure for the generic case. In the @xmath case,
the trace equation eliminated @xmath , so we were able to use the
divergence equation to eliminate @xmath and @xmath . Here, since the
trace is dynamical, we have that either @xmath , or @xmath will remain
dynamical. More precisely, using the @xmath component of ( 2.2.17 ) and
the appropriate combination of the @xmath component of ( 2.2.16 ) and (
2.2.19 ), we find non-dynamical equations for @xmath and @xmath which
fix the initial conditions in terms of the ones of @xmath and @xmath .
We can then use the @xmath component of ( 2.2.17 ) along with the @xmath
component of ( 2.2.16 ) to do the same for @xmath . We are then left
with the @xmath component of ( 2.2.16 ) in an appropriate combination
with the @xmath component and ( 2.2.19 ), which yield dynamical
equations for the unconstrained fields @xmath . This therefore
corresponds to @xmath , or @xmath when @xmath , i.e. the trace @xmath
(or equivalently the Lorentz trace @xmath ) is now part of the dynamical
spectrum.

In particular, for @xmath , equations ( 2.2.16 ), ( 2.2.17 ) and (
2.2.19 ) can be brought to the simple form

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.36)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.37)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Using the second equation along with the @xmath component we get

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.38)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.39)
  -- -------- -- ----------

These fields are thus non-dynamical and their initial conditions are
fixed in terms of the ones of @xmath and @xmath . We are thus left with
@xmath obeying

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.40)
  -- -------- -- ----------

so @xmath , and in particular @xmath for @xmath .

##### Massless

Let us now pass to the @xmath case. First remember that ( 2.2.17 ) is a
possible choice of gauge only if @xmath , since otherwise its divergence
is gauge-invariant. We therefore have that the @xmath case follows from
the massive @xmath case by simply setting @xmath , although now ( 2.2.17
) is obtained by a gauge transformation, as in the spin-1 theory. We
work in the gauge corresponding to @xmath so that our equations are (
2.2.36 ) with @xmath . Again, as in electrodynamics, there is a residual
gauge symmetry given by the gauge parameters that satisfy @xmath . The
divergence and trace of the spatial part of ( 2.2.36 ) read

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.41)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and their solutions take the form

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.42)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath and @xmath are homogeneous solutions. We can then perform a
residual gauge transformation

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.43)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and we see that we can kill the homogeneous solutions with the choice

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.44)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.45)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

Therefore, @xmath are @xmath are fully determined by the source and thus
carry no degrees of freedom. The only unconstrained components are the
spatial transverse-traceless part @xmath , i.e. @xmath and @xmath ,
whose equation of motion is the spatial transverse-traceless part of (
2.2.36 )

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.46)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and correspond to @xmath degrees of freedom. As in the spin-1 case, the
fact that @xmath and @xmath are apparently dynamical is a gauge
artefact. By starting all over again but rather considering the gauge

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.47)
  -- -------- -- ----------

we find indeed that they both obey non-dynamical equations and thus have
that @xmath , with @xmath in the @xmath case.

### 2.3 Canonical formalism

The most rigorous way to perform the degree of freedom count and to
study the stability of a theory is through the canonical formalism (see
for instance [ 31 , 32 , 39 , 44 , 45 ] for the case of massive
gravity). It is also the most suited way to unambiguously see that
@xmath for gauge theories. Here we assume that the reader has the basic
knowledge of constrained Hamiltonian systems, i.e. Dirac’s algorithm,
weak equality ⁷ ⁷ 7 Weak equality “ @xmath ” holds for “ @xmath up to
the addition of terms that are zero on the constrained hypersurface”. ,
first/second class constraint terminology ⁸ ⁸ 8 A constraint is “first
class” if its Poisson bracket with any other constraint and the
Hamiltonian is weakly zero. A constraint that is not first class is
called “second class”. etc. ⁹ ⁹ 9 See for instance [ 81 ] for details on
this formalism. .

#### 2.3.1 Spin 1

##### Massive

Since @xmath has no kinetic term @xmath in ( 2.2.1 )

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.3.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

we Legendre transform only with respect to @xmath . The conjugate
momenta (the electric field) read

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.3.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

so that the action in canonical form is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.3.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.3.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

is the Hamiltonian density. Since @xmath is an auxiliary non-dynamical
field, it can be integrated-out in order to provide a clearer picture of
the dynamics, i.e. it can be replaced with the solution of its own
equation of motion

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.3.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

It is then clear that we have @xmath degrees of freedom forming two
vectors @xmath and @xmath under SO @xmath .

##### Massless

In the case @xmath , we have to go back to ( 2.3.4 ) and observe that
@xmath becomes a Lagrange multiplier enforcing the Gauss constraint

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.3.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We now enter Dirac’s constraint formalism so let us define the Poisson
bracket

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.3.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and let us also smear the phase space functions of interest

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.3.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

so that time-evolution is given by ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 Note that the second term
here is needed because @xmath can depend on the source which has its own
time-dependence. The @xmath operator will of course not act on the
smearing fields @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.3.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We then have that, for a conserved source, @xmath is first class

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

so @xmath is not determined by the equations of motion and @xmath
generates abelian gauge transformations on phase space

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which for @xmath and @xmath translate into

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This implies that @xmath is pure-gauge, the simplest example being the
Coulomb gauge @xmath . Along with @xmath , we thus get that the
longitudinal parts of @xmath and @xmath are non-dynamical, leaving only
the transverse parts as the @xmath degrees of freedom of the theory.
Moreover, here we can clearly see why @xmath . Indeed, the fields with
constrained initial conditions @xmath and @xmath appear as a Lagrange
multiplier @xmath , which is thus totally arbitrary and in fact
represents the gauge parameter, and a canonical couple @xmath subject to
a constraint (spatial differential equation) and a gauge transformation
on phase space. Thus both @xmath and @xmath are non-dynamical and thus
@xmath . Finally, note that in both the massive and massless cases, the
quadratic part of the (gauge-fixed for @xmath ) Hamiltonian is positive
definite, so these theories are stable.

#### 2.3.2 Spin 2

##### Massive @xmath

Since the @xmath components have no kinetic term in ( 2.2.13 ), we first
remove all time-derivatives that act upon them by integrating by parts

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.3.13)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

and then Legendre transform only with respect to @xmath . The conjugate
momenta read

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and the inversion gives

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

so that the action in canonical form reads

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and the Hamiltonian density is

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We see that @xmath is an auxiliary field that appears quadratically
whatever the value of @xmath , so we can integrate it out as we did for
@xmath in the spin-1 case to get

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Now, for @xmath we have that @xmath is also a quadratic auxiliary field,
so we can integrate it out as well

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                                
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

To see the instability in this setting we can harmonically decompose
@xmath

  -- -- -- ----------
           (2.3.20)
  -- -- -- ----------

and trade @xmath for the more convenient variable

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.21)
  -- -------- -- ----------

to get that the part of @xmath which is quadratic in @xmath in the
scalar sector reads

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.22)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We see that @xmath is thus not positive-definite, or that by completing
the square there is a negative-definite term. Since this occurs at the
level of the conjugate momenta, we have that the corresponding mode is a
ghost. The degrees of freedom are the @xmath and @xmath components, that
is, a total of @xmath .

##### Massive @xmath

So let us go back to ( 2.3.2 ) and move on to the @xmath case where
@xmath becomes a Lagrange multiplier enforcing the constraint

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.23)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Defining the Poisson bracket

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.24)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and the smeared observables

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.25)
  -- -------- -- ----------

we get that @xmath is second class (using ( 2.3.9 ) and for a conserved
source)

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.26)
  -- -------- -- ----------

so it is a priori not conserved under time evolution. To repair this, we
must therefore consider @xmath as an additional (secondary) constraint
and append a term @xmath to the total Hamiltonian density @xmath

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.27)
  -- -------- -- ----------

with @xmath a Lagrange multiplier. Now, demanding that @xmath be
conserved fixes @xmath

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.28)
  -- -------- -- ----------

so we can choose

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.29)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which is nothing but ( 2.2.20 ), and the Hamiltonian density now reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We must finally demand that @xmath be conserved under time-evolution
with this new Hamiltonian

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.31)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which ends up fixing @xmath . The resulting Hamiltonian preserves the
constraints @xmath under time-evolution as long as they are imposed on
the initial conditions. These constraints kill precisely the degree of
freedom which causes the instability in the @xmath case and make the
Hamiltonian positive-definite. Indeed, by performing a harmonic
decomposition of @xmath ( 2.3.20 ) and also @xmath

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.32)
  -- -------- -- ----------

we can actually solve the constraints explicitly and get that they
relate the traces to the longitudinal parts

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.3.33)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.3.34)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

Actually, as in the @xmath case, one can use more convenient
combinations instead of the longitudinal modes

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.35)
  -- -------- -- ----------

so that, using the constraints, we can express @xmath in terms of @xmath
and @xmath . We get

  -- -- -- ----------
           (2.3.36)
  -- -- -- ----------

and

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.37)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and the action reads

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.38)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.39)
  -- -------- -- ----------

with ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 The harmonic variables of the source @xmath are defined in
( 2.4.18 ) and the conservation equation in terms of them reads ( 2.4.36
).

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                       @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.3.40)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

The quadratic part is positive definite and the theory is thus stable,
with @xmath degrees of freedom. These correspond to @xmath and their
conjugate momenta.

##### Massless

We can finally proceed to the massless case where @xmath becomes a
Lagrange multiplier as well. We must therefore go back to ( 2.3.2 ) with
@xmath and define the constraint imposed by @xmath as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.41)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Observe that the secondary constraint @xmath of Fierz-Pauli theory (
2.3.26 ) actually reduces to @xmath in the @xmath limit. The only
non-trivial Poisson bracket arises in

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.42)
  -- -------- -- ----------

so the system is now first class and the @xmath are not determined by
the equations of motion. Rather, they serve as the gauge parameters of
the gauge transformations generated by @xmath and @xmath on phase space

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.3.43)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.3.44)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

which for @xmath and @xmath imply

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.45)
  -- -------- -- ----------

These can be used to fix the gauge to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.46)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which, along with @xmath and @xmath , imply that @xmath and @xmath are
both transverse-traceless. The degrees of freedom of the theory are thus
@xmath . The Hamiltonian density in this gauge is positive-definite

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.47)
  -- -------- -- ----------

so the theory is stable.

We can now note that the combinations @xmath and @xmath defined in (
2.3.35 ), that were used in the treatment of the massive theory, are
actually invariant under ( 2.3.45 ) ¹² ¹² 12 This will become clear in
the next section where we will deduce the transformations of the
harmonic variables under the gauge symmetry. . We thus have that the
scalar sector of the FP theory @xmath , once the second class
constraints are solved, becomes invariant under the transformations
generated by the massless constraints @xmath . It is important to note
however that not all of these constraints appear in the massive theory
and, for those who do, they are second class for @xmath . This means
they do not correspond to gauge symmetries, since there is no totally
undetermined field playing the role of the gauge parameter. Thus, by
discussing the transformations of the scalars in the massive theory we
are actually comparing objects in two different theories.

Nevertheless, the fact that these modes are gauge-invariant is again a
property of the scalar sector of FP theory alone, since this is not the
case of the vector sector, where @xmath is gauge-invariant but @xmath is
not, and it is also not the case in massive electrodynamics. Moreover,
it is also not the case for the ghost scalar when @xmath , so this has
all the characteristics of the issue that was discussed in the previous
section: on the FP point @xmath there is something that looks like a
gauge symmetry but that is actually not.

Another interesting feature we can already see here is the vDVZ
discontinuity of the @xmath theory. Indeed, sending @xmath in ( 2.3.2 )
effectively neutralizes the vector modes but the scalar mode remains,
that is, one more dynamical field that in the @xmath case.

It seems that the use of harmonic variables has helped our understanding
of this apparent symmetry issue and has generally made the dynamics of
the theory more transparent. Unfortunately, in the canonical formalism
the action is a bit too crowded because of the presence of the conjugate
momenta, so this is still not the optimal way to understand the theory.
We therefore now propose to use harmonic variables, but in the
Lagrangian formulation.

### 2.4 Harmonic formalism

In this section we consider the @xmath -harmonic decomposition, but at
the level of the Lagrangian formulation. This will allow us to explore
the above mentioned “residual gauge symmetry” of Fierz-Pauli theory, but
it will also make the dynamical structure of the theory more
transparent. Moreover, this formalism is also easily applicable in the
case of a de-Sitter background. It will thus allow us to understand in a
different language a number of results in the literature on the degrees
of freedom of massive gravity over de-Sitter. This section is based on
original work from our group [ 79 ] .

To briefly introduce the harmonic decomposition, let us start by noting
that at each space-time point @xmath , the field components form
irreducible representations of SO @xmath , i.e. @xmath is a SO @xmath
-scalar, @xmath a SO @xmath -vector, the traceless part of @xmath is a
SO @xmath -tensor and so on. If we now consider the full group of
isometries of @xmath -dimensional space, i.e. the Euclidean group ISO
@xmath of rotations and translations, then a field is no longer seen as
an infinite collection of independent SO @xmath representations, but as
a finite collection of irreducible representations of ISO @xmath . For
instance, we have that inside of @xmath there hides a scalar under SO
@xmath , that is, @xmath . We can therefore split @xmath into its scalar
part @xmath and its transverse vector part @xmath , obeying @xmath ,
which obviously do not mix under translations, nor under rotations since
the latter commute with @xmath . For tensors one can analogously
decompose the traceless part of @xmath into a scalar, a transverse
vector and a transverse-traceless tensor.

We will therefore refer to “ @xmath -scalars”, “ @xmath -vectors” and “
@xmath -tensors” for these irreducible representations of ISO @xmath ,
while the irreducible representations of SO @xmath will be referred to
as “SO @xmath -vectors” and “SO @xmath -tensors”. Note that @xmath
-vectors and @xmath -tensors are thus automatically transverse. The
basic advantage of the harmonic decomposition in our analysis lies in
the following fact: the massless dynamical fields form the highest
possible irreducible representation of ISO @xmath , while the massive
ones form the highest possible representation of SO @xmath . This
formalism is thus ideal for observing the activation of modes by mass.

#### 2.4.1 Spin 1

We start by splitting @xmath and @xmath into longitudinal and transverse
parts

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.4.1)
     @xmath      (2.4.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with the inverse map being

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.4.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and so on for @xmath , where @xmath is the projector on the subspace of
@xmath -vector fields (transverse SO @xmath -vectors)

  -- -- -- ---------
           (2.4.4)
  -- -- -- ---------

Note that the harmonic variables are therefore spatially non-local
combinations of the original fields. In terms of the harmonic variables
the gauge transformation ( 2.2.2 ) reads

  -- -- -- ---------
           (2.4.5)
  -- -- -- ---------

so that @xmath is gauge-invariant, while @xmath and @xmath can combine
to form the gauge-invariant combination

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.4.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

On the other hand, current conservation @xmath translates into

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.4.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and this equation will be implicitly used every time some @xmath term
appears. We then get that the action ( 2.2.1 ) can be written as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.4.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where we consider @xmath as the independent fields, while @xmath is just
a shorthand notation for the combination @xmath . Here one might be
tempted to use @xmath as an independent field instead of @xmath or
@xmath , but should refrain from doing so. This is because @xmath
depends on time-derivatives of the original fields @xmath . This in turn
implies that the initial conditions of @xmath are not determined, since
they require the knowledge of the initial value of @xmath . So keep in
mind that one can only consider field redefinitions that preserve the
initial data for the Cauchy problem to remain well-posed.

##### Massless

This subtlety being mentioned, the first thing to notice in the above
action is that for @xmath it is explicitly gauge-invariant since it
depends only on the gauge-invariant quantities @xmath and @xmath . The
latter obeys a massless Klein-Gordon equation

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.4.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and thus constitutes the @xmath degrees of freedom of the theory. The
equation of motion of @xmath is the Poisson equation

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

while the equation of motion of @xmath is the time-derivative of it. Pay
attention to the way in which gauge-invariance neutralizes the
longitudinal mode @xmath in this setting. The latter does have a kinetic
term @xmath in the action, which would naively make it dynamical, but
the fact that it enters only through the combination @xmath and that the
latter ultimately obeys a purely spatial equation makes @xmath
non-dynamical. Therefore, in the massless case, it turns out that we can
effectively consider @xmath as an independent variable and vary the
action with respect to it because the initial conditions of @xmath are
pure-gauge so the initial data of @xmath are defined. This will no
longer be true in the massive theory.

Until now, the spatial differential equations we obtained always
concerned gauge-dependent fields, so that we did not need to worry about
questions of instantaneous response to a source. Here, we are witnessing
an equation that involves only spatial derivatives for @xmath , which is
a gauge-invariant variable. As anticipated in section 2.1.2 , we see
however that @xmath is a spatially non-local functional of the original
fields, so that it cannot be measured instantaneously to begin with.

##### Massive

Turning on the mass @xmath , we first see that the gauge-invariant
variables are not sufficient to describe the mass term since the latter
breaks the gauge symmetry. This means that the equation of @xmath will
not be implied by the one of @xmath any more and therefore that its
time-derivatives will now make it a dynamical field. The equation of
motion of @xmath is now a massive Klein-Gordon equation

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

while the ones of @xmath and @xmath read

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Then, isolating @xmath in the latter and plugging the result in the
time-derivative of the equation of @xmath , we get

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

so @xmath corresponds to the additional @xmath degrees of freedom one
gets when @xmath . On the other hand, solving for @xmath in its own
equation of motion and plugging the result in the time-derivative of the
equation of @xmath , we get that @xmath is non-dynamical and that its
initial conditions are totally determined by the ones of the other
fields

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

One could therefore integrate-out @xmath , and redefine the longitudinal
modes by a spatially non-local operation ¹³ ¹³ 13 Note that the
square-root is real because @xmath is positive-definite as it can be
seen by using its Fourier representation.

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

to find a spatially local action for the dynamical fields only

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Now only the dynamical fields appear in the action. This was already the
case in the canonical formalism after having integrated-out @xmath , but
the advantage here is that the action is analytic in @xmath so that one
can study the @xmath limit unambiguously. Note that the new dynamical
mode one gets in the massive case (here @xmath or @xmath ) is not
gauge-invariant, as one would expect in a massive theory, and disappears
in the @xmath limit.

Finally, observe that, after having eliminated the non-dynamical field,
the dynamical ones come with the Klein-Gordon kinetic terms, even though
they are not representations of the Lorentz group. This is because
Poincaré invariance implies the standard relativistic dispersion
relation @xmath for the dynamical fields.

#### 2.4.2 Spin 2

We start by defining the harmonic variables

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.4.17)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.4.18)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

where

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.19)
  -- -------- -- ----------

while the inverse relation is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.4.20)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.4.21)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.4.22)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.4.23)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.4.24)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.4.25)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

and so on for the components of @xmath , where @xmath is the projector
on the subspace of @xmath -tensors (transverse-traceless SO @xmath
-tensors)

  -- -- -- ----------
           (2.4.26)
  -- -- -- ----------

Decomposing the gauge parameter as well

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.27)
  -- -------- -- ----------

we get that the gauge transformation ( 2.2.15 ) reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.4.28)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.4.29)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.4.30)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.4.31)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.4.32)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.4.33)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.4.34)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

so one can form the following independent gauge-invariant combinations

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.35)
  -- -------- -- ----------

known as “Bardeen potentials” [ 82 ] , of which @xmath is already known
from the previous section. Finally, the conservation equation @xmath
gives

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.36)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and, as in the spin-1 case, these will be implicitly used whenever we
have a time-derivative acting on a source component in the subsequent
computations. The action ( 2.3.13 ) in terms of these variables reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.4.37)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

As in the case of electrodynamics, note that for @xmath only
gauge-invariant quantities appear, thus making the symmetry manifest.
Again, we cannot consider @xmath and @xmath as independent variables
with respect to which we could vary the action because they contain
time-derivatives of the original fields and their initial conditions are
thus not defined. This is however not the case of @xmath , so we choose
to consider @xmath as the independent fields, while @xmath and @xmath
are mere shorthand notations.

##### Massless

So let us start with the massless case @xmath and compute the equations
of motion. In the @xmath -scalar sector, the ones of @xmath and @xmath
read

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.38)
  -- -------- -- ----------

respectively, while the ones of @xmath and @xmath are the first and
second time-derivative of the former. To simplify the second equation we
note that by taking the double time-derivative of the first one and
using ( 2.4.36 ) we get

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.39)
  -- -------- -- ----------

so that the equation of @xmath actually gives

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.40)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In the vector sector we have the equation of motion of @xmath

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.41)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and the one of @xmath which is its time-derivative, while finally for
the tensor modes

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.42)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Therefore, the Bardeen variables @xmath are physical but non-dynamical
fields, thus leaving the @xmath components of @xmath and @xmath as the
only degrees of freedom/dynamical fields of the theory.

##### Massive

Let us now turn on the mass @xmath in which case the equations of motion
of @xmath are no longer implied by the ones of @xmath and @xmath . Since
there are a lot of variables now, it is not particularly illuminating to
work at the level of the equations of motion. Rather, we can do directly
as we did in the end of the spin-1 case, that is, to integrate-out at
the level of the action the manifestly non-dynamical modes, i.e. those
without time-derivatives. For notational simplicity, we will consider
the @xmath -scalar, @xmath -vector and @xmath -tensor sectors
separately. As far as the last two are concerned, the procedure and
properties are exactly analogous to the ones of the @xmath -scalar and
@xmath -vector modes in massive electrodynamics. For the @xmath -tensor
sector there is nothing to do, we simply have that it becomes massive

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.43)
  -- -------- -- ----------

For the @xmath -vector sector the non-dynamical field is @xmath , so
integrating it out in ( 2.4.37 ) and using the spatially non-local
redefinition

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.44)
  -- -------- -- ----------

we get the spatially local action

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.45)
  -- -------- -- ----------

As for the longitudinal mode in the spin-1 case, we have that the @xmath
-vector mode activated by the mass @xmath is not gauge-invariant and
smoothly disappears in the @xmath limit. The novel feature in the spin-2
case, as already anticipated in the previous sections, lies in the
@xmath -scalar sector. We can start by integrating-out @xmath to get

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

At this point, it is convenient to trade @xmath for the trace

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.47)
  -- -------- -- ----------

in which case we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.4.48)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

We next integrate-out @xmath , i.e. we solve the equation of motion of
@xmath

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.49)
  -- -------- -- ----------

plug it back inside the action. Choosing the above defined @xmath and
@xmath as the independent fields instead of @xmath we get a diagonal
action

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Note that @xmath is proportional to the on-shell trace @xmath , so in
particular it is a Lorentz scalar on-shell. As a check, we can compare
its equation of motion

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.51)
  -- -------- -- ----------

with ( 2.2.19 ), using ( 2.4.49 ), and see that they match exactly. We
have thus shown what we had claimed in section 2.2 , i.e. it is indeed
the trace which is the unstable mode and, more precisely, it is a ghost
with mass

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.52)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Unlike the case of the @xmath -scalar sector or massive electrodynamics,
here the action is non-analytic in both @xmath and @xmath , if our
fields are combinations of the @xmath that are analytic in these
parameters. In the @xmath limit, with @xmath kept fixed, we see that
@xmath diverges, while the coupling to the source remains constant, so
we effectively have @xmath and thus also @xmath . It is also instructive
to see how this condition appears when working directly at the @xmath
point. So let us go back at the level of ( 2.4.53 ) where now @xmath is
a Lagrange multiplier. Integrating it out will therefore result in
fixing another field, which we choose to be @xmath . The equation of
motion of @xmath is then simply @xmath and, plugging this inside the
action we are indeed left with ¹⁴ ¹⁴ 14 After deriving this result we
were informed by S. Deser (private communication) that a similar form
was obtained in an old and little known paper [ 83 ] . Interestingly
enough, this paper appeared in 1966, that is 14 years before the
introduction of gauge-invariant variables by Bardeen [ 82 ] in
cosmological perturbation theory.

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.53)
  -- -------- -- ----------

At this stage we can make a series of remarks. First, we have now
reached in this formalism the same conclusion we did in the previous
section, namely, that the scalar degree of freedom in FP theory is
gauge-invariant and it does not go away in the @xmath limit. Second,
what we have gained here with respect to the canonical formalism is a
clearer picture of the whole @xmath plane provided by ( 2.4.2 ). Indeed,
we are now able to see more clearly the fact that the vDVZ discontinuity
as @xmath arises only for @xmath . If we go back to ( 2.4.2 ) and take
@xmath with @xmath fixed, we get

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.54)
  -- -------- -- ----------

so that the kinetic terms in the action cancel out and we retrieve the
same number of degrees of freedom as in the massless theory. We now
understand that the vDVZ discontinuity and the fact that the FP @xmath
-scalar mode is gauge-invariant are intimately related features. Indeed,
in the @xmath limit we retrieve the gauge symmetry so that only
gauge-invariant combinations can survive. For instance, in the case of
electrodynamics, we have that the longitudinal mode must disappear since
it is not gauge-invariant. Here, for @xmath we have that the @xmath
-scalar modes are not gauge-invariant and must thus disappear in the
@xmath limit. On @xmath however, since @xmath survives the @xmath limit,
it must be gauge-invariant.

##### Hidden gauge symmetry

It is now the appropriate moment for discussing the fact that FP theory
seems to have something that looks like a symmetry but which is not
quite it. This was the novel result of our paper [ 79 ] , where ( 2.4.53
) was derived, and we have therefore elaborated on the physical
significance of @xmath being gauge-invariant.

Already from section 2.2.2 we know that, for on-shell configurations
@xmath , the action is invariant under gauge transformations of the form
@xmath (see eq. ( 2.2.23 )), but not the equations of motion. The fact
that this holds for on-shell configurations in equivalent to the fact
that here some equations of motion have to be used, i.e. the ones of the
non-dynamical fields, in order to get the invariance. The additional
information we gain here with respect to section 2.2.2 is that the
sector of the equations of motion which corresponds to the dynamical
field @xmath is also gauge-invariant, a feature which is not visible
when we work with @xmath . Moreover, the transformation considered in
section 2.2.2 was one-dimensional, whereas here we have two gauge
parameters in the @xmath -scalar sector of @xmath ( 2.4.27 ), that is,
@xmath and @xmath . Trading the former, for @xmath , we can write the
corresponding gauge parameter ( 2.4.27 )

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.55)
  -- -------- -- ----------

so that @xmath corresponds to the @xmath parameter considered in section
2.2.2 , while @xmath parametrizes the additional transformation under
which ( 2.4.53 ) is invariant.

Now observe that, if we perform the gauge transformation ( 2.4.55 ) at
the level of the original action, we get a new action that depends on
the gauge parameters

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.56)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath for general @xmath , so that this is not a gauge symmetry.
If we decompose @xmath harmonically, we have that @xmath will correspond
to @xmath with @xmath replaced by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.57)
  -- -------- -- ----------

respectively. Then, since these are simply the original variables that
have been shifted, integrating-out the non-dynamical ones will
automatically yield again ( 2.4.53 ), i.e. whatever the values of @xmath
and @xmath . Thus, although the actions @xmath are not the same, they do
reduce to the same action once the non-dynamical fields are
integrated-out. In conclusion, although the action is not invariant
under the @xmath transformation, the physics is . It is in this sense
that this is a “hidden” gauge symmetry.

#### 2.4.3 de-Sitter background

As a final display of the power of the harmonic formalism, let us apply
it to the case where the background space-time is de-Sitter and see
whether it is still a gauge-invariant field which propagates in the
@xmath -scalar sector for @xmath . This is not guaranteed a priori
because on flat space-time we concluded that it was the vDVZ
discontinuity which was responsible for this and, as it turns out, there
is no discontinuity on a de-Sitter background [ 31 , 32 ] .

It is convenient to work in the following coordinates

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.58)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the scale factor and @xmath the (constant) Hubble
parameter. We consider directly the case case of the linear massive
spin-2 field and obtain its action by linearizing the Einstein-Hilbert
action with cosmological constant

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.59)
  -- -------- -- ----------

around the corresponding de-Sitter solution. Also appending a FP mass
term and a linear source this gives

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.4.60)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

where the non-vanishing components of the Christoffel symbols @xmath are

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.61)
  -- -------- -- ----------

For @xmath , we have the gauge symmetry

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.62)
  -- -------- -- ----------

provided the source satisfies the background-covariant conservation
equation @xmath , while for @xmath we have a one-dimensional gauge
symmetry

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.63)
  -- -------- -- ----------

provided the source satisfies

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.64)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The latter case is known as the “partially massless” theory because the
gauge symmetry eliminates the @xmath -scalar mode. It is convenient to
define the following field strength [ 84 ]

  -- -- -- ----------
           (2.4.65)
  -- -- -- ----------

which is invariant under ( 2.4.63 ) and in terms of which the action
becomes

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.66)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.67)
  -- -------- -- ----------

is precisely zero for the partially massless theory. This representation
is quite elegant from the point of view of the partially massless theory
@xmath because it exhibits many analogies with electrodynamics: there is
a one-dimensional gauge symmetry, the theory can be written as the
square of some gauge-invariant field strength and there is a
cohomological chain structure between the gauge parameter @xmath , the
field @xmath and the field strength @xmath [ 84 , 85 ] . Then, @xmath
appears as the mass that will break this symmetry and activate the
@xmath -scalar mode. In particular, we can already anticipate that for
@xmath the theory will be unstable [ 86 , 87 ] .

Here we will focus on the @xmath -scalar sector of the theory only,
since this is where the exotic features lie, and we will neglect the
source for simplicity. In defining and using harmonic variables we must
now pay attention to the fact that the position of the spatial indices
matters, i.e. they are displaced using @xmath , so for instance

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.68)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The definitions of the harmonic variables are the same, except for the
spatial sectors whose natural generalization is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.4.69)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.4.70)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

Note that this changes only the definitions of @xmath and @xmath . The
inverse relation now reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.4.71)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.4.72)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.4.73)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the same as before but one must use @xmath to displace
its indices now. The gauge transformation ( 2.4.62 ) reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.4.74)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.4.75)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.4.76)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.4.77)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

so the Bardeen variables are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.4.78)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.4.79)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the @xmath of Minkowski space-time. We see that now both
combinations include time-derivatives of the original variables so that
none of these can be taken as a fundamental field since their initial
conditions are undetermined. In particular, this seems to imply that the
@xmath -scalar degree of freedom on the FP point @xmath will not be
gauge-invariant.

Nevertheless, one must note that the Bardeen variables are the only
gauge-invariant combinations (up to combinations among themselves) that
are local in time in the harmonic variables. This is certainly
convenient, although not at all a physical requirement. In fact, as we
will see in a moment, if we abandon this property we get access to
gauge-invariant combinations that do not suffer from the above initial
condition problem.

We can now write down the @xmath -scalar part of the action

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Again, when @xmath we see that only gauge-invariant combinations appear
and we retrieve the flat space-time result for @xmath . For @xmath , the
second and third terms of the first line can be rewritten in a
convenient way

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.81)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where we have used the fact that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.82)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and then integrated by parts the time derivative. Observe also that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.83)
  -- -------- -- ----------

so that this combination actually only depends on @xmath and @xmath . We
can then consider @xmath as our independent variables and integrate by
parts here and there to finally get

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.4.84)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

We start by integrating-out @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We now rescale our fields

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.85)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and trade @xmath for the new variable

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.86)
  -- -------- -- ----------

so that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.87)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and get

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We can now trade @xmath for the new variable

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.88)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the time at which the initial conditions are given and
we have omitted the @xmath dependence for notational simplicity. The
choice of the time-independent term will be justified later. As already
suggested above, this is a non-local generalization of @xmath to
de-Sitter space-time, for which the Cauchy problem is well-defined.
Indeed, it is gauge invariant, as we will show in a moment, and the
initial data @xmath are in bijection with @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.4.89)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.4.90)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

contrary to the Bardeen variable @xmath . We can then invert this to get

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.91)
  -- -------- -- ----------

so, although @xmath , performing this replacement in the action will
yield non-local terms because of the presence of undotted @xmath ’s.
However, after integrating-out @xmath and solving for @xmath , we get
that the latter becomes a total time derivative

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.92)
  -- -------- -- ----------

so that ( 2.4.91 ) becomes local

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.93)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We now understand that the time-independent piece in ( 2.4.88 ) was
chosen precisely such that it cancels the one arising in the above
integral. We are thus left with an action for @xmath alone which, after
many integrations by parts, gives

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.94)
  -- -------- -- ----------

If we rescale back in order to obtain the volume form @xmath for the
integration measure

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.95)
  -- -------- -- ----------

we get

  -- -- -- ----------
           (2.4.96)
  -- -- -- ----------

so this has also the effect of replacing @xmath with @xmath in the mass
term. The dynamical mode in the @xmath -scalar sector is therefore
@xmath , which in terms of the original fields reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Under a gauge transformation ( 2.4.62 ) we have that @xmath is
gauge-invariant so

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.98)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and thus @xmath is gauge-invariant if we set @xmath . Note that this
restriction is by no means a loss of symmetry since it concerns only a
subset of measure zero of the gauge parameters. One can still use such
an @xmath to trivialize the time-evolution of a field mode. Thus, after
having integrated-out the non-dynamical fields, the @xmath -scalar
sector remains gauge-invariant even in de-Sitter space.

A very elegant feature of our result ( 2.4.96 ) is that it renders the
dependence of the spectrum on @xmath quite transparent. @xmath becomes
non-dynamical when @xmath , in which case we reach the partially
massless theory with gauge symmetry ( 2.4.63 ) ¹⁵ ¹⁵ 15 Since the
mapping between @xmath and @xmath is singular as @xmath , we should
actually check this result by working directly on the @xmath point, in
which case integrating out @xmath to fix @xmath gives @xmath . , while
for @xmath that mode becomes a ghost. The stability condition @xmath is
known as the “Higuchi bound” [ 87 ] . We also see that the “natural
variables” with respect to the interpretation of @xmath as being the
mass of the partially massless theory are the rescaled ones, since it is
for these fields that @xmath appears as the mass ( 2.4.94 ) and for
which @xmath involves no @xmath in its definition ( 2.4.88 ).

### 2.5 Propagator

The dynamical content and stability of a linear theory can also be
deduced by looking at its propagator. Moreover, since the propagator is
an essential building block of perturbative QFT, it is important to be
able to “read from it” this important information of the theory. We will
not write explicitly the @xmath prescription here since it depends on
whether one is interested in classical or quantum propagation. It will
be however useful to use some QFT language, e.g. the number of dynamical
fields becomes the number of particle polarizations/states.

#### 2.5.1 Spin 1

Writing the Proca action ( 2.2.1 ) in the form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.5.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

we can identify the quadratic structure

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.5.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The propagator is defined by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.5.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

whose solution is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.5.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The exchange of a photon between two vertices in the computation of a
scattering amplitude will then be controlled by the saturated propagator

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.5.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where here @xmath either represent external on-shell sources, in which
case conservation implies @xmath , or parts of a Feynman diagram to
which the photon is attached, in which case it is the Ward identity ¹⁶
¹⁶ 16 The Ward identity is usually presented as a direct consequence of
gauge symmetry and it can therefore appear as a surprise that it still
holds in the massive case. However, note that one can also derive the
identity by simply using the operator equation @xmath , which is valid
in the massive case, when computing correlation functions with on-shell
external momenta @xmath . Thus, the Ward identity still holds in massive
electrodynamics, not because @xmath contains no propagating degrees of
freedom as in the massless case, but because @xmath is simply zero
on-shell. which implies these equations. In the classical case, the
saturated propagator is what controls the interaction mediated by the
electromagnetic field in the perturbative equations of motion of the
fields present in the source.

In the massive case we have as many possible inversions of @xmath as
with @xmath because of the homogeneous solutions. These are parametrized
by all the possible linear superposition amplitudes @xmath (belonging to
some space of integrable functions), that are functions on @xmath .
Going to the @xmath case enlarges that kernel dramatically because now
it also includes all the pure-gauge solutions @xmath , parametrized by a
function @xmath on @xmath . Thus, on top of the pole contour
prescription, which can be translated into a prescription on
initial/final conditions, one must also give a prescription for picking
a preferred gauge, i.e. one must add a gauge-fixing term. The usual
Lorentz-invariant choice is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.5.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

so that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.5.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

is invertible and ¹⁷ ¹⁷ 17 For non-linear theories the gauge-fixing term
breaks the unitarity of the @xmath -matrix and one must also include
Faddeev-Popov fields to restore it.

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.5.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

What matters for the gauge-fixing term to be valid is that the saturated
propagator must be independent of it because the physics cannot depend
on a choice of gauge. Since @xmath , which is also a consequence of
gauge symmetry when @xmath , we have indeed the @xmath -independent
result

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.5.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Comparing with ( 2.5.5 ) we note that the interaction between two
sources mediated by the photon is continuous in the @xmath limit. At the
same time however, we know that the massive photon has @xmath
polarizations, while the massless one has @xmath polarizations. To
understand how a discontinuity in this number can be consistent with a
continuous limit at the propagator level, we decompose @xmath and @xmath
harmonically ( 2.4.2 ) which in Fourier space gives

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.5.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and similarly for @xmath . We then restrict to tree-level diagrams and
sources with “mass” @xmath , so that @xmath is the “mass” of the virtual
photon that is being exchanged. For instance, in the case where the
source is made of minimally coupled electrons and positrons we have that
@xmath . We also consider the case @xmath so that we do not have to deal
with the complications of resonances ¹⁸ ¹⁸ 18 Demanding heavier sources
@xmath and no loops implies that the virtual photon can never be
on-shell, i.e. it is never a “real” photon. Alternatively, if @xmath ,
then the process in which the photon is on-shell would be kinematically
allowed, in which case the propagator would be singular, implying an
infinite probability for this process to occur. As in the case of any
heavy particle, the resolution of this apparent problem comes by noting
that the heavy particle becomes unstable precisely when @xmath , since
it can then disintegrate into the source’s particles. By the optical
theorem, we then have that the imaginary part of the vacuum polarization
diagram becomes non-zero. Since that diagram is responsible for shifting
the mass @xmath under radiative corrections in the propagator, we get
that the poles of the renormalized propagator have a non-vanishing
imaginary part. Thus, the case @xmath , where @xmath is the renormalized
mass of the photon, is not a singularity of the renormalized propagator
but rather the maximum of the so-called “Breit-Wigner” resonance. . We
can then write the conservation equation ( 2.4.36 ) as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.5.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and similarly for @xmath , so that the saturated propagator reads

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.5.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The first term in the square bracket represents the exchange of the
longitudinal photons between the longitudinal modes of the sources,
while the second term corresponds to the exchange of a transverse photon
between the transverse modes of the sources. We can now focus on the
case where @xmath from above, so that the photon gets close to being
real. It can therefore be considered as an external photon that has been
“produced” by @xmath at @xmath and then “detected” by its interaction
with @xmath at @xmath .

This shows how the continuity in the saturated propagator can be
reconciled with the discontinuity in the dynamical fields of the photon:
the longitudinal information is simply proportional to @xmath for real
photons and thus smoothly decouples in the massless limit. It is
therefore not enough to look at the unsaturated propagators to deduce
the number of dynamical fields in the theory, one must also make use of
the conservation equation of the source, which brings in the mass
dependence.

Note that the source components that appear are the ones that are being
propagated so that counting them gives us a lower bound on the number of
dynamical fields @xmath . In the massive case we have @xmath and @xmath
, that is @xmath , while in the massless limit the longitudinal part
@xmath smoothly decouples and becomes unobservable and we are thus left
with @xmath . Here these inequalities are saturated, as we know. We will
see however that this is not always the case for non-local theories in
the presence of ghosts.

Finally, as far as stability is concerned, we have that the saturated
propagator ( 2.5.12 ) is the one of a healthy scalar times a
positive-definite scalar product of @xmath and @xmath , so that this
theory is stable.

#### 2.5.2 Spin 2

Let us start by identifying the quadratic structure of ( 2.2.13 )

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.5.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath was defined in ( 2.2.14 ). The propagator

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.5.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.5.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In the saturated propagator with conserved sources the terms with
uncontracted @xmath ’s drop

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.5.16)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

Note that this neatly splits into the Fierz-Pauli propagator @xmath plus
an extra scalar propagator which can be written as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.5.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

with @xmath given precisely by ( 2.4.52 ). Indeed, this is the pole
corresponding to the ghost since the “kinetic” part @xmath in the
denominator comes with the wrong sign and the corresponding source is
the trace @xmath . In the case @xmath we have that @xmath , so that this
becomes also a tachyon, but then the tensor structure becomes the one of
the massless theory

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.5.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Let us now focus on the case @xmath . As we did for the spin-1 case, we
can again perform the harmonic decomposition of the sources ( 2.4.18 )
and use the conservation equations ( 2.4.36 ) with “source mass” @xmath

  -- -- -- ----------
           (2.5.19)
  -- -- -- ----------

to get

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.5.20)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath and @xmath is a @xmath matrix with eigenvalues

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.5.21)
  -- -------- -- ----------

so that there is only one pole corresponding to the @xmath -scalar
sector and with the correct sign, as expected. We see that the @xmath
-vector and @xmath -tensor sectors are the exact analogues of the @xmath
-scalar and @xmath -vector sectors of electrodynamics ( 2.5.12 ).
Considering the limits @xmath we get that the @xmath part smoothly
decouples and we are left with only @xmath . In the @xmath -scalar
sector however we have the vDVZ discontinuity since

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.5.22)
  -- -------- -- ----------

so this pole remains. We can compare this with the case @xmath where,
because of the gauge symmetry, we must add a gauge-fixing term in the
action in order to invert the quadratic structure. The usual
Lorentz-invariant choice is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.5.23)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath has been defined in ( 2.2.37 ), in which case one has

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

with inverse

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Comparing the saturated one

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.5.26)
  -- -------- -- ----------

with ( 2.5.16 ) for @xmath , we see that the discontinuity lies in the
factor in front of the @xmath term which is @xmath instead of @xmath .
This difference is what is precisely needed in order to cancel the
@xmath -scalar pole. Finally, here too we can see that the @xmath and
@xmath limits do not commute. Indeed, taking @xmath while keeping @xmath
fixed we get that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.5.27)
  -- -------- -- ----------

so ( 2.5.16 ) becomes the massless propagator, which is independent of
@xmath , and there is thus no vDVZ discontinuity.

### 2.6 Stückelberg formalism

In using massive theories so far we have encountered two conceptually
disturbing features. First, the gauge symmetry is broken and, second,
the number of degrees of freedom is discontinuous in the @xmath limit as
it suddenly jumps from @xmath to @xmath . The Stückelberg trick [ 88 ,
31 , 32 ] is an elegant way of killing those two birds with one stone at
the level of the action, and with explicit Lorentz covariance. As in the
case of propagators, it shows that the degrees of freedom do not change
discontinuously as @xmath , but that some of them simply decouple.

#### 2.6.1 Spin 1

The so-called “Stückelberg trick” amounts to introducing auxiliary
fields in a way which is patterned on the gauge transformation itself.
In the case of massive electrodynamics we have ( 2.2.2 ) so one
substitutes

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.6.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

in ( 2.2.1 ), where @xmath is the “Stückelberg field”. Since this
technically has the form of a gauge transformation, only the mass term
varies and we have that the Proca action becomes

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.6.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

By construction, this action is invariant under the gauge transformation

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.6.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

so @xmath is a redundant (pure-gauge) field. The equations of motion of
@xmath and @xmath are, respectively,

  -- -- -- ---------
           (2.6.4)
  -- -- -- ---------

and we see that the latter is nothing but the divergence of the former.
The gauge in which @xmath is called the “unitary gauge”, in which case
one recovers the equations of Proca theory. However, the advantage of
having @xmath around is to keep imposing the gauge condition on the
gauge field, and by choosing this condition appropriately, @xmath can
then be interpreted as carrying the information of the longitudinal
degrees of freedom that are activated in the massive theory. To see
this, let us proceed to two different gauge-fixing scenarios.

We first choose to impose the Lorentz gauge @xmath so that, along with
the equation of motion of @xmath , we can fix the initial conditions of
the latter

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.6.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We are then left with the equations

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.6.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Now we see that, as in the massless case in ( 2.2.1 ), we also have a
residual gauge symmetry given by the @xmath obeying @xmath . However,
since the @xmath obey a massive Klein-Gordon equation, we cannot use
such a @xmath to kill the homogeneous solution of @xmath as in the
massless case. Rather, we can use @xmath to set @xmath , so that this
amounts to choosing the unitary gauge. Thus, with the Lorentz gauge the
Stückelberg field cannot represent the longitudinal mode since it obeys
a massless Klein-Gordon equation.

Another initial choice of gauge is @xmath , in which case the conditions
on @xmath read

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.6.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and the leftover equations are

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.6.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We have again a residual gauge symmetry but it is now parametrized by
the @xmath obeying @xmath . We can thus choose either to set @xmath
using such a @xmath , or to eliminate the homogeneous solution of @xmath
as in ( 2.2.1 ). In the latter case, it is therefore @xmath which
survives and represents the degrees of freedom associated with the
longitudinal part @xmath , while @xmath contains @xmath degrees of
freedom as in the massless case. Thus, the interpretation of @xmath
depends on the choice of gauge one makes.

Nevertheless, the interpretation in which @xmath represents the 2
degrees of freedom of the longitudinal part is the most appealing
because it survives in the @xmath limit. Indeed, for @xmath we have that
@xmath becomes gauge-invariant and thus an unambiguous degree of
freedom. We are then left with massless electrodynamics plus a scalar,
totaling @xmath . The important feature is that @xmath and @xmath are
now decoupled, so if we focus on the dynamics of @xmath then @xmath is
unobservable. Just as we saw when studying the propagators, the
longitudinal modes do not propagate in the @xmath field anymore.

#### 2.6.2 Spin 2

In the spin-2 case we must pattern the introduction of the Stückelberg
field on ( 2.2.15 )

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.6.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

in ( 2.2.13 ) to get

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.6.10)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

where as usual @xmath , so that the gauge symmetry is restored

  -- -- -- ----------
           (2.6.11)
  -- -- -- ----------

Note that for @xmath the equation of motion of @xmath takes the form of
the equation of massless electrodynamics with an @xmath -dependent
source, so it is invariant under the U @xmath transformation ( 2.2.2 ).
This means that @xmath represents @xmath degrees of freedom, while the
difference between Fierz-Pauli theory and the massless theory is @xmath
, so if we take the @xmath limit now we are still discontinuous in the
number of degrees of freedom. We can thus perform a second Stückelberg
trick on this field in order to acquire the U @xmath symmetry as well.
We replace

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.6.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

to get

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

which has the gauge symmetry

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.6.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

For @xmath we see that we have a higher derivative theory for @xmath
which means that it carries a healthy and a ghost-like degree of
freedom. Indeed, one can integrate-in a second scalar @xmath to lower
the derivative order by replacing ¹⁹ ¹⁹ 19 The original action is then
obtained by integrating-out @xmath .

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.6.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and then diagonalize the @xmath kinetic sector to find there is a ghost
²⁰ ²⁰ 20 This is why any other kinetic term than @xmath for a vector
field implies a ghost by the way. .

As for the limit @xmath , the cases @xmath and @xmath must be considered
separately as always. In the former case we have that @xmath decouples,
while we still have terms @xmath . We must thus diagonalize the @xmath
and @xmath kinetic sectors by redefining

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.6.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

to get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We see that although @xmath has totally decoupled, the scalar @xmath
remains coupled to the source and is gauge-invariant under ( 2.6.14 ).
Thus, @xmath still interacts with the system and this is the way the
vDVZ discontinuity manifests itself in this formalism. For the @xmath
case, there is no U @xmath gauge symmetry in the equation of @xmath to
begin with, so the latter already represents the @xmath degrees of
freedom that are activated by the mass. We therefore do not need to
introduce the Stückelberg scalar and can take the @xmath limit at the
level of the @xmath action ( 2.6.10 ), to get that @xmath decouples,
leaving us with the massless theory for @xmath .

### 2.7 Non-local formulation

Another advantage of the Stückelberg formalism is that it can serve as
an intuitive starting point for constructing non-local gauge theories.
Here we follow closely the procedure introduced in [ 69 , 29 ] and also
used in our paper [ 68 ] .

#### 2.7.1 Spin 1

Let us start by solving in a causal way the equation of motion of the
Stückelberg field @xmath ( 2.6.4 )

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.7.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a homogeneous solution @xmath and @xmath must have
finite past for this equation to make sense. For notational simplicity,
unless specified otherwise, from now on we will only write “ @xmath ” to
denote the retarded inversion of @xmath .

Since we know that @xmath is not physical, demanding that it has finite
past is not too much of a restriction. It would have been way more
dramatic if we imposed this condition on all of @xmath , because this
would exclude free wave-packet solutions since these extend arbitrarily
far into the past. We can now proceed and plug ( 2.7.1 ) inside the
equation for @xmath to get

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.7.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where we have a new conserved source

  -- -- -- ---------
           (2.7.3)
  -- -- -- ---------

and we have defined the operator

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.7.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which has the following nice properties. It is a projector

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.7.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where we have used the fact that @xmath is a right inverse of @xmath ,
the projected field @xmath is @xmath -transverse ²¹ ²¹ 21 This is not a
surprise since the right-hand side of ( 2.7.2 ) is transverse.

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.7.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and, under a gauge transformation ( 2.2.2 ) where the gauge parameter
@xmath has finite past, varies as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.7.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Indeed, since @xmath acts on @xmath , it only makes sense for @xmath
with finite past, which implies that @xmath has finite past and also
that @xmath . This condition on the gauge parameter is reminiscent of
the condition we encountered on the initial conditions of the gauge
parameter on de-Sitter space-time. Again, this does not exclude the
possibility of using @xmath to neutralize a field mode, so it does not
diminish the gauge symmetry in any sense. We thus have that @xmath is
gauge-invariant for all practical purposes.

Going back at ( 2.7.2 ) we see that we have reached a gauge invariant
description of massive electrodynamics with no extra field, but at the
price of non-locality. This may a priori sound a bit surprising because
we know that this non-local theory is equivalent to a local one. This
means that the physics of ( 2.7.2 ) cannot be non-local, i.e. the
prediction of the value of some physical observable at @xmath should
still only depend on the data in its infinitesimal past light-cone
neighbourhood. This is indeed the case because by going to the Lorentz
gauge @xmath the equations become local. Thus, non-locality is only an
artefact of explicit gauge-invariance and actually affects only the
pure-gauge modes. The mass term can therefore be understood as the
obstruction to having simultaneously both manifest locality and
gauge-invariance.

##### Where are the degrees of freedom?

Let us now try to count the degrees of freedom using ( 2.7.2 ). We
choose the Lorentz gauge @xmath so that we retrieve the equation of
motion of Proca theory ( 2.2.5 ), but with @xmath instead of @xmath ,
i.e. we have the homogeneous solution of @xmath that is still around.
This amounts to as many different sources as @xmath has initial data, so
we might be worried that our non-local trick might have inserted
additional degrees of freedom into the system. Of course there is no
miracle, and @xmath is eliminated by the residual gauge symmetry one has
in the Stückelberg formalism. Indeed, the equations being

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.7.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

we can transform with @xmath such that @xmath to get

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.7.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Since @xmath as well, we can choose @xmath and retrieve Proca theory
exactly. Indeed, remember from section 2.6.1 that in the @xmath gauge,
@xmath cannot represent the longitudinal mode because it is massless
@xmath , so fully gauge-fixing can only result in the unitary gauge
@xmath . This shows us that we could have avoided keeping track of
@xmath in the above computations since at the end of the day this
“freedom” is pure-gauge. In the Stückleberg formalism if we set @xmath ,
then we still have a residual gauge-symmetry. In the non-local formalism
with @xmath if we set @xmath we have the Proca equations and thus no
residual gauge symmetry.

Nevertheless, we also saw in section 2.6.1 that if we rather choose the
gauge @xmath , then @xmath obeys @xmath , so its homogeneous solution
could be interpreted as carrying the longitudinal degrees of freedom of
the theory. However, here if @xmath were to carry the plane wave
solutions of the longitudinal mode, then the gauge choice @xmath would
not be admissible because @xmath would not have finite past.

We therefore conclude that the Stückelberg fields cannot represent the
mode that is activated by the mass in this non-local formulation and
thus one can safely set @xmath . From now on @xmath and we will also
neglect the homogeneous solutions when integrating-out the Stückelberg
fields in the spin-2 case. Indeed, there too the homogeneous solutions
of the Stückelberg fields will be massless so that they cannot represent
the dynamical fields of the theory. They ultimately correspond to the
residual gauge freedom of the Stückelberg formalism.

##### Filtered response to linear sources

The non-local equation of motion ( 2.7.2 ), although quite elegant, can
be simplified even more if we restrict to the case where all of @xmath
has finite past and thus so does @xmath . This is the case where one is
interested in the production of electromagnetic waves by a source with
finite past, i.e. when any radiation at future infinity is entirely due
to @xmath . Then, one can write

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.7.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

so that ( 2.7.2 ) reads

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.7.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In this particular case, we have access to a new interpretation of the
mass term as a high-pass filter [ 69 , 29 , 31 , 32 ] . Indeed, going to
‘‘Fourier space’’ ²² ²² 22 This is actually not really possible for the
time coordinate since @xmath will in general not vanish at future
infinity because of the waves generated by the source. One should rather
use a Laplace transform for @xmath since the support of @xmath is
bounded in the past. and neglecting the pole contour prescription, we
have

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.7.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which can be inverted to give

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.7.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Now the left-hand side is the kinetic term of ordinary massless
electrodynamics, but the source is multiplied by a filter which
modulates its intensity. Indeed, for @xmath , i.e. for high frequencies
and large wave-lengths, the source of @xmath becomes @xmath . This is
the degravitation analogue for electrodynamics, which “screens” the
large scale behaviour of the source [ 69 , 29 ] .

It is important to stress one more time that equation ( 2.7.11 ) is
valid only when studying the response to an external source. More
precisely, ( 2.7.11 ) only makes sense if @xmath has finite past, which
excludes ingoing radiation at past infinity since that radiation does
not obey @xmath because of the mass. Therefore, ( 2.7.11 ) cannot be
taken as a classical model covering every feature of massive
electrodynamics. For a full description of the theory, with the
constraint of past infinity applying only on non-dynamical fields (here
@xmath ), one needs to consider ( 2.7.2 ).

##### Propagators using projectors

The computation of the propagator in a massive but yet gauge-invariant
setting is very instructive, especially in the light of this projector
formalism. We can first rewrite ( 2.7.11 ) as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.7.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

so that the operator which must be inverted is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.7.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

As in the massless case, the gauge invariance of the equation is
reflected in the fact that @xmath is proportional to a projector. It
gives zero on pure-gauge modes, which means a non-trivial kernel, which
means that it is not uniquely invertible. In section 2.5 we have used
the standard method for inverting such operators, which is to introduce
a gauge-fixing term that will not affect the saturated propagator. In
the spirit of the projector formalism developed here, there is actually
a natural way of privileging an inverse that is also easily computable.
Indeed, we can note that the space in which @xmath lives is the space of
transverse operators and that @xmath is the identity element. Thus, as
long as we restrict to this subspace, the inversion relation becomes

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.7.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and admits a unique transverse inverse (up to the homogeneous
solution/initial conditions ambiguity)

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.7.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Not surprisingly, in the massless case this corresponds to the Landau
gauge @xmath in ( 2.5.8 ). This is the only choice that cannot be
expressed through a gauge fixing term ( 2.5.6 ) precisely because it is
the only choice which imposes transversality @xmath , instead of
breaking it. In any case, as already noted, since the source is
conserved the physically relevant term is the one with no uncontracted
@xmath ’s. In the spin-2 case however, there will be a whole
one-parameter family of transverse operators, so this construction will
be very useful.

#### 2.7.2 Spin 2

The equations of motion of ( LABEL:eq:ShStuck ) are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.7.18)
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.7.19)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.7.20)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

for @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , respectively, and we find convenient to
define the quantity

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.7.21)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Again, note that each one of these equations is the divergence of the
previous one. For @xmath , we can solve for @xmath

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.7.22)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where, as anticipated in the spin-1 case, the homogeneous solution
@xmath can be safely set to zero since it cannot represent a massive
mode and is thus ultimately pure-(residual)gauge. Remember that this
expression for @xmath makes sense only if @xmath and @xmath have finite
past. Plugging this inside the equation of @xmath we get

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.7.23)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where every term is independently transverse. Now this equation is
gauge-invariant so we must fix the gauge in order to solve it. We choose
@xmath , invert @xmath and then add a pure-gauge term to get the general
solution. This gives, setting again to zero any homogeneous solution,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.7.24)
  -- -------- -- ----------

To perform this inversion we now also need @xmath to have finite past,
not just its divergence. This is again ok because @xmath does not
represent dynamical fields since it is actually zero in the original
formulation ( 2.2.17 ). Plugging the solution of @xmath in the one of
@xmath we get

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.7.25)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where we have used the fact that @xmath has finite past since @xmath has
finite past. Now that both @xmath and @xmath are expressed in terms of
@xmath we can plug them in the equation of motion of the latter to get

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.7.26)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.7.27)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

Although we have expressed this such that @xmath acts separately on
@xmath and @xmath , this requires only that @xmath has finite past to
converge. Given the complexity of this structure, here we will directly
focus on the case where all of @xmath , and thus @xmath , has finite
past, so that we can commute all these operators at will. The result is
then very elegant since it can be expressed in terms of the vector
projectors

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.7.28)
  -- -------- -- ----------

As anticipated earlier, here we have that @xmath is a one-parameter
family of operators making the tensor on which they act transverse

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.7.29)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and also gauge-invariant under ( 2.2.15 ) for @xmath with finite past.
It is convenient to switch to another parametrization, namely

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.7.30)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and define

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.7.32)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

where

  -- -- -- ----------
           (2.7.33)
  -- -- -- ----------

To avoid confusing @xmath with @xmath where @xmath , let us stress that
the letter “ @xmath ” will be exclusively used in order to denote the
second operator in ( 2.7.33 ). Now observe that @xmath and @xmath are
orthogonal projectors

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.7.34)
  -- -------- -- ----------

on the subspaces of transverse-traceless and transverse-pure-trace
tensors, respectively. Indeed, @xmath so the latter is also invariant
under linearized local conformal transformations

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.7.35)
  -- -------- -- ----------

for @xmath with finite past. The obvious advantage of the @xmath
parametrization is that now the linear combination and product of two
such operators follow the simple rules

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.7.36)
  -- -------- -- ----------

so @xmath is not a projector unless @xmath or @xmath . In the latter
case, we have the projector on the subspace of transverse tensors @xmath
. Thus, @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are the identity elements of the
space on which they project.

In terms of @xmath the choice @xmath corresponds to @xmath , which is
the value for which the mass of the ghost ( 2.4.52 ) vanishes. Indeed,
since the ghost is the trace @xmath , it is consistent that the mass
term in that case is traceless. Interestingly enough, the projector
@xmath corresponds to the value @xmath . From now on, every time we
assign a numerical value to the argument of @xmath it will be with
respect to the “ @xmath ” parametrization ( 2.7.32 ).

Now note that the Lichnerowicz operator ( 2.2.14 ) takes the form @xmath
, which corresponds to @xmath . Indeed, this is the only @xmath that has
no @xmath term, so it is the only case where @xmath is a local
second-order transverse operator. Therefore, in the case @xmath , we can
rewrite the equation in a compact form analogous to ( 2.7.11 )

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.7.37)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which is the result found in [ 69 , 29 , 68 ] , ²³ ²³ 23 Note that in [
69 , 29 ] the authors erroneously concluded that this theory propagates
only the @xmath -tensor part of @xmath , i.e. it has the same dynamical
content as the massless theory, because it has the same tensor structure
(adding a gauge-fixing term and inverting one finds that the saturated
propagator is indeed ( 2.5.18 )). Their argument is that one has
precisely integrated-out the Stückelbergs which correspond to the @xmath
-vector and @xmath -scalar modes, so that the latter do not appear in
this equation. As we have seen, this is not true because the
Stückelbergs do not represent the dynamical fields that are activated by
the mass. Moreover, it is not the tensor structure of the propagator
alone which determines the dynamical content, otherwise the latter would
be the same in massless and massive electrodynamics. As we have also
seen, the presence of the mass is important, because it will affect the
conservation equation of the source in Fourier space. Indeed, as we
pointed out in [ 68 ] , by expressing the saturated propagator ( 2.5.18
) in terms of the harmonic variables of the conserved sources, we get (
2.5.20 ) with @xmath having both a positive and a negative eigenvalue
(the ghost pole). We then have that @xmath as @xmath so that we have no
vDVZ discontinuity, as expected. However, for @xmath , all the
independent components of the source are present and thus so are all the
dynamical fields of the local theory. . Not surprisingly, for this value
of @xmath we also have that, according to ( 2.4.52 ),

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.7.38)
  -- -------- -- ----------

so that the ghost mode is also a tachyon with the same magnitude of mass
as the spin-2 modes. To understand why this happens, note that the
differential operator corresponding to this equation is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.7.39)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Since it is transverse but not traceless, the appropriate identity for
the inversion is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.7.40)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and thus, using the product rule ( 2.7.36 ) the propagator is trivial to
compute

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.7.41)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We see that, because @xmath , all the poles are at @xmath , with the
ghost mode having the wrong overall sign, but the same magnitude for the
mass. Conversely, this is why the rest of the @xmath cases cannot be
written as @xmath for some @xmath , because the mass of the ghost is not
@xmath any more.

To conclude the @xmath case ( 2.7.26 ), note that in the @xmath limit we
are left with the massless theory. Thus, as expected, there is no
discontinuity. Moreover, as in the spin-1 case, the non-locality is
“pure-gauge” since one can fix the gauge

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.7.42)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which remember is possible for @xmath , to get

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.7.43)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and thus the local equation we started with.

##### Fierz-Pauli point

We now pass to the Fierz-Pauli case. We can first observe that the value
@xmath corresponds to a diverging @xmath so that the @xmath operators
are not well defined in this limit. However, one should note that now
the action is linear in @xmath and its equation of motion ( 2.7.20 ) is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.7.44)
  -- -------- -- ----------

to which we will refer as the “scalar equation”. For @xmath with finite
past this is equivalent to @xmath , so if the scalar equation holds then
@xmath and we may still use the projectors. Since now @xmath , the
equation of motion of @xmath ( 2.7.19 ) has a transverse right-hand side
and can be solved as before. The result is then plugged inside ( 2.7.18
) and @xmath simply redefines @xmath again. In order to determine the
latter, we can then take the trace of that equation and isolate @xmath ,
to get

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.7.45)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where we have used @xmath and have put to zero the homogeneous solution
since it is massless. Plugging this back inside the equation we get the
following system

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.7.46)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.7.47)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

where now the source has changed and is actually the
traceless-transverse part of @xmath

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.7.48)
  -- -------- -- ----------

thus satisfying

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.7.49)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Now note that the scalar equation is just the trace of ( 2.7.46 ), so
that it is not independent and can be dropped. This might appear
disturbing because then we are left with the left-hand side of the
theory @xmath , which is not the Fierz-Pauli one @xmath , and the
corresponding propagator thus has an extra ghost pole. However, when we
saturate it with @xmath we retrieve indeed the saturated Fierz-Pauli
propagator in terms of @xmath . Thus, in this formulation the
modification of the source is very relevant. The fact that the
Fierz-Pauli theory has one less dynamical field is now reflected in the
fact that @xmath “sees”, and thus propagates, one less component of the
source. Another advantage of this formulation is that now the reason for
the vDVZ discontinuity at @xmath is obvious, the source remains @xmath
as @xmath .

Another option, is to keep the scalar equation and use it to have @xmath
and thus @xmath , to finally get the following system

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.7.50)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.7.51)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

The first equation is precisely what we have found for the @xmath case (
2.7.37 ), but now it is the additional scalar equation which makes the
whole difference. It cannot be obtained through a gauge transformation
and is responsible for killing the ghost.

Again, since the theory we started with is local, non-locality can only
be a pure-gauge effect, although this time this may be a bit less
obvious to show because the source term is non-local as well. This is
why the source must be part of the gauge-fixing condition

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.7.52)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Indeed, with this the scalar equation becomes the equation fixing the
trace ( 2.2.26 ) and, using this to express the source non-locality in
terms of @xmath , we can arrange the terms to get ( 2.2.24 ). Eq. (
2.2.25 ) is then found by taking the divergence of ( 2.2.24 ) and using
( 2.2.26 ).

##### Extra gauge symmetry

Using again that all @xmath act the same on @xmath , yet another
interesting formulation of the Fierz-Pauli non-local equations ( 2.7.51
) is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.7.53)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.7.54)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

The advantage here is that the first equation is invariant under
linearized local conformal transformations ( 2.7.35 ), and consistently
traceless on both sides. However, this is not the case of the scalar
equation. We can thus “lift” Fierz-Pauli theory to a non-local gauge
theory with one more gauge symmetry

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.7.55)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and now interpret the scalar equation as a gauge condition that is
reached using ( 2.7.35 ) with

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.7.56)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This is a very elegant result because now the ghost mode is also
neutralized by a gauge symmetry. Indeed, in the spin-1 case we had
@xmath because there are @xmath fields, one gauge symmetry and no
residual symmetry because of the mass. In the spin-2 case we have @xmath
fields, @xmath gauge symmetries in general, so that we are left with
@xmath , except in the @xmath case where an extra gauge symmetry reduces
that number by one.

Now the differential operator corresponding to ( 2.7.55 ) is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.7.57)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Since it is both transverse and traceless, the appropriate identity for
the inversion is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.7.58)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and thus, using the product rule ( 2.7.36 ) the propagator reads

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.7.59)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Saturating it, one finds the Fierz-Pauli result, i.e. ( 2.5.16 ) with
@xmath . This formulation provides us with yet another point of view on
the vDVZ discontinuity. Indeed, in the massless theory we saw that the
only projector for which @xmath is local is the @xmath one. This gives
@xmath for the propagator and the following tensor structure for the
saturated one

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.7.60)
  -- -------- -- ----------

On the other hand, Fierz-Pauli theory, because of the extra gauge
symmetry that is needed to kill the ghost in the non-local formulation,
must have @xmath as its differential operator, and thus the tensor
structure for the saturated propagator is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.7.61)
  -- -------- -- ----------

#### 2.7.3 New non-local theory

In the case of electrodynamics, the uniqueness of the projector makes
the non-local formulation of Proca theory the only stable non-local
theory of a massive vector field. In the tensor case, the presence of
two independent projectors, @xmath and @xmath defined in ( 2.7.33 ),
allows us to construct more healthy models than the ones that are
obtained from local theories. In particular, as we will see in this
thesis, one can construct a novel, genuinely non-local linear theory,
that includes the trace scalar but with no ghost poles in the
propagator. This is possible if we also modify non-locally the kinetic
term, so it will not correspond to simply adding a non-local mass term
to linearized GR.

To construct that theory, we take full advantage of the projector
formalism developed above to write an equation in which the tensor and
scalar modes are diagonalized

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.7.62)
  -- -------- -- ----------

so that each one of them can have its own mass. The @xmath factor will
be useful in tracking ghost-like behaviour. Now since by definition
@xmath , the only case in which the kinetic part is local, and thus
coincides with linearized GR, is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.7.63)
  -- -------- -- ----------

To study the stability and particle content of these theories let us
compute the corresponding propagator. Because of the scalar sector we
have that the differential operator

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.7.64)
  -- -------- -- ----------

is transverse but not traceless, so that the appropriate identity
element for the inversion is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.7.65)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and the solution is (using the product rule ( 2.7.36 ))

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.7.66)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Saturating it with conserved sources we get

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.7.67)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which is the Fierz-Pauli propagator with mass @xmath plus a healthy
scalar propagator, for @xmath , with mass @xmath . Thus, the first term
in ( 2.7.62 ) describes the massive SO @xmath -tensor modes, while the
second term describes the massive trace mode. This is a remarkable
advantage compared to local massive spin-2 theory, where that extra
scalar can only be a ghost. In our formalism, instead of having to fight
to kill that extra mode allowed by the diffeomorphism symmetry, we have
the opportunity to simply let it participate in the dynamics since we
can choose @xmath freely. Moreover, its mass is also free, instead of
being determined by the one of the tensor modes. Note also that for
@xmath this is not a scalar-tensor theory, nor a bigravity theory in
disguise, where the scalar or the second metric would have been
integrated-out. Indeed, in scalar-tensor theories the graviton is not
massive, while in bigravity theories there is also a massless graviton.

We thus have that stability requires @xmath , as it could have been
expected from ( 2.7.62 ). This means however that, if we want the
kinetic term to be the one of GR ( 2.7.63 ), then the scalar is a ghost.
The exception is when both masses are zero, in which case that mode is
neutralized by the residual gauge symmetry of linearized GR. Thus, as in
Fierz-Pauli theory, continuity with GR at @xmath can only be achieved in
the presence of a ghost. Conversely, any ghost-free massive theory will
have a discontinuity, at the linearized level at least.

This can be easily seen by considering the massless limit @xmath in the
saturated propagator. So let us rewrite the latter as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.7.68)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ----------

so that the first term reduces to the GR result in the @xmath limit. We
see that we are left with the usual vDVZ discontinuity of the
Fierz-Pauli propagator, representing the gauge-invariant combination of
the two @xmath -scalars in @xmath , plus the massive scalar mode. Taking
also @xmath , we see that only in the case ( 2.7.63 ) does one obtain
linearized GR, but then the massive theory has a ghost.

There is however an important difference with FP theory regarding that
discontinuity. Here the discontinuity is already visible at the level of
the equations of motion ( 2.7.62 ), since we do not retrieve the
massless local equations in the @xmath limit, for @xmath . On the other
hand, in FP theory the action tends to the massless one in the @xmath
limit. The reason for this difference is the presence of projectors, and
thus gauge-invariance. Indeed, thanks to the projectors the tensor
structure @xmath in the equations of motion ( 2.7.62 ) is identical ²⁴
²⁴ 24 Up to Klein-Gordon operators. to the structure of the propagator (
2.7.67 ). Because of this, any discontinuity in the latter must also
arise in the former. In FP theory on the other hand, the tensor
structure @xmath in the action and the one in the propagator @xmath are
not at all the same and one can thus have a discontinuity in the latter
that does not show up in the former.

##### Genuine non-locality

Let us now try to turn ( 2.7.62 ) into a system of local equations by
fixing the gauge. The choice which makes the @xmath operator local and
involves only local operators is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.7.69)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which is accessible since @xmath . For generic masses @xmath and @xmath
this gauge does not make the equation local, whatever the choice of
@xmath , so the system is genuinely non-local. The only exception is
when @xmath because then ( 2.7.62 ) can be expressed in terms of a
single @xmath operator

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.7.70)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and we can fix the ( 2.7.69 ) gauge with @xmath to get the local system

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.7.71)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.7.72)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

This is reminiscent of the situation in local massive spin-2 equations,
because ( 2.7.72 ) looks like the divergence of ( 2.7.71 ). Upon close
inspection however, we observe that the analogy does not hold because
here the divergence of ( 2.7.71 ) implies that @xmath is a free
dynamical field, not zero. Because of this, these equations do not
derive from the local action

  -- -- -- ----------
           (2.7.73)
  -- -- -- ----------

which describes an obviously unstable theory since it does not have the
GR tuning in the kinetic sector. Therefore, even in the case of local
gauge-fixed equations, the theory does not derive from a local action
and we thus have genuine non-locality.

In the case of local theories, the fact that one could localize the
equations by fixing the gauge was a consequence of the fact that the
integrated-out fields where pure-gauge. It therefore seems that, if we
now wish to localize the above equations by integrating-in some
auxiliary fields, the latter will not be pure-gauge, so that these
theories cannot be obtained by some Stückelberg-ed local theory. This is
not a surprise, since we know Proca and Fierz-Pauli theories to be the
only ghost-free local theories of spin-1 and spin-2 dynamics,
respectively.

## Chapter 3 Subtleties of non-local field theory

Now that we have reached the subject of non-local field theory, it is
important that we discuss some peculiar features that distinguish it
from local field theory. This chapter is based on, and extends, [ 68 ,
71 , 72 ] .

### 3.1 Non-local actions

#### 3.1.1 Schwinger-Keldysh formalism

The first point is that causal non-local equations of motion cannot
derive from the strict application of the variational principle on some
non-local action. Indeed, say we wish to vary an action containing a
term of the form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.1.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where “r” denotes the retarded Green’s function. The variation with
respect to @xmath will provide a causal equation of motion

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.1.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

but the variation with respect to @xmath will involve the “transposed”
Green’s function @xmath , which is thus the advanced one

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.1.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

so that this equation is anti-causal. In the case @xmath , such as in
the kinetic terms that would correspond to the non-local theories we
constructed, one would rather get the term

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.1.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

i.e. the retarded function is effectively symmetrized inside the action.
This is a direct consequence of the time-reversal and time-translational
symmetries, i.e. the physics that derives from an action is reversible
and invariant under time-translations. Conversely, if the equations of
motion are non-local but causal, then there is an arrow of time and they
can therefore not derive from an action. This is why causal non-local
equations encompass for example dissipative/non-conservative systems [
66 , 67 ] and systems with memory. Yet another way to understand this is
by noting that, although one uses initial conditions to evolve the
equations, the variation of the action is performed by fixing boundary
conditions in time. This is clearly non-local data and thus the result
will in general depend on the whole time-interval, with the only
exception being for local actions [ 66 ] .

Therefore, non-local equations of motion appear to be of less
fundamental significance since they cannot derive from an action and
thus cannot be understood as the saddle point approximation of some path
integral. Nevertheless, one should remember that this is actually not
the rigorous connection between quantum mechanics and classical
equations. Rather, the equation of motion of a classical field @xmath
has physical relevance because it can be understood as the @xmath limit
of the equation of motion of some expectation value @xmath of the
corresponding operator @xmath , for some fixed state @xmath . The
evolution of @xmath is governed by the quantum effective action @xmath
and, as it turns out, in interacting theories @xmath is indeed non-local
because of the non-local nature of quantum corrections [ 60 , 61 , 62 ,
63 , 64 ] ¹ ¹ 1 More precisely, in perturbative QFT the propagator
@xmath corresponds to a non-local operator @xmath in real space, so the
loop corrections will in general be non-local. For scales @xmath however
one can expand

@xmath (3.1.5)

in which case the corresponding real-space corrections are a series of
local, but higher-derivative operators. In the presence of massless
particles however, such as in the case of gravity for example, the
propagator becomes non-analytic in @xmath around @xmath , so these
corrections are non-local at all scales. . So non-locality is not such
an exotic feature when one is interested in realistic equations of
motion deriving from some underlying QFT and, as a matter of fact,
non-local terms @xmath even dominate in the infra-red. So how can these
equations be causal?

The important point is to realize that @xmath is not an action in the
usual sense of an integral over all of space-time and thus it is a
somewhat modified variational principle that allows us to extract
physically sensible equations of motion. Indeed, the effective action
@xmath we are discussing here, which we will denote by “ @xmath ”,
should not be confused with the better known quantum effective action
@xmath that is used in the computation of scattering amplitudes and is
an action of the usual form @xmath . In order to clearly distinguish the
two, let us first describe @xmath . In that case one is interested in
@xmath -matrix elements @xmath where the ket is a state at the initial
time @xmath and the bra is a state at final time @xmath . Therefore, the
path integral representation of this quantity involves the integral of
the Lagrangian

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.1.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

over the whole time interval @xmath . The quantum effective action
@xmath , where @xmath , is then the Legendre transform of the generating
functional

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.1.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is an external linear source. Although the equations of
motion of @xmath provide the time-evolution of @xmath for @xmath , by
construction, @xmath is mostly used for its property of being the
generating functional of 1PI diagrams. Indeed, the equations of motion
of @xmath are not very relevant because they are acausal, since the sum
over paths will depend on both what happens before and after @xmath .
Moreover, if one works with vacuum-to-vacuum amplitudes on backgrounds
with non-trivial evolution, as is in the case of cosmology for instance,
then the initial vacuum is not proportional to the final vacuum ² ² 2 Or
the latter is not even known. and @xmath is not even real ³ ³ 3 This is
why @xmath can be used for computing the lowest order quantum
corrections to a potential @xmath on flat space-time, because then
@xmath and one can restrict to the cases @xmath where the
time-non-locality is irrelevant [ 95 ] . . Thus, this @xmath usually
lacks physical interpretation by not being an eigenvalue of the operator
@xmath and intrinsically non-local in its definition.

In order to get causal equations of motion for some real field one
rather needs to consider the quantum effective action for an expectation
value @xmath , i.e. with both the ket and the bra being the same state
defined at @xmath , ⁴ ⁴ 4 As explained in [ 96 ] , even in the case of
scattering amplitudes what is physically observable is not the
amplitude, but the corresponding probability

@xmath (3.1.8)

which also takes the form of an expectation value of some operator. .
Now however the path integral is constructed in a different way and we
enter the so-called “in-in” or “Schwinger-Keldysh” or “closed time-path”
formalism [ 89 , 90 , 91 , 92 , 60 , 61 , 93 , 94 ] . In the scattering
case, we had that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.1.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

because one must connect @xmath from @xmath to @xmath at @xmath and then
the latter to @xmath at @xmath . In the case of @xmath we connect @xmath
from @xmath to @xmath at @xmath , but then we have to connect the latter
back to @xmath at @xmath , i.e. by going backwards in time. This gives

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

It is now obvious that the dynamics of @xmath can only depend on the
physics in the time-interval @xmath so that its evolution must be
causal. The corresponding quantum effective action @xmath will then be
the Legendre transform of the generating functional

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and will thus depend on two fields @xmath , the one representing @xmath
on @xmath , going forward in time @xmath and the one representing @xmath
on @xmath , going backwards @xmath . Concretely,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the fundamental Lagrangian and the quantum corrections
will typically mix the two sectors precisely because of non-locality.
For instance, we may find terms of the form ⁵ ⁵ 5 In general one finds
arbitrary powers of different Green’s functions, but always such that
the corresponding integration kernel is zero when its second argument is
outside the past light-cone of its first argument.

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the retarded Green’s function. Note that @xmath is
indeed causally propagated forward in time to @xmath , since the latter
occurs in front of it in this bended time-line. As in the scattering
case, the variational principle is now a direct consequence of the
relation between @xmath and @xmath . By construction

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.1.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

so for vanishing external source we get that the variation of @xmath is
zero. The additional requirement here is that one must evaluate these
equations at @xmath where the two functions coincide by definition
@xmath . Since @xmath is “going forward in time” it will obey a causal
equation, while since @xmath “goes backward in time” it will obey an
anti-causal equation. It is thus the equation for @xmath which is
relevant for us, while the one of @xmath is its time-reversed copy.
Applying this variational principle to the example given above ( 3.1.13
) we get that the corresponding term in the action is indeed causal
@xmath .

One should also note that the boundary conditions of this variational
principle are given at the extremities of the time-line, which here
correspond to simply @xmath but for two fields @xmath . Thus, for the
field @xmath at the end of the application of the variational principle,
these are nothing but the initial conditions. Therefore, this is a
variational principle that relies on fixing initial data instead of
boundary data. Going back to section 2.1.1 , remember that the Feynman
propagator is the @xmath corresponding to the boundary conditions of the
“in-out” path integral with @xmath and @xmath . It is symmetric @xmath
and thus privileges no time direction, consistent with the fact that the
boundary conditions of the path integral are defined at both past and
future infinity. Here we see that the retarded propagator is the @xmath
of the “in-in” path integral for @xmath , where one fixes initial
conditions instead of boundary conditions and where the arrow of time is
explicit. Indeed, for a scalar field in ( 3.1.1 ) one must insert a
@xmath factor in @xmath and a @xmath factor in @xmath for the path
integral to converge. For the classical solutions @xmath , which
dominate the path integral, this imposes no ingoing positive frequency
modes at past infinity, through @xmath , and no negative frequency modes
at past infinity again, through @xmath , so these effectively become the
boundary conditions of the retarded Green’s function ( 2.1.5 ).

Finally, note that the above construction holds only for theories for
which the fundamental Lagrangian is local, with the non-localities in
@xmath being due to quantum corrections. This is because in constructing
the path integral one must first pass through the canonical formalism
and the latter does not exist in the non-local case precisely because of
time non-locality. Nevertheless, the “in-in” action and the
corresponding variational principle can be taken independently of their
quantum origin as a well-defined action-based formulation for classical
non-local field theory. As a matter of fact, such a construction has
also been used from the purely classical point of view in order to
enlarge the scope of action-based mechanics to include dissipative
systems as well [ 66 , 67 ] . In particular, this has allowed for a
generalization of Noether’s theorem that provides the variation of the
charges in terms of the dissipative part of the action [ 67 ] .

#### 3.1.2 Formal action

An interesting observation about the issue that was raised in the
previous section is that the whole problem revolves around the type of
Green’s function that will appear in the equations of motion. Apart from
that, the equations one would derive using the standard variational
principle on some @xmath or with the modified variational principle
applied on some @xmath , would be formally the same. Since the usual
@xmath action is simpler and closer to our habits, it would be very
convenient if we could use it anyway, even if we have to rely on purely
formal manipulations. Indeed, we could for instance decide that all
@xmath occurrences inside the action are formal, i.e. undetermined
linear inverses of @xmath . Then, once the equations of motion have been
computed, one should turn all the @xmath into retarded ones by hand.