## 1 Introduction

Einstein equations have been discovered for over a century now and found
many important applications [ 3 ] in experimental and theoretical
physics. Despite the long period they are being studied by the
scientific community, there are just a few exact solutions [ 3 , 4 ]
known so far and one class of them is called black hole (BH) metrics.
These solutions were one of the main discoveries of general relativity,
first of all, due to their astrophysical importance. Black holes are
assumed to be a final step in star evolution [ 5 , 6 , 7 ] , are
believed to make an important contribution in galaxy formation processes
[ 8 , 9 , 10 ] and are “blamed” to be responsible for a great amount of
high energy radiation [ 11 , 12 ] that we detect in the universe.
Although black holes have not been observed directly, their indirect
observations are overwhelming [ 13 , 14 , 15 ] and from general
considerations it is believed that they should be rotating objects with
almost no electric charge. The space-time of such a black hole is best
approximated by the Kerr metric [ 16 ] , which is a four-dimensional
stationary, asymptoticly flat vacuum solution of Einstein’s equations.
There exists higher dimensional generalization of Kerr space-time which
is called Myers-Perry black hole [ 81 ] . Just like Kerr black hole, it
is also a stationary, asymptoticly flat vacuum solution of Einstein’s
equations which describes a spinning black hole in an arbitrary
dimension.

An important special case of Kerr black hole is the so called extremal
Kerr solution which has the smallest possible mass for a given angular
momentum or charge. Some astrophysical black holes have been claimed to
be very close to the extremity bound, e.g. Cygnus X-1 [ 17 ] or
MCG-6-30-15 [ 18 ] , although other independent data analyses led to
opposite results [ 20 ] . If in the future, the measurements of high
angular momentum will be confirmed, extremal black holes will start to
represent real astrophysical interest.

Black hole geometries are also important objects in mathematical
physics. Many of them represent a background for integrable systems.
Some of these integrable systems have been unknown prior to their
discovery in black hole geometries. Particularly interesting is the
integrability of Hamilton-Jacobi equation as it describes the geodesics
of particles. Geodesics in the near horizon limit of Kerr black hole are
associated with black hole accretions which might be a source of Very
High Energy (VHE) gamma-ray bursts (for a review [ 21 ] ). Accretions
around black holes can also be the key to the first direct observation
of a black hole [ 63 ] (e.g. with the Event Horizon Telescope).

As it is known, the Killing vectors of a geometry are associated with
integrals of motion of a geodesic in that metric. In the case of the
near horizon metric of an extremal rotating black hole, the killing
vectors obey the structural relation of @xmath (2, 1) algebra. It has
been demonstrated (e.g. [ 66 , 74 , 45 , 43 ] ) that the Casimir element
of this @xmath (2, 1) algebra gives rise to a reduced Hamiltonian system
called spherical or angular mechanics, which contains all the specific
information about the near horizon geometry. By reformulating this
discussion one can say that a massive particle moving in the near
horizon geometry of an extremal rotating black hole possesses dynamical
conformal symmetry, i.e. defines “conformal mechanics” [ 41 , 51 , 52 ,
36 , 80 , 43 , 44 , 45 , 46 , 47 , 48 , 49 , 50 ] , whose Casimir
element can be viewed as a reduced Hamiltonian, which contains all the
necessary information about the whole system.

On the other hand this reduced Hamiltonian or the spherical mechanics
can be thought of as a separate system. Spherical mechanics associated
with near horizon extremal black hole geometries are relatively
unexplored. Latest works in this direction include [ 46 ] , where the
Hamiltonian of the spherical mechanics associated with Near Horizon
Extreme Myers-Perry (NHEMP) geometry has been constructed for the
special case when all rotation parameters of the black hole are equal.
In [ 51 , 52 ] the integrability of this system has been proven and the
integrals of motion were presented. Extremal Myers-Perry black holes
with nonequal nonvanishing rotation parameters in odd dimensions have
been studied in [ 36 ] where the integrability of such systems was
proven and separation of variables was carried out.

As we will see, the near horizon geometry of Myers-Perry black holes
contains integrable and superintegrable systems like Rosochatius and
Pöschl-Teller systems. Studies of these kind of systems is important as
they appear in many topics of theoretical physics. Another approach that
we have adopted here for investigating such systems is their
geometrization procedure. Geometrical counterparts of classical systems
have been studied extensively. They provide a new viewpoint to existing
and well-known classical systems and spread some light on their
underlying structure. An important approach for geometrization of
classical problems is the Jacobi metric approach [ 92 , 93 , 94 ] . This
is a procedure for producing a geodesic from a given Hamiltonian, which
has many important applications. In particular, Onge studied the
curvature of the the Jacobi metric for the Newtonian @xmath -body
problem [ 95 ] , which in @xmath case, reduces to the Kepler’s problem
of the relative motion.

We will propose a geometrization procedure for quantum systems. We are
mostly interested in problems which are superintegrable in higher
dimensions. Particularly interesting are the Higgs oscillator [ 102 ,
103 ] , which is a particle on a @xmath -sphere with a specific
potential and the superintegrable Rosochatius system - a direct
generalization of the Higgs oscillator. We will encounter the classical
superintegrable Rosochatius system in Section 3.4 as the angular
mechanics of near horizon limit of fully isotropic Myers-Perry black
hole. Separation of variables in Rosochatius system results into a
recursive family of one-dimensional Pöschl-Teller system.

Higgs oscillator, Rosochatius system and Pöschl-Teller system belong to
a class of quantum quantum systems where energy are quadratic functions
of the energy level number. After the geometrization procedure proposed
in Chapter 5 , these systems will result into Klein-Gordon equations
with eigenmode frequencies linear in the frequency level number. In
other words this means that the frequencies are highly resonant, which
itself has important consequences in the AdS stability problem (see [
108 ] for a review).

Another important class of solutions of Einstein’s equations are
gravitational waves. Compared to black holes, gravitational waves have
been directly detected in 2015 by two LIGO (Laser Interferometer
Gravitational-wave Observatory) detectors. The existence of
gravitational waves has been proven by indirect astrophysical
observations long before their detection. In particular, the presence of
gravitational waves was confirmed by monitoring the orbital parameters
of the binary millisecond pulsar PSR B1913+16 [ 19 ] . Because of the
gravitational radiation, the objects in the binary system lose energy
and angular momentum which was detected and corresponded to the
quantitative predictions of the theory. Besides being a real physical
phenomena and one of the most important predictions of the theory of
general relativity, gravitational waves will take an important role in
observational astronomy. Compared to other types of radiation, e.g.
photons, neutrinos and cosmic rays, gravitational waves don’t get
refracted by gas clouds and absorbed by cosmic bodies and can travel big
distances, pointing directly back to the source. The importance of
gravitational wave detectors will grow with their sensibility.

When a pair of inertial test particles encounter gravitational waves,
their relative positions get shifted permanently. This phenomena is
called the gravitational memory effect. It is known to be related to the
theory of soft gravitons and symmetries of null infinity of
asymptotically flat spaces and particularly black holes.

In Chapter 2 we are going to discuss this effect and suggest its
covariant formulation in frames of a model of impulsive gravitational
waves. This model assumes that the space-time is divided into two
domains by a hypersurface, which in general can contain a mixture of
gravitational waves and other material sources. There are many examples
of physical systems in nature which can be described in frames of this
model. Such systems may appear after cataclysmic astrophysical events,
such as a supernova or a collision of neutron stars. These systems are
used to simulate an exploding white hole, to model an impulsive null
signal from a system of neighboring test particles and have many other
applications. In general one can choose these two metrics to be either
continuous or discontinuous on the boundary hypersurface subject to the
condition that the induced metric is unique, but either way the metric’s
transverse derivative will not be continuous. This always leads to a
singularity in the form of a @xmath -function in the Riemann tensor.

Solutions to the Einstein equations give different results depending on
whether the boundary surface is taken to be null or timelike
(spacelike). In the first case, when the hypersurface is null, both Weyl
and Ricci parts of the Riemann tensor are singular. As it is known, the
Weyl part of the Riemann tensor is associated with gravitational waves,
whereas the Ricci tensor has non-zero value only in the presence of some
material source. Hence, in the case of null boundary hypersurface, both
a material source and an impulsive tidal wave can be present. When the
boundary surface is timelike, only the Ricci tensor is singular, giving
rise only to a matter stress-energy tensor. Depending on the matter
distribution, the discussed hypersurfaces are classified into two types:
shock waves or boundary surfaces, which arise when there is a jump
discontinuity in the density of the stress-energy tensor between the two
metrics that they divide and surface layers, otherwise called thin
shells, where the density becomes infinite.

There are two different approaches to describe singular hypersurfaces.
The first one is called the distributional method. In this case a common
set of coordinates is used for both sides of the hypersurface. The other
method is a generalization of the “cut and paste” approach of Penrose.
Here, the space-time coordinates on the two sides of the hypersurface
can be chosen independently from each other, so in this sense it is a
more general approach than the distributional algorithm. It was
introduced by Israel to describe timelike hypersurfaces [ 2 ] but it was
not suitable for the case of null hypersurfaces. In the timelike case,
the Israel approach uses the extrinsic curvature of the hypersurface to
describe the stress-energy tensor in it. When we move to the null case,
the intrinsic metric of the hypersurface space-time becomes degenerate,
because the normal vector becomes tangent and there is no
distinguishable transverse vector defined. Hence, the extrinsic
curvature, which is defined in terms of the metric, is no longer
uniquely definable, so it cannot be used to study the hypersurface. This
problem was solved and the approach was generalized for the lightlike
case by Barrabès and Israel [ 24 ] .

In this thesis we are going to discuss different problems related to
asymptotic flat spaces, integrable systems and mathematical physics
associated with black holes. First, we will study gravitational memory
effect which is known to have deep connections with soft gravitons and
symmetries of null infinity of asymptotically flat spaces. Then, we will
discuss Myers-Perry black holes, more particularly, the near horizon
geometry and associated integrable systems. Finally, we will propose a
geometrization procedure for a special class of quantum
(super)integrable systems, which appear in many topics of mathematical
physics ( including in near horizon geometry of Myers-Perry black hole).

This thesis is based on the papers [ 75 , 76 , 79 , 80 , 77 , 78 ] . The
research done in Chapter 2 was carried out under supervision of Martin
O’Loughlin. The problem addressed in Chapter 5 was suggested and solved
in cooperation with Oleg Evnin.

It is organized as follows.

In Chapter 2 we study the effects that an impulsive signal in a singular
hypersurface can have on a particle which encounters it. A similar
question has been discussed by Barrabès and Hogan in [ 33 ] for the case
of timelike particles, where they have constructed the geodesics
deviation vector in the first order approximation and found a relation
between the geodesic deviation vector, the stress-energy content and
gravitational wave components of the shell. We propose a new approach
for studying the effect of null shells on null geodesic congruences.
This is an exact method which allows one to easily calculate the change
in the expansion, shear and rotation of the congruence upon crossing the
shell and its evolution to the future of the shell. We find that the
effect of the shell on the congruence, as already observed in the
time-like case in [ 32 ] , is a discontinuity in the B-tensor (the
gradient of the geodesic vector). We call this the B-memory effect,
which is a more covariant way of describing the gravitational memory
effect. Gravitational memory effect has deep connections with soft
gravitons [ 28 ] , which in turn is linked to the symmetries of null
infinity of asymptotically flat spaces [ 26 , 27 ] . We found the
explicit relation of B-memory with the stress energy and gravitational
wave components of the shell. We consider the simplest case of a null
shell representing an outgoing gravitational wave and parametrized by a
general soldering transformation (a subclass of which are the BMS
supertranslations) in Minkowski space, but our method is applicable to
any geodesic congruence that crosses a null shell localized on a killing
horizon.

In Chapter 3 and Chapter 4 conformal mechanics associated with Near
Horizon geometry of Extremal Myers-Perry (NHEMP) black hole has been
studied. First, a unified description of an arbitrary odd and even
dimensional geometry and conformal mechanics has been proposed. Then,
the question integrability of special cases of fully non-isotropic and
fully isotropic cases has been addressed in this description. We have
found a non-trivial transformation from non-isotropic NHEMP conformal
mechanics to its isotropic case. Furthermore, the general case, when
groups of equal and non-equal rotation parameters exist, has been
studied and shown that this problem reduces to its special cases of
fully non-isotropic and fully isotropic NHEMP conformal mechanics. At
the end of the Chapter 4 another non-trivial near-horizon geometry has
been discussed. The so-called Near Horizon Extremal Vanishing Horizon
Myers-Perry black hole (NHEVHMP) is obtained when one of the rotation
parameters of the Myers-Perry black hole vanishes. We studied the
integrability properties of NHEVHMP in higher dimensions in fully
isotropic, fully non-isotropic and general cases.

In Chapter 5 we propose a geometrization procedure which associates to a
non-relativistic quantum particle in a potential on a curved spacetime a
purely geodesic motion in another spacetime. In other words, we propose
a correspondence between the solutions of Schroedinger equation and
Klein-Gordon equation on a corresponding manifold, which itself, as it
is well known, reduces to a geodesic equation through quasi-classical of
Eikonal approximation. We will explain this procedure on the example of
the Higgs oscillator and superintegrable Rosochatius system.

## 2 Geodesic congruences, impulsive gravitational waves and
gravitational memory

The study of impulsive gravitational waves in the form of null shells
has recently received renewed attention due to their possible role in
the transfer of information from black hole horizons to null infinity.
As the black hole horizon is a killing horizon, there is an infinite
variety of ways to attach (solder) the black hole interior to the black
hole exterior creating a null shell on the horizon [ 24 , 25 ] . A
subclass of these can be shown to correspond to BMS like
supertranslations. Furthermore the long studied BMS supertranslations at
null infinity of asymptotically flat spaces are linked to the physics of
soft gravitons which appear to play an important role in restoring
information not seen in the hard gravitons of Hawking radiation [ 26 ,
27 ] . In turn the soft gravitons are related to the gravitational
memory effect [ 28 ] .

Gravitational memory [ 29 , 30 , 31 ] is the classical change in nearby
geodesics in an asymptotically flat region of space-time as they pass
through an outgoing gravitational wave. The study of the effect of a
null shell on a time-like congruence that crosses it has been addressed
by Barrabes and Hogan [ 32 , 33 ] . They calculated the change in the
tangent vector and the geodesic deviation vector together with the
expansion, shear and rotation upon crossing an impulsive gravitational
wave and found a jump in the acceleration of the geodesic and
derivatives of the geodesic deviation vector proportional to the
stress-energy content and gravitational wave components of the shell.

To further understand the relationship between gravitons and
gravitational memory it is thus important to study the effect of waves
on null geodesic congruences, not only as the congruence crosses the
wave but also the future evolution of the congruence. In this chapter we
describe a new exact approach for studying the effect of null shells on
null geodesic congruences. This method allows one to easily calculate
the change in the @xmath -tensor, which encodes the expansion, shear and
rotation of the congruence, upon crossing the shell and its evolution to
the future of the shell. We find that the effect of the shell on the
congruence, as already observed in the time-like case in [ 32 ] , is a
discontinuity in the @xmath -tensor, which we will refer to as @xmath
-memory effect, not to be confused with the B-mode gravitational memory.
We show how this @xmath -memory is determined by the stress energy and
gravitational wave components of the shell. We consider the simplest
case of a null shell representing an outgoing gravitational wave and
parametrised by a general soldering transformation (a subclass of which
are the BMS supertranslations) in Minkowski space, but our method is
applicable to any geodesic congruence that crosses a null shell
localised on a killing horizon. It is intriguing to note that our
formulation of @xmath -memory has much in common with gravitational
memory as formulated in [ 31 ] .

In Section 2.1 we give a short review of the model of impulsive signals
and the distributional algorithm for constructing null singular shells.

In Section 2.2 we introduce the concept of a B-memory effect as a
covariant formulation of gravitational memory.

In Section 2.3 we describe the setup of the problem and give a general
description of the suggested approach. A detailed discussion of the
approach is carried out in Section 2.4 while in Section 2.5 the detailed
behavior of a lightlike congruence is studied.

In Section 2.6 we discuss our results and their relation to other
formulations of gravitational memory, in particular to that reviewed in
[ 31 ] .

The results of this chapter were obtained in cooperation with Martin
O’Loughlin and are based on [ 75 ] .

### 2.1 Impulsive signals in null hypersurfaces

In this section we will discuss a space-time manifold @xmath which is
divided into two domains by a null hypersurface with a @xmath metric
tensor (metric tensor is continuous across the hypersurface but its
first derivatives are not). We will denote the domain on the left side
of the hypersurface by @xmath and on the right side of the hypersurface
by @xmath (see fig. 1 ). Let @xmath ( @xmath = 0, 1, 2, 3) be the local
coordinates on both sides of the hypersurface and @xmath be the equation
of the hypersurface, with @xmath corresponding to @xmath and @xmath to
@xmath . The normal vector to the lightlike hypersurface is

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (1)
  -- -------- -- -----

where @xmath are the components of the metric tensor on space-time
@xmath @xmath @xmath and @xmath is an arbitrary function. Any tensor
field will be denoted by @xmath or @xmath superscripts on @xmath and
@xmath . If these tensors differ on each side of the boundary
hypersurface @xmath , the jump @xmath across @xmath , will not be zero
and is an important quantity for our later derivations. Here, the
subscript @xmath indicates that @xmath should be evaluated on the
hypersurface. We also define a hybrid tensor @xmath as follows

  -- -- -- -----
           (2)
  -- -- -- -----

where @xmath is the Heaviside step function. We will assume we are
dealing with a continuous metric across @xmath , so

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (3)
  -- -------- -- -----

The metric is also continuous in the derivatives tangent to the
hypersurface, but is discontinuous in the transversal derivative. We
introduce symmetric tensor @xmath to describe the discontinuity in
transversal derivative

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (4)
  -- -------- -- -----

As @xmath is a null vector, to find the components of @xmath we will
need to introduce a transversal vector @xmath , which points out of
@xmath

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (5)
  -- -------- -- -----

So, it follows from ( 4 ) that

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (6)
  -- -------- -- -----

We only restrict the choice of @xmath by requiring it to have a uniquely
defined projection on the hypersurface @xmath . Thus, we have the
following gauge freedom:

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (7)
  -- -------- -- -----

where @xmath is a four-dimensional vector field defined on @xmath .
@xmath is not uniquely defined as well. The scalar product ( 5 ) is
invariant under the gauge transformation

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (8)
  -- -------- -- -----

Our aim is to construct the Riemann and Einstein tensors for the
space-time @xmath , which depend on partial derivatives of @xmath . For
a partial derivative of some general @xmath tensor field we can write

  -- -------- -------- -------- -----
     @xmath   @xmath            (9)
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -----

For the derivative of the Heaviside step function, we can write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so equation ( 9 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (10)
  -- -------- -- ------

In addition, we should also note that if we have two @xmath and @xmath
tensors defined, then from ( 2 ) it follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

To derive the form of Einstein’s tensor we need to start from the
Christoffel symbols. Using ( 3 ) and ( 10 ) we can obtain

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (11)
  -- -------- -- ------

from which it follows that

  -- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath            (12)
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- ------

For @xmath we will get

  -- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath            (13)
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- ------

The brackets around indices denote symmetrization over those indices.

Now we can calculate the Riemann tensor. The Riemann tensor is expressed
through Christoffel symbols according to the following equation.

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (14)
  -- -------- -- ------

The tilded Riemann tensor will be

  -- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath      (15)
  -- -------- -------- -- ------

From ( 10 ) we can deduce that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So, plugging this into the tilded Riemann equation we find

  -- -------- -------- -------- ------
     @xmath   @xmath            (16)
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- ------

where terms that vanish distributionally have been ignored.

The last two terms in tilde-Riemann equation can be simplified.

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and square brackets around indices denote skew-symmetrization. Plugging
this result into ( 16 ) will give

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (17)
  -- -------- -- ------

Similarly we find

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (18)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (19)
  -- -------- -- ------

where

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (20)
  -- -------- -- ------

From the form of the Einstein tensor we conclude that the stress-energy
tensor will contain two terms one of which proportional to the Dirac
@xmath -function.

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (21)
  -- -------- -- ------

The tilde-term of the stress-energy tensor corresponds to the matter
content @xmath of the exterior domains @xmath . The second term
corresponds to the matter in the singular hypersurface, which is
actually a shell of lightlike matter. The stress-energy tensor on the
null shell is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (22)
  -- -------- -- ------

The three terms in the stress-energy tensor in the last equation, if
taken on the hypersurface @xmath , can be interpreted as being related
to the energy density, the isotropic tensor and the energy current
respectively.

### 2.2 @xmath-memory as gravitational memory

The gravitational memory effect is the change in relative velocity
between neighboring geodesics after the passing of a gravitational wave
- the idea being that the passing of a gravitational wave leaves some
“memory” in the relative movement of inertial observers. Here we propose
a more covariant characterization of this memory effect by considering
the effect of an outgoing wave in the form of a null shell on a null
geodesic congruence.

To see explicitly how this works we begin with the general construction
and notation of [ 25 ] . The impulsive wave (null shell) is confined to
a singular null hypersurface @xmath which divides the space-time into
two domains @xmath @xmath @xmath - the past and future domains - each
with its own coordinate system @xmath . Each domain has its own metric,
@xmath or @xmath , together with junction conditions for soldering that
relate the two metrics where they meet on the hypersurface @xmath . The
soldering determines the constituents of the impulsive wave and in the
case that @xmath coincides with a killing horizon an infinite variety of
solderings are allowed [ 25 ] producing an infinite variety of impulsive
signals. For explicit calculations we will use the freedom to perform
independent coordinate transformations on @xmath and @xmath to choose a
global coordinate system @xmath that is continuous across @xmath and
such that the metric is also continuous

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (23)
  -- -------- -- ------

In these global coordinates the hypersurface @xmath is defined by the
equation @xmath with @xmath covering the future domain and @xmath
covering the past domain.

We will consider a congruence with tangent vector field @xmath
transverse to @xmath together with the null generator @xmath of the
shell, where @xmath , and to calculate the independent components of the
@xmath -tensor @xmath [ 34 ] we will project it onto the spatial
submanifold of the shell defined by a pair of space-like orthonormal
vectors @xmath , @xmath such that @xmath . Furthermore we can and will
choose @xmath to be parallel transported along the congruence, a choice
that simplifies the following equations by eliminating the connection
from the evolution equation for @xmath . The projection of @xmath onto
the congruence is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (24)
  -- -------- -- ------

where the expansion, shear and rotation are explicitly given by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (25)
  -- -------- -- ------

The evolution equation for @xmath (with respect to the affine parameter
@xmath of the congruence) is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (26)
  -- -------- -- ------

and

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (27)
  -- -------- -- ------

where

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (28)
  -- -------- -- ------

and @xmath is traceless.

In the presence of a null shell the Riemann and Weyl tensors have a term
that is localised on the shell and proportional to a delta function [ 24
] . Thus we separate @xmath and @xmath into their bulk and shell
components

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (29)
  -- -------- -- ------

In the evolution equation for @xmath the delta function in @xmath on the
right hand side can only be balanced by a delta function in the
derivative of @xmath meaning that the @xmath -tensor must be
discontinuous across the shell. This discontinuity is related to the
stress-energy and gravitational wave components of the shell as we will
see in detail in the following sections.

The evolution of the rotation is simply given by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (30)
  -- -------- -- ------

which can be integrated to give

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (31)
  -- -------- -- ------

We can deduce from this equation that the rotation must be continuous
but not necessarily differentiable across the shell as the expansion is
at most discontinuous. In particular, and as we will see in detail in
the following sections, a zero rotation before the shell and at worst a
finite jump in the expansion will result in zero rotation after the
shell. This means that a congruence that is hypersurface orthogonal to
the past of the shell must also be hypersurface orthogonal to the future
of the shell.

Our calculations thus indicate that an alternative and generally
covariant formulation of the gravitational memory effect is that there
is a discontinuity in the @xmath -tensor of a congruence upon crossing a
null shell. In the following sections we will show how to explicitly
calculate the evolution of the @xmath -tensor for a congruence that
crosses a null shell.

### 2.3 The setup and proposal

Our general construction is applicable to any null shell located on a
killing horizon. For simplicity (and without loss of conceptual insight)
we will consider in the following sections exclusively the case of a
planar null hypersurface (which is obviously a killing horizon) in
Minkowski space.

To study the evolution of a null geodesic congruence upon crossing a
null shell we start directly from the geodesic equation. In continuous
coordinates by definition the metric is continuous across @xmath while
the Christoffel symbols are discontinuous, and the Riemann tensor has a
delta function singularity localised on the shell, these properties
being directly related to the stress-energy tensor of the shell and
explained in detail in [ 25 ] . For the purposes of our calculations we
will obtain continuous coordinates across the shell by performing a
coordinate transformation on @xmath while leaving @xmath in flat
coordinates.

The geodesic equation in the vicinity of the shell is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (32)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the Heaviside step function. It is clear that
non-trivial solutions to this equation may have a discontinuity in the
acceleration, but not in the tangent vector @xmath , and thus the
geodesic flow lines are @xmath across the shell as shown in figure 1 .
Mathematically speaking this means that the geodesic vector on the shell
( @xmath ) is uniquely defined @xmath . Taking this into account we
state that if the test particle has approached the hypersurface from the
past then the action of crossing the hypersurface is mathematically
equivalent to making a coordinate transformation on the geodesic vector
from the past flat coordinates, where for the purposes of our
calculations we consider a trivial constant and parallel null
congruence, to the continuous coordinate system. This transformed
congruence then forms the initial conditions for the congruence to the
future of the hypersurface.

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (33)
  -- -------- -- ------

Here @xmath is the geodesic vector of the test particle in the past
domain in past flat coordinates and @xmath is the corresponding vector
after the particle crosses the shell in future coordinates as shown in
both figures 1 and 2 . Here we should recall that all the information
regarding the stress-energy tensor on the shell, which also means the
effect that the shell will have on the congruence, is fully encoded in
the definition of the soldering conditions and thus in the Jacobian of
the soldering transformation.

Note that the geodesics are straight lines in the future and the past in
the corresponding coordinate systems and with affine parameters @xmath
they are given by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (34)
  -- -------- -- ------

There is a one parameter freedom in the choice of affine parameters

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (35)
  -- -------- -- ------

and the continuity equation ( 33 ) establishes a one-to-one relation
between @xmath and @xmath , thus fixing the affine parameter in the
future we also fix the affine parameter in the past.

### 2.4 Null Congruences crossing horizon shells

Applying the proposed algorithm of the previous section we consider the
congruence @xmath globally to the past of @xmath ( @xmath will be fixed
after fixing the affine parameter to the future, as discussed in the
previous section) and perform on @xmath a coordinate transformation
parametrised by @xmath where @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -- ------
     @xmath         (36)
  -- -------- -- -- ------

We will refer to this transformation as a Newman-Unti soldering being
the extension to a soldering of the Newman-Unti transformation @xmath .

This one sided soldering transformation creates a shell at the location
of @xmath and the properties of the shell are encoded in the function
@xmath as described in detail in [ 25 ] . To the future of @xmath we
have coordinates @xmath and we identify the future and past coordinates
on @xmath . After the transformation the metric to the past of the shell
is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (37)
  -- -------- -- ------

while to the future it remains

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (38)
  -- -------- -- ------

We are interested in the value of the congruence @xmath on @xmath in
continuous coordinates,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (39)
  -- -------- -- ------

Inverting the Jacobian matrix of the coordinate transformation evaluated
on @xmath we find, for our choice of @xmath , that

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (40)
  -- -------- -- ------

The null congruences to the future of @xmath are labeled by the point
@xmath at which they cross @xmath and the affine parameter @xmath .
Taking @xmath as the initial condition for the congruence on @xmath at
@xmath we find that the null congruence to the future is described by
the lines

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (41)
  -- -------- -- ------

and from the @xmath component of this equation we find that

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (42)
  -- -------- -- ------

The remaining components of ( 41 ) can in principal be inverted (in
practice there will be unavoidable problems of caustics meaning that the
inversion from some future points will not be well defined - we will
ignore these subtleties), to obtain a projection along geodesic lines
from @xmath to @xmath of the form @xmath as illustrated in figure 3 .
The congruence to the future is then simply @xmath . In the following,
by a slight abuse of notation, we will use @xmath to denote the
extension of the soldering transformation @xmath to the future such that
@xmath . A simple and useful consequence of this construction, that one
can show with the help of the @xmath components of ( 41 ), is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (43)
  -- -------- -- ------

With a little further work one can show that the congruence to the
future of the shell is given by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (44)
  -- -------- -- ------

and is thus hypersurface orthogonal as anticipated at the end of Section
2.2 .

### 2.5 How the shell modifies the congruence.

We now turn to the projection of the B-tensor and its behaviour upon
crossing the shell as described in Section 2.2 . A natural choice for
completing the tetrad along the congruence is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (45)
  -- -------- -- ------

together with @xmath and the tangent vector @xmath . We will also need
the completeness relation

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (46)
  -- -------- -- ------

As already discussed a null shell produces a delta function singularity
in the Riemann tensor and the physical content of the shell is encoded
in the jump in the orthogonal derivatives of the metric tensor

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (47)
  -- -------- -- ------

The shell in general contains matter with stress-energy tensor

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (48)
  -- -------- -- ------

with @xmath . The four independent components of the stress energy
tensor are the energy density @xmath , and the surface current @xmath ,
the @xmath component of which is minus the pressure @xmath

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (49)
  -- -------- -- ------

These account for four out of the six independent components of @xmath ,
the remaining two coming from the spatial @xmath part of @xmath

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (50)
  -- -------- -- ------

which contribute to the Weyl tensor and encode the two polarisations of
an impulsive gravitational wave on the shell. We will see in detail how
this works below.

To study the behaviour of a null congruence crossing the null shell we
need to calculate @xmath and it is straightforward to show that

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (51)
  -- -------- -- ------

Given the Einstein equation

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (52)
  -- -------- -- ------

we can relate the trace of @xmath to the surface quantities

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (53)
  -- -------- -- ------

while the projection of the Weyl tensor on the congruence is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (54)
  -- -------- -- ------

#### 2.5.1 Newman-Unti soldering transformations

Taking the explicit form for @xmath from the previous section we find
for a general Newman-Unti type transformation that

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (55)
  -- -------- -- ------

Evaluating @xmath on the shell gives us directly its discontinuity given
that we have taken a congruence with @xmath before the shell. In this
expression we must take care to recall that although @xmath second
derivatives must include the Jacobian of the mapping @xmath . We see
that @xmath is symmetric and thus the congruence has zero rotation
consistent with the hypersurface orthogonality demonstrated in the
previous section and also the more general arguments of Section 2.2 .

Evaluating explicitly @xmath and @xmath and comparing to ( 55 ) we find
that the change in expansion upon crossing the shell

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (56)
  -- -------- -- ------

is determined by a combination of the shell energy density and surface
currents while the change in the shear

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (57)
  -- -------- -- ------

is determined by the gravitational wave component and surface current of
the shell.

#### 2.5.2 BMS soldering

To explicitly evaluate @xmath ( 55 ) also to the future of the shell we
need to invert equations ( 41 ) as discussed in the previous section. We
will simplify the following calculations by just considering the special
case of BMS supertranslation solderings and thus we take

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (58)
  -- -------- -- ------

Then

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (59)
  -- -------- -- ------

and

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (60)
  -- -------- -- ------

In this case we need only the Jacobian of the transformation on spatial
coordinates that we obtain by taking derivatives of the @xmath
components of ( 41 ) with respect to @xmath to obtain

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (61)
  -- -------- -- ------

and inverting we find the Jacobian of the transformation

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (62)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath and @xmath . Thus

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (63)
  -- -------- -- ------

corresponding to the expansion

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (64)
  -- -------- -- ------

and shear

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (65)
  -- -------- -- ------

Evaluating

  -- -- -- ------
           (66)
  -- -- -- ------

it is easy to check that our solutions for expansion and shear on and to
the future of @xmath satisfy the evolution equations

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (67)
  -- -------- -- ------

We see in particular that for the BMS transformations the @xmath -memory
effect corresponds to a jump in the expansion upon crossing the shell
that is proportional to the energy density of the shell together with a
change in the shear that is proportional to the gravitational wave
component of the shell.

### 2.6 Discussion

We have presented a new approach for studying congruences that cross a
singular hypersurface. Our method is based on the physically justified
assumption that the geodesic vector of a test particle is continuous
across the hypersurface when using continuous coordinates. To obtain the
geodesic flow to the future of the hypersurface one simply needs to do a
coordinate transformation on the past coordinates to go to a continuous
coordinate system. The resulting transformation on the geodesic
congruence in @xmath gives initial conditions on @xmath to develop the
geodesic vector field on @xmath to the future.

We then proved that a parallel congruence upon crossing the shell gives
rise to a hypersurface orthogonal congruence to the future of the shell,
and in particular that the shell gives rise to a discontinuity in the
@xmath -tensor of the congruence. In general the jump in the expansion
is determined by the energy density and currents on the shell while the
jump in the shear is determined by the gravitational wave component
together with the surface currents. Although we derived these results
using a particular congruence, it should be clear from ( 56 ) and ( 57 )
that the results are independent of the choice of congruence in the case
of BMS supertranslations for which the surface currents are zero. We
also provide a general argument that a hypersurface orthogonal
congruence before the shell will give rise to a hypersurface orthogonal
congruence to the future.

The change in the @xmath -tensor after the passage of an outgoing
gravitational wave leads to a covariant description of the gravitational
memory effect - the @xmath -memory effect. Although our construction and
approach to gravitational memory appears to be quite distinct from that
reviewed in [ 31 ] there are many intriguing similarities. They
introduce a trace free “shear like” tensor @xmath where @xmath is the
shift in a BMS supertranslation on @xmath and the Lie derivative along
@xmath of @xmath is the news tensor @xmath . The picture that emerges
suggests that the outgoing null shell induces a BMS supertranslation on
@xmath in the same way that a soft graviton is supposed to [ 30 ] .

It would be very interesting to study the quantum version of this effect
and the calculation of the eikonal wavefunction may be a first step in
such an approach. In the eikonal picture the local wavefronts of a
wavefunction follow the geodesics of the spacetime. The presence of an
outgoing gravitational wave produces a radical reorganization of the
congruence such that in general a flat wavefront can be distorted in a
myriad of different ways. One may imagine that at a deeper level this
distortion corresponds to a radical change in the quantum field theory
vacuum that is constructed from plane wave states. It would be
interesting in particular to investigate how the propagation across the
shell of a good basis of wave-functions may not give rise to a
reasonable basis to the future of the shell given that BMS
transformations map between inequivalent quantum field theory vacuum
states [ 31 ] .

## 3 Integrability of geodesics in near-horizon extremal Myers-Perry
black holes: Special cases

Any dynamical system, particle or field dynamics alike, is classically
described by equations of motion and some boundary conditions for the
field theory case. The main task in analyzing the system is to solve the
equations of motion, which are generically (partial) second order
differential equations, and solving them is generically a formidable
task. Symmetries, Noether theorem and constants of motion, are the usual
tools facilitating tackling the problem. In this and the following
chapter we will focus on particle dynamics on certain @xmath dimensional
curved backgrounds.

In a dynamical system with @xmath degrees of freedom and hence a @xmath
dimensional phase space, if number of independent symmetries is equal to
@xmath , the system is called integrable and is usually solvable. If the
system possesses @xmath @xmath , independent symmetries (and hence
functionally independent constants of motion), it is called
superintegrable and the region it can probe in its @xmath dimensional
phase space is a compact @xmath dimensional surface; e.g. see [ 37 , 38
, 39 ] .

For the question of particle dynamics on a general curved (usually a
black hole) background in @xmath dimensions, we are dealing with a
@xmath dimensional phase space. It is an established fact that
isometries of the background, the Killing vectors, provide a set of
constants of motion. Moreover, reparametrization invariance of the
particle action implies that there is always a second rank
Killing-tensor whose conserved charge is the mass of particle. For
backgrounds of interest, e.g. black holes or their near horizon
geometries, usually the number of Killing vectors plus one is less than
@xmath and one may wonder if the system is integrable.

The question of integrability of particle dynamics on black hole or near
horizon geometries have been extensively analyzed in the literature e.g.
see [ 40 , 41 , 43 , 44 , 45 , 46 , 47 , 48 , 49 , 50 , 51 , 52 , 42 ,
54 , 56 , 55 , 53 , 57 , 58 , 59 ] . In particular, it has been shown
that the problem is (super)integrable for a large class of black holes.
The integrability is often associated with the existence of higher rank,
usually second rank, Killing tensor fields [ 40 ] (see [ 60 ] for
review).

Given an extremal black hole there are general theorems stating that in
the near horizon limit we obtain a usually smooth geometry with larger
isometry group than the original extremal black hole [ 61 ] . It is
hence an interesting question to explore if this symmetry enhancement
yields further independent constants of motion and how it affects the
(super)integrability of particle dynamics. This question, besides the
academic interests, is also relevant to some of the observations related
to black holes: It is now a well-accepted fact that there are fast
rotating black holes in the sky which are well modeled by an extreme
Kerr geometry [ 62 ] and the matter moving around these black holes in
their accretion disks are essentially probing the near horizon geometry
[ 63 ] .

The isometry group of generic stationary extremal black holes in the
near horizon region is shown to have an @xmath part [ 61 , 64 ] .
Therefore, particle dynamics on the near horizon extreme geometries
possesses dynamical @xmath dimensional conformal symmetry, i.e. it
defines a “conformal mechanics” [ 41 , 43 , 44 , 45 , 46 , 47 , 48 , 49
, 50 , 51 , 52 ] . This allows to reduce the problem to the study of
system depending on latitudinal and azimuthal coordinates and their
conjugate momenta with the effective Hamiltonian being Casimir of
conformal algebra. Such associated systems have been investigated from
various viewpoints in Refs. [ 65 , 66 , 67 , 68 , 69 ] where they were
called “angular (or spherical) mechanics”.

In this work, we continue our analysis of [ 36 , 80 ] and extend the
analysis there to Near Horizon Extremal Myers-Perry [ 81 ] (NHEMP) black
holes [ 64 ] in general odd and even dimensions. We discuss the
separability of variables, constants of motion for “angular mechanics”
associated with these systems and how they are related to the second
rank Killing tensors of the background. While the system is in general
integrable, as we show, there are special cases where the system is
superintegrable. Moreover, we discuss another interesting case, the
Extremal Vanishing Horizon (EVH) [ 82 ] Myer-Perry black holes [ 83 ]
and show the integrability of geodesics in the Near Horizon EVH
Myers-Perry (NHEVH-MP) geometries.

In Section 3.1 we present the geometry of near-horizon extremal
Myers-Perry black holes in generic even and odd dimensions, and
construct the “angular mechanics” describing probe particle dynamics. In
this section we set our notations and conventions.

In Section 3.3 we analyze generic causal curve, massive or massless
geodesic, in the NHEMP background. We show that this Hamiltonian system
is separable in ellipsoidal coordinate system, work out the constants of
motion and establish that the system is integrable. Moreover, we show
how the Killing vectors and second rank Killing tensors are related to
these constants of motion. In Section 4.1 we analyze special cases where
some of the rotation parameters of the background NHEMP are equal. In
these cases we have some extra Killing vectors and tensors and the
system is superintegrable. Section 4.2 contains the analysis of particle
dynamics on the special class of Extremal Vanishing Horizon (EVH)
Myers-Perry black holes. We end this note with discussions and further
comments.

This chapter was based on the papers [ 80 , 76 , 77 , 78 ]

### 3.1 NHEMP in arbitrary dimensions; unified description

The NHEMP metric in both odd and even dimensions in the Gaussian null
coordinates was presented in [ 64 ] . The NHEMP is a (generically) a
smooth solution to vacuum Einstein equations in odd @xmath - and @xmath
-dimensions, in general it is specified by @xmath number of rotation
parameters @xmath (or @xmath angular momenta @xmath ) and has @xmath
isometry. In Boyer-Lindquist coordinates NHEMP metric has the form

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (68)
     @xmath      (69)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath , i.e. @xmath for the odd and @xmath for the even
dimensions cases, @xmath is a black hole radius which satisfy the
equation

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (70)
  -- -------- -- ------

and, ^(*) ^(*) * There seems to be a minor typo in the exressions for
NHEMP metrics given in [ 64 ] , which we have corrected here.

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (71)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (72)
  -- -------- -- ------

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (73)
  -- -------- -- ------

In our notations lowercase Latin indices @xmath run from @xmath to
@xmath and uppercase Latin indices @xmath run over 1 to @xmath .

For the case when all @xmath take generic non-zero values ^(†) ^(†) †
The case when one of the @xmath is zero is the EVH case we will discuss
separately in Section 4.2 . it is convenient to introduce new parameters
@xmath

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (74)
  -- -------- -- ------

and re-scaled coordinates @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (75)
  -- -------- -- ------

In these terms the near-horizon metrics reads

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (76)
  -- -------- -- ------

where

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (77)
  -- -------- -- ------

with

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (78)
  -- -------- -- ------

With this unified description at hands we are ready to describe probe
particle dynamics.

### 3.2 Probe-particle dynamics

The metric ( 76 ) has @xmath isometry group and hence the particle
dynamics on this background exhibits dynamical conformal symmetry; we
are dealing with a “conformal mechanics” problem [ 41 , 43 , 44 , 45 ,
46 , 47 , 48 , 49 , 50 , 51 , 52 ] . Let us denote the three generators
of this @xmath algebra by @xmath , and its Casimir by @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (79)
  -- -------- -- ------

The mass-shell equation for a particle of mass @xmath moving in the
background metric

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (80)
  -- -------- -- ------

leads to the following expression

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (81)
  -- -------- -- ------

where

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (82)
  -- -------- -- ------

Using ( 81 ), as in [ 36 ] , we can construct the Hamiltonian @xmath and
the other generators of the conformal algebra

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (83)
     @xmath      (84)
  -- -------- -- ------

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the momenta @xmath are conjugate to @xmath with the canonical
Poisson brackets

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (85)
  -- -------- -- ------

Thus, the Casimir element of the conformal algebra reads

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (86)
  -- -------- -- ------

where

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (87)
  -- -------- -- ------

In an appropriately chosen frame @xmath can be written in formally
nonrelativistic form [ 43 , 44 , 45 , 46 , 47 , 48 , 49 , 50 , 51 , 52 ]

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (88)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath , @xmath are the effective “radius” and its canonical
conjugate “radial momentum”. As we will show below the Casimir @xmath
encodes all the essential information about the system of particle on
these backgrounds. The Casimir @xmath ( 86 ) is at most quadratic in
momenta canonically conjugate to the remaining angular variables and it
can conveniently be viewed as the Hamiltonian of a reduced
“angular/spherical mechanics” [ 65 , 66 , 67 , 68 , 69 ] describing
motion of particle on some curved background. Note that the “time
parameter” conjugate to @xmath is different than the time parameter
@xmath appeared in metric ( 76 ) whose conjugate variable is @xmath .
See [ 84 ] for more detailed discussions.

Since the azimuthal angular variables @xmath are cyclic, corresponding
conjugate momenta @xmath are constants of motion. We then remain with a
reduced @xmath -dimensional system described by Hamiltonian ( 86 ) and
@xmath variables and their conjugate momenta.

### 3.3 Fully Non-isotropic case

To show that the angular/spherical mechanics system is integrable, we
show that it is separable in the ellipsoidal coordinates when we are
dealing with cases where all parameters @xmath are non-equal. The
ellipsoidal coordinates @xmath for odd and even dimensions are then
defined as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (89)
  -- -------- -- ------

To resolve the condition @xmath we choose @xmath and hence there are
@xmath independent @xmath variables, which will be denoted by @xmath .

In these coordinates the angular Hamiltonian @xmath (shifted by a
constant and appropriately rescaled) reads

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (90)
  -- -------- -- ------

where

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (91)
  -- -------- -- ------

with

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (92)
  -- -------- -- ------

and @xmath , @xmath .

The level surface of angular Hamiltonian ( 90 ), @xmath , can be
conveniently represented through

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (93)
  -- -------- -- ------

where ^(‡) ^(‡) ‡ Note that @xmath and @xmath replacements have been
assumed in the current chapter compared to [ 36 ] .

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (94)
  -- -------- -- ------

and we used the identities

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (95)
  -- -------- -- ------

We can rewrite the expression ( 93 ) in more useful form, recalling the
identities,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (96)
  -- -------- -- ------

Multiplying both sides of ( 96 ) by arbitrary constants @xmath and
adding to ( 93 ), we get

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (97)
  -- -------- -- ------

Equipped with the above we can solve the Hamilton-Jacobi equations

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (98)
  -- -------- -- ------

and obtain the generating function @xmath depending on @xmath
integration constants (i.e. the general solution of Hamilton-Jacobi
equation). To this end we substitute in ( 97 )

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (99)
  -- -------- -- ------

and choose the ansatz

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (100)
  -- -------- -- -------

This reduces the Hamilton-Jacobi equation to a set of @xmath ordinary
differential equations

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (101)
  -- -------- -- -------

or in an explicit form,

  -- -------- -- -- -------
     @xmath         (102)
  -- -------- -- -- -------

Hence, the analytic solution to the Hamilton-Jacobi equation is given
through the generating function ( 100 ) with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (103)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then, differentiating with respect to constants @xmath , we can get the
explicit solutions of the equations of motion

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (104)
  -- -------- -- -------

To include the dynamics of azimuthal coordinates @xmath we have to
consider the generating function @xmath where we take into account
functional dependence of @xmath from @xmath . This yields the solutions
for azimuthal coordinates

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (105)
  -- -------- -- -------

Thus, we get the solutions of the angular sector of generic NHEMP with
non-equal non-vanishing rotational parameters.

#### 3.3.1 Constants of motion

The expressions for commuting constants of motion @xmath can be found
from ( 101 ), by expressing constants @xmath in terms of @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath            (106)
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------

where @xmath are given by ( 94 ). Integrals of motion are the solutions
to this equation and may be expressed via the inverse Vandermonde
matrix, explicitly,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (107)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (108)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the following subsection we will first derive the explicit forms of
these first integrals in the initial @xmath coordinates in seven, nine
and eleven dimensions [ 80 ] and then generalize these results for
arbitrary dimensions.

#### 3.3.2 Cases of 7, 9 and 11 dimensions

For the simplest case of @xmath , corresponding to seven-dimensional MP
black hole, we have two integrals of motion given by ( 107 ):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (109)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using the expression

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (110)
  -- -------- -- -------

one can explicitly calculate @xmath , which is valid for any @xmath ^(§)
^(§) § Hereinafter, we ignore an additional constant term and an overall
constant factor which might arise in the expressions for the first
integrals.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (111)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the case of @xmath we will obtain all three integrals of motion from
the equation ( 107 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath            (112)
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Constants of motion @xmath and @xmath in Cartesian coordinates are given
by ( 86 ) and ( 111 ) respectively. The second integral of motion can be
derived by directly transforming the second equation in ( 112 ). Using (
110 ) we derive the expression for @xmath which is valid for arbitrary
@xmath

  -- -- -- -------
           (113)
  -- -- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (114)
  -- -------- -- -------

If @xmath we have four integrals of motion, three of which are given by
( 86 ), ( 111 ) and ( 113 ). The missing one is @xmath which, as in the
previous cases, is given by ( 107 ) in ellipsoidal coordinates

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (115)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath is given by ( 114 ) and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (116)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using ( 110 ) we can represent @xmath in Cartesian coordinates and
generalize it to higher dimensions

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath            (117)
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------

Here we use the following notations

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (118)
  -- -------- -- -------

#### 3.3.3 Generalization to arbitrary dimensions

After tedious transformations on can rewrite ( 107 ) in @xmath
coordinates,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (119)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -- -- -------
           (120)
           (121)
  -- -- -- -------

with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath            (122)
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (123)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is also assumed that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (124)
  -- -------- -- -------

One can check that in odd dimensions in the special cases of @xmath and
@xmath , the above reduce to the corresponding integrals of motion [ 80
] given by ( 111 ), ( 113 ) and ( 117 ). One can also check, that simply
requiring the rotation parameters to be equal in these expressions, one
does not recover all the integrals of the special case of @xmath NHEMP.
In such special cases all of the first integrals of the spherical
mechanics of generic (non-equal @xmath ) case transform into the
Hamiltonian of the spherical mechanics of the equal @xmath case. So, to
obtaining the Liouville integrals in the isotropic case we need to
develop more sophisticated contraction procedure.

We also note that the above expressions for the constants of motion were
found in the ellipsoidal coordinates introduced for the special case of
non-equal rotational parameters @xmath . However, we then written them
in the initial coordinates, they hold for generic nonzero values of the
rotation parameters @xmath . We will analyze the special cases where
some of the @xmath or @xmath are equal in Section 4.1 and when one of
them is vanishing in Section 4.2 .

#### 3.3.4 Killing tensors

In previous subsection we presented the constants of motion in the form
demonstrating their explicit dependence on the momenta @xmath . To
represent ( 119 ) through the respective @xmath second rank Killing
tensors, one can replace the last term proportional to @xmath from the
mass-shell equation ( 80 ), ( 81 ). Note also that the @xmath , provides
@xmath one constants of motion. We can then add @xmath to this
collection, which is proportional to the mass with the corresponding
second rank killing tensor being the inverse metric, i.e.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (125)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we assumed @xmath .

To get the expression for Killing tensors, we should simply replace the
momenta by the respective vector fields, @xmath . That is, in the
coordinates @xmath where the constants of motion ( 119 ) are written,
one should replace

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In ellipsoidal coordinates the above presented @xmath Killing tensors
read

  -- -- -- -------
           (126)
  -- -- -- -------

Thus, we have @xmath mutually commuting Killing vectors @xmath and
@xmath Killing tensors, summing up to @xmath and hence the system is
integrable. One may check that our expressions for the Killing tensors
match with those appeared in [ 58 , 85 ] after taking the near-horizon
limit. We note that the two extra Killing vectors of the @xmath part of
the isometry which appear in the near horizon limit and in the
coordinates of ( 76 ) take the form,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (127)
  -- -------- -- -------

do not yield new independent constants of motion.

### 3.4 The fully isotropic, equal rotation parameters

When all of the rotational parameters coincide, the Hamiltonian of probe
particle reduces to the system on sphere and admits separation of
variables in spherical coordinates [ 51 , 52 ] . It can be checked that
in this case, the Hamiltonian of the reduced mechanics derived from ( 86
) transforms into the corresponding mechanics with equal parameters
derived in [ 51 , 52 ] for both odd and even dimensional cases. Notice,
that in this limit the difference between even and odd cases becomes
visible:

-   In the odd case, @xmath , isotropic limit corresponds to the choice
    @xmath , @xmath . As a result, the angular Hamiltonian ( 86 ) which
    we will denote it by @xmath takes the form

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (128)
      -- -------- -- -------

    For the fixed @xmath configuration space of this system is @xmath
    -dimensional sphere, and the Hamiltonian defines specific
    generalization of the Higgs oscillator, which is also known as a
    Rossochatius system [ 111 ] .

-   In the even case, @xmath , one has @xmath when @xmath and @xmath ,
    i.e. we can’t choose all parameters @xmath be equal. As a result,
    the angular Hamiltonian ( 86 ) reads

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (129)
      -- -------- -- -------

    where

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (130)
      -- -------- -- -------

    In the case of even dimension configuration space fails to be sphere
    (even with fixed @xmath ).

What is important is that both systems admit separation of variables in
spherical coordinates. Namely, by recursively introducing spherical
coordinates

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (131)
  -- -------- -- -------

we get the following recurrent formulae for the constants of motion

  -- -- -------- -------- -- -------
        @xmath   @xmath      (132)
        @xmath   @xmath      (133)
  -- -- -------- -------- -- -------

It is clear, that @xmath define complete set of Liouville constants of
motion and the @xmath system contains @xmath as a subsystem. Moreover,
the Rosochatius system (angular Hamiltonian for @xmath case with fixed
@xmath ) is superintegrable: it has @xmath additional functionally
independent constants of motion defined by the expression

  -- -- -- -------
           (134)
  -- -- -- -------

When @xmath are not fixed, the system is @xmath -dimensional one. In
that case, from its action-angle formulation [ 51 , 52 ] one can
observe, that it remains maximally superintegrable for @xmath , i.e.
possesses @xmath constants of motion: Besides @xmath constants of motion
given by ( 132 ) and ( 134 ), and the @xmath commuting integrals @xmath
(associated with axial Killing vectors), there are @xmath additional
constants of motion with quadratic term mixing @xmath and @xmath ; i.e.
@xmath second rank Killing tensors in @xmath direction. When @xmath ,
the system is @xmath -dimensional, and has @xmath integrals, i.e., as
lacks one integral from being maximal superintegrable.

From these constant of motion one can readily read the associated
Killing vectors and second rank Killing tensors. Hence, isotropic system
has @xmath mutually commuting Killing vectors and @xmath Killing
tensors, and an additional @xmath non-commuting second rank Killing
tensors.

For more detailed analysis of the isotropic case see [ 51 , 52 ] . Here
we present it mainly to set the conventions we use in the study of
“intermediate case”, when only some of the rotation parameters are equal
to each other.

## 4 Integrability of geodesics in general non-vanishing and vanishing
NHEMP geometry

In the previous chapter we studied two special cases of the
integrability of Hamilton-Jacobi equation in the background of
Non-Vanishing Near Horizon Extremal Myers-Perry black hole: when there
are no equal rotation parameters and when all of the rotation parameters
are equal. In this chapter we are going to generalize the previous
results and study the case when some of the rotational parameters are
equal and others are not. Furthermore, we are going to study the
integrability of geodesics in the background of vanishing NHEMP geometry
(when one of the rotational parameters is 0).

### 4.1 Partially isotropic cases

When some of the @xmath ’s are equal the geometry ( 68 ) exhibits a
bigger isometry group than @xmath ; depending on the number of equal
@xmath ’s the @xmath part is enhanced to a rank @xmath subgroup of
@xmath . This larger isometry group brings larger number of Killing
vectors and tensors and one hence expects the particle dynamics for
these cases to become a superintegrable system. This is what we will
explore in this section and construct the corresponding conserved
charges.

#### 4.1.1 Partially isotropic case in odd dimension

Let’s start with the simpler odd dimensional system, @xmath , with
@xmath nonequal rotation parameters and @xmath equal ones:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (135)
  -- -------- -- -------

Starting from the metric ( 76 ) we will construct the Hamiltonian for
the reduced mechanics by introducing spherical and ellipsoidal
coordinates. Spherical coordinates @xmath will be introduced for the
@xmath latitudinal coordinates @xmath corresponding to the equal
rotational parameters

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (136)
  -- -------- -- -------

Hence,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (137)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath being the metric on @xmath -dimensional sphere: @xmath .

Performing the coordinate transformation ( 136 ) in ( 68 ), it is seen
that the radial coordinate @xmath of the spherical subsystem behaves
very much like the other latitudinal coordinates of non-equal rotational
parameters. Therefore, we will treat @xmath and @xmath in the same way:

  -- -- -- -------
           (138)
  -- -- -- -------

in terms of which the metric takes the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (139)
  -- -------- -- -------

with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (140)
  -- -------- -- -------

Hamiltonian of the corresponding spherical mechanics then reads

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (141)
  -- -------- -- -------

and @xmath defined as by ( 128 ) in @xmath -dimensional space. The above
describes a lower-dimensional version of ( 86 ), where all rotational
parameters are nonequal and we can analyze it as we did for the general
case in the previous chapter. That is, we introduce on the @xmath
-dimensional ellipsoidal coordinates

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (142)
  -- -------- -- -------

and take @xmath for resolving the constraint ( 140 ) given by the second
expression. The rest of the analysis goes through as in [ 36 ] and as in
Section 3.3 .

The partially isotropic case discussed here, as we see, interpolates
between the generic case of Section 3.3 ( @xmath ) and the fully
isotropic case ( @xmath ) of Section 3.4 : it decouples to the
Hamiltonians of type ( 90 ) and ( 128 ). The case @xmath corresponds to
the system with non-equal parameters, and the spherical subsystem is
trivial ( @xmath ). For @xmath the @xmath -dimensional spherical
subsystem is not trivial anymore and has @xmath constants of motion.
Thus the reduced @xmath -dimensional angular system has @xmath constants
of motion, i.e. the number of extra constants of motion compared to the
generic case is @xmath , with @xmath . It becomes maximally
superintegrable only for @xmath , i.e when all rotational parameters are
equal.

This discussion can be easily extended to the case of even dimensions (
@xmath ). Here we will have an additional latitudinal coordinate (
@xmath ) and a rotational parameter with a fixed value ( @xmath ). One
should note that @xmath cannot be equal to any other rotational
parameter, so it is one of the @xmath non-equal parameters. In the
limiting case when @xmath and all rotational parameters are different
and we have an integrable system with @xmath configuration space degrees
of freedom, as expected. Since @xmath cannot be equal to the others,
@xmath cannot be equal to @xmath and the even dimensional system cannot
be maximally superintegrable. In the limit when all rotational
parameters are equal except @xmath ( @xmath ), the system will lack one
integral of motion to be maximally superintegrable.

#### 4.1.2 General case

Having discussed the some equal @xmath ’s but the rest nonequal case, we
now turn to the most general case when there are @xmath sets (blocks) of
equal rotation parameters each containing @xmath members. As before we
assume that there are @xmath rotation parameters which are not equal to
the others, so that @xmath . Note that in our conventions @xmath . We
introduce an upper index which, written on a parameter or a function,
denotes the number of the block under consideration. So, for example
@xmath will denote all the equal rotational parameters in the @xmath -th
set of rotation parameters and @xmath will denote their corresponding
latitudinal coordinates and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (143)
  -- -------- -- -------

The list of all rotational parameters can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (144)
  -- -------- -- -------

Let us start with the odd ( @xmath case and the metric ( 76 ). We can
construct the Hamiltonian for the reduced mechanics by introducing
spherical and ellipsoidal coordinates. Different spherical coordinates
will be introduced separately for each set of latitudinal coordinates
corresponding to different sets of equal rotational parameters.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (145)
  -- -------- -- -------

One should note that these spherical coordinates satisfy the relations

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (146)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath denotes the metric on unit @xmath -dimensional sphere. For
the rest of the latitudinal coordinates @xmath corresponding to
non-equal rotational parameters and the radial coordinates @xmath of
isotropic subsystems we introduce the notation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (147)
  -- -------- -- -------

In this notation the the metric ( 76 ) can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (148)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath are defined as in ( 77 ) and ( 140 ) respectively.
Therefore, the Hamiltonian of the corresponding angular mechanics reads

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (149)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are the spherical subsystems resulting from the @xmath sets
of equal rotation parameters, @xmath is defined by ( 141 ), and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (150)
  -- -------- -- -------

Hence, the reduced spherical mechanics ( 149 ) has the exact form of (
90 ) (with appropriate constants) whose integrability has already been
discussed. All discussions from the previous subsection can be easily
extended to this case, e.g. separation of variables may be achieved in
the ellipsoidal coordinates

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (151)
  -- -------- -- -------

and place @xmath for resolving the constraint on latitudinal coordinates
( 78 ), which now takes the form @xmath .

So, we separated the variables for the @xmath -dimensional angular
mechanics describing the geodesics in the near-horizon limit of @xmath
-dimensional Myers-Perry black hole in arbitrary dimension with
arbitrary non-zero values of rotational parameters. The number of
constants of motion in this system can be easily counted: it is equal to
@xmath . The generic case of nonequal @xmath is recovered by @xmath and
the fully isotropic case as @xmath . In a similar manner one can
construct associated Killing tensors.

#### 4.1.3 Contraction from fully non-isotropic to isotropic NHEMP

Having the two corner cases discussed (fully non-isotropic and
isotropic) an interesting question arises. What kind of approximation
would transform the first integrals of fully non-isotropic NHMEP to the
first integrals of isotropic NHEMP? It is straightforward to check that
simply taking all rotation parameters to be equal just transforms all
the first integrals of fully non-isotropic NHMEP to the Hamiltonian of
the spherical mechanics of isotropic NHEMP (with an overall constant
factor and a constant term). So if @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (152)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are constants. To find the desired
approximation, we will work with rotation parameters which have little
variations from their isotropic value @xmath ( @xmath ),

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In such a limit, the Hamiltonian of the non-isotropic mechanics can be
extended in powers of @xmath , keeping the first order term only

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (153)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (154)
  -- -------- -- -------

is the isotropic Hamiltonian. We should note that the linear term of
@xmath still corresponds with the isotropic Hamiltonian @xmath but the
relation @xmath doesn’t hold anymore.

Now, if we find some linear combination @xmath of first integrals of
non-isotropic mechanics such that the free term of the expansion around
@xmath vanishes, we can write

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath            (155)
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------

We see that the first order coefficients @xmath of the @xmath linear
combination are first integrals for @xmath . To construct such
combination whose free term vanishes we can take any of the first
integrals, let’s say @xmath and expand it.

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (156)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

We see from ( 153 ) and ( 156 ) that by combining @xmath and @xmath the
free term can be eliminated

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath            (157)
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------

Furthermore, from the expression @xmath we can find

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and replace with this relation every occurrence of @xmath in ( 157 ).
Doing this, we will end up with the same equation ( 157 ) with just
@xmath replaced by @xmath . So in further calculations we are free to
consider equation ( 157 ) with a redefined @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (158)
  -- -------- -- -------

Thus, having in mind ( 155 ), we find the first integrals of isotropic
mechanics to be

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath                     (159)
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------

Now, we can see that the sum of all @xmath first integrals results into
the casimir of isotropic mechanics

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (160)
  -- -------- -- -------

Thus, by definition, all @xmath commute with @xmath , but one can check
that they don’t commute with each other.

### 4.2 Extremal vanishing horizon case

As seen from metric ( 68 ), the case where one of the @xmath ’s is zero
is a singular case. In fact for this case one should revisit the
near-horizon limit. It has been shown that [ 83 ] for the odd
dimensional extremal MP black holes the horizon area also vanishes and
we are hence dealing with an Extremal Vanishing Horizon (EVH) black hole
[ 82 ] . The near-horizon EVH black holes have remarkable features which
are not shared by generic extremal black holes; they constitute
different set of geometries which should be studied separately [ 87 ] .
In particular, it has been proved that for EVH black holes the near
horizon geometry include an AdS @xmath factor (in contrast with the AdS
@xmath factor of general extremal case) [ 87 , 88 ] , i.e. the @xmath
dimensional NHEVHMP exhibits @xmath isometry. To study this case, we
start by a review on black hole geometry itself. Then, by taking the
near horizon and EVH limit, we discuss the separability of
Hamilton-Jacobi equations on the NHEVH geometries.

As discussed in the special case of EVH black holes one has to revisit
the standard NH theorems for extremal black holes. Here we review EVH
black holes in the family of odd dimensional MP black holes [ 81 ] :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (161)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (162)
  -- -------- -- -------

The extremal case happens when @xmath has double roots and the EVH case
is when one of @xmath parameters, which we take to be @xmath is zero.
That is in the EVH case @xmath . We note that we could have considered a
“near-EVH” metric where the black hole is at a non-zero but small
temperature and the horizon area is also small, while the ratio of
horizon area to the temperature is finite [ 82 , 87 ] .

The horizon for the EVH case is at @xmath and hence in the NH limit, the
leading contributions come from

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (163)
  -- -------- -- -------

Plugging the above into the metric ( 161 ) and taking:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we obtain the NHEVHMP metric [ 83 ] :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (164)
  -- -------- -- -------

where in the above @xmath run from @xmath to @xmath . Had we started
from the near-EVH geometry, the AdS @xmath factor (the @xmath part) of (
164 ) would have turned into a generic BTZ black hole geometry [ 82 , 87
] . The NH geometry ( 164 ) has @xmath isometry. This is to be compared
with @xmath of the non-EVH NHEMP discussed in previous sections.

To discuss separability of the particle dynamics on ( 164 ), as in the
previous sections, we introduce coordinates,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (165)
  -- -------- -- -------

in which ( 164 ) takes the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (166)
  -- -------- -- -------

with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (167)
  -- -------- -- -------

The generators of the two @xmath Killing vectors may be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (168)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath . The Casimir of @xmath ’s are

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (169)
  -- -------- -- -------

and one can readily check that both Casimirs are equal to @xmath

The mass-shell equation of the probe particle ( 80 ) then reads

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (170)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (171)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (172)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath in ( 172 ) is the Casimir. Note that while the background
has @xmath isometry the Casimirs of the the two @xmath factors happen to
be identically the same and hence we are dealing with a single @xmath ;
appearance of an extra @xmath does not add to number of constant of
motion compared to the non-EVH case.

Hence, as in the regular case, we have to consider separately three
cases

-    Generic, non-isotropic case, all @xmath are non-equal

    To separate the variables in ( 172 ), in the special case when none
    of the rotational parameter is equal, we introduce the ellipsoidal
    coordinates

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (173)
      -- -------- -- -------

    In this terms the angular Hamiltonian reads

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (174)
      -- -------- -- -------

    where @xmath . One can see that ( 174 ) has a very similar form to (
    90 ), and using the identities ( 95 ) and ( 96 ), it can be
    rewritten as follows (after fixing the Hamiltonian @xmath )

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (175)
      -- -------- -- -------

    where

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (176)
      -- -------- -- -------

    Separation of variables and the constants of motion is similar to
    the Section 3.3 , where ( 175 ) corresponds to ( 93 ).

-    Isotropic case, all @xmath are equal

    In this case ( @xmath ), we separate the variables in ( 172 ) by
    introducing spherical coordinates @xmath

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (177)
      -- -------- -- -------

    where @xmath . In these coordinates ( 172 ) will take the following
    form

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (178)
      -- -------- -- -------

    with @xmath defined in ( 132 ), where the separation of variables
    and the derivation of integrals of motion was carried out according
    to 3.4 .

-    partially isotropic case

    The last case is the most general one which involves sets of equal
    and a set of non-equal rotational parameters. With the discussions
    of the two previous cases (fully isotropic and fully non-isotropic)
    in view and recalling the analysis of partially isotropic NHEMP case
    of previous section, it is straightforward to separate the variables
    in partially isotropic NHEVHMP. Following the steps in Subsection
    4.1.2 , one should first introduce different spherical coordinates
    for each set of equal rotational parameters and ellipsoidal
    coordinates for the joint set of non-equal rotational parameters and
    the radial parts of spherical coordinates. This will result into a
    spherical mechanics similar to ( 149 ) where the Hamiltonians of
    spherical subsystems will be included as parameters.

### 4.3 Discussion

Continuing the analysis of [ 36 , 80 ] , we studied separability of
geodesic motion on the near horizon geometries of Myers-Perry black hole
in @xmath , even or odd, dimensions and established the integrability by
explicit construction of @xmath constants of motion. In the general case
@xmath of these constants of motion are related to the Killing vectors
of the background (note that the background in general has @xmath
Killing vectors, but three of them form an @xmath algebra and hence
there is only one independent conserved charge from this sector). Our
analysis reconfirms the earlier observations that although near-horizon
limit in the extremal black holes enhances the number of Killing vectors
by two [ 61 ] , the number of independent conserved charges from the
Killing vectors does not change. Our system, in the general case, has
@xmath constants of motion associated with second rank Killing tensors
the system possesses. We also constructed the explicit relation between
these Killing tensors and the conserved charges and one may check that
our Killing tensors and those in [ 58 ] match. We note that the Killing
tensors of [ 58 ] were obtained using the near horizon limit on the
Killing tensors of Myers-Perry black hole in a coordinate system which
makes the geodesics of black hole separable itself. Whereas, we directly
worked with ellipsoidal coordinates for the NHEMP, introduced in [ 36 ]
. Comparing the two systems before and after the NH limit, it was argued
in [ 58 ] that a combination of Killing tensors is reducible to the
Killing vectors, however, we obtain other second rank Killing tensors,
through which the system remains integrable. Moreover, by explicitly
showing the separability, one concludes that there is no inconsistency
with the theorems in [ 54 ] . There is an extra conserved charge related
to the Casimir of @xmath symmetry group which intrinsically exists in
the NHEG’s. We have shown that the charge of the Casimir is independent
of the other conserved charges. In this sense, one of the “hidden
symmetries,” symmetries which are associated with equations of motion
and are not isometries of the background, becomes explicit in the NH
limit [ 58 ] .

Following the discussions in [ 51 , 52 ] , we showed that for special
cases where some of the rotations parameters of the background are
equal, the geodesic problem on NHEMP is superintegrable. We established
superintegrability by establishing existence of other constants of
motion. Our methods here, combined with those in [ 51 , 52 ] , allows
one to read the extra second rank Killing tensors obtained in these
cases. The rough picture is as follows: We started with a system with
@xmath variables with @xmath isometries. Fixing the momenta associated
with the isometries, we obtained and focused the @xmath dimensional
“angular mechanics” part. In this sector, whenever @xmath number of
rotation parameters @xmath of the background metric are equal the @xmath
isometry is enhanced to @xmath and this latter brings about other second
rank Killing tensors. All in all, the fully isotropic case in odd
dimensions with @xmath isometry, the @xmath dimensional spherical
mechanics part is maximally superintegrable, it has @xmath extra
constants of motion. The fully isotropic case in even dimensions,
however, is not maximally superintegrable; it has still @xmath extra
Killing tensors (one less than the @xmath constants of motion to make
the system fully superintegrable). We discussed the “special cases” in
two different ways. First, we reanalyzed the system from the scratch (in
Section 3.4 ) and also took the equal rotation parameter limit of the
generic case (in Subsection 4.1.3 ). As expected, these two cases
matched. Our preliminary analysis, which we did not show here, indicate
that the above statements is also true for the NH limit of extremal MP
black holes in (A)dS backgrounds.

We also discussed the EVH case, which happens for odd dimensional
extremal MP when one of the rotation parameters @xmath vanishes. In the
general NHEVHMP case, where the background isometry is @xmath the number
of independent charges associated with Killing vectors is @xmath .
Despite enhancement of the isometry group compared to the generic NHEMP
case, we found that this symmetry enhancement does not add independent
constants of motion, the system in general does not poses extra
constants of motion and remains just integrable.

Here we explored second rank Killing tensors. One may suspect that the
system has independent higher rank Killing tensors too, although it is
unlikely. But if it does, the system for the generic rotation parameters
becomes superintegrable. It is interesting to explore this question.
Finally, as already pointed out in the introduction, one can consider
other probes including scalar, Dirac field or gauge or tensor
perturbations on the NHEMP backgrounds and study their integrability. To
this end, the study of Killing Yano tensor and principal tensor [ 89 ,
90 ] should be completed.

## 5 Superintegrable quantum systems and resonant spacetimes

Geometrization of dynamics is a recurrent theme in theoretical physics.
While it has underlied such fundamental developments as the creation of
General Relativity and search for unified theories of interactions, it
also has a more modest (but often fruitful) aspect of reformulating
conventional, well-established theories in more geometrical terms, in
hope of elucidating their structure. One particular approach of the
latter type is the Jacobi metric (for a contemporary treatment, see [ 92
, 93 , 94 ] ). This energy-dependent metric simply encodes as its
geodesics the classical orbits of a nonrelativistic mechanical particle
on a manifold moving in a potential.

The geometrization program we propose here can be seen as a quantum
counterpart of the Jacobi metric. To a nonrelativistic quantum particle
on a manifold moving in a potential, we shall associate a relativistic
Klein-Gordon equation in a static spacetime of one dimension higher.
Since the Klein-Gordon equation can be seen as a sort of quantization of
geodesics (and reduces to the geodesic equation in the eikonal
approximation), this provides a quantized version of the correspondence
between particle motion on a manifold in the presence of a potential and
purely geometric geodesic motion in the corresponding spacetime.
Executing our geometrization algorithm in general reduces to a nonlinear
elliptic equation closely reminiscent of the one emerging in relation to
the Yamabe problem and its generalizations known as prescribed scalar
curvature problems [ 96 , 97 , 98 ] , and thus connects to extensive
literature and interesting questions in differential geometry. (The
Yamabe problem refers to constructing a conformal transformation of the
given metric on a manifold that makes the Ricci scalar of the
conformally transformed metric constant.)

While the correspondence we build may in principle operate on any
system, we are primarily motivated by its application to a very special
class of quantum systems whose energy is a quadratic function of the
energy level number. Such systems are exemplified by the one-dimensional
Pöschl-Teller potential, and in higher dimensions they are typically
superintegrable. In fact, our construction has been developed precisely
as a generalization of the correspondence [ 99 , 100 , 101 ] between the
Higgs oscillator [ 102 , 103 ] , a particularly simple superintegrable
system with a quadratic spectrum, and Klein-Gordon equations on the
Anti-de Sitter (AdS) spacetime, the maximally symmetric spacetime of
constant negative curvature. This correspondence has emerged in the
context of studying selection rules [ 104 , 105 , 106 ] in the nonlinear
perturbation theory targeting the AdS stability problem [ 107 , 108 ] .
The correspondence has been useful for both elucidating the structure of
AdS perturbation theory [ 100 ] and for resolving the old problem of
constructing explicit hidden symmetry generators for the Higgs
oscillator [ 101 ] .

The reason for our emphasis on systems with quadratic spectra is that,
in application to such systems, our geometrization program generates
Klein-Gordon equations whose frequency spectra are linear in the
frequency level number, and hence the spectrum is highly resonant (the
difference of any two frequencies is integer in appropriate units). It
is well-known that in the context of weakly nonlinear dynamics, highly
resonant spectra have a dramatic impact, as they allow arbitrarily small
nonlinear perturbations to produce arbitrarily large effects over long
times. This feature has been crucial in the extensive investigations of
the AdS stability problem in the literature (for a brief review and
references, see [ 108 ] ). The main practical target of our
geometrization program thus appears twofold:

-   to provide geometric counterparts for quantum systems with quadratic
    spectra (the resulting Klein-Gordon equation is set up on a highly
    special spacetime with a resonant spectrum of frequencies and the
    geometric properties of this spacetime are likely to yield insights
    into the algebraic properties of the original quantum system,
    including its high degree of degeneracy and hidden symmetries),

-   to generate, starting from known quantum systems with quadratic
    spectra, highly resonant spacetimes (weakly nonlinear dynamics in
    such spacetimes is likely to be very sophisticated, sharing the
    features of the extensively explored weakly nonlinear dynamics of
    AdS).

In Section 5.1 and Section 5.2 , we formulate our general geometrization
procedure and describe how it simplifies for the case of zero mass in
the Klein-Gordon equation one is aiming to construct. In Section 5.3 ,
we describe how the previously known correspondence [ 99 , 100 , 101 ]
between the Higgs oscillator and AdS fits in our general framework. In
Section 5.4 , we analyze the superintegrable Rosochatius system, which
generalizes the Higgs oscillator, and generate a large family of
spacetimes perfectly resonant with respect to the massless wave
equation. We conclude with a review of the current state of our
formalism and open problems.

The results of this chapter were obtained in cooperation with Oleg Evnin
and are based on [ 79 ] .

### 5.1 General formulation of the procedure

Consider a quantum system with the Hamiltonian

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (179)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the Laplacian on a @xmath -dimensional manifold
parametrized with @xmath and endowed with the metric @xmath . We shall
be particularly interested in systems whose energy spectrum consists of
(in general, degenerate) energy levels labelled by the level number
@xmath , 1, …, and the energy is a quadratic function of the level
number:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (180)
  -- -------- -- -------

Such spectra are indeed observed in a number of interesting systems,
typically involving superintegrability, for example:

-   The Higgs oscillator [ 102 , 103 ] , which is a particle on a @xmath
    -sphere moving in a potential varying as the inverse cosine-squared
    of the polar angle.

-   The superintegrable version [ 109 , 110 ] of the Rosochatius system
    on a @xmath -sphere [ 111 , 112 ] , which is the most direct
    generalization of the Higgs oscillator.

-   The quantum angular Calogero-Moser model [ 113 ] .

-   The (spherical) Calogero-Higgs system [ 114 , 115 ] .

We additionally mention the following two completely elementary systems
which give a particularly simple realization of the quadratic spectrum (
180 ):

-   A particle in one dimension in an infinite rectangular potential
    well.

-   The trigonometric Pöschl-Teller system [ 116 ] .

We would like to associate to any system of the form ( 179 ) a
Klein-Gordon equation in a certain static @xmath -dimensional
space-time. We introduce a scalar field @xmath satisfying

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (181)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the above expression, @xmath can in principle be an arbitrary
constant, but our main focus will be on systems with energy spectrum of
the form ( 180 ) and @xmath read off from ( 180 ). One can equivalently
write ( 181 ) as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (182)
  -- -------- -- -------

Where @xmath is the D’Alembertian of the metric

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (183)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath . By construction, if one implements separation of variables
in ( 182 ) in the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (184)
  -- -------- -- -------

one recovers the original Schrödinger equation as @xmath . This
guarantees that the mode functions of ( 182 ) are directly related to
the energy eigenstates of the original quantum-mechanical problem. Note
that, if one focuses on systems with energy spectra of the form ( 180 ),
by construction, separation of variables in ( 181 ) will lead to
eigenmodes with linearly spaced frequencies:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (185)
  -- -------- -- -------

In this case, after conversion to the Klein-Gordon form, which we shall
undertake below, the resulting spacetime will possess a resonant
spectrum of frequencies.

Equation ( 181 ) is not of a Klein-Gordon form, but we can try to put in
this form by applying a conformal rescaling to @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (186)
  -- -------- -- -------

One thus gets (relevant conformal transformation formulas can be
retrieved, e.g., from [ 117 ] )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (187)
  -- -------- -- -------

If the expression in the square brackets can be made constant by a
suitable choice of @xmath , we get a Klein-Gordon equation in a
spacetime with the metric @xmath . We thus need to solve the equation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (188)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is wiser to rewrite this equation through the metric @xmath , which
is already known and given by ( 183 ):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (189)
  -- -------- -- -------

Since neither @xmath nor @xmath depend on @xmath , one can assume that
@xmath is a function of @xmath as well. Hence,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (190)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note that ( 188 ) is closely reminiscent of the equation emerging from
the following purely geometrical problem: Consider a metric @xmath whose
Ricci scalar is @xmath . Is it possible to find @xmath such that the
Ricci scalar corresponding to @xmath has a given form @xmath ? Indeed,
from the standard formulae for the change of the Ricci scalar under
conformal transformations, see, e.g., (3.4) of [ 117 ] , one gets

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (191)
  -- -------- -- -------

Algebraically, this has the same structure as ( 188 ).

Equations of the form ( 191 ) for simple specific choices of @xmath and
@xmath have been studied in mathematical literature as various
realizations of the ‘prescribed scalar curvature’ problem [ 98 ] .
Substitution

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (192)
  -- -------- -- -------

reduces ( 190 ) to the following compact form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (193)
  -- -------- -- -------

closely reminiscent to the equation arising in relation to the Yamabe
problem [ 96 , 97 , 98 ] . (Note that the specific power of @xmath
appearing on the righ-hand side of this equation is different from the
standard Yamabe problem. This is because we are performing a conformal
transformation in a spacetime of one dimension higher, rather than in
the original space.) Once ( 193 ) has been solved, the spacetime
providing geometrization of the original problem ( 179 ) can be written
explicitly as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (194)
  -- -------- -- -------

Equation ( 190 ) dramatically simplifies in one spatial dimension (
@xmath ), where all the derivative terms drop out, leaving @xmath .
Thus, for the particle in an infinite rectangular potential well,
Klein-Gordonization gives a massless wave equation on a slice of
Minkowski space between two mirrors, while for the Pöschl-Teller system,
one immediately obtains a two-dimensional spacetime metric reminiscent
of Anti-de Sitter spacetime AdS @xmath . This latter result displays
some parallels to the considerations of [ 118 ] (focusing in the
hyperbolic Pöschl-Teller system).

As we already briefly remarked, the above geometrization procedure can
be applied to any Hamiltonian of the form ( 179 ) and any @xmath ,
irrespectively of the form of the spectrum. However, it is precisely for
the spectrum and @xmath given by ( 180 ) that the resulting spacetime
possesses the remarkable property of being highly resonant (and one may
expect that its geometric properties will give a more transparent
underlying pictures of the algebraic structurs of the original
quantum-mechanical problem, as happens for the Higgs oscillator). We
shall therefore focus on the application of our geometrization procedure
to such systems with quadratic energy spectra.

### 5.2 The massless case

Equation ( 193 ) is a nonlinear elliptic equation and in general
difficult to solve. Extensive existence result are established for an
algebraically similar equation arising in relation to the Yamabe
problem, hence one may hope that some level of understanding of
solutions to ( 193 ) in full generality may also be attained in the
future. We shall not pursue such systematic analysis here, however.

Driven by practical goals of constructing resonant spacetimes and
geometrizing concrete superintegrable systems, we would like to point
out that ( 193 ) becomes linear and dramatically simplifies if one
assumes @xmath . Hence, converting a given quantum mechanical problem to
a massless wave equation is considerably simpler than for general values
of the mass.

We note that, if @xmath , equation ( 193 ) looks identical to the
Schrödinger equation corresponding to the Hamiltonian ( 179 ), with
energy eigenvalue @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (195)
  -- -------- -- -------

(Normalizable eigenstates of this energy do not generically exist, but
@xmath does not have to satisfy the same normalizability conditions as
standard wave functions, hence this should not be a problem.) Since
quadratic spectra ( 180 ) are seen to arise from highly structured,
typically superintegrable, systems, one may naturally expect that ( 195
) is amenable to analytic treatment.

There is one further assumption one might make that immediately yields
solutions of ( 195 ) from known solutions of the original
quantum-mechanical problem ( 179 ). Namely, imagine one has an @xmath
-parameter family of Hamiltonians ( 179 ) with quadratic spectra ( 180
). In this case, @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are functions of the
@xmath parameters defining our family of Hamiltonians. One may impose

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (196)
  -- -------- -- -------

which generically yields an @xmath -parameter subfamily of quantum
systems with quadratic spectra. Within this subfamily, the ground state
@xmath has the energy @xmath , i.e., @xmath . Hence, @xmath satisfying (
195 ) can be chosen as the vacuum state of @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (197)
  -- -------- -- -------

We shall make use of this construction below, as it allows for a
straightforward application of our methodology to known exactly solvable
systems. (In some cases, it is geometrically advantageous to use the
non-normalizable counterpart of @xmath with the same energy eigenvalue
to define @xmath . Such non-normalizable states should also be easy to
construct for exactly solvable systems with quadratic spectra. We shall
see an explicit realization of this scenario in our subsequent treatment
of the superintegrable Rosochatius problem.)

As a variation of the above special case, one could force @xmath of (
180 ) to be equal to a negative integer and @xmath to be equal to an
excited state wavefunction. This, however, introduces singularities in
the conformally rescaled spacetime ( 194 ) at the location of zeros of
the excited state wavefunctions. While one could still try to pursue
this scienario by imposing appropriate constraints on the wave equation
solution at the singular locus, we shall concentrate below on the most
straightforward formulation ( 197 ) utilizing the ground state
wavefunction, where the conformal factor is non-vanishing and no such
subtleties arise.

### 5.3 KG background dual to Higgs oscillator

Before proceeding with novel derivations we would like to demonstrate
how the case of the Higgs oscillator, which has motivated our general
construction, fits into our present framework. We are essentially just
reviewing the derivations in [ 99 , 100 , 101 ] .

The Higgs oscillator is a particle on a sphere moving in a specific
centrally symmetric potential (which we shall specify below). It is
remarkable for being one of only three centrally symmetric maximally
superintegrable systems on a sphere (together with free motion and the
spherical Coulomb potential). A practical manifestation of
superintegrability is that all of its classical trajectories are closed.
The quantum version of this system has attracted considerable attention
after it was reintroduced in a different guise and solved in [ 119 ] .
The observed high degeneracy of energy levels of this system prompted
investigation of its hidden symmetries in [ 102 , 103 ] , which resulted
in identification of the hidden @xmath group of symmetries for a system
on a @xmath -sphere, and spawned extensive literature on algebras of
conserved quantities of the Higgs oscillator. The energy spectum of the
Higgs oscillator is of the form ( 180 ).

We shall now define, with some geometric preliminaries, the Higgs
oscillator Hamiltonian. Consider a unit @xmath -sphere embedded in a
(d+1)-dimensional flat space as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (198)
  -- -------- -- -------

and parametrized by the angles @xmath , …, @xmath as

  -- -- -------- -- -------
        @xmath      (199)
        @xmath      (200)
        @xmath      
        @xmath      
  -- -- -------- -- -------

The sphere is endowed with the standard round metric defined recursively
in @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (201)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- -------

Similarly, the corresponding Laplacian is defined recursively

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (202)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- -------

The Higgs oscillator is a particle on a @xmath -sphere moving in a
potential varying as the inverse cosine-squared of the polar angle:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (203)
  -- -------- -- -------

The energy spectrum is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (204)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the energy level number. This expression is manifestly
of the form ( 180 ).

To implement our geometrization program for the Higgs oscillator, one
can work directly with ( 190 ), which takes the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (205)
  -- -------- -- -------

Substituting @xmath produces only two constraints on the parameters to
ensure that the equation is satisfied:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (206)
  -- -------- -- -------

The value of @xmath above agrees with the one in ( 204 ), while the
relation between the Klein-Gordon mass and the Higgs potential strength
is the same as found in [ 99 ] . The output of our construction is thus
a family of Klein-Gordon equations on the spacetime

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (207)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is precisely the (global) Anti-de Sitter spacetime AdS @xmath . We
note that rational values of @xmath in ( 203 ) correspond to
Klein-Gordon masses in AdS for which the frequency spectrum ( 185 ) is
perfectly resonant (all frequencies are integer in appropriate units)
rather than merely strongly resonant (differences of any two frequencies
are integer in appropriate units).

A remarkable property of the Higgs oscillator is that the metric ( 207 )
does not depend on the Higgs potential strength (which only affects the
value of the Klein-Gordon mass). This feature is not replicated for more
complicated potentials. Conversely, this implies that the AdS spacetime
possesses a resonant spectrum of frequencies for fields of all masses
(this statement can in fact be extended to fields of higher spins),
rather than for fields of one specific mass. It is tempting to
conjecture that AdS (being a maximally symmetric spacetime) is the only
spacetime with this property, though we do not know a proof. Relations
between Klein-Gordon equations of different masses have recently
surfaced in the literature on “mass ladder operators” [ 120 , 121 , 122
, 123 ] .

### 5.4 KG background dual to Rosochatius system

The superintegrable Rosochatius system is the most direct generalization
of the Higgs oscillator on a @xmath -sphere preserving its
superintegrability. General Rosochatius systems [ 111 ] were among the
first Liouville-integrable systems discovered. A restriction on the
potential makes these systems maximally superintegrable. The Higgs
oscillator can be recovered by a further restriction of the potential as
a particularly simple special case. Such systems are thus an ideal
testing ground for applying our machinery, which has already been shown
to work for the Higgs oscillator.

#### 5.4.1 The superintegrable Rosochatius system

The superintegrable Rosochatius systems we shall deal with here are
defined by the following family of Hamiltonians:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (208)
  -- -------- -- -------

The explicit form of the Laplacian and coordinates on the unit @xmath
-sphere can be read off from ( 199 - 202 ). The standard more general
definition of the Rosochatius system [ 111 , 112 ] additionally includes
a harmonic potential with respect to the @xmath variables, @xmath ,
which gives an integrable system. If this harmonic potential is omitted,
as we did above, the system becomes maximally superintegrable, as
mentioned, for instance, in [ 109 , 110 ] .

In order to find the spectrum of the above Hamiltonian, we shall have to
apply recursively the solution of the famed one-dimensional
Pöschl-Teller problem [ 116 ] . While this material is completely
standard and occasionally covered in textbooks, we find the summary
given in [ 124 ] concise and convenient. The energy eigenstates of the
Pöschl-Teller Hamiltonian

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (209)
  -- -------- -- -------

are given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (210)
  -- -------- -- -------

We shall not need the explicit form of the eigenfunctions satisfying
@xmath (though it is known).

Because of the recursion relations on @xmath -spheres outlined above,
the Rosochatius Hamiltonian ( 208 ) can likewise be defined recursively:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (211)
     @xmath      (212)
  -- -------- -- -------

The variables separate, and if one substitutes the wave function in the
form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (213)
  -- -------- -- -------

one obtains a recursive family of one-dimensional eigenvalue problems,
all of which are of the Pöschl-Teller form:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (214)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are eigenvalues of @xmath . Each subsequent equation
introduces one new quantum number which we shall denote @xmath .

The recursive solution of ( 214 ) proceeds as follows. First, the
solution at @xmath is given by ( 210 ) as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (215)
  -- -------- -- -------

At @xmath , one gets

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (216)
  -- -------- -- -------

Hence,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (217)
  -- -------- -- -------

The general pattern can now be guessed as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (218)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is straightforward to prove inductively that this expression persists
under the recursion given by ( 214 ). Note that ( 218 ) is manifestly of
the form ( 180 ). A classical version of the same construction,
recursively expressing the superintegrable Rosochatius Hamiltonian
through the action-angle variables has been given in [ 110 ] .

#### 5.4.2 The dual KG background

To demonstrate how the geometrization procedure we have proposed above
operates, we shall now apply it to the superintegrable Rosochatius
system. For the purposes of demonstration, we shall use the simplest
formulation outlined in Section 5.2 , which allows one to utilize known
explicit solutions for ground state wavefunctions to construct the
relevant massless Klein-Gordon (wave) equation.

The only technical input we shall need is the form of the ground state
wavefunction of the Pöschl-Teller Hamiltonian ( 209 ) given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (219)
  -- -------- -- -------

(This form satisfies the standard boundary conditions for physical
wavefunctions only for @xmath and @xmath . If not, @xmath must be
replaced by @xmath , and correspondingly for @xmath . This is, however,
completely irrelevant for our application of @xmath to construct
geometrical conformal factors, and the above form, without any
modifications, is perfectly suitable for our purposes.) From ( 219 ) and
the recursive construction ( 213 - 218 ), one gets for the ground state
wavefunction of the superintegrable Rosochatius Hamiltonian ( 208 )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (220)
  -- -------- -- -------

On the other hand, @xmath defined by ( 180 ) can be read off ( 218 ) as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (221)
  -- -------- -- -------

We can hence directly apply the algorithm of Section 5.2 by introducing

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (222)
  -- -------- -- -------

under the assumption that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (223)
  -- -------- -- -------

This yields a @xmath -parameter family of spacetimes given by ( 194 )
whose massless wave equations possess perfectly resonant spectra and
geometrize the superintegrable Rosochatius problem:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (224)
  -- -------- -- -------

(Note that setting @xmath and the rest of @xmath to 0 returns the case
of Higgs oscillator with the coupling strength corresponding to zero
mass in the Klein-Gordon equation, while ( 224 ) becomes the AdS
metric.)

For a final statement of our result, it is convinient to reparametrize
@xmath as

  -- -------- -- -- -------
     @xmath         (225)
  -- -------- -- -- -------

In terms of @xmath , ( 224 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (226)
  -- -------- -- -------

This evidently agrees with ( 207 ) when @xmath and the rest of @xmath
are zero.

### 5.5 Discussion

We have presented a procedure (“Klein-Gordonization”) associating to
quantum systems of the form ( 179 ) a Klein-Gordon equation on a static
spacetime given by ( 194 ). For systems with the quadratic energy
spectrum ( 180 ), our procedure results in spacetimes with a resonant
spectrum of evenly spaced frequencies ( 185 ). This correspondence
generalizes the previously known relation between the Higgs oscillator (
203 ) and (global) Anti-de Sitter spacetime ( 207 ).

Implementing our procedure in practice requires solving a nonlinear
elliptic equation, which can be written as ( 190 ) or ( 193 ). The
latter form is closely reminiscent of elliptic equations extensively
studied in relation to classic ‘prescribed scalar curvature’ problems of
differential geometry (though the exact power appearing in the power-law
nonlinearity is different).

If one aims at constructing a massless Klein-Gordon (i.e., wave)
equation corresponding to the original quantum-mechanical system, the
nonlinearity drops out, resulting in a much simpler problem. In this
case, known ground state wavefunctions for the original quantum system
can be utilized for the conversion procedure, as described in section
5.2 . We have demonstrated how this approach works for superintegrable
Rosochatius systems ( 208 ), resulting in a family of spacetimes ( 226 )
resonant with respect to the massless wave equation.

We conclude with a list of open questions relevant for our formalism:

-   General theory of existence of solutions of ( 193 ) would contribute
    appreciably to clarifying the operation of our formalism. Similar
    equations arising in differential geometry [ 98 ] have been
    thoroughly analyzed, hence one should expect that the situation for
    our equation may as well be elucidated.

-   In practical applications of our formalism, we have focused on the
    case of zero Klein-Gordon mass, where ( 193 ) greatly simplifies.
    Are there any general technics for solving this equation (rather
    than analyzing the existence of solutions) for non-zero masses (at
    least, for solvable potentials in the original quantum-mechanical
    system).

-   Equation ( 193 ) may in principle admit multiple solutions, given
    that there is freedom in choosing boundary conditions, depending on
    which conformal transformation one allows. Singular conformal
    transformations may also be allowed (and they may push boundaries at
    finite distance off to infinity). This is in fact the case for the
    AdS construction starting from the Higgs oscillator. It would be
    good to quantify this freedom in choosing solutions of ( 193 ) and
    understand which prescriptions result in spacetimes interesting from
    a physical perspective.

-   Systems with quadratic spectra exist in extentions of the class of
    Hamiltonians we have considered here, given by ( 179 ). For example,
    it is possible to include effects of monopole fields without
    distorting the spectrum [ 125 ] . Klein-Gordonization is likely to
    generalize to such systems, resulting in Klein-Gordon equations with
    background gauge fields.

-   It would be interesting to understand how the spacetimes resulting
    from our construction, such as ( 226 ), function in the context of
    dynamical theories of gravity. For instance, Anti-de Sitter
    spacetime solves Einstein’s equations with a negative cosmological
    constant. More complicated spacetimes may require some matter fields
    to be supported as solutions.

    In the context of dynamical theories, the resonant linear spectra of
    our spacetimes will guarantee that weakly nonlinear dynamics of
    their perturbations is highly sophisticated. (Nonlinear instability
    of AdS, which is precisely a manifestation of such phenomena, is a
    broad currently active research area.)

-   What are the symmetry properties of spacetimes generated by
    “Klein-Gordonization”?

    How do they connect to the symmetries of the original
    quantum-mechanical problem (and in particular hidden symmetries)?

    Again, for the case of the Higgs oscillator, this perspective has
    turned out to be fruitful, and it would be good to see how it works
    in more general cases.

## Conclusion

Let us summarize our results. In Chapter 2 we discussed how an impulsive
signal in a singular hypersurface effects null geodesics in Minkowski
space. A new approach has been suggested which allows for full analysis
of geodesic congruences compared to previous studies [ 32 , 33 ] where
approximations were assumed. The method can be applied to any space-time
and any geodesic congruence. It is based on the physically justified
assumption that, in continuous coordinates, the geodesic vector of a
test particle is continuous across the hypersurface. Thus, to obtain the
geodesic vector in the future one just needs to apply a coordinate
transformation on the geodesic vector in the past.

Applying this technique on a parallel null congruence in flat space we
obtained the initial conditions for the congruence to the future of the
shell. We proved that the resulting congruence stays hypersurface
orthogonal, as it was before crossing the shell. Furthermore, we
provided arguments which generalize this result to any hypersurface
orthogonal congruence in the past, meaning that any such congruence will
give rise to a hypersurface orthogonal congruence to the future. An
equivalent physical statement would be that an impulsive signal does not
effect the rotation of a congruence if it didn’t rotate before crossing
the shell.

As stated above, in continues coordinates the geodesic vector flow does
not suffer a jump upon crossing the shell. But a discontinuity arises in
the gradient of the geodesic vector flow, the B-tensor. We have shown,
for the parallel geodesic flow, that this discontinuity is related to
different components of the stress-energy tensor. In particular the jump
in the expansion is determined by the energy density and currents on the
shell while the jump in the shear is determined by the gravitational
wave component together with the surface currents. It is clear from ( 56
) and ( 57 ) that the results are independent of the choice of
congruence in the case of BMS supertranslations. This change in the
B-tensor after the passage of an outgoing gravitational wave leads to a
covariant description of the gravitational memory effect - the B-memory
effect.

Chapter 3 and Chapter 4 were devoted to the integrability problem of
Hamilton-Jacobi equation in the near horizon geometry of Myers-Perry
black hole in arbitrary (even or odd) @xmath dimensions. The fully
isotropic case in arbitrary dimensions has been fully studied
previously. The fully non-isotropic problem in odd dimensions has been
shown to be integrable, although the explicit form of the first
integrals were unknown. We were able to introduce a convenient common
description of the geometry in odd and even dimensions and unify these
two cases into a single problem. After having this unified description,
we continued studying the separability of variables in fully
non-isotropic NHEMP geometry to prove the integrability of even
dimensions as well and to find the explicit forms of the first
integrals.

It was shown in [ 36 ] that integrals of motion of Hamilton-Jacobi
equation in fully non-isotropic case can be expressed through inverse
Vandermonde matrix in ellipsoidal coordinates. Solving this equation we
found the hidden symmetries and expressed them through initial
coordinates. This procedure was explained in lower (7, 9 and 11)
dimensions and a general formula for higher dimensional first integrals
was derived. Using our unified description of odd and even dimensions it
is trivial to extend the results to the even dimensions, where the
problem is integrable as well. We also found the second rank Killing
tensors generating these symmetries. It is also interesting to have a
transformation relating the first integrals of fully isotropic NHEMP to
the first integrals of fully non-isotropic NHEMP. Taking all rotation
parameters to be equal to each other in the first integrals of fully
non-isotropic NHEMP just transforms all of them to the Hamiltonian of
the spherical mechanics of fully isotropic NHEMP, so finding a
transformation between the first integrals of these two systems is not a
trivial task. We found such a transformation by taking small variations
of the rotation parameters from their isotropic value and introducing
combinations of first integrals which commute with the isotropic
Hamiltonian.

After finalizing the discussion of the special cases, meaning the fully
isotropic and fully non-isotropic cases, it is apparent that they are a
part of a bigger picture, the most general case when rotation parameters
are grouped in blocks of equal and non-equal values. Indeed, it turns
out that when some of the rotation parameters are equal to each other
and are different from the rest, the system becomes superintegrable. In
short, the steps for obtaining the hidden symmetries is the following.
We start from a system with @xmath variables with @xmath isometries.
Fixing the momenta associated with the isometries, we obtain and focus
the @xmath dimensional “angular mechanics” part. By introducing a
special coordinate system, which is a mixture of spherical and
ellipsoidal coordinates, we separate the variables in the angular
mechanics thus introducing @xmath independent constants, or the first
integrals. This system reduced to its special cases of fully isotropic
and fully non-isotropic NHEMP after appropriate assumptions.

The next step in our discussion was the extremal vanishing horizon
geometry, which exists in odd dimensions, when one of the rotation
parameters @xmath vanishes. In the general NHEVHMP case, where the
background isometry is @xmath the number of independent charges
associated with Killing vectors is @xmath . The system contains two
conformal algebras, but they have the same Casimir operator, so there is
a single angular mechanics. As a result the system remains integrable
and no new independent constants of motion exist compared to the
non-vanishing case.

In Chapter 5 we have suggested an approach for mapping quantum systems
to a Klein-Gordon equation on a curved space-time. In general, the
procedure is the following. We start from the equation ( 182 ) which
defines a scalar field and can be reduced to the Schrödinger equation
with Hamiltonian ( 179 ) after separating the time variable. Equation (
182 ) is not a Klein-Gordon equation yet but can be transformed into
such after an appropriate conformal rescaling ( 186 ) of the metric and
the scalar field. Such a conformal factor should satisfy a non-linear
elliptic equation ( 190 ), which greatly simplifies with a further
assumption of the Klein-Gordon equation being massless. Now, we are
primarily interested in systems with quadratic spectra for various
reasons mentioned in the introduction and in the Chapter 5 . We have
shown that for these spectra the ground state wavefunction of the
initial Schrödinger equation satisfies the elliptic equation for the
conformal factor. In other words, the ground state wavefunction of the
initial Schrödinger equation defines the conformal factor which maps the
quantum system to a massless wave equation.

Many well-known physical systems, including superintegrable ones, have
quadratic spectra. Examples include the Higgs oscillator, the
superintegrable Rosochatius system and elementary systems like one
dimensional infinite rectangular potential well problem and the
trigonometric Pöschl-Teller system. We have demonstrated how the
proposed mapping procedure can be applied on the Higgs oscillator and
the superintegrable Rosochatius system. In the case of Higgs oscillator,
the procedure results into a massive Klein-Gordon equation in the AdS
background. In the case of superintegrable Rosochatius system we obtain
a massless field equation on the background ( 226 ).
