## Chapter 1 Introduction

It is well known that the Einstein-Hilbert action for gravity, plus
higher curvature corrections, represents a non-renormalizable theory if
the spacetime metric is treated as a dynamical quantum field, since the
coupling constant @xmath has positive mass dimension. Although there is
no obstruction to applying quantum field theory techniques to general
relativity at low energies where there will be an effective field theory
description, we do not currently understand the theory’s ultraviolet
(UV) completion. The Anti-de Sitter / conformal field theory
correspondence (AdS/CFT) [ 1 ] is one of the most common tools used in
our pursuit of a true theory of quantum gravity, as it allows us to
reframe questions of quantum gravity in terms of non-gravitational
quantum field theories (QFT), in particular, ones with manifest scaling
symmetry giving a straightforward UV completion.

While most work on AdS/CFT has been geared towards understanding quantum
gravity in terms of CFTs, the correspondence also works in the other
direction. Conformal field theories arise in numerous models of physical
systems, especially in condensed matter physics where they often
describe the physics of quantum critical systems since generically the
endpoints of renormalization group flows are CFTs. In some cases
strongly coupled critical systems can be described more simply by a dual
gravitational theory, since AdS/CFT is a strong-weak duality [ 2 , 3 ] .
When the CFT is strongly coupled, quantum effects in the gravity theory
are suppressed and we recover a semiclassical theory. A similar
application arises in quantum chromodynamics (QCD) for describing the
quark-gluon plasma produced in relativistic heavy ion collisions [ 4 ] ,
while AdS/CFT has also been used to describe effective theories of
relativistic hydrodynamics [ 5 , 6 ] .

This thesis is primarily concerned with the application of techniques
from quantum information theory to quantum gravity through the AdS/CFT
correspondence. As CFTs are ordinary quantum theories, states typically
exhibit quantum correlations which can be quantified using ideas from
quantum information theory. Interest in the overlap of these disciplines
blossomed when it was realized quantum information becomes encoded in
the geometry of the dual quantum gravity theories, and even leads to
gravitational dynamics governed by the Einstein equations. The influx of
quantum information ideas to quantum gravity has had a reciprocal
effect, with the development of new techniques for measuring quantum
correlations in general, and new insights into the properties of well
established quantities. In this thesis we will provide an overview of
the interchange of ideas between these fields. The novel work forming
the body of this thesis is split into two parts. The first half concerns
the refinement of a specific duality within AdS/CFT which stems from
measures of quantum information that were designed with quantum gravity
in mind. In the remainder, we study the dynamical properties of
well-established entanglement measures in general quantum systems.

In this introduction we will make the case that quantum information
tools have diverse application in AdS/CFT, and play a large role in our
understanding of how gravitational phenomena such as black holes and
dynamical spacetimes can emerge from non-gravitational field theories.
After a review of the most important aspects of conformal field
theories, we study the holotype for measures of quantum information in
QFT and CFT, entanglement entropy. We discuss the important physical
implications of its universal behaviour, but also the shortcomings of
its traditional definition. A deeper dive into algebraic aspects of QFT
allows us to construct mathematically consistent measures of quantum
information while simultaneously exposing the foundational entanglement
properties of quantum field theories. We then build off these notions to
explore how entanglement in CFT can be understood geometrically in
quantum gravity via the AdS/CFT correspondence, and the implications
entanglement has for the emergence of spacetime.

### 1.1 Conformal field theory

Compared to ordinary relativistic quantum field theories, conformal
field theories have a significantly enlarged symmetry group which allows
for greater theoretical control. An enormous literature has been
developed on the unique properties of this class of theories along with
special mathematical techniques that take advantage of the extra
symmetry. This section will only include a brief introduction to the
principal advantages of CFTs that have allowed the study of AdS/CFT to
flourish over the past two decades. A more comprehensive introduction
can be found in the standard textbook [ 7 ] .

Relativistic quantum field theories including the Standard Model obey
the Poincaré symmetry of spacetime transformations that leaves the
Minkowski metric invariant, along with possibly some internal symmetry
groups. Poincaré transformations include rotations, boosts, and
translations comprising the @xmath group, where @xmath is the total
number of spacetime dimensions. In addition to this, conformal theories
are invariant under scaling operations, or dilatations, as well as
so-called special conformal transformations, which can be viewed as the
composite operation of an inversion, translation, and inversion. In
total, these operations form the @xmath conformal group ( @xmath in
Euclidean signature), and have the overall property of preserving the
metric up to a scale factor @xmath .

The generators of each type of transformation can be expressed as

  -- -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
        @xmath            @xmath            (1.1)
                 @xmath            @xmath   
                 @xmath            @xmath   
                 @xmath            @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

These generate translations, rotations and boosts, dilatations, and
special conformal transformations respectively, while satisfying the
@xmath conformal algebra

  -- -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
        @xmath            @xmath            (1.2)
                 @xmath            @xmath   
                 @xmath            @xmath   
                 @xmath            @xmath   
                 @xmath            @xmath   
                 @xmath            @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

An important property of conformal fields is their scaling dimension
@xmath in response to a dilatation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

In more generality, the transformation of a spinless field under a
general conformal transformation is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Any field that transforms in this way, with @xmath the Jacobian of the
transformation, is called quasi-primary. Fields of this type play a
major role in AdS/CFT due to their highly constrained properties.

One of the most powerful consequences of conformal symmetry is that the
2-point and 3-point correlation functions of quasi-primary operators are
almost entirely fixed. For instance, the 2-point function of spinless
fields contains only a single arbitrary constant @xmath which can be
determined by the normalization of the fields,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , and the fields @xmath and @xmath must have the same
scaling dimension @xmath for a non-zero result. Similarly, the structure
of 3-point functions is mostly fixed,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

which involves the set of theory-dependent 3-point coefficients @xmath .
Correlation functions of higher numbers of fields are not fixed in the
same way. When there are at least 4 distinct positions involved we can
form conformally invariant combinations of the points called cross
ratios. For instance, 4-point functions can involve an arbitrary
function @xmath of the combinations

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

A particularly useful way to write the 4-point function of scalars for
later purposes is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath .

Despite the freedom in @xmath -point functions, there are powerful
techniques to relate them to sums of @xmath -point functions, which can
be applied iteratively eventually reaching the fixed 2 and 3-point
structures. The fundamental tool enabling this is the operator product
expansion (OPE) which expresses a product of quasi-primary operators in
terms of a local basis of other operators in the theory [ 8 ] . For two
scalar operators @xmath and @xmath with scaling dimensions @xmath and
@xmath respectively, the OPE in the limit @xmath takes the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

In this expression @xmath represents another quasi-primary operator in
the theory with dimension @xmath , and the sum is over all such
operators. The derivative terms act on @xmath to produce descendant
operators which are not quasiprimary, but are in the same representation
of the conformal group as @xmath . Additionally, the constants @xmath
are completely fixed by conformal symmetry. This can be seen by taking
the OPE of two operators inside a 3-point function, resulting in a sum
of derivatives of the fixed 2-point structure ( 1.5 ),

  -- -- -- --------
           (1.10)
  -- -- -- --------

Consistency between the derivatives of 2-point functions and the 3-point
structure itself ( 1.6 ) determines the @xmath coefficients [ 8 ] .
Hence, the OPE can be used recursively to write @xmath -point functions
in terms of the CFT data consisting of the spectrum of quasiprimary
operators @xmath with their associated dimensions @xmath , and the
3-point coefficients @xmath . While the OPE can be used in any QFT, its
special form in CFT becomes even more useful as the expansion is not
only valid in the @xmath limit, but is absolutely convergent at finite
separations, as long as no other operators are within a radius of @xmath
[ 9 , 10 ] .

It is also important to note that in the special case of @xmath CFTs,
the conformal group becomes much larger than the expected @xmath or
@xmath . This is most easily expressed in Euclidean signature, related
to the Lorentzian case by Wick rotation. In this case we can utilize
complex coordinates @xmath on the plane, in which case any
(anti-)holomorphic function @xmath ( @xmath ) gives a valid conformal
map. Such transformations can be generated by @xmath and @xmath for all
@xmath , satisfying the Witt algebras

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Notice that the subgroup generated by elements @xmath over @xmath with
@xmath is @xmath , isomorphic to @xmath . This important subgroup is
often called the global conformal subgroup. In the two-dimensional
context, we reserve the terminology “primary” for fields which transform
like ( 1.4 ) under all conformal transformations, while quasiprimary
fields may transform like ( 1.4 ) under only the global subgroup. In the
quantum theory, due to the trace anomaly of the stress tensor, the Witt
algebras are replaced by their unique central extension, the Virasoro
algebra

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

which incorporates the constant central charge @xmath . This constant
plays a significant role in 2D CFTs, including in the transformation
properties of the stress tensor, a non-quasiprimary field, and appears
in physical quantities like the entanglement entropy which we turn to
next.

### 1.2 Entanglement entropy in quantum field theory

In the context of QFT, entanglement entropy is an important quantity for
expressing one of the key features of typical low energy states such as
the vacuum; they are highly entangled. This fact underpins many of the
interesting recent developments in quantum gravity, such as the
connection between spatial entanglement and the emergence of spacetime [
11 ] . It is perhaps best expressed by the Reeh-Schlieder theorem of
algebraic quantum field theory [ 12 ] which states that starting with
the vacuum of a QFT in Minkowski spacetime, the states generated by
smeared operators supported in an arbitrarily small region of spacetime
are dense in the entire vacuum sector of the Hilbert space of the
theory. In essence, the vacuum state is spatially entangled between any
two local regions of the spacetime, such that operations in any region
can affect any other [ 13 ] . To understand the consequences of this
statement, it is of great interest to quantify the amount of
entanglement in a quantum system. The most elementary tool for this is
the entanglement entropy.

The origin of entanglement entropy is in quantum information theory
where it is defined in terms of the reduced density matrices of a state
@xmath with respect to a bipartition of the Hilbert space. If the
Hilbert space factorizes as @xmath , then the subsystem @xmath described
by @xmath has entanglement entropy

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

This quantity will be zero for all pure states with no entanglement
between subsystems @xmath and @xmath , so called separable states of the
form @xmath , and is non-zero for all non-separable states. The value of
@xmath is directly tied to the ability of performing operational tasks
that rely on using entanglement as a resource, at least in pure states [
14 ] .

Despite this simple characterization of entanglement for pure states in
quantum mechanics, when dealing with quantum fields things are
significantly more complicated. First, the dimensionality of the Hilbert
space of a quantum field theory is typically infinite, so that a
definition like ( 1.13 ) would involve tracing out an infinite number of
degrees of freedom. While the dimensionality alone is not an
insurmountable difficulty, after all quantum harmonic oscillators have
infinite dimensional Hilbert spaces but still can have sensible
entanglement entropies, it does already suggest that ( 1.13 ) may be
divergent in QFT. In the algebraic approach to QFT local algebras
associated to spatial subsystems are of a type where a normalized trace
cannot be defined so that the existence of the trace used in ( 1.13 )
cannot be taken for granted. Second, the Hilbert space of a QFT does not
necessarily factorize across spatial bipartitions, the typical
counterexample being gauge theories [ 15 , 16 , 17 ] . To identify gauge
invariant states, the physical states of the theory, one must look at
the system overall, and not simply at subregions. In other words, gauge
constraints relate degrees of freedom at different spatial locations
meaning that they do not factorize along spatial lines. As a result, it
becomes difficult to uniquely define what is meant by the reduced
density matrix. At the very least, choices must be made as to which
degrees of freedom are or are not traced out near the boundary of a
particular partition. Some QFTs escape this caveat, such as the lattice
regularized free boson theory which does factorize over lattice sites,
but even this is plagued by the third problem of UV divergences. In the
continuum limit there are modes of the field at arbitrarily small
scales, and in typical states these UV modes will be entangled across
any partition. This again suggests that ( 1.13 ), when it is even
possible to define the reduced density matrix, will be UV divergent.
Theories can be regulated with a UV cutoff, for example by working on a
lattice with a minimum scale, which can in some cases assuage the three
concerns mentioned here, but it is a delicate matter to remove the
cutoff while maintaining physically sensible results.

The groundbreaking replica trick technique [ 18 , 19 ] allowed the first
systematic calculations of entanglement entropy for lattice regularized
QFTs in 2 dimensions, putting previous arguments about its expected
behaviour on solid footing [ 20 , 21 ] . In the replica trick, one
starts with a generalization of entanglement entropy to the Rényi
entropies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

from which the entanglement entropy is recovered in the @xmath limit
since @xmath . This definition is simpler to handle, since it involves
the logarithm of the trace (a number) rather than the logarithm of the
density matrix itself. Strictly speaking, the powers of the reduced
density matrix are only guaranteed to be defined for positive integers
@xmath , yet the limit @xmath requires us to extend the definition to
the reals. This can be a subtle matter as there is often not a unique
analytic continuation given the data of @xmath at the positive integers.
Nevertheless, an individual copy of @xmath can be prepared as followed.
The ground state wavefunctional for the field @xmath corresponds to a
Euclidean path integral with boundary conditions inserted at @xmath ,

  -- -- -- --------
           (1.15)
  -- -- -- --------

The integration from @xmath to @xmath of the exponential of the
Euclidean action @xmath damps out any possible excitations, ensuring we
prepare the ground state. A similar construction integrating from @xmath
to @xmath with boundary conditions @xmath gives the complex conjugate
@xmath , and together this constructs the density matrix @xmath .
Tracing over the complement of the region @xmath has the effect of
setting @xmath when @xmath . Hence, the reduced density matrix of the
ground state for an interval @xmath along @xmath is given by the path
integral over the Euclidean space with a cut along @xmath , and boundary
conditions inserted on either side of the cut, as depicted in Fig.
1.0(a) .

We move from @xmath to @xmath by preparing @xmath copies of the path
integral just described, and stitching together the copies sequentially
along @xmath by matching the boundary conditions as @xmath , @xmath , …,
@xmath . In total, @xmath is computed by the Euclidean path integral
over the @xmath -sheeted Riemann surface given by the stitching
procedure as shown in Fig. 1.0(b) . Then, taking the derivative and
@xmath limit produces the ground state entanglement entropy of the
single region @xmath . This is easier said than done, since actually
performing the path integral can be difficult. For 2d CFTs in particular
the path integral can actually be evaluated, and the complete result is
[ 18 , 19 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath the length of interval @xmath , and @xmath the lattice
spacing. Furthermore, @xmath is the central charge of the CFT appearing
in the Virasoro algebra ( 1.12 ), but this is the only theory-dependent
detail of the CFT that enters this universal result.

A crucial feature of this expression is the UV divergence as we take the
continuum limit @xmath . In fact this divergence does not depend on our
choice of the ground state, as it also appears in the entanglement
entropy calculated when other operators are inserted into the path
integral [ 22 , 23 ] . Changing the state while leaving the entangling
region the same only changes the entanglement entropy by a finite
amount. In other words, every state looks like the vacuum at short
enough distances, and will therefore have the same leading UV
divergence. From general arguments we always expect that @xmath for a
region in QFT will have a divergence proportional to the area of the
boundary of @xmath [ 24 , 20 , 21 ] ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath a theory dependent constant, and @xmath the total
dimensionality of spacetime. This area law expresses the idea that it is
UV scale entanglement across the codimension-2 entangling surface @xmath
that leads to divergences. We note that the previous result ( 1.16 ) is
slightly different because with one spatial dimension, the entangling
surface is just a set of points, and the power law divergence @xmath is
tempered to a logarithmic divergence. Following these milestone results
on calculating entanglement entropy in QFT, many variations and
extensions have been explored, including working with higher dimensional
theories, more complicated entangling regions, using quantum fields with
different spins and statistics, and many forms of interactions.

Instead of entanglement entropy it can be more useful to study UV finite
quantities like the relative entropy, defined for factorizable Hilbert
spaces as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

or the mutual information

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Relative entropy is a measure of distinguishability of states, since it
is zero if and only if @xmath , otherwise being positive, and acts as a
distance measure between states in Hilbert space (though it is not a
metric as it is not symmetric). In the relative entropy, two states
@xmath and @xmath are compared on the region @xmath . Since both exhibit
the same UV divergence, the difference of the two entropy-like terms can
be finite ¹ ¹ 1 The second term in ( 1.18 ) can be divergent for other
reasons, namely when @xmath has support on the kernel of @xmath . In
this case the states are perfectly distinguishable. . The mutual
information measures the total correlations, both quantum and classical,
shared by regions @xmath and @xmath in the potentially mixed state
@xmath . It is also finite since it can be written as the relative
entropy between @xmath , and the uncorrelated product of reduced density
matrices @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

The definitions given so far for entanglement entropies, reduced density
matrices, and relative entropies are borrowed from quantum information
theory and rely on assumptions which cannot honestly hold in QFT. Eq.(
1.13 ) uses the factorization of the Hilbert space in order to separate
degrees of freedom in @xmath from those in @xmath , but this and the
calculation leading to ( 1.16 ) make use of a lattice regularization.
Furthermore it is not apparent that a trace over @xmath can be
normalized appropriately when removing a non-countably infinite number
of degrees of freedom associated with @xmath in the continuum theory. It
is therefore desirable to work directly with the continuum theory and
avoid these assumptions. However this requires a great overhaul to the
definitions already made.

Starting with a QFT in Minkowski spacetime, such as a Hermitian scalar
field @xmath , the vacuum state @xmath can be used to build the vacuum
sector Hilbert space @xmath by acting with smeared operators @xmath for
smooth functions @xmath ,

  -- -- -- --------
           (1.21)
  -- -- -- --------

Allowing the functions @xmath to have support on the entire spacetime
ensures that all states in the vacuum sector @xmath are generated. This
is overkill though, since we expect that data limited to an initial
value hypersurface, or Cauchy slice @xmath , should be sufficient to
generate @xmath . Therefore we can restrict to functions @xmath
supported in an open neighbourhood @xmath of @xmath . These statements
apply directly to the continuum theory and make no assumptions about
possible factorizations of @xmath .

The primary result indicative of the major role entanglement plays in
QFT pushes the previous restriction to the extreme: the Reeh-Schlieder
theorem allows us to restrict @xmath to have support in a neighbourhood
@xmath of an arbitrarily small open set @xmath , and still generate
@xmath with states of the form ( 1.21 ) [ 12 , 25 , 13 ] . In more
detail, one can show that any proposed state @xmath which is orthogonal
to all states of the form ( 1.21 ) for @xmath supported in @xmath must
also be orthogonal to all states created without the restriction to
@xmath . This argument relies on the Hamiltonian satisfying @xmath and
this being the lower bound of the operator. But then @xmath is
orthogonal to all states in @xmath , and must be zero. Considering the
local algebra of operators supported in @xmath as @xmath , we say that a
state is cyclic with respect to @xmath when the states @xmath for @xmath
are dense in @xmath . From a physical point of view, the cyclicity of
the vacuum is indicative of the nonlocal vacuum fluctuations we expect
to be present in a QFT. An experimenter working in a local region can
perform measurements that exploit these fluctuations to produce any
state in the vacuum sector over the entire spacetime.

When @xmath is a small open subset of @xmath we can consider the
complement of its closure to be @xmath , another open set spacelike
separated from @xmath . Then any operator supported in the neighbourhood
@xmath will commute with operators supported in @xmath , so long as the
neighbourhoods are also taken to be spacelike separated. Consider one
such operator @xmath in @xmath , and suppose that it annihilates the
vacuum, @xmath . It would then follow that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

by commuting @xmath onto @xmath . But the Reeh-Schlieder theorem applies
to @xmath as well, and implies that the states @xmath are dense in
@xmath , so that @xmath annihilates all states in @xmath and must be the
zero operator, @xmath . Clearly a similar construction would apply to
any region @xmath of the spacetime which is spacelike separated from
some open region to which Reeh-Schlieder can be applied. We say that a
state @xmath is separating with respect to @xmath when @xmath implies
@xmath for any @xmath . The implication is that a state that is cyclic
for @xmath will be separating for any other algebra of local operators
which all commute with @xmath . From a physical point of view, the
separating property implies that there are no localized operators which
annihilate the vacuum. Conversely, true particle excitations represented
by states orthogonal to the vacuum cannot be produced by localized
operators [ 26 ] . Despite this, it is a mistake to think of the vacuum
as empty. The separating property also implies that the vacuum has
non-zero overlap with all states created by operators in @xmath for open
regions @xmath .

In this language, the Reeh-Schlieder theorem says that the vacuum of our
QFT is cyclic and separating for any local algebra @xmath constructed as
above. In fact the theorem can be extended to states in the theory which
have bounded energy, meaning that cyclic separating states are
commonplace in QFT. Let us now unpack these properties and understand
the role of entanglement in its implications. If @xmath is any operator
supported in the region @xmath , then there must exist another operator
@xmath supported in @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

since either local algebra generates the same vacuum sector Hilbert
space ² ² 2 This type of relationship, an operational symmetry of the
state, motivates a method of measuring entanglement which we have
developed in [ 27 ] . . We are free to choose @xmath arbitrarily small,
and to be located at the other end of the universe from @xmath , yet the
approximation between the states in ( 1.23 ) can be made arbitrarily
good. At face value this may seem to violate the sacred principles of
causality and locality, however it is important to note two things.
First, the operator @xmath will typically not be simple, nor unitary. We
note that since @xmath and @xmath commute, @xmath , but this need not be
equal to @xmath . @xmath could represent some operator with very small
vacuum expectation value, but a large expectation value in the mimicking
state @xmath , and still there is no contradiction. The Reeh-Schlieder
theorem does not guarantee that an @xmath exists that is also unitary.
Hence, it is also not guaranteed that we will be able to implement
@xmath as a physical operation, i.e. as @xmath for some Hamiltonian over
which we have experimental control. The more relevant consequence is
what this implies about the entanglement structure of the vacuum. The
possibility of recreating the action of a local operator with other,
very distant, local operators is saying that the vacuum of a QFT
contains quantum correlations between any two regions of the spacetime.
These intrinsic correlations are what allow local, non-unitary
operations on a state to affect correlation functions at distant,
spacelike separated points. There is no violation of causality in the
same sense that Bell pairs do not transmit information superluminally
when measurements are performed on one qubit in the pair, despite the
non-classical correlations between measurements attributed to the
entanglement of the pair.

It is also important that the Hilbert space of our QFT does not, in
truth, factorize into a (infinite) product of Hilbert spaces associated
to small regions @xmath . If there were some factorization into Hilbert
spaces representing subsets of @xmath , roughly @xmath , then there
would exist in the theory separable states like @xmath . This type of
state would share none of the interesting physics displayed by the
entangled vacuum. Apart from the evidence given in the area law ( 1.17 )
that all low energy QFT states share the UV divergent entanglement
entropy of the vacuum, ruling out the separable state, we also expect
that on small enough scales any state should behave like vacuum, and
emphatically @xmath does not. We are forced to conclude that there is no
factorization structure of the Hilbert space according to spatial
regions of the spacetime. But without this there is also no notion of
the reduced density matrix @xmath , and definitions like ( 1.13 ) or (
1.18 ) cannot be used. Luckily, there are additional tools in algebraic
QFT that allow the construction of a relative entropy function with the
same properties as ( 1.18 ), and that reduces to ( 1.18 ) when a
factorization structure is put in place (e.g. when a lattice
discretization is used).

In order to construct a relative entropy function directly in the
continuum of a QFT without reference to reduced density matrices, it is
necessary to borrow a result from the theory of von Neumann algebras.
The major result of Tomita-Takesaki theory [ 25 ] is that there exists
an operator @xmath , sometimes called the Tomita operator, associated to
any state @xmath which is cyclic separating for @xmath with the property

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

There are several immediate facts one can derive about the Tomita
operator, but as it is only an intermediate step towards our goal, we
only mention the most important one for us which is its invertibility.
This property is clear since @xmath . Hence, it has a polar
decomposition which we write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

in terms of the modular conjugation operator @xmath and modular operator
@xmath . The latter is really our object of study. It is Hermitian and
positive definite, since it can be shown that @xmath , and furthermore
from @xmath we obtain that for any function of @xmath , @xmath .

The relative entropy must compare two states, so mirroring the
construction of @xmath the relative Tomita operator can be introduced as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

Once again @xmath must be cyclic separating for @xmath assuring that any
@xmath can be produced by acting on @xmath . While there is no strict
constraint on @xmath , it is easiest to assume that it is cyclic
separating for @xmath as well, in which case there would also exist
another relative Tomita operator

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

Obviously @xmath so again @xmath is invertible. Now the relative modular
operator is defined in the same way as before; from the polar
decomposition @xmath it can be shown that,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the relative modular operator @xmath is Hermitian and positive
definite.

From these definitions Araki constructed the relative entropy between
states @xmath and @xmath , compared in the region @xmath as [ 28 ] ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

To see why this could be a sensible definition for a measure of
distinguishability between @xmath and @xmath , consider when the states
are related by @xmath for a unitary element @xmath , the commuting
algebra of @xmath . Then the measurement of any operator @xmath in the
state @xmath would produce

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

In other words, the states @xmath and @xmath give the same results for
all measurements of operators in @xmath , and thus are indistinguishable
in @xmath , as the local unitary outside of @xmath does not affect the
physics in region @xmath . Indeed we find for these two states that the
relative entropy @xmath is zero ³ ³ 3 For @xmath and @xmath , the
relative Tomita operator behaves as @xmath , so we identify @xmath .
Hence, by definition ( 1.28 ) the relative modular operator also reduces
to the ordinary modular operator for @xmath , @xmath . Then we find that
@xmath , and the relative entropy between the states vanishes. , @xmath
and @xmath are indistinguishable in @xmath . Furthermore, this
definition obeys the same properties as the quantum information
definition ( 1.18 ); it is non-negative for any two states, and
monotonically increasing as we enlarge the region in which measurements
can take place,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

Intuitively, with access to additional measurements an experimenter has
better prospects for distinguishing the states, so the relative entropy
must increase for larger regions. These are significant properties in
the quantum information context. Positivity implies positivity for
mutual information ( 1.20 ), equivalently subadditivity of the
entanglement entropy

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

through ( 1.19 ). Monotonicity implies the highly non-trivial strong
subadditivity result for entropies,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

as this can be rewritten @xmath or indeed @xmath which is monotonicity.
In the quantum information context, these are the only inequalities
needed to completely characterize the structure of allowed relative
entropy values [ 29 ] .

To summarize, in this section we have explored one of the crucial facts
about low energy states in QFTs: they are highly entangled between any
two local regions. This can be seen explicitly in calculations of the
entanglement entropy for lattice regularized systems, where a universal
UV divergence is found, best expressed by the area law ( 1.17 ).
Alternatively, it can be seen as a corollary of the Reeh-Schlieder
theorem from algebraic QFT which shows that the vacuum of a QFT is
cyclic separating for any local subalgebra, and means that any local
operation on the vacuum can be reproduced by another local operation (
1.23 ), potentially in a spacelike separated region. We have also shown
that relative entropy can be defined directly in the continuum for QFTs
( 1.29 ) where it is free from UV divergences and does not assume
anything about the factorization structure of the Hilbert space. Our
next focus will be on the far-reaching consequences of entanglement in
holography, and what it tells us about the emergence of spacetime.

### 1.3 AdS/CFT

The Anti-de Sitter/conformal field theory correspondence has been
continuously revolutionizing our understanding of quantum gravity since
its discovery [ 1 , 30 , 31 ] . AdS/CFT posits that there is an exact
mathematical duality between certain CFTs in @xmath dimensions, with
theories of quantum gravity in @xmath dimensional asymptotically AdS
spacetimes. Due to the difference in dimensionality of the theories, the
correspondence is said to be holographic, and is often referred to
simply as “holography” [ 32 , 33 ] . Originally understood in the
context of string theory constructions, where extended objects could be
described equivalently by a supersymmetric CFT or a string theory on a
product of AdS with other compact manifolds, the correspondence has more
recently been found to apply under quite general conditions [ 34 ] .
Specifically, whenever a boundary CFT admits a large @xmath expansion,
and has a sparse spectrum of light operators, it should have a bulk AdS
description, where the AdS radius is large compared to the Planck
length.

These conjectures have exceedingly important implications for our
understanding of quantum gravity. While at present there is no direct
construction of a well understood, experimentally verified theory of
quantum gravity, AdS/CFT gives us an alternate approach to the problem.
Since the CFTs are non-gravitational theories on a much firmer
theoretical footing, they can be used to define what we mean by quantum
gravity in AdS, and explore its properties. Still, we do not have a full
understanding of how CFTs can manifest all aspects of quantum gravity,
such as the emergence of an extra holographic bulk dimension [ 35 ] ,
locality of bulk observables [ 36 ] , their gauge invariance under
diffeomorphisms [ 37 ] , or the apparent loss of information through
black hole evolution [ 38 , 39 ] . Evidence for the correspondence
consists of a dictionary that translates observables and other
quantities between the two sides of the duality. For instance, every CFT
has a spin 2 stress tensor @xmath as the conserved current for
translation symmetry, and this is dual to the metric tensor @xmath of
the gravitational theory. The matching of other dual fields, like scalar
CFT operators to scalar bulk fields, is accomplished by calculating
their correlation functions. Using the AdS propagator one finds the
2-point function of a free scalar field with mass @xmath to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

in the limit where @xmath and @xmath are points close to the asymptotic
boundary. We see that the 2-point function matches the form ( 1.5 ) for
a scalar CFT operator with dimension @xmath , which was dictated
entirely by conformal symmetry.

Most of the early checks on AdS/CFT involved the matching of
correlations functions, as the GKPW conjecture [ 31 , 30 ] provided a
concrete formulation of the correspondence in these terms:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

This states that the gravitational partition function in an
asymptotically AdS spacetime @xmath , with light bulk fields @xmath ,
can be computed by the generating functional of correlation functions in
the dual CFT on the spacetime @xmath , the conformal boundary of @xmath
. It includes all light fields in the bulk effective theory, with their
sources at the boundary @xmath , and dual low-dimension CFT operators
@xmath . Remarkably, since CFTs are scale invariant and therefore UV
complete, the GKPW dictionary has the potential to non-perturbatively
define a UV complete theory of quantum gravity.

Higher-point CFT correlation functions, such as a four-point function of
scalar quasi-primaries
@xmath , can be computed holographically by Witten diagrams, a
diagrammatic expansion in bulk field couplings. This construction
operates on the observation that the normalizable modes of a bulk field
@xmath extrapolated to the boundary @xmath , with an appropriate
normalization factor to account for the field’s falloff, produces a
quantity that behaves exactly like a CFT quasi-primary [ 40 , 41 , 42 ]
,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

The mass of the field determines the rate of falloff @xmath near the
boundary via @xmath , but also dictates the scaling dimension of the CFT
object. Witten diagrams connect the boundary fields @xmath to bulk
interaction vertices @xmath with a bulk-to-boundary propagator, the
Green’s function which solves

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

Bulk vertices are connected to each other via the bulk-to-bulk
propagator of bulk fields involved in the interaction, which could
include gravitons, or scalar exchange as in Fig. 1.2 . In the latter
example, the propagator would solve

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

in the fixed AdS background. The Witten diagram then shows us the
elements needed for this contribution to the 4-point function; the
diagram in Fig. 1.2 represents the contribution

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

An enormous amount of work has gone into calculating correlation
functions in this way and comparing them to the structures dictated by
CFT [ 43 , 44 ] .

The aspects of holography that will be of most interest in this thesis
are some that go beyond the matching of correlation functions. In recent
years, a number of concepts from quantum information theory have become
highly applicable in holography due to their geometric realizations in
the bulk. The primary example is the entanglement entropy of a
subregion, which we saw takes a universal form for a single interval in
a 2d CFT vacuum state ( 1.16 ). Holographically, entanglement entropy is
dual to the area of an extremal surface @xmath attached to the boundary
such that it is homologous to the CFT subregion @xmath [ 45 , 46 , 47 ,
48 ] , see Fig. 1.2(a) ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using this Ryu-Takayanagi prescription in AdS @xmath , the minimal
surface is just a geodesic attached to the boundary at the ends of a CFT
interval (or set of intervals). A simple geometrical calculation for the
AdS @xmath geodesic length subtending a boundary interval of length
@xmath produces

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since distances near the boundary become large in AdS, the length of the
geodesic is divergent, and we regulate by placing a cutoff surface at a
radial distance @xmath from the boundary. Furthermore, the
Brown-Henneaux formula [ 49 ] ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

provides a relationship between the central charge @xmath of the dual
CFT @xmath , and both the AdS radius @xmath and gravitational Newton
constant @xmath , from the conformal algebra of asymptotic symmetries in
AdS @xmath . Together, these results exactly reproduce the CFT
entanglement entropy ( 1.16 ) with the expected UV divergence. The
matching between ( 1.40 ) in asymptotically AdS geometries and ( 1.13 )
in dual CFT states has been tested in a wide variety of scenarios [ 50 ,
51 , 52 , 53 ] .

Notably, the geometric interpretation allows for very simple proofs of
some important properties of entanglement entropy, such as subadditivity
( 1.32 ) and strong subadditivity ( 1.33 ) [ 54 ] . In quantum
information theory the proof of strong subadditivity relies on the
highly non-trivial result that relative entropy is monotonic. Yet, in
holography its proof can be summed up digrammatically, see Fig. 1.2(b) .
Interestingly, entanglement entropy is more constrained in holography as
compared with general quantum systems, since it satisfies a number of
additional inequalities. The first new inequality found is called
monogamy of mutual information and constrains the entanglement shared
between three regions [ 55 ] ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

Additional inequalities for higher numbers of regions have been
reported, but a complete characterization of the extra conditions obeyed
by ( 1.40 ) is still a topic of active research [ 56 , 57 , 58 ] . These
results have direct bearing on the structure of CFT states which can
give rise to holographic geometries [ 59 ] .

Holographic entanglement entropy was the first example of how
entanglement and other information theoretic properties of a CFT can be
geometrized in the bulk. A number of widely used ideas from quantum
information theory have been realized in similar ways, including
entanglement negativity [ 60 , 61 ] , quantum Fisher information [ 62 ]
, quantum error correcting codes [ 63 , 64 , 65 , 66 ] , and modular
flow [ 67 , 68 , 69 , 70 ] . As examples of recent progress we will look
over two other cases in more detail: entanglement of purification and
complexity.

One recently discovered duality that is fairly similar to entanglement
entropy is the entanglement of purification [ 71 , 72 ] , defined by
quantum information theorists in the following way [ 73 ] . Given a
mixed state @xmath we can create a pure state @xmath on a larger space
by introducing ancilla systems @xmath and entangling @xmath with @xmath
. This is done in such a way that tracing out @xmath reproduces @xmath .
Then one can evaluate the von Neumann entropy ( 1.13 ) between @xmath
and @xmath . However, many purifications are possible for different
ancilla systems, so the entanglement of purification is defined as the
least entropy over all possible purifications,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

In fact, for pure states @xmath there is no need to introduce @xmath for
purification, so this construction reduces to the entanglement entropy
@xmath exactly. For mixed states the definitions are not equivalent, and
in holography we find a different interpretation of @xmath .

Let @xmath and @xmath represent two boundary subregions. The
entanglement wedge of @xmath is the region surrounded by the
Ryu-Takayanagi extremal surface homologous to @xmath , and we break it
up into two disjoint components separated by a surface @xmath . There
are many bulk surfaces which can separate @xmath from @xmath within the
entanglement wedge, but we select the one with minimal area @xmath , see
Fig. 1.4 , and define the entanglement wedge cross section in a similar
manner to the Ryu-Takayanagi entanglement entropy,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

There is strong evidence supporting the conjectured duality that the CFT
entanglement of purification for the region @xmath equals the
entanglement wedge cross section,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

which has been accumulated in a number of papers exploring aspects and
extensions of the conjecture [ 74 , 75 , 76 , 77 ] . The significance of
this duality is that it can be used in conjunction with entanglement
entropy to isolate quantum correlations. Entanglement entropy and
entanglement of purification both have the undesirable feature that they
are sensitive to the classical correlations in mixed states. But the two
measures account for classical correlations in different ways so that by
comparing @xmath and @xmath it is possible to isolate the contributions
of genuine quantum correlations [ 78 ] .

Another conjectured duality for which a great deal of evidence has
arisen has to do with the quantum information theory concept of
complexity [ 79 ] . The circuit complexity of a quantum state is defined
as the number of simple quantum logic gates needed to construct the
state from a fixed reference state. Clearly there are some ambiguities
in this definition which we should address. For quantum circuits acting
on qubit systems, it is well known that it suffices to choose a small
number of different logic gates to reproduce the action of any possible
circuit. Such a gate set is called a universal set. When defining the
complexity of a state it certainly matters which gates we are permitted
to utilize. If we allow any gates whatsoever, then any state should have
a complexity of one (or zero), since there exists some operation to
prepare the state directly from the reference. By limiting ourselves to
a fixed universal gate set we can meaningfully compare the number of
gates needed to construct different states. Still, there will be many
different choices of universal sets, and these choices will potentially
provide different complexities for the same state. Furthermore, the
choice of reference state will also greatly affect the definition of
complexity, and there is no a priori reason to prioritize some
particular state as a reference over any other. Hence, complexity is
only defined relative to some reference state and some universal gate
set; it is not an absolute concept.

Complexity can be considered as a distance measure on Hilbert space, but
is quite different in character than the relative entropy which we
mentioned earlier. The relative entropy ( 1.18 ) between two orthogonal
pure state diverges, since orthogonal states are perfectly
distinguishable with the appropriate measurement protocol, e.g. a
projective measurement onto one of the states. However, in some sense
this can produce unintuitive distances. If we have a pure state of a
large system comprised of thousands of qubits each in the computational
@xmath state, @xmath , then when we flip the state of the @xmath th
qubit, @xmath , we obtain an orthogonal state with infinite relative
entropy. But overall we may consider a single bit flip to be a small
change. Using complexity as a distance measure, the two states @xmath ,
@xmath could have a distance of 1, since a single bit flip gate enacts
the change. A state like @xmath has the same infinite relative entropy
with @xmath , but much higher relative complexity. Despite the freedoms
in the definition of complexity, it is possible to identify some
definite features.

For general interacting quantum systems with random local dynamics
complexity is known to grow approximately linearly for very long times.
Starting from a reference state, a discrete evolution where individual
gates are chosen randomly and applied to the state almost always takes
us to more complex states rather than less complex states. This is
simply due to the size of Hilbert space; at almost every step in the
evolution there are many more branches outward to new parts of Hilbert
space than branches taking us back towards previously seen, or less
complex states. This is very similar to the microscopic explanation of
the second law of thermodynamics, and can be stated in qubit systems as
a second law of complexity : if complexity is less than its maximum,
exponential in the number of qubits, then it will increase with
overwhelming likelihood into the future and the past [ 80 ] . Since
complexity will almost always grow by one unit at each step in the
evolution, given that we only apply one gate per step, then the rate of
growth is approximately linear in time for exponentially long times.
Although CFTs are not simply qubit systems, the notion of complexity can
still be applied to them. We can think of individual logic gates as
small changes to, for example, the global phase, the position or
momentum of the wavefunction, the entanglement between two field modes,
or the scale of a mode [ 81 ] . The second law still applies for random
applications of these gates to parts of the system.

The real motivation for introducing complexity in the context of AdS/CFT
was the observed discrepancy between timescales of evolution in black
holes and their dual thermal CFT states. An eternal black hole in AdS is
characterized by a wormhole, or Einsten-Rosen bridge (ERB), which
connects two asymptotic AdS boundaries. This system has a boundary dual
comprised of two CFTs in an entangled state, such that the reduced state
of either CFT is thermal, with temperature equal to the black hole
temperature [ 82 ] . This is the so-called thermofield double state,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are energy eigenstates of the left and right CFTs, @xmath
is the temperature, and the partition function @xmath normalizes the
state. In the CFT state, small perturbations thermalize within a short
scrambling time, proportional to @xmath , where @xmath is the entropy,
similar to the rapid scrambling of information thrown into a black hole
[ 83 ] . After this time entropy is maximized, and there is no apparent
evolution of typical observables like correlation functions in the CFT.
In contrast, the volume of the ERB continues to grow linearly long after
the scrambling time [ 84 , 85 ] . It was conjectured that the circuit
complexity of the CFT state should be dual to this long lasting growth,
since even after thermalization, fluctuations to nearby thermal states
cause complexity to increase continuously.

These ideas were formalized in a number of distinct conjectures for the
gravitational quantity dual to CFT complexity [ 86 , 87 , 88 , 89 ] . It
should not be too surprising that multiple candidates for a dual
quantity have been proposed given that the circuit complexity is
inherently ambiguous due to the choice of reference state and gate set.
One proposal suggests that the complexity is dual to the volume of the
maximal codimension-1 surface @xmath through the bulk that reaches the
boundary at the timeslice @xmath where the CFT state is defined,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

To achieve the correct units, an extra length scale @xmath is added,
which may be the AdS radius or black hole horizon length, but again this
ambiguity hearkens back to the inherent difficulties of defining
complexity. A second proposal suggests that the complexity should be
given by the gravitational action of the Wheeler-DeWitt patch, the
causal development of the same surface @xmath mentioned before,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

Both of these quantities exhibit linear growth for exponentially long
times, well beyond the scrambling time for thermalization.

There is currently no consensus on which definition is “correct”, and
probably there can be no unique dual for CFT complexity for the reasons
discussed. It is entirely possibly that there exists a large class of
gravitational quantities that exhibit late time linear growth, which
would roughly correspond to different choices of gate set and reference
state for defining complexity. Yet, the study of complexity is a
worthwhile endeavour as a novel and very distinct quantity in dynamical
systems with applications to the black hole information paradox [ 90 ] .

Beyond simply matching quantities on the two sides of the duality, the
information theoretic dualities we have mentioned suggest deeper
connections between the nature of spacetime in quantum gravity and
entanglement. It has been suggested that CFT entanglement is responsible
for stitching together the bulk spacetime, based on the observation that
two unentangled CFTs are dual to two disconnected geometries whereas two
entangled CFTs can be dual to a single connected spacetime where a
wormhole joins the two asymptotic regions through the bulk. As
entanglement is removed from the CFT state, the bulk spacetime pinches
off and becomes disconnected [ 82 , 11 ] . This idea was expanded into
the conjecture that wormholes and entangled particles are fundamentally
the same under the moniker “ER=EPR” [ 91 ] .

Holographic entanglement also gives us a handle on the structure of
spacetime [ 92 ] . If we suppose a bulk geometry exists and is such that
extremal surfaces attached to the boundary reproduce the patterns of
entanglement in the dual CFT state, then in principle the bulk metric
should be reconstructable from entanglement entropy data in the regions
that can be reached by the extremal surfaces. In practice this is a
difficult approach because the problem is highly overconstrained.
Typically the metric of the spacetime is specified by a number of
functions of a few coordinates and parameters, whereas the boundary
entanglement entropies give some function on the space of subregions of
the boundary. It will then only be for very special CFT states that a
geometry exists, but this is exactly what happens in known examples of
the duality. In more practical terms, individual points in the bulk can
be located through extraneous singularities of boundary correlators [ 93
] , and the metric at these points reconstructed up to a conformal
factor through boundary data [ 94 ] . Alternatively, the metric can be
reconstructed up to a conformal factor through the Lie algebra generated
by modular Hamiltonians of all spherical CFT subregions [ 95 ] .

An additional obstacle to reconstruction of the bulk metric through
entanglement entropy data is that in many geometries boundary anchored
extremal surfaces do not reach all parts of the bulk. Regions not
reached are in the “entanglement shadow” [ 96 , 97 , 98 , 99 ] . Based
on the statement of the AdS/CFT correspondence, we expect that the
entire bulk should be encoded in the CFT state, including these shadow
regions, so it behooves us to develop better probes which can reach such
regions. One clue in this direction comes from gauged systems, where
there can be internal degrees of freedom that are not spatially
organized, but which contribute to entanglement. This type of
entanglement in a CFT state is not captured by Ryu-Takayanagi surfaces
which are only sensitive to spatially organized entanglement at leading
order in @xmath ⁴ ⁴ 4 The leading order behaviour of holographic
entanglement entropy is purely geometrical and hence spatially
organized, but corrections to the Ryu-Takayanagi formula may exhibit
different behaviour [ 100 , 101 ] . . These ideas led to the
introduction of entwinement , computed in the CFT by first lifting the
gauge constraints, computing entanglement entropy, and then enforcing
gauge invariance. This construction is dual in AdS @xmath to the length
of non-minimal boundary anchored geodesics which reach into the
entanglement shadow [ 102 , 103 ] . The need to develop more fine
grained probes of entanglement for understanding holographic spacetimes
is a major motivation for this thesis.

The idea of bulk reconstruction through boundary data has been
approached from many directions, including those just mentioned, but
initially was accomplished by assuming the existence of a bulk AdS
spacetime and using equations of motion to reconstruct local bulk fields
in terms of smeared boundary operators [ 36 ] . In order to isolate a
bulk point with these methods, one must involve a sufficiently large
boundary region such that its causal extension into the bulk contains
that point. It is, however, undesirable to assume the very features we
are hoping to reconstruct. Using more modern techniques involving
modular flow, local bulk fields can be reconstructed using CFT
considerations only [ 104 ] . Interestingly, it has also become apparent
that sometimes local bulk fields can be reconstructed even if they lie
outside the causal wedge of a boundary region, as long as they are
contained within the Ryu-Takayanagi extremal surface homologous to that
region [ 105 , 106 , 107 ] . Generally, the idea of subregion-subregion
duality is a refinement of the global AdS/CFT proposal that suggests
that there should be a holographic dictionary mapping all bulk data
within a bulk subregion to boundary data in a corresponding subregion [
108 ] .

Not only can the structure of spacetime potentially be reproduced via
CFT entanglement data, but gravitational dynamics can also be found
through laws of entanglement. Spacetime geometries which are consistent
with CFT entanglement entropies according to the Ryu-Takayanagi relation
( 1.40 ) satisfy the Einstein equations perturbatively [ 109 , 110 ] .
In fact, this can be shown independently of AdS/CFT, that is, without
assuming the existence of a quantum gravitational bulk dual, and hence
it implies a direct emergence of gravitation from CFT entanglement [ 111
] . Along these lines, entropic inequalities also imply gravitational
energy conditions [ 112 , 113 ] , an avenue of study which has lead to
numerous developments in AdS/CFT, QFT, and even classical gravity on the
general validity of energy conditions [ 114 , 115 , 68 , 116 , 117 , 118
] .

The survey of topics presented here hopefully conveys the diversity of
applications of quantum information theory to AdS/CFT, and its
contributions to our understanding of quantum gravity in general.

### 1.4 Outline

This thesis is quantized as follows. In Chapters 2 and 3 we detail the
construction of new fine-grained observables in the AdS @xmath /CFT
@xmath correspondence associated to the non-minimal boundary anchored
geodesics which appear for non-pure AdS spacetimes. Chapter 2 begins by
recounting the construction of a third spacetime in the correspondence,
kinematic space, which allows us to connect some aspects of the bulk and
boundary theories more easily. This intermediary spacetime reveals a
duality between OPE blocks in the CFT, which give the contribution to
the OPE from an entire conformal family of operators in the theory, and
geodesic integrated bulk fields, a conveniently diffeomorphism invariant
set of observables in the bulk. However, the original arguments
establishing this duality relied heavily on the symmetries of pure AdS,
and were therefore significantly limited in scope. We will show how the
duality must be modified when the bulk is not pure AdS, using the
example of conical defect spacetimes [ 119 ] . In the bulk, the presence
of non-minimal boundary anchored geodesics corresponds to a
decomposition of OPE blocks in the CFT. We will establish a duality
between the quantities in this decomposition, which are individually
valid observables in the CFT, and geodesic integrated bulk fields, where
the geodesics can be minimal or non-minimal.

In Chapter 3 we explore the new duality further in an important class of
spacetimes obtained as quotients of AdS @xmath with respect to elements
of its isometry group. Instead of relying on symmetry arguments, we will
construct explicit coordinate maps between pure AdS @xmath and the
quotient spacetimes [ 120 ] . Then, we will use these maps to
demonstrate how non-minimal geodesics arise due to the non-analyticities
in the maps. The same maps, in the boundary limit, will be used to
transform OPE blocks in the CFT. Again, the non-analyticities in the
maps alter the structure of the OPE blocks in a way that mirrors the
appearance of non-minimal geodesics. The transformed OPE blocks in all
cases considered admit a decomposition into more fine-grained CFT
observables. We argue that the new observables are dual to geodesic
integrated bulk fields, where the geodesics can be minimal, wind around
the singularity in the bulk, or even cross through horizons. We will
conclude these sections with further connections to recent ideas in the
literature.

In the latter parts of this thesis we will consider entanglement
phenomena in general quantum systems, not specifically focused on
AdS/CFT, but potentially applicable there. In Chapter 4 , we will
briefly present a quantum information theoretic introduction to
entanglement measures and their properties to reorient the reader. In
Chapter 5 the focus will be on entanglement dynamics of general systems,
as measured by the family of Rényi entropies [ 121 ] . Instead of
choosing a specific physical system, we retain general applicability by
focussing on common initial conditions. We show that, starting from
initially pure, unentangled states, the leading order growth of
entanglement is characterized by a timescale which has the same form for
all Rényi entropies. Since the Rényi entropies as a family completely
characterize the bipartite entanglement properties of a pure state, the
timescale can be considered universal.

The universal growth of Rényi entropies raises questions around the
behaviour of distinct entanglement measures. In particular, one of the
most commonly used entanglement measures, called negativity, does not
conform to the growth behaviour described above. In Chapter 6 we conduct
an independent perturbative analysis of negativity and find that
additional mathematical tools are required [ 122 ] . These new tools are
extended from an underdeveloped branch of mathematics known as patterned
matrix calculus. After constructing the perturbative expansion of
negativity, we compare its dynamical behaviour to Rényi entropies, and
investigate the structural differences between these measures. The
result is summarized in a theorem describing a class of functions for
which patterned matrix derivatives are equivalent to ordinary matrix
derivatives, and hence the additional complications of patterned matrix
calculus can safely be glossed over. Rényi entropies belong to this
class, while negativity does not, which neatly explains why a different
approach is necessary for the perturbative expansion of negativity.
Finally, we will discuss several other quantities which are commonly
used in quantum information theory, and which do not belong to the class
in the theorem. These examples will show how relevant patterned matrix
calculus can be within this branch of physics as a whole.

## Chapter 2 Kinematic space for conical defects

This chapter is based on the paper [ 119 ] published in JHEP.

### 2.1 Introduction

Even before the AdS/CFT correspondence [ 1 , 30 , 31 ] provided a
physical duality between conformal field theories and theories of
quantum gravity in Anti-de Sitter spacetimes, CFT quantities had been
mathematically represented in terms of bulk fields [ 123 , 124 ] . These
ideas relating contributions to conformal blocks and integrals of bulk
fields over geodesics have reemerged recently in the context of geodesic
Witten diagrams [ 125 , 126 ] . Whereas a four-point Witten diagram with
bulk vertices integrated over the entire bulk calculates a contribution
to a full CFT four-point function, integrating the vertices only over
geodesics connecting boundary insertions as in Fig. 2.1 computes a
conformal partial wave. The conformal partial wave represents the
contribution of a primary operator and its descendants to the four-point
function, and somehow knows about the geodesic structure of AdS.

In more detail, a 4-point function of identical scalars like @xmath ,
which has the structure ( 1.8 ), can be reduced using the OPE ( 1.9 )
twice, taking @xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath stands in for the fixed differential operator appearing in
the OPE according to the quasi-primary @xmath of dimension @xmath and
spin @xmath , with tensor indices implied. Since the 2-point function is
only non-zero when the two operators have the same dimension, we take
them to be identical for simplicity, and define conformal partial waves
@xmath from

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

We see that this represents the contribution to the 4-point function
from the exchange of @xmath and its descendants in the channel @xmath .
If we imagine a projector onto the conformal family of @xmath ,
schematically

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath the operator that generates the @xmath th descendant, then
the conformal partial wave would be

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

We also can define conformal blocks which only depend on the conformally
invariant cross ratios,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Hence conformal blocks and conformal partial waves contain the same
physical content, but the former is manifestly conformally invariant.
Comparing ( 2.2 ) and ( 1.8 ), the conformal blocks are related to the
arbitrary function @xmath appearing in the 4-point function by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The fact that conformal blocks (or partial waves) can be computed by
geodesic Witten diagrams [ 125 , 126 ] is not only a technical boon for
calculations, but provides a new understanding of how AdS 4-point
amplitudes can be contained within the rigid structure of CFT
correlation functions, and has led to many new developments along these
lines [ 127 , 128 , 129 , 130 ] . As we will explain, a very similar
bulk to boundary correspondence holds when considering the bare OPE
itself.

A new approach to the AdS/CFT correspondence has shed more light on the
connection between composite operators in the OPE, and integrated bulk
fields. The authors of [ 131 , 132 ] proposed the use of an auxiliary
space that interpolates between the bulk and boundary theories, similar
to the space used in [ 133 ] . The auxiliary space, called kinematic
space, functions as a way of organizing the non-local degrees of freedom
which lead to diffeomorphism invariant quantities in the bulk gravity
theory. Whereas local bulk fields fail to satisfy diffeomorphism
invariance, a field integrated over a boundary anchored geodesic or
otherwise attached to the boundary with a geodesic dressing can be
invariant [ 134 , 135 ] . Boundary anchored geodesics in asymptotically
AdS spacetimes meet the boundary at pairs of spacelike or null separated
points suggesting a relation to bi-local CFT operators. Such composite
operators are easily described in terms of the OPE. Both a geodesic
integrated field and the basis of non-local operators forming the OPE
can be viewed as fields on kinematic space leading to a diffeomorphism
invariant entry into the AdS/CFT dictionary.

Several proposals have been made as to how kinematic space should be
defined from the bulk and boundary. Kinematic space was originally
presented as the space of bulk geodesics with a measure derived from
their lengths in terms of the Crofton form used in integral geometry (as
opposed to differential geometry) [ 131 ] . Since the length of a
minimal geodesic is holographically related to entanglement entropy in
AdS @xmath /CFT @xmath [ 45 ] , a boundary description of kinematic
space was given as the space of boundary intervals with the metric
defined in terms of the differential entropy of those intervals [ 96 ] .
¹ ¹ 1 This approach was recently inverted to derive the universal parts
of the entanglement entropy in a CFT with a boundary from knowledge of
the kinematic space [ 136 ] . In order to generalize the kinematic space
approach to higher dimensional systems, later approaches defined points
in kinematic space as oriented bulk geodesics, and simultaneously as
ordered pairs of boundary points [ 132 ] .

In the case of a pure AdS @xmath geometry, these approaches are
consistent since there is a unique geodesic connecting each pair of
spacelike separated boundary points. Other well known locally AdS @xmath
geometries can have several geodesics connecting each pair of boundary
points, namely conical defects and BTZ black holes [ 137 , 138 , 139 ] .
There are two diverging ways to modify the definition of what
constitutes a kinematic space point in such cases. Any spacelike
separated pair of boundary points will be connected by a unique minimal
geodesic, so the bulk definition can exclude non-minimal geodesics from
kinematic space with no need to change the boundary definition.
Alternatively, non-minimal geodesics can be considered as points with
the same standing as minimal ones, in which case ordered pairs of
boundary points alone will not fill out kinematic space. Excluding
non-minimal geodesics is not desirable due to the generic fact that
minimal geodesics do not reach all depths of the bulk. The region probed
by non-minimal geodesics is known as the entanglement shadow [ 102 , 99
, 103 ] . A full description of the bulk in terms of kinematic space can
only succeed when non-minimal geodesics are included. This forces a
change to the definition of kinematic space from the boundary point of
view.

In this chapter, we take up the issue of non-minimal geodesics in
kinematic space, and the matter of an equivalent boundary definition of
points in the simplest geometry exhibiting this feature, the static
conical defects in three bulk dimensions. In Section 2.2 the geometry of
the conical defect kinematic space is derived in two ways. The first is
a simple application of the differential entropy definition applied to
geodesics of all lengths. The second follows [ 140 ] in noting that the
conical defects can be obtained as a quotient of pure AdS @xmath . Under
this quotient classes of geodesics are identified, producing a quotient
on kinematic space, and leading to a result equivalent to the first
approach. In Section 2.3 the metric of kinematic space is extracted from
OPE blocks in the CFT. By mapping to a convenient covering CFT system we
find that conventional OPE blocks can be broken down further than done
before using the method of images. Individual image contributions to the
OPE blocks contain information about subregions of kinematic space that,
when combined, reproduce the same space identified from the bulk.
Intuition from previous uses of the method of images to calculate
correlation functions holographically suggests an association between
partial OPE blocks in the CFT and geodesics of a fixed winding number in
the bulk. Kinematic space provides a realm where the connection between
these objects can be made precise, as is shown in Section 2.4 . We
conclude by isolating the contribution to the full OPE block from
individual bulk geodesics, minimal or non-minimal, which connect the
boundary insertion points. This extends the holographic dictionary
established in [ 132 ] between OPE blocks and geodesic integrated
operators, and provides more fine-grained information about the
holographic contributions to the blocks.

### 2.2 Kinematic space from the bulk

In this section we focus on static conical defect spacetimes and
consider the kinematic space for a constant time slice. We show that the
differential entropy approach [ 131 ] , and the quotient approach [ 140
] produce different fundamental regions of the same kinematic space, but
are entirely equivalent.

#### 2.2.1 Review of geometries

In global coordinates, the universal cover of AdS @xmath has the metric

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath , and @xmath with the identification @xmath . Throughout
this chapter the “unwrapped” time coordinate @xmath of the universal
cover will be used. The AdS @xmath geometry can be understood as a
surface embedded in the higher dimensional flat space @xmath with metric

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The AdS @xmath metric is induced by restricting to a hyperbolic surface

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

The parameter @xmath is the AdS length scale which will be set to unity
throughout the remainder of this chapter. The metric in global
coordinates is obtained from the embedding equations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

For visual representations it will be useful to consider the Poincaré
disk. By taking a constant time slice @xmath , equivalently @xmath , the
metric induced from @xmath is that of the hyperbolic plane @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

This describes a two sheeted hyperboloid in @xmath with disconnected
parts above and below the @xmath plane. The tips of the sheets are
located at @xmath and @xmath in the @xmath embedding coordinates. The
Poincaré disk can be obtained by projecting the @xmath sheet onto the
@xmath plane through the point @xmath . In the disk, boundary anchored
geodesics are described by the particularly simple equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath denotes the angular coordinate of the center of the
geodesic, and @xmath is the half-opening angle. Pictorially, geodesics
in the Poincaré disk are arcs of circles that meet the boundary at right
angles as in Figure 2.1(a) .

Conical defect spacetimes can be obtained as a quotient of AdS @xmath by
identifying surfaces of constant @xmath leaving an angular coordinate
with a smaller period. In global coordinates the metric is simply

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where now @xmath . The parameter @xmath gives the strength of the
defect. This metric is no longer a solution of the vacuum Einstein
equations everywhere but requires a pointlike source at the origin. The
defect can be viewed as a static particle of mass @xmath where @xmath .
The mass must stay below the black hole limit @xmath , which corresponds
to @xmath . For the special cases where @xmath is an integer, the
spacetime is a cyclic orbifold AdS @xmath . Some example geodesics in
the @xmath slice of the conical defect are shown in Figure 2.1(b) , and
the corresponding geodesics of AdS @xmath in Figure 2.1(c) .

The kinematic space corresponding to the Poincaré disk was investigated
in [ 131 ] and found to be a two dimensional de Sitter geometry. For
ease of comparison the dS @xmath spacetime can be embedded in the same
@xmath where it is a one-sheeted hyperboloid given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

The embedding equations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

lead to the dS @xmath metric in global coordinates,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Conformal or “kinematic” coordinates @xmath will be used often in this
chapter as they naturally fit with the description of kinematic space as
the space of geodesics in AdS @xmath . The transformation @xmath , where
now @xmath , leads to the dS @xmath metric

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

With these conventions laid out, the remainder of this section briefly
recounts the derivation of the kinematic space geometry for pure AdS
@xmath , then details two methods of obtaining the kinematic space for
conical defects from the bulk.

#### 2.2.2 Kinematic space from differential entropy

In [ 131 ] a definition of kinematic space for constant time slices of
AdS @xmath in terms of differential entropy was derived from integral
geometry. Each interval of the boundary, denoted by an ordered pair of
points @xmath , corresponds to a point in kinematic space covered by
null coordinates @xmath . The kinematic space metric in these
coordinates was found to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath was the length of the shortest oriented geodesic connecting
the ends of the interval @xmath through the bulk. Since the length of a
minimal geodesic is holographically interpreted as the entanglement
entropy of the interval it subtends, the quantity @xmath was dubbed
differential entropy [ 96 , 97 , 141 ] . However, many interesting
spacetimes including the conical defects and BTZ black holes have
multiple geodesics connecting pairs of spacelike separated boundary
points. Non-minimal geodesics do not correspond to entanglement between
spatial regions, but have been conjectured to describe correlations
between internal degrees of freedom [ 102 ] . Because of this potential
interest, and their importance in the geodesic approximation for
correlation functions [ 142 , 143 ] , in this chapter the differential
entropy definition will be expanded to include non-minimal geodesics.

For the constant time slice of AdS @xmath , there is a unique oriented
geodesic connecting each ordered pair of boundary points so the issue of
non-minimal geodesics in eq. ( 2.18 ) does not arise. Geodesics can be
labelled by their half-opening angle @xmath and centre angle @xmath ,
and have length

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath serves as a gravitational infrared cutoff [ 144 ] . By
transforming between kinematic coordinates and null coordinates using
@xmath , and @xmath , eq. ( 2.18 ) can be applied to find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus, the kinematic space of a constant time slice of AdS @xmath is dS
@xmath according to the differential entropy definition, as shown in
Figure 2.3 . The @xmath and @xmath halves are mapped into one another
under orientation reversal which acts as @xmath and @xmath . The
geodesics with @xmath cut straight across the Poincaré disk and have
maximal length.

Now consider a constant time slice of the conical defect geometry eq. (
2.13 ). Since the total angle around the boundary is @xmath , the centre
angle of a geodesic will now be denoted @xmath . Once again, for any
pair of boundary points there is a unique minimal geodesic connecting
them through the bulk. Minimal geodesics have half-opening angles in the
domain @xmath , and by reversing orientations with @xmath and @xmath ,
also the domain @xmath . Minimal geodesics cover the top and bottom
regions of kinematic space in Figure 2.3 .

In contrast to AdS @xmath , there can be non-minimal geodesics
connecting pairs of boundary points. It will be useful to label
geodesics and their corresponding regions in kinematic space by the
number of times they wind around the defect, @xmath . The cases of
integer and non-integer @xmath will be treated separately for clarity.

For integer @xmath there are @xmath non-minimal geodesics connecting
each pair of boundary points, with winding numbers @xmath . Geodesics
with winding number @xmath fill in the regions of kinematic space

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where these domains are related by orientation reversal. The upper and
lower halves of kinematic space are divided by geodesics with @xmath
which touch the conical defect. On the covering AdS @xmath space, these
are the straight lines through the origin of the Poincaré disk. In total
there are @xmath equally sized regions on kinematic space in the @xmath
coordinates.

For non-integer @xmath , the maximally winding geodesics have @xmath and
live near the centre line @xmath . There are fewer maximally winding
geodesics than other classes, filling out a truncated region

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.22)
  -- -- -- --------

Other winding numbers follow eq. ( 2.21 ). Each pair of boundary points
is connected by @xmath or @xmath geodesics, depending on their angular
separation.

The differential entropy definition eq. ( 2.18 ) can be applied to show
that the geometry on kinematic space remains locally dS @xmath for any
@xmath . The key fact is that minimal and non-minimal geodesics still
have lengths given by eq. ( 2.19 ) [ 144 ] . Treating the types on equal
footings from the point of view of kinematic space and using @xmath ,
@xmath once again gives ² ² 2 A previous paper [ 145 ] describing the
kinematic spaces for several locally AdS @xmath geometries, including
conical defects, chose to consider only minimal geodesics, and hence
found different kinematic space geometries.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

The kinematic space for a constant time slice of a conical defect has
the same dS @xmath metric as the AdS @xmath case, but with the angular
coordinate identified as @xmath . This was expected since the static
conical defects are locally AdS @xmath , only differing by the global
identification along the angular coordinate. The identification does not
affect the lengths of the remaining geodesics. From the differential
entropy perspective, the conical defect kinematic space is found by
taking an angular quotient of the AdS @xmath kinematic space; the same
quotient that produces the conical defect from pure AdS @xmath itself.
In the next section we show how the quotient acts on geodesics in the
covering space, displaying the inherent ambiguities involved in defining
kinematic space.

#### 2.2.3 Kinematic space from boundary anchored geodesics

The bulk calculation of the kinematic space for conical defects is more
enlightening when the defects are viewed from the perspective of the
covering space, AdS @xmath . In particular, it provides motivation for
treating minimal and non-minimal geodesics on equal footing in the
definition of kinematic space, since there is no real distinction
between the types when viewed in the cover. All spacelike geodesics of
the conical defect descend from the covering space; the quotient that
produces the conical defect divides geodesics into equivalence classes.

As an explicit example, consider the case of @xmath . The covering space
of @xmath is shown in Figure 2.3(a) . The covering space can be split
into two regions with boundaries labelled @xmath and @xmath , which are
identified under the quotient. Boundary anchored geodesics on this slice
can be grouped into four classes @xmath depending on the boundary region
their endpoints lie on. The locations of the classes on kinematic space
are shown in Figure 2.3(b) .

Under the @xmath quotient, @xmath geodesics are mapped into @xmath
geodesics. Similarly, @xmath geodesics are mapped into @xmath geodesics.
Therefore, all geodesics in @xmath can be generated by the classes
@xmath , and the @xmath action. The number of unique geodesics in the
conical defect slice is greatly reduced, and similarly for points on
kinematic space. As is shown in Figure 2.3(b) , the kinematic space for
the @xmath conical defect slice is a diagonal strip of width @xmath ,
with the identification @xmath . However, there are many equivalent ways
to choose the fundamental region under the quotient action. If, for
example, the classes @xmath had been chosen as fundamental, the diagonal
strip would point in the opposite direction. Similarly, the entire strip
can be shifted by any amount in the @xmath direction. There is nothing
to distinguish these choices, so as in [ 140 ] a conventional choice has
been made.

The quotient only changes the global identification of points in the
spacetime, and the geodesics within it. The relationship between nearby
geodesics in the kinematic space metric are locally unchanged. While the
origin of AdS @xmath is a fixed point of the quotient, there are no
oriented geodesics which are left invariant. From the perspective of
kinematic space, the quotient is freely acting, so the metric is
expected to be locally unchanged, and the topology to be invariant. This
is in contrast to the kinematic space of the BTZ black hole found in [
140 ] . The quotient of AdS @xmath which produces a BTZ black hole has
no fixed points so there are no curvature singularities in the BTZ
spacetime, but there are geodesics which are fixed under the quotient
which changes the topology of kinematic space from a single cylinder to
two.

For the more general case of a @xmath quotient, there are @xmath
distinct classes of oriented geodesics from the number of ways we can
choose two ordered endpoints. The number of distinct regions in
kinematic space is @xmath , one for each of the @xmath classes, and one
extra for each of the @xmath boundaries. The fundamental region is a
diagonal strip with width given by @xmath since @xmath is identified.
This also describes the fundamental region for arbitrary @xmath .

The two approaches presented here, using the differential entropy
definition eq. ( 2.18 ), and studying how the quotient identifies
geodesics on the covering space both produce a locally dS @xmath
spacetime but naturally pick out different regions of the kinematic
space. The differential entropy definition picks out a vertical strip,
while the classification of endpoints on the covering space produces a
diagonal strip. However, it is clear from the latter approach that there
are many equivalent choices of fundamental region, each with its own
merits. The diagonal choice contains some geodesics which have boundary
position @xmath on the cover. The vertical choice only contains
geodesics which are centred at boundary coordinates @xmath . Since it is
easiest to label geodesics with kinematic coordinates @xmath and @xmath
, the vertical strip will be used in the rest of this chapter.

### 2.3 Kinematic space from the boundary

#### 2.3.1 Kinematic space metric from conformal symmetry

In [ 132 ] a definition of kinematic space from the boundary theory was
given: each point in kinematic space corresponds to an ordered pair of
CFT points. ³ ³ 3 In [ 132 ] and [ 146 ] it was shown that an equivalent
definition can be made in terms of boundary causal diamonds. For pure
AdS @xmath /CFT @xmath restricted to a time slice, each ordered pair of
CFT points singles out a unique spacelike boundary anchored geodesic so
this definition is entirely natural. In the full time dependent
geometry, conformal symmetry alone fixes the metric on kinematic space
to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the inversion tensor. The numerical prefactor in the metric is chosen
by convention. The two CFT points @xmath and @xmath form a pair of
lightlike coordinates on kinematic space with the strange signature
@xmath . Since kinematic space is not to be viewed as a physical space,
but only as a useful auxiliary space for translating between the bulk
and boundary, this is not a concern.

In order to get back the dS @xmath metric found from the bulk, it is
easiest to perform a coordinate transformation from the planar set
@xmath to kinematic coordinates on the cylinder. The two pairs of
kinematic coordinates are defined through

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

In terms of these coordinates the kinematic space metric is two copies
of the dS @xmath metric in eq. ( 2.17 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus the kinematic space for global AdS @xmath , and the dual vacuum
state of a CFT @xmath is dS @xmath dS @xmath . When we restrict to a
constant time slice by setting @xmath we see from eq. ( 2.26 ) that
@xmath and @xmath become redundant coordinates fixed in terms of @xmath
, and that eq. ( 2.27 ) becomes eq. ( 2.23 ), up to the arbitrarily
chosen prefactor.

When the bulk spacetime has non-minimal geodesics, there is no longer a
one-to-one correspondence between pairs of CFT points and bulk
geodesics. In such a case the argument above cannot be applied. In order
to reproduce the quotient structure of kinematic space for conical
defects seen in section 2.2 , another approach must be taken. We take
the point of view espoused in [ 147 ] ; OPE blocks in the CFT should be
viewed as free fields on kinematic space, and their equation of motion
reflects the geometry of kinematic space.

#### 2.3.2 OPE blocks

In [ 132 ] , the operator product expansion (OPE) of two scalar CFT
operators was broken into OPE blocks, and these blocks were identified
as fields on kinematic space. Two scalar operators @xmath and @xmath in
a planar CFT with conformal weights @xmath and @xmath respectively can
be expanded in terms of a local basis of operators at the origin,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is the OPE, where the quasi-primaries @xmath , and their
descendants given by the derivative terms, form the basis of operators
at the origin. Notably, the @xmath coefficients are completely fixed by
conformal symmetry, while the @xmath are simply constants, but are
theory-dependent. Each term in the sum has a characteristic scaling
dimension @xmath , the dimension of the quasi-primary @xmath , and
represents the contribution to the OPE of the entire conformal family of
@xmath . Each of these terms can be packaged into a new operator @xmath
called an OPE block, and the OPE can be written as

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.29)
  -- -- -- --------

Since the OPE blocks depend on a pair of CFT points, the two points
where operators in the OPE are inserted, it is natural to view them as
fields on kinematic space. A major insight of [ 132 ] was that the
Casimir eigenvalue equation satisfied in the CFT by the OPE blocks can
be interpreted as a wave equation. The differential representation of
the CFT Casimir operator appropriate for OPE blocks is the Laplacian in
the kinematic space metric eq. ( 2.27 ). This gives yet another
prescription for determining the kinematic space for a CFT state which
is applicable when arguments from conformal symmetry alone are not
sufficient, as advocated for recently in [ 147 ] . In the following
section, we will show how this prescription can be modified and used to
obtain the kinematic space for excited CFT states dual to conical
defects, in agreement with the results of section 2.2 . First, we review
how the bulk metric of AdS @xmath can be determined from a quadratic CFT
@xmath Casimir in a differential representation appropriate for scalar
fields, and how the bilocal scalar representation of OPE blocks gives
the metric on kinematic space. These initial cases have been summarized
in [ 132 , 146 ] .

In a 2d CFT, the global conformal group @xmath forms a subgroup of the
larger Virasoro symmetry group. The global subgroup corresponds
holographically to the isometries of pure AdS @xmath with appropriate
boundary conditions, while the other generators of the Virasoro group
are associated to transformations which preserve the asymptotic boundary
[ 49 ] . The global conformal generators @xmath in the standard basis
satisfy two copies of the Witt algebra

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

When acting on conformal operators, the algebra is represented by some
differential operators @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

which depend on the @xmath representation of @xmath .

The quadratic Casimir operator

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

commutes with all the global conformal generators. ⁴ ⁴ 4 Our conventions
are as in [ 146 ] . Here, @xmath is written as an @xmath Lorentz
operator in the embedding space formalism [ 148 ] . Quasi-primary
operators @xmath are eigenoperators of this Casimir obeying

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

where for a quasi-primary with scaling dimension @xmath and spin @xmath
the eigenvalue is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

The same eigenvalue applies to the conformal Casimir in higher
dimensional CFTs although we only consider @xmath here. Since
descendants of @xmath are obtained through the action of conformal
generators which commute with @xmath , descendants obey the same Casimir
eigenvalue equation. Thus, Casimir eigenvalues classify irreducible
representations of the global conformal group.

The holographic interpretation of the Casimir equation ( 2.33 ) depends
on the representation used for the conformal generators. As an example,
consider a scalar quasi-primary operator @xmath with dimension @xmath ,
dual to a massive bulk scalar field @xmath . In terms of right and left
moving planar CFT coordinates @xmath , @xmath , the appropriate
differential representation of the global conformal generators is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

and similarly for barred generators with @xmath . An explicit
calculation of eq. ( 2.33 ) using eq. ( 2.32 ) verifies that @xmath .

Holographically, the global conformal generators correspond with AdS
@xmath isometries. Scale/radius duality prescribes that the scaling
dimension @xmath be replaced by the radial scale operator @xmath . Then
the conformal generators become

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

with a barred sector given by @xmath . These operators still satisfy the
algebra eq. ( 2.30 ) under the Lie bracket. However, this algebra now
admits a non-trivial extension

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

which leaves the Lie brackets between all elements unchanged, and which
vanishes in the boundary limit @xmath . Using the extended algebra, and
replacing @xmath by its dual field, the Casimir equation ( 2.33 )
becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is the Klein-Gordon equation for a massive scalar field in
Poincaré AdS @xmath , with @xmath [ 149 ] . In the @xmath scalar
representation, the global conformal Casimir can be identified as the
AdS @xmath Laplacian, @xmath .

In a similar manner, the Laplacian for the kinematic space of the CFT
@xmath vacuum state can be derived from the Casimir in an appropriate
representation. The authors of [ 132 ] identified this representation
from the transformation properties of OPE blocks, the natural candidates
for fields on kinematic space. Under a conformal transformation, a
spin-zero local operator with scaling dimension @xmath transforms as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

while

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

From eq. ( 2.29 ), these transformation laws imply that OPE blocks obey

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

Restricting to the case of @xmath shows that the equal-weight OPE block
transforms in a spinless, @xmath representation in each of its
coordinates. This is the same transformation law as a pair of
dimensionless scalar operators @xmath . The action of the conformal
generators on this pair is, from eq. ( 2.31 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the @xmath differential representation of @xmath acting
only on the @xmath coordinates. The OPE block is a linear combination of
a single quasi-primary and its descendants, so it satisfies a Casimir
eigenvalue equation with the same eigenvalue ( 2.34 ) as the
quasi-primary,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

Employing an explicit representation for the conformal generators will
produce a differential equation for the OPE blocks which can be
interpreted as a Klein-Gordon equation on kinematic space.

From the global AdS @xmath Killing vectors

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

we can obtain a differential representation of the conformal generators
on the cylinder by taking the @xmath boundary limit [ 49 ] ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using this representation to calculate the Casimir in its bilocal scalar
representation ( 2.43 ) requires computing

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

as in eq. ( 2.32 ). This task is simplified since the two terms which
act on only a single coordinate do not contribute. This can be verified
directly from the representation ( 2.45 ), or by noting that @xmath
acting on @xmath produces the eigenvalue ( 2.34 ), which vanishes for
the @xmath representation appropriate for the equal-weight OPE blocks in
@xmath .

The term with mixed derivatives does not vanish. It is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the second index indicates which point in the pair @xmath the
operator acts on. Using eq. ( 2.45 ) leads to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

This operator simplifies greatly if we introduce coordinates analogous
to the kinematic coordinates used in eq. ( 2.26 ), ⁵ ⁵ 5 There is no
longer a @xmath because this transformation is between sets of
coordinates on the cylinder.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

which leads to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Casimir equation for the OPE block is then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is easy to check that this operator is the scalar Laplacian in the dS
@xmath dS @xmath metric ( 2.27 ) found from conformal symmetry
arguments. This motivates the interpretation of an OPE block as a
negative mass scalar field propagating freely on kinematic space [ 132 ]
,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the mass term @xmath given by the Casimir eigenvalue ( 2.34 ) for
the quasi-primary of the block. Again, kinematic space is meant to be a
useful auxiliary space, not a physical one, so the appearance of
negative mass fields is not a concern.

In the following section the equal-time OPE will be considered for CFTs
dual to conical defects. Setting @xmath in eq. ( 2.49 ) and eliminating
two redundant coordinates in eq. ( 2.51 ) leads to the Laplacian for a
single dS @xmath spacetime,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 2.3.3 CFT dual to conical defects

Conical defect spacetimes can be created by adding a particle to pure
AdS and are dual to certain excited states of the boundary theory [ 142
, 150 ] . The dual CFT is discretely gauged and lives on a cylinder with
an angular identification inherited from the bulk. For the conical
defects with integer @xmath it is often useful to consider a covering
CFT living on the boundary of pure AdS @xmath that ungauges the discrete
@xmath symmetry [ 102 ] . ⁶ ⁶ 6 The covering CFT only inherits a
Virasoro symmetry group when @xmath is an integer [ 151 ] . Physical,
gauge invariant quantities in the base CFT can be computed from
appropriately symmetrized quantities on the cover. This method of images
on the cover is a common way to calculate correlation functions of
operators in the base CFT [ 142 , 152 , 153 , 154 , 155 ] . It is
important to note that the covering CFT is not identical to the base
CFT, as there are many non-symmetrized quantities on the cover that do
not correspond to physical, gauge invariant quantities on the base. In
addition, the two theories do not share the same central charge. In line
with section 2.2 , quantities on the base where @xmath will be marked
with a tilde to distinguish them from quantities on the cover where
@xmath .

Restricting to integer @xmath , a base operator @xmath of dimension
@xmath can be represented on the cover by a symmetrized operator

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is an operator on the cover of the same dimension @xmath ,
with @xmath , and the first copy @xmath is inserted at @xmath by
convention. ⁷ ⁷ 7 The equality of scaling dimensions here is a
consequence of unitarity in a 1+1d CFT and may not be guaranteed in
higher dimensions. This convention is somewhat arbitrary. It reflects
the freedom to choose a fundamental domain on the kinematic space, as
will become clear. The timelike coordinates of the two theories are
simply identified, and we work on a fixed time slice in both cases. The
generators of rotation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

are conformal generators that have the effect of permuting through
copies of @xmath equally spaced around the circle. An equivalent
expression to eq. ( 2.54 ) is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### Partial OPE block decomposition

The main goal of this section will be to obtain a symmetrized expression
for the equal-time base OPE in terms of cover OPE blocks. That
expression can then be used to determine the appropriate Casimir
eigenvalue equation for the blocks, and in turn the kinematic space
geometry can be inferred. The base OPE of equal-time operators inserted
at locations @xmath and @xmath with @xmath is of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the equal-time base OPE blocks. ⁸ ⁸ 8 Here, operators
on the cylinder have been rescaled relative to the planar operators used
in section 2.3.2 , see [ 9 ] for example. In the OPE limit @xmath where
the curvature of the cylinder becomes unimportant, one recovers the form
of eq. ( 2.29 ) for a planar CFT. Again, @xmath so the indices @xmath on
the OPE blocks are dropped for brevity. The base OPE can be rewritten
using eq. ( 2.54 ), after which the OPE between cover operators can be
broken into OPE blocks to get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

The structure constants and OPE blocks may be different on the cover
compared to the base, and are differentiated by a tilde.

Now, in the covering space we introduce kinematic coordinates of the
form (cf. ( 2.49 ))

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

The permutation generators can be rewritten

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

The @xmath terms in the double sum ( 2.58 ) can be reorganized into a
more appealing form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

The interior sum over @xmath accounts for the @xmath terms where both
points @xmath and @xmath are shifted by the same amount, that is @xmath
. In this case @xmath is fixed; the @xmath generator permutes between
images of the pair of operators on the cover. From the bulk viewpoint,
@xmath permutes through the @xmath images of a geodesic that are
identified under @xmath . In the exterior sum, the @xmath generators
increase the angular distance between the insertion points. In bulk
terms, @xmath changes the winding number of geodesics connecting the
boundary points.

It may seem more natural to use @xmath generators along with the @xmath
generators. However, when @xmath is an even integer, acting with @xmath
alone does not reach images on the cover of all separations @xmath . In
bulk terms, not all winding numbers for geodesics with a given
orientation can be reached with @xmath generators alone. In order to
reach all images for all integer @xmath , a combination of @xmath and
one of @xmath or @xmath is needed, as illustrated in Figure 2.5 .

The form of eq. ( 2.61 ) suggests the definition of a more fine-grained
OPE block which is symmetrized on the cover,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath takes on a fixed value @xmath within each term of this
block. We emphasize that since this “partial” OPE block is @xmath
symmetrized it is a valid observable on the base theory. The OPE of the
base theory is then put in the suggestive form (cf. ( 2.54 ))

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

The partial OPE blocks @xmath encapsulate the contribution to the base
OPE from ordered pairs of cover operators at a common distance @xmath ,
and @xmath as in Figure 2.6 .

The base OPE blocks @xmath in the decomposition ( 2.57 ) group the
contributions to the OPE from the conformal family of the primary @xmath
. In rearranging the sums to get ( 2.61 ) we lose this interpretation
for the partial OPE blocks @xmath . It is not immediately clear what CFT
operator contributions these blocks group together. However, we will
find that the partial OPE blocks have a clear interpretation in the
bulk; they organize the contributions to the base OPE from bulk
geodesics of fixed winding numbers.

For each block @xmath , the coordinate @xmath is in the domain @xmath
since @xmath was set by convention. We can always choose @xmath in this
fundamental domain, even though its full domain on the covering space is
@xmath , because the symmetry generators in eq. ( 2.62 ) permute through
all the images of @xmath symmetrically. The choice of fundamental domain
for this coordinate is the same as the choice for a fundamental domain
of kinematic space made in eq. ( 2.23 ) and section 2.2.3 .

Importantly, in a single @xmath block the coordinate @xmath is
restricted to a domain of size @xmath . To see this, consider the @xmath
block where the image points have the smallest separation @xmath and are
connected by a geodesic of winding number @xmath through the bulk. Fix
@xmath and allow @xmath to take on different values. Keeping @xmath and
@xmath requires @xmath to stay in the domain @xmath . Over this domain
@xmath so the @xmath block corresponds to @xmath in this range.
Increasing @xmath moves the @xmath insertion to its next image at @xmath
, so the @xmath block has @xmath and corresponds to geodesics of winding
number @xmath . The relationship between @xmath and @xmath is piecewise
linear, and differs for even or odd integer @xmath . For odd @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

while for even @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

All values of the winding number @xmath are reached by the @xmath
applications of the @xmath generator for both odd and even @xmath . In
summary, with our conventions each partial OPE block @xmath lives in a
restricted domain @xmath and @xmath .

##### Partial OPE block Casimir equations

It was noted in eq. ( 2.43 ) that an OPE block satisfies a Casimir
equation with the same eigenvalue as the quasi-primary @xmath it is
built from. Since the Casimir operator commutes with all elements of the
global conformal group, the @xmath blocks satisfy the same Casimir
equation as the @xmath blocks from which they are built ( 2.62 ), with
the same eigenvalue,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

The differential representation of @xmath must be adapted for the @xmath
blocks compared to the @xmath blocks because the conformal generators of
the base and cover theory are not the same.

While the conical defect is dual to an excited state of the base CFT,
the covering CFT is in its ground state [ 102 ] . For this reason, the
differential form of the Casimir operator acting on the @xmath blocks is
given by eq. ( 2.46 ) using a representation such as in eq. ( 2.45 ).
The only difference that appears in the calculation leading to the
Laplacian on kinematic space, eq. ( 2.53 ), is the restricted coordinate
domain of @xmath : @xmath and @xmath . Thus the Casimir equation for the
@xmath blocks is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

which suggests the metric for the kinematic space of the single @xmath
block is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is a subregion of dS @xmath with the restricted coordinate range as
indicated above. Each of the @xmath @xmath blocks gives rise to a region
of kinematic space in the same vertical strip of width @xmath but with
differing ranges of @xmath , as depicted in Figure 2.7 . The union of
these @xmath regions cover half of the vertical strip, but are not all
connected because of how the winding number jumps as one insertion point
is permuted through its images, recall tables ( 2.64 ) and ( 2.65 ). The
indicated half of the vertical strip was obtained by taking @xmath for
the @xmath block and acting with @xmath generators. By starting with
@xmath for the @xmath block and following the same construction with
@xmath in the place of @xmath , one fills out the remaining regions of
kinematic space. This is made more clear with a view of the bulk picture
in Figure 2.6 where interchanging the roles of @xmath and @xmath
reverses the orientation of the connecting geodesics.

The base OPE in eq. ( 2.63 ) receives contributions from each @xmath
with both @xmath and @xmath . Taking the union of the regions identified
from each @xmath shows that the kinematic space for the excited states
dual to a timeslice of AdS @xmath can be identified as de Sitter with an
identified angular coordinate @xmath . In other words, the kinematic
space of a static conical defect is a quotient of the kinematic space
for pure AdS @xmath , as anticipated in [ 131 , 132 , 145 ] . This is
the same kinematic space geometry, up to the choice of fundamental
region, that was determined from the differential entropy prescription
of eq. ( 2.23 ), and the analysis of boundary anchored geodesics under
the @xmath quotient in section 2.2.3 .

Just as kinematic space from the bulk point of view can be divided into
regions by the winding number of geodesics as in Figure 2.3 , from the
CFT perspective kinematic space is built up from the contributions to
the OPE by images of fixed separation @xmath . This suggests that there
should be a connection between the partial @xmath OPE blocks and
geodesics of a fixed winding number associated to @xmath . In the
following section and chapter we will further explore the properties of
the new observables, partial OPE blocks, and will clarify the connection
to bulk geodesics and their images under quotients.

### 2.4 Discussion

In this chapter we have shown that the kinematic space for a constant
time slice of a static conical defect spacetime is a quotient of the
kinematic space for time slices of pure AdS @xmath . This fact was
anticipated in [ 156 , 132 , 145 ] since all locally AdS @xmath
spacetimes can be obtained as a quotient of AdS @xmath itself, with
geodesics of AdS @xmath descending to geodesics of the quotient space.
From the bulk our results were derived from the original differential
entropy prescription, and by studying how the quotient acts on
geodesics. The two approaches led to different subregions of the full dS
@xmath kinematic space for pure AdS @xmath , but it was argued that the
subregions were equivalent fundamental domains under the
identifications.

From the CFT point of view kinematic space had previously been defined
as the space of ordered pairs of points. For a CFT dual to pure AdS
@xmath there is a one-to-one correspondence between ordered pairs of
points and bulk geodesics, making it consistent with the bulk
definition. Then, conformal symmetry can be used to derive a unique
metric on the space of pairs of points, matching the bulk results.
However, the one-to-one correspondence is not a typical feature of
locally AdS @xmath spacetimes. While the possibility of including
non-minimal geodesics in the description of kinematic space has been
considered previously from the bulk [ 156 , 145 , 140 ] , there has been
no clear generalization of the boundary point of view. In this chapter
we showed that the metric of the kinematic space for conical defects can
be inferred from the Casimir equation of partial OPE blocks. Excited
states in a discretely gauged CFT dual to conical defects can be related
to the ground state of a covering CFT, and gauge invariant operators in
the base descend from symmetrized operators in the cover. This allows
the base OPE blocks to be broken up into distinct contributions from
pairs of image operators on the cover at each possible angular
separation. These contributions are encapsulated in partial OPE blocks
which were shown to satisfy a wave equation. The Laplacian appearing in
the wave equation is that of a subregion of dS @xmath , which allows us
to infer the metric of patches of kinematic space. The base OPE is a sum
of partial OPE blocks, while the union of patches matches the kinematic
space identified by bulk arguments.

The method of images provides the solution to the lack of a one-to-one
correspondence between pairs of points and geodesics in this case. When
both the bulk and boundary are lifted to their covering spaces,
non-minimal geodesics become minimal geodesics connecting distinct image
points. The fact that each partial OPE block corresponds to a specific
range of @xmath on the CFT covering space is very similar to how the
@xmath coordinate on kinematic space arranges geodesics by their winding
number. This suggests a holographic interpretation for the partial OPE
blocks: the block @xmath represents the contribution to the base OPE
from a single class of bulk geodesics with fixed winding number @xmath
related to @xmath by tables ( 2.64 ) or ( 2.65 ). Thus the partial OPE
blocks allow for a more fine-grained understanding of the holographic
contributions to the OPE. To confirm this suspicion we now consider the
holographic dictionary entry relating OPE blocks and bulk fields
integrated over geodesics that was established in [ 132 ] , and find
that partial OPE blocks are dual to bulk fields integrated over
individual minimal or non-minimal geodesics.

#### 2.4.1 Duality between OPE blocks and geodesic integrals of bulk
fields

In [ 132 ] it was noted that a bulk scalar field integrated over a
geodesic of AdS @xmath satisfies the same differential equation on
kinematic space as a scalar OPE block. ⁹ ⁹ 9 See also [ 157 , 158 ] for
an independent development of the connection between geodesic operators
and OPE blocks. By verifying that the two quantities also obeyed the
same initial conditions a holographic dictionary entry was established
for pure AdS @xmath : OPE blocks are dual to integrals of bulk local
fields along geodesics . The derivation of this dictionary entry relies
heavily on the fact that both pure AdS @xmath and its kinematic space dS
@xmath dS @xmath are homogeneous spaces with the same isometry group.
This allowed the authors to derive a kinematic space equation of motion
for the integrated field by relating the action of the isometries on the
field and on the geodesics. In contrast, the conical defect spacetimes
are not homogeneous spaces. The defect traces out a worldline that is
not invariant under boosts. Nevertheless, progress can be made on
extending the dictionary entry to the conical defect case by working on
the covering space. For continuity, we will review the essential points
of the derivation of the dictionary entry in pure AdS @xmath . Full
details can be found in [ 132 ] .

Consider a massive scalar field @xmath on AdS @xmath integrated over a
boundary anchored geodesic @xmath in a constant time slice of the
geometry,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

This “X-ray” transform of @xmath is naturally viewed as a field on
kinematic space because it is a function of geodesics, i.e. points in
kinematic space. ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 When the integration is performed over an
extremal surface in a higher dimensional theory this is known as a Radon
transform, used first in a holographic context in [ 159 ] .

Let @xmath be an isometry of AdS @xmath . The scalar field is invariant
under the isometry but its argument is shifted, @xmath . Integrating the
shifted field over a geodesic @xmath is equivalent to integrating the
original field over a shifted geodesic @xmath , noting that all
isometries of AdS @xmath map geodesics into geodesics. In terms of the
X-ray transform this is expressed as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

A shift in the argument of @xmath can be compensated by a shift in the
argument of @xmath .

When @xmath is an element of the isometry group near the identity, the
action of @xmath on the field is described by the group generators

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is an isometry generator of AdS written with embedding
space indices, and @xmath is the antisymmetric matrix parameterizing the
isometry. In a similar way, the action of @xmath on the X-ray transform
is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is an isometry generator on the kinematic space of
geodesics. Applying eqs. ( 2.71 ) and ( 2.72 ) to eq. ( 2.70 ) produces
the remarkable intertwining relation of isometry generators

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

Applying the same relation twice produces quadratic Casimirs ( 2.32 ),
in their respective representations of the isometry group;

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

The subsequent step of the derivation relies crucially on the properties
of homogeneous spaces, as noted in [ 132 ] . For homogeneous spaces the
Casimir operator of the isometry group is identified with the scalar
Laplacian. ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 A homogeneous space can be written as the coset
space of its isometry group quotiented by the stabilizer subgroup of a
point. The Casimir of the isometry group is the scalar Laplacian for the
group’s Cartan-Killing metric. The same Laplacian is inherited by the
coset space when the Casimir acts on functions that are constant on
orbits of the stabilizer group. Note that a point in kinematic space is
an AdS geodesic, so the stabiliser subgroup of a geodesic in AdS should
be used in the quotient. This was demonstrated for AdS @xmath in eq. (
2.38 ) and for dS @xmath dS @xmath in eq. ( 2.51 ). On the right side of
eq. ( 2.74 ) the Casimir acts on a scalar AdS field so the Casimir is in
the bulk scalar representation @xmath . On the left side the Casimir
acts on a function of geodesics so it is in the kinematic space
representation @xmath . Using the equation of motion for the bulk field
and the definition ( 2.69 ) leads to an equation of motion for the X-ray
transform as a scalar field on kinematic space

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

This shows that free bulk scalars integrated over boundary anchored
geodesics are free scalar fields propagating on kinematic space. This is
the same equation satisfied by the OPE block ( 2.52 ) of a spin zero
quasi-primary of dimension given by @xmath . The X-ray transform and OPE
block also satisfy the same initial conditions on a Cauchy slice which
establishes that they are dual quantities [ 132 ] .

###### Conical defect case.

Now let us analyze the conical defect case, again restricting to the
quotients AdS @xmath . The fact that conical defects are not homogeneous
spaces precludes the possibility of running through the previous
argument directly. However, it is possible to use the intertwining
relations obtained in the pure case and only then perform the @xmath
quotient with an appropriate prescription for the X-ray transform over
conical defect fields.

Consider a massive bulk scalar field @xmath on AdS @xmath , and
similarly @xmath on pure AdS @xmath , each described by the action

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Klein-Gordon equation in global coordinates, eq. ( 2.7 ) for pure
AdS, and eq. ( 2.13 ) for the defect, is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

For @xmath the angular coordinate is @xmath , while for @xmath , @xmath
should be replaced by @xmath .

In either case the solutions are obtained through separation of
variables [ 153 ] . For example, in the AdS case solutions are @xmath ,
with the circular harmonics

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

Similarly, @xmath . The circular harmonic here is @xmath periodic,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore the @xmath modes are a subset of the @xmath modes with @xmath
. They are @xmath symmetric @xmath modes that are solutions of the
conical defect Klein-Gordon equation in each @xmath wedge of the
covering space, reflecting the quotient structure of the defect.
Appropriately symmetrized modes of AdS will be denoted @xmath ; any
@xmath can be obtained by restricting some @xmath to a single @xmath
wedge.

The X-ray transform for the conical defect can then be defined as usual

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

However, this transform acts in a non-homogeneous space and may not
share the same invertibility properties as its counterpart eq. ( 2.69 ).
It is preferable to lift @xmath and @xmath to the covering space where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

Instead of integrating @xmath over a geodesic @xmath in the conical
defect spacetime, the corresponding symmetrized AdS field @xmath can be
integrated over one of the preimages @xmath of @xmath under the @xmath
quotient, see Figure 2.8 . This prescription works for all boundary
anchored @xmath , minimal or non-minimal, since all conical defect
geodesics descend from geodesics @xmath on AdS.

Note that in going from @xmath to @xmath , and @xmath to @xmath in eq. (
2.81 ) there is the freedom to choose one of several identical wedges.
The choice of wedge will lead to different coordinate values for @xmath
and @xmath . This is analogous to the ambiguities encountered throughout
this chapter in choosing a fundamental region. For consistency with the
previous choice of a vertical strip of kinematic space, see Figure 2.3 ,
let @xmath be the preimage of @xmath with the smallest centre angle
which will always be in the range @xmath .

By working with the right side of eq. ( 2.81 ), the properties of
homogeneous spaces can be used to find an intertwining relation for the
equations of motion. Once again, let @xmath be an infinitesimal isometry
of AdS @xmath . The intertwining relation eq. ( 2.73 ) for homogeneous
spaces applies as before,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

and leads to the intertwined Casimirs

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.83)
  -- -------- -- --------

On the right side the Casimir of AdS isometries becomes the AdS
Laplacian which produces the mass eigenvalue. On the left side the
Casimir is in the kinematic space representation @xmath so that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

On both sides eq. ( 2.81 ) can be used to find the equation of motion
for geodesic integrated fields on the conical defect

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

The notation @xmath is to remind that this operator now acts on the
subspace of dS @xmath obtained by restricting to @xmath with periodic
boundary conditions. This is the same behaviour that the symmetrized
field exhibits under the quotient, namely @xmath within any single
wedge.

One might worry that the above argument leading to eq. ( 2.82 ) could
break down when @xmath is a boost isometry of AdS under which the
conical defect is not invariant. Under the action of a boost, the field
@xmath may no longer be symmetrized around the origin, but the conical
defect no longer sits statically at the origin (see [ 154 ] for a
relevant discussion). The moving defect is still locally AdS, and can be
obtained directly from the covering AdS @xmath spacetime through an
identification along an AdS Killing vector. The identification is no
longer a simple angular identification, but shifts time as well as
angle. These identifications are given explicitly in [ 160 , 142 , 161 ]
for example. The moving conical defect solutions can be viewed as global
coordinate transformations of the static case, and do not exhibit any
different physics compared to stationary ones. On an appropriately
boosted timeslice through the moving conical defect spacetime, the
transformed field @xmath can be obtained from @xmath using the
identification that produces the spacetime itself.

The equation of motion for geodesic integrated fields on the conical
defect, eq. ( 2.85 ), after taking the equal time limit is the same as
the Casimir equation for the base OPE block @xmath . The OPE block
@xmath represents the contribution to the @xmath OPE from the conformal
family of the quasi-primary @xmath . From the bulk this contribution is
obtained by integrating @xmath , the dual of @xmath , over all geodesics
connecting the boundary insertion points of @xmath and @xmath . This is
the well known geodesic approximation which has been used to compute
correlation functions [ 142 , 154 , 162 ] , and geodesic Witten diagrams
[ 126 ] . Non-minimal geodesics provide a finite number of sub-leading
corrections to the minimal geodesic contribution, but can become
significant in some regimes.

The connection between bulk and boundary can be made more detailed
through the use of kinematic space. Consider the case where @xmath is a
minimal geodesic. The X-ray transform @xmath over a minimal @xmath , is
restricted to @xmath , @xmath with periodicity in the @xmath coordinate.
The appropriate wave equation ( 2.85 ) on the @xmath timeslice is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

Comparing with eq. ( 2.67 ) suggests that the @xmath block with @xmath
is dual to @xmath and represents the contribution to the base OPE from a
single class of geodesics, the minimal ones. The duality between @xmath
and @xmath is established by showing that these quantities satisfy the
same initial conditions. The @xmath Cauchy slice of kinematic space is
obtained by taking the coincidence limit of the OPE block, and in the
bulk by integrating over a small geodesic that stays near the boundary.
These limits are unchanged from the pure AdS case and have been
discussed previously [ 126 , 132 , 146 ] . In the coincidence limit only
the quasi-primary @xmath on the cover, and not its descendants,
contributes to the partial OPE block

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

while in the conical defect spacetime the behaviour of the dual scalar
field near the AdS boundary is given by the extrapolate dictionary

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.88)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that integrating over a small geodesic localized at @xmath gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.89)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence, the initial conditions on kinematic space provide the relative
normalization between the dual quantities,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.90)
  -- -------- -- --------

In general, the @xmath block represents the contribution to the base OPE
from the dual field @xmath integrated over geodesics with winding number
@xmath , where @xmath and @xmath are related by table ( 2.64 ) or ( 2.65
). For the non-minimal cases with @xmath , the geodesics do not stay
near the boundary, preventing the use of eq. ( 2.88 ). However, the
transition between winding numbers is smooth. Away from the defect it is
clear that there is no discontinuity in the length or shape of oriented
geodesics as @xmath is increased, even as the winding number jumps, see
Figure 2.9 . This means the X-ray transform @xmath is a continuous and
smooth function of the bulk geodesics on the @xmath region of kinematic
space. Similarly, the partial OPE blocks @xmath blocks defined in eq. (
2.62 ) are continuous in @xmath across transitions in the winding
number. This is simply because the OPE behaves smoothly as the operator
insertions are moved, and it remains convergent for all separations [ 9
] .

There is a potential obstacle to the continuity of @xmath at @xmath
where geodesics touch the defect. Geodesics in AdS @xmath with @xmath
pass through the origin and behave smoothly as @xmath is varied, but the
corresponding geodesics on the defect spacetime must jump as they pinch
in on the defect. As depicted in Figure 2.10 , geodesics with constant
center angle @xmath jump as @xmath is increased past @xmath and are not
homologous across the jump. Despite this, the length and shape of such
geodesics varies smoothly which suggests the X-ray transform of @xmath
will be smooth as well. That this must be the case is easiest to see by
using the lifted X-ray transform ( 2.81 ). There is no discontinuity
whatsoever in the transform of lifted geodesics as @xmath is increased
past @xmath .

One can avoid this obstacle entirely by considering an alternative
Cauchy slice on the upper half of kinematic space, namely @xmath , which
also corresponds to near-boundary geodesics and the coincidence limit
for the OPE. By the same argument made for @xmath , the X-ray transform
@xmath over a minimal geodesic with @xmath obeys the same initial
conditions as the corresponding partial OPE block, and both are
continuous functions on the @xmath half of kinematic space.

Since the initial conditions in the @xmath limits match between @xmath
and @xmath , the equations of motion ( 2.67 ) and ( 2.85 ) along with
continuity in @xmath establish the duality between OPE blocks and
geodesic operators for static conical defects. The base OPE receives
contributions from each bulk geodesic, minimal and non-minimal,
connecting the boundary insertion points. Each partial OPE block
encapsulates the contribution to the base OPE from the dual bulk field
integrated over a single geodesic of fixed winding number.

#### 2.4.2 Future directions

The various approaches to kinematic space used in this chapter were
adapted to constant time slices of the bulk geometry, equivalently the
equal-time limit of the OPE. In each case it was seen that the kinematic
space for a quotient spacetime was a quotient of the pure AdS @xmath
kinematic space. The full four dimensional geometry of kinematic space
describing the time dependent bulk [ 132 ] should also be obtainable
using this quotient. There will be a new ambiguity, in addition to the
choice of fundamental regions discussed in this chapter, from the
possibility of rotating in time the faces of AdS @xmath which are
identified, see for example Figure 1 from [ 161 ] . On neighbouring
constant time slices of the AdS @xmath geometry the wedge representing
the conical defect spacetime can have a relative shift in its angular
coordinate. The kinematic spaces for subsequent time slices would be
vertical strips of dS @xmath with different ranges of centre angle
@xmath . Since the twisted and untwisted identifications of AdS @xmath
produce physically identical conical defect spacetimes, this extra
ambiguity can be resolved by making a canonical prescription for an
appropriate fundamental region of kinematic space. A complete
description of this ambiguity is left for future work.

The conical defect CFT results in this chapter were derived in the
special case dual to AdS @xmath , since there is a particularly simple
description of this system in terms of a covering CFT in its vacuum
state. It is not surprising that the CFT descriptions of the integer and
non-integer cases are significantly different when the holographic
consequences are kept in mind. The integer defect spacetimes in the bulk
have a mild orbifold singularity that does not obstruct the construction
of a consistent string theory on this background [ 163 , 152 , 164 ] .
¹² ¹² 12 We thank Oleg Lunin for comments on this point.

Furthermore, this chapter was mainly concerned with static conical
defects. These are part of a more general class of moving defects which
are produced either by boosting the static solution, or by taking a
quotient of AdS @xmath along a Killing vector with a timelike component
[ 160 , 142 , 161 , 154 ] . It would be interesting to perform this
quotient on the AdS @xmath kinematic space to obtain the kinematic space
of a moving defect. Then, using the relation between OPE blocks and
geodesic bulk fields it may be possible to use the method of images to
relate back to results on the geodesic approximation for correlation
functions in those spacetimes.

The partial OPE blocks discussed in this chapter reorganize the operator
contributions to the base OPE as compared to the traditional OPE blocks.
While a clean CFT interpretation of the operator grouping in terms of
conformal families is not obvious from this perspective, we gain a bulk
interpretation in terms of the contributions of geodesics with different
winding numbers. It would be enlightening to understand better the CFT
operator contributions that are represented by partial OPE blocks, and
we return to this question in the following chapter. One potential
avenue to explore is the superficially similar construction used in [
165 ] . Our partial OPE blocks were constructed by first un-gauging a
discrete symmetry in going to the covering space description. Gauge
invariance is restored by considering symmetrized sums of cover
operators under the action of the @xmath symmetry. The authors of [ 165
] studied conformal blocks which give the contribution of a conformal
family to a four-point function. The blocks were approximated by
considering only the contribution from light descendants at the cost of
modular invariance for the four-point function. Modular invariance was
restored by summing over images of the approximate block under the
action of modular generators. It may be that these two constructions are
related on a deeper level. The sum over descendants composing an OPE
block evinces that they are non-local operators in the CFT. As such, OPE
blocks @xmath have a smeared representation where the quasi-primary
@xmath they are built from is integrated over a causal diamond defined
by the insertion points @xmath [ 132 , 146 ] . It was suggested in [ 132
] that for conical defects the OPE blocks corresponding to winding
geodesics should have a smeared representation over diamonds which wrap
all the way around the CFT cylinder (See Figure 20 of [ 132 ] ). Indeed,
our cover OPE blocks have a smeared representation over causal diamonds
on the covering CFT cylinder, and so partial OPE blocks can be viewed as
symmetrized sums over smeared operators on the cover ( 2.62 ). For the
block @xmath representing minimal geodesics, the causal diamonds on the
cover are each contained within one @xmath portion of the cylinder and
do not overlap. For blocks representing winding geodesics, the causal
diamonds extend over multiple @xmath portions and can overlap with each
other (cf. Figure 2.5(b) ). Imposing the @xmath angular identification
on any one of these large causal diamonds produces a diamond which wraps
around the cylinder of the base CFT and can overlap on itself. It would
be interesting to know if the CFT avatar of entwinement [ 102 , 103 ]
can be cast in terms of partial OPE blocks and wrapping diamonds, and
how the bulk can be probed in a more fine-grained fashion using these
objects.

Other locally AdS @xmath geometries and their kinematic spaces have been
studied from the bulk and using the differential entropy definition [
166 , 156 , 145 , 140 ] , but differences in definitions for kinematic
space have led to inconsistent results. For instance, the geometries for
the kinematic space of the BTZ black holes described in [ 140 ] include
geodesics of both orientations, while [ 145 ] and [ 166 ] do not.
Furthermore, the authors of [ 145 ] chose to include only minimal
geodesics in their definition of kinematic space, in contrast to the
choice we have made here. In this chapter we have advocated for defining
kinematic space from the CFT in terms of OPE blocks, rather than from
pairs of points, and have isolated the important contributions of
non-minimal geodesics. In the next chapter we will study the newly
defined partial OPE blocks in several of the geometries mentioned here.

## Chapter 3 Holographic relations for OPE blocks in excited states

This chapter is based on the paper [ 120 ] published in JHEP.

### 3.1 Introduction

Since its initial formulation, the AdS/CFT correspondence has opened up
many new avenues for studying gravity [ 1 ] . It provides a dictionary
that can translate unfamiliar gravitational physics into familiar field
theory, and vice versa. One of its most powerful aspects is the ability
to encode the spatial organization of the bulk as a relationship between
the degrees of freedom in the CFT. A particularly useful way of
analyzing the geometry of spacetime is through examining the structure
of geodesics and extremal surfaces. This has a long history in the
AdS/CFT context, and an important new theme was begun with the work of [
45 ] . Their results in AdS @xmath showed that the entanglement entropy
of a CFT @xmath interval is dual to the length of a bulk geodesic
anchored at the interval’s endpoints.

The connection between entanglement and geometry [ 11 ] has become of
fundamental interest, and has been expanded to many other aspects of
quantum information. These include the emergence of gravitational
equations of motion from CFT entanglement entropies [ 111 ] , bulk gauge
freedom interpreted as boundary quantum error correcting codes [ 63 , 65
, 64 ] , the volume of Einstein-Rosen bridges as complexity [ 84 ] , and
the entanglement wedge cross section as CFT entanglement of purification
[ 71 ] .

A useful auxiliary space termed kinematic space has been introduced
describing the structure of geodesics while also geometrizing
entanglement entropy [ 131 , 132 , 146 ] . Each boundary anchored
geodesic, or equivalently each pair of boundary points, is viewed as a
single point in kinematic space. One of the major developments
discovered through this construction was the holographic dual of a bulk
field integrated over a boundary anchored geodesic, namely the OPE block
of the corresponding dual operator in the CFT. This is closely related
to the duality between conformal blocks in the CFT and geodesic Witten
diagrams in the bulk [ 126 , 125 ] . The properties of OPE blocks
themselves have been studied further for defect CFTs [ 127 , 128 ] and
using modular flow [ 167 ] .

While these works on kinematic space were thorough, they mainly focused
on pure AdS. Followup papers [ 168 , 145 , 140 , 147 , 119 , 169 , 170 ]
have worked towards extending kinematic space and the OPE block duality
to more general AdS spacetimes. We will continue this line of inquiry
for AdS @xmath , where all vacuum solutions to the Einstein equation
with negative cosmological constant are locally AdS @xmath and can be
obtained as quotients. The immediate challenge is that there is no
longer a unique geodesic through the bulk between any pair of boundary
endpoints. A natural question is to ask how the CFT dual of a geodesic
integrated bulk field changes. We will argue that in states dual to
quotient geometries, OPE blocks decompose into contributions which are
invariant under the quotient action. Each contribution is dual to a bulk
field integrated over a single geodesic which may wind around the
quotient’s fixed points.

Our arguments are based on the monodromy of maps between pure AdS @xmath
and the quotient geometries. In the bulk the monodromy is responsible
for the appearance of non-minimal geodesics, and on the boundary it
induces non-analyticities in the OPE blocks. We resolve the latter issue
by constructing quotient invariant OPE blocks, and interpret them in
terms of winding geodesics. We often utilize the group manifold
description of AdS @xmath and its quotients, in which the structure of
geodesics is made clear, and their lengths are easily computable.
Throughout, we work with the Euclidean and Lorentzian versions of the
construction in parallel to emphasize their differences.

In Section 3.2 we review the duality between OPE blocks and geodesic
integrated bulk fields. Then we introduce the quotient spacetimes of
interest and find explicit maps between them and pure AdS @xmath . In
Section 3.3 we use these maps to study the structure of geodesics in the
quotient geometries and determine their lengths. In Section 3.4 we
construct quotient invariant OPE blocks, highlighting their relationship
to winding geodesics. In Section 3.5 we conclude with a summary and
discussion of remaining open questions.

### 3.2 Preliminaries

#### 3.2.1 OPE blocks and kinematic space

In a 2d CFT, the OPE allows us to expand the product of two quasiprimary
operators in terms of a basis of local operators at a single location.
The OPE can be organized by the contributions from conformal families in
the theory, each consisting of a quasiprimary @xmath and its
descendants. Considering two scalar operators with the same conformal
weight @xmath , conformal symmetry dictates that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

with some theory dependent constants @xmath , and theory independent
constants @xmath . Since much of this structure is fixed by symmetry, it
is convenient to define an OPE block @xmath associated to each
quasiprimary @xmath that repackages the contribution of a conformal
family,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Kinematic space has been defined as the space of pairs of CFT points, or
equivalently as the space of boundary anchored geodesics in pure AdS [
132 , 146 ] . Since OPE blocks are functions of two boundary points they
are fields on kinematic space, and this suggests that they are related
to the geodesics of the bulk dual. Indeed, it was shown that for pure
AdS the dual of a scalar OPE block is a bulk field integrated over a
boundary anchored geodesic,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the geodesic with endpoints @xmath and @xmath is the
scalar field dual to @xmath .

The duality between the OPE blocks and geodesic integrated fields was
established by showing that both objects behave as fields on kinematic
space with the same equation of motion, and the same boundary
conditions. Each OPE block built from a scalar quasiprimary @xmath is in
an irreducible representation of the conformal group and satisfies an
eigenvalue equation under the action of a quadratic conformal Casimir
@xmath , with the eigenvalue induced from @xmath ,

  -- -- -- -------
           (3.4)
  -- -- -- -------

By expressing the Casimir operator in the differential representation
appropriate for @xmath , this becomes a Laplacian on the dS @xmath dS
@xmath kinematic space,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

On the other hand, the bulk scalar field @xmath dual to @xmath satisfies
a wave equation on AdS @xmath , with its mass related to @xmath by the
holographic dictionary,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then, the remarkable intertwining property of isometry generators
determines the equation of motion for the geodesic integrated field [
132 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

The conclusion is that the geodesic integrated field obeys the same
kinematic space wave equation ( 3.5 ) as the OPE block,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Rounding out the proof requires showing both quantities satisfy the same
constraints and the same boundary conditions, which determine the
relative normalization omitted in ( 3.3 ).

For pure AdS there is a one-to-one correspondence between pairs of
spacelike separated boundary points and geodesics in the bulk. This
makes it simple to identify both the space of pairs of boundary points,
and the space of bulk geodesics as the same kinematic space. But for
spacetimes that are locally AdS @xmath , the existence of non-minimal
geodesics in the bulk obfuscates this prescription. In such cases it is
not a priori clear in what sense the duality ( 3.3 ) holds.

This question was addressed for the case of conical defect spacetimes in
Chapter 2 (see [ 119 ] ). Static conical defects are locally AdS @xmath
geometries obtained from AdS @xmath by a @xmath quotient in the angular
direction, leaving a @xmath periodic @xmath coordinate. This coordinate
parametrizes the one dimensional boundary of a timeslice on which the
OPE can be studied. The exact CFT states dual to the conical defect
geometries will depend on the system under scrutiny, but in general they
can be viewed as the CFT vacuum excited by a heavy operator that sources
the defect in the bulk [ 142 , 171 , 172 ] . In the presence of other
operators the OPE does not have an infinite radius of convergence, and
it becomes more difficult to study the properties of the OPE blocks
directly. Instead, in Chapter 2 the excited CFT states were lifted to
vacuum states of a covering space CFT on an @xmath -times longer circle
parametrized by @xmath [ 102 ] . This process can be seen as removing
the discrete @xmath symmetry of the base CFT states; only appropriately
symmetrized quantities on the cover descend to observables on the base [
103 ] .

With this construction, the OPE blocks in the base and cover CFTs can be
related. Individual OPE blocks on the cover @xmath are not @xmath
symmetric, but can be combined into gauge invariant observables dubbed
partial OPE blocks,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here, the cover OPE blocks are written in terms of the half opening
angle @xmath and centre angle @xmath . The angular distance @xmath
between operators is taken to be fixed at @xmath while the rotations
generated by @xmath implement the symmetrization. The full OPE blocks in
the base theory @xmath receive contributions from partial OPE blocks at
all allowed angular separations @xmath on the cover

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath generates changes in separation.

Finally, it was shown that the partial OPE blocks individually satisfy
duality relations like ( 3.3 ) as fields integrated over minimal or
non-minimal geodesics in the conical defect spacetime. The angular
separation @xmath of the block @xmath is related to the winding number
of the geodesic in @xmath . Hence, the new observables @xmath allow us
to obtain more fine-grained information about the bulk spacetime that
reaches beyond the entanglement shadow limiting minimal geodesics and
Ryu-Takayanagi entanglement entropy.

Our approach in this chapter will be similar, but can more readily be
applied to the broad class of AdS @xmath quotient geometries. We will
argue that the base OPE blocks for states dual to these geometries can
be obtained through the coordinate maps we develop as a sum over partial
OPE blocks. The partial blocks are constructed to be invariant under the
quotient action. We propose that a partial block is dual to a bulk field
integrated over an individual geodesic, which can be minimal or not, as
specified by the monodromy under the map. To avoid branch cuts in the
full OPE blocks, we identify them as a sum over partial OPE blocks.

While the bulk interpretation of the partial blocks is clear, they give
the contribution to the OPE from individual geodesics or saddlepoints of
the path length action [ 142 ] , our new method also affords a better
understanding of the CFT interpretation. Each partial block gives a
contribution to the OPE as distinguished by the monodromy around the
excited state’s heavy operator insertion. To reach these results, we
must first develop exact mappings between AdS @xmath and the quotient
geometries that can be used to transform the OPE blocks. We proceed with
the Euclidean and Lorentzian cases in turn.

#### 3.2.2 AdS@xmath quotients

##### Euclidean AdS

One construction of AdS @xmath is through the @xmath embedding space. We
start with the metric @xmath , with AdS @xmath defined as the surface
@xmath . There are a number of different parametrizations of this
hyperboloid which give different patches of AdS. We focus on the
Poincaré patch, which only covers part of the hyperboloid. To get the
Poincaré metric, we implement the coordinates

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

which leads to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath is the AdS radius. We can do a further coordinate
transformation by setting @xmath , @xmath , which gives us the metric

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Boundary anchored geodesics, and especially their lengths, will be very
important for understanding the OPE block duality. In Poincaré
coordinates, the geodesic distance @xmath along the embedding surface
between two points @xmath and @xmath obeys

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the limit where both points approach the boundary, such that @xmath
with their ratio held fixed, @xmath , this becomes

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The length of a boundary anchored geodesic can then be approximated by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can also construct Poincaré AdS @xmath as a group manifold [ 138 ] .
This is done by considering each point @xmath in Euclidean AdS @xmath as
an element of @xmath where, in the embedding coordinates,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

For the Euclidean Poincaré embedding we have,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

The metric on AdS @xmath ( 3.13 ) is then given by the Cartan-Killing
metric @xmath which has the correct isometry group for Poincaré AdS
@xmath , @xmath [ 173 ] . Other locally AdS @xmath solutions are
constructed as quotients by a subgroup of the isometry group. The
subgroups we study in this chapter are conjugacy classes generated by
the elliptic, parabolic, and hyperbolic elements of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . In each case, elements related by
conjugation, @xmath , are identified to obtain the quotient manifold.

Each type of element produces a different locally AdS @xmath solution.
Identification using the elliptic element will give the conical defect,
abbreviated ‘CD’, with deficit angle @xmath . Accounting for the @xmath
quotient of the isometry group, the subgroup generated by an elliptic
element is the cyclic group @xmath , where we take @xmath . The other
two elements lead to infinite discrete groups. A quotient using the
parabolic element with @xmath yields the massless BTZ black hole, which
we abbreviate as ‘0M’. The hyperbolic element with @xmath gives the
static BTZ black hole with mass @xmath , which we abbreviate as ‘BTZ’.
In summary, the three types of quotient lead to identifications on the
Poincaré patch as follows,

  -- -- -------- -- --------
        @xmath      (3.20)
        @xmath      (3.21)
        @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -- -------- -- --------

The @xmath limit of the CD metric and the @xmath limit of the BTZ metric
both produce the 0M metric, but the respective conjugacy classes ( 3.19
) by which elements are identified are not related in this way. Some
differences between these limits have been noted in [ 174 ] . For these
reasons we treat the 0M solution as a distinct case throughout.

Other locally AdS @xmath solutions can be obtained using quotients by
more complicated subgroups, such as a rotating BTZ black hole using a
combination of elliptic and hyperbolic identifications, but we focus on
the three archetypal examples above.

Finally, one may wonder if we can consider conical defects where @xmath
but not an integer. Considering the rational case of @xmath , we find
that the subgroup generated by this is @xmath , which is not
distinguishable from the integer case. For non-rational @xmath things
are worse, as the subgroup generated is no longer finite and the
identification one gets is ambiguous. In addition, the validity of
non-integer conical defects is suspect in string theory [ 172 , 175 ] ,
so we will not consider them further.

##### Lorentzian AdS

The Lorentzian case presents a challenge in our approach because the
boundary cannot be described by a single complex coordinate. Still, one
direct way of approaching Lorentzian AdS using our knowledge of the
Euclidean case is to compare them on a timeslice. The @xmath slice in
embedding coordinates is

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.23)
  -- -- -- --------

This now satisfies the Lorentzian constraint equation @xmath as well as
the Euclidean one, allowing for direct comparison between signatures. On
the timeslice the metric is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

which transforms to the upper half plane (UHP) using @xmath , @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

The upper half plane inherits a @xmath isometry group from the full
@xmath of Lorentzian AdS @xmath when restricted to the timeslice. Again,
we can describe a point @xmath in the timeslice using

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then in the group manifold description a point on the UHP is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

The action of a @xmath isometry group element

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

will transform the UHP coordinate as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

The @xmath isometry group also has three different types of elements
that define conjugacy classes. The elliptic, parabolic, and hyperbolic
elements are now given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . Note that there are differences
from the @xmath cases we had previously. In particular, the parabolic
element involves a real value and the structure of the elliptic element
is different. Once again, locally AdS @xmath spacetimes are obtained as
a quotient of @xmath by subgroups. For the two BTZ cases, the
identifications are exactly the same as before with @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.31)
     @xmath      (3.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

However, the identification in the elliptic case is significantly more
complicated. We take @xmath with @xmath to reproduce the conical defect
geometry, and find the identifications

  -- -- -------- -- --------
        @xmath      (3.33)
        @xmath      (3.34)
  -- -- -------- -- --------

It is simpler in this case to use the complex @xmath coordinate, @xmath
, which is identified as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 3.2.3 AdS@xmath maps and metrics

##### Euclidean AdS

We will be making use of powerful maps that relate pure AdS @xmath to
other locally AdS @xmath geometries [ 176 , 177 ] . We begin by
considering a general AdS @xmath solution, written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can see that for @xmath this is the usual Poincaré metric of pure AdS
@xmath . More generally, we have the relationship

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the holomorphic stress tensor and @xmath is the usual
central charge given by the Brown-Henneaux formula [ 49 ] . The
analogous relation holds for the anti-holomorphic stress tensor. For
what follows, we will set @xmath .

The transformation of the stress tensor can be exploited to find maps
between AdS @xmath and the quotients. We consider starting with the
usual Poincaré metric ( 3.13 ) and implementing the asymptotic
relationship @xmath . The stress tensor transforms as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Schwarzian derivative. Since @xmath for pure AdS, in
the general spacetime ( 3.36 ) we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

From the CFT point of view, this allows us to get to any background we
wish by identifying @xmath . Suppose we have the state @xmath which is
excited by an operator with weight @xmath . Since

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

we can find the asymptotic map @xmath relating this background to the
flat background by solving the differential equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

In turn, the asymptotic map @xmath can be extended into the bulk using [
177 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

which gives the full map between ( 3.13 ) and ( 3.36 ). In addition, if
there is a map @xmath that asymptotically implements the transformation,
then for any constants @xmath , a more general solution to @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

which comes from @xmath invariance. These maps will give the same metric
regardless of the @xmath parameters but the corresponding coordinate
transformations will differ. For simplicity we take @xmath , @xmath .

With this in place, we would like to work out the maps ( 3.42 ) for our
AdS @xmath quotients. The three cases we study correspond in the CFT to
states excited by operators with weights

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the case of the conical defect, we can see the weight is that of the
twist operator and these maps have been looked at before in other
contexts [ 178 , 179 ] . The 0M case is the @xmath or @xmath limit of
the other two. Furthermore, these weights are all non-negative for
@xmath and @xmath , as they should be in a unitary CFT.

These three cases lead to three differential equations ( 3.41 ). One can
try to solve them using normal methods, or alternatively, one can
surmise the form of @xmath from invariance under the identifications (
3.20 ), ( 3.21 ), ( 3.22 ) found from the group manifold approach. These
identifications suggest the asymptotic maps

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.45)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.46)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.47)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

which reproduce the expected weights. As can be seen from the form of
the conjugacy classes ( 3.19 ), the @xmath and @xmath limits produce the
identity map, rather than the appropriate 0M map, further emphasizing
its distinct character.

Each asymptotic map can be extended into the bulk using ( 3.42 ), which
for the conical defect yields the full coordinate transformations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

Similarly, for massless BTZ we have the full coordinate transformations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally, for massive BTZ the full coordinate transformations are

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.50)
  -- -- -- --------

Applying these transformations to pure AdS @xmath yields metrics of the
form ( 3.36 ), with @xmath and @xmath determined by ( 3.44 ) through (
3.39 ) and ( 3.41 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

which confirms that the asymptotic maps in ( 3.45 )-( 3.47 ) produce the
expected metrics when extended into the bulk. We finish by noting that
although the massless BTZ metric can be obtained as a simple limit
@xmath or @xmath of the conical defect or BTZ metrics respectively, the
coordinate transformations are not related in this way.

##### Lorentzian AdS

The above maps do not generalize straightforwardly to the timeslice.
However, we can again use the knowledge that the maps should respect the
identifications ( 3.31 ), ( 3.32 ), and ( 3.35 ) to determine

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.52)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.53)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.54)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

We note that these are full maps on the UHP, not asymptotic ones. The
latter two are similar to the asymptotic maps we had before, as the
identification on the timeslice is unaffected. The map for the conical
defect has a similar piece, but needs to be changed to reflect the
change in the elliptic element. In the following, it will be easiest to
write the single complex coordinate @xmath , which we will call the
quotient coordinate for all three cases, as @xmath .

In the original @xmath coordinates, the map for the conical defect looks
like

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

For massless BTZ it takes the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally for massive BTZ it looks like

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the first two cases the boundary @xmath is when @xmath in the new
coordinates, but for massive BTZ we have two boundaries, @xmath and
@xmath . The identification also produces a horizon at @xmath in the
Poincaré coordinates which interpolates between the boundaries [ 180 ] .
Furthermore, to have @xmath , we need @xmath for CD, @xmath for 0M, and
@xmath for BTZ. Transforming the metric with these maps produces

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.58)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.59)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.60)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

We see that the limits @xmath and @xmath reproduce the 0M metric, while
taking @xmath or inserting @xmath gives back pure AdS @xmath .

Finally, for the CFT analysis, we are interested in the asymptotic maps
which are now easily obtained from the full ones

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.61)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.62)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.63)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Note that the sign in the BTZ case will depend on which boundary one
considers. We can interpolate between the two boundaries by analytic
continuation, @xmath [ 162 ] . Further, if we interpret @xmath to be the
complex angle of @xmath , the monodromy @xmath will implement the
identifications ( 3.35 ), ( 3.31 ), and ( 3.32 ), similarly to the
Euclidean case.

### 3.3 Bulk analysis of geodesic structure

#### 3.3.1 Euclidean analysis

In this section we use the maps between Poincaré AdS @xmath and the
quotient geometries to study the resulting structure of geodesics via
the group manifold approach. The non-analyticities in the maps allow us
to distinguish geodesics with different winding numbers.

Since the geometries ( 3.51 ) are all locally AdS @xmath , the
properties of their geodesics are closely related to those of pure AdS
@xmath . More concretely, the lengths of quotient geodesics are given by
lengths of AdS @xmath geodesics whose endpoints are related by the
quotient action. We calculate them using the method outlined in [ 181 ]
. We consider points @xmath in the group manifold of AdS @xmath as in
equation ( 3.17 ). The length of the geodesic between these points found
in ( 3.14 ) is then rewritten as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

The boundary is represented by singular matrices @xmath , up to a
divergent factor, and the geodesic distance between them diverges. We
regulate by considering curves @xmath , @xmath which approach the
boundary as @xmath , and which have the property that @xmath , and
similarly @xmath , are finite and non-zero. Then in the boundary limit
the geodesic length goes to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . The correction term indicates that any rescaling of
@xmath can give a different finite contribution. In our quotient
coordinates, we choose @xmath where the boundary is cut off at @xmath .
The radial coordinate is different for each of the different quotient
geometries, so the different regulators are labelled.

This approach affords a very clear understanding of non-minimal geodesic
lengths. We quotient the AdS @xmath group manifold by the discrete group
generated by one element from ( 3.19 ). The length of the geodesic
connecting the boundary points @xmath and @xmath is still given by (
3.65 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

but in the quotient spacetime @xmath and @xmath are identified.
Typically @xmath . We now show that non-minimal geodesics can also be
identified from monodromies in the asymptotic maps.

We now parametrize the points in the quotient manifold by mapping the
embedding coordinates for Poincaré, equation ( 3.11 ), to our quotient
coordinates @xmath . Using ( 3.17 ) to find the group elements yields

  -- -- -------- -- --------
        @xmath      (3.67)
        @xmath      (3.68)
        @xmath      (3.69)
                    
  -- -- -------- -- --------

One can check that conjugation by the elliptic, parabolic, or hyperbolic
generators corresponds to taking @xmath for the respective points. To
consider boundary points we take the limit described above resulting in

  -- -- -------- -- --------
        @xmath      (3.70)
        @xmath      (3.71)
        @xmath      (3.72)
  -- -- -------- -- --------

Now we can pick two points, say @xmath and @xmath , and compute the
geodesic length using equation ( 3.65 ),

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.73)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.74)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.75)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Like for the metrics, but unlike for the transformations, the 0M
geodesic distance is correctly obtained by taking either @xmath or
@xmath . Since conjugation by a quotient generator takes @xmath , and
with reference to ( 3.66 ), we also obtain winding geodesic lengths from
these formulae. This demonstrates how non-analyticities in the
asymptotic maps give rise to winding geodesics in the defect geometries.

#### 3.3.2 Lorentzian analysis

We can proceed similarly using our maps ( 3.55 ), ( 3.56 ), and ( 3.57 )
on the embedding coordinates ( 3.23 ) to find the matrix representations
of points in the various quotients as

  -- -- -------- -- --------
        @xmath      (3.76)
        @xmath      (3.77)
        @xmath      (3.78)
  -- -- -------- -- --------

Again, conjugation by the appropriate quotient generator takes @xmath .
For boundary points we take the limit @xmath in the conical defect case,
and @xmath in the massless and massive BTZ cases. This is due to the
difference in domains of @xmath , as described in Sec. 3.2.3 . Taking
these limits gives the points

  -- -- -------- -- --------
                    (3.79)
        @xmath      (3.80)
        @xmath      (3.81)
  -- -- -------- -- --------

We can pick two points on the boundary circle, @xmath and @xmath , to
find the geodesic lengths from ( 3.65 ),

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.82)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.83)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.84)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Again, we see a nice smooth limit between the @xmath and @xmath limits
for the massless BTZ geodesic lengths even though their maps and their
embedding coordinates do not have a smooth limit.

In the BTZ expression above we took both points to be on the same
boundary @xmath . Points on the @xmath boundary are parametrized as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have a different regulator, @xmath . For two points on the
@xmath boundary the distance formula is unchanged, but for horizon
crossing geodesics between the two boundaries the lengths are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that this is related to the single sided geodesic length with
@xmath .

Once again, in view of ( 3.66 ) and the fact that quotient generators
take @xmath we find that non-analyticities in the maps between pure AdS
@xmath and the quotient geometries distinguish boundary anchored
geodesics of different windings.

### 3.4 CFT analysis of OPE blocks

#### 3.4.1 Euclidean analysis

In this section we argue that the non-analyticities in the asymptotic
maps between pure AdS @xmath and the quotient geometries which
distinguish winding geodesics also distinguish quotient invariant
contributions to OPE blocks. The terms in the OPE block decomposition
are in correspondence with the winding geodesics, which suggests a dual
relationship.

We start by mapping vacuum OPE blocks to a non-trivial background using
the asymptotic maps from our bulk analysis. Consider a transformation
@xmath where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

An OPE block @xmath of scalar operators will in general transform as [
132 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.88)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . For simplicity, we will set @xmath . Now we apply
equations 3.47 , 3.46 and 3.45 for the CD, 0M, and BTZ cases
respectively which naively gives the transformation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.89)
  -- -------- -- --------

However, we immediately see a problem. All of these maps have a branch
cut as we take @xmath , whereas the OPE block should be a single-valued
observable. If we wish to remove branch cuts from the OPE block, we
should instead consider

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.90)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.91)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.92)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

These are sums over pre-images of points identified under the maps.
Alternatively, these sums can be argued for from the quotient
identifications on pure AdS @xmath in equations ( 3.20 ), ( 3.21 ), and
( 3.22 ) respectively as they are invariant under the boundary action of
the quotient. This method of images has been used frequently for
describing quotient invariant observables [ 142 , 152 , 153 ] .

We now relate these images to geodesics. Fixing one of the points in the
vacuum OPE block and taking images of the other point defines a sequence
of different geodesics in the pure AdS @xmath bulk. Under the quotient
these all map to geodesics with the same endpoints, but differing by
their winding. For conical defects we found in Chapter 2 that fields
integrated on each of these winding geodesics have a dual description,
the partial OPE block, summarized in equation ( 3.10 ). Similarly, we
can reorganize the sums above, decomposing the full OPE blocks into
distinct contributions labelled by @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.93)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.94)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.95)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.96)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.97)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.98)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Each of the new quantities @xmath is invariant under the appropriate
quotient action on both coordinates @xmath sending @xmath , meaning they
are valid observables in the quotient coordinates. This has been
expressed before in terms of invariance under the CFTs discrete gauge
symmetry that is induced by the quotient [ 103 , 119 ] .

Our suggestion is that each partial OPE block @xmath is dual to the bulk
field integrated over a geodesic with winding related to the label
@xmath . By construction, each partial OPE block depends on pairs of
boundary points at a fixed separation determined by @xmath . This can be
seen from the geodesic distance formulae, equations 3.75 , 3.74 and 3.73
, by acting with the quotient generator @xmath times on point @xmath ,
and @xmath times on point @xmath , as dictated by equations 3.98 , 3.97
and 3.96 and equations 3.95 , 3.94 and 3.93 :

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.99)
              @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.100)
              @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.101)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

In each case we find that all dependence on the @xmath -sum index drops
out. This means that each vacuum OPE block entering @xmath defines an
AdS @xmath geodesic, all of which have the same length and become
identified under the quotient. Hence, each @xmath picks out a unique
geodesic in the dual quotient geometry, with winding specified by @xmath
. Blocks with different @xmath are related by repeated action of the
quotient generator on only one of the boundary points in the same way
that geodesics with different windings are related, as seen in ( 3.66 )
and the results of Section 3.3 .

The new quantities @xmath are each defined as a sum over vacuum OPE
blocks which are known to be convergent inside correlation functions [ 9
, 10 ] , but any required normalization has been neglected above. For
the conical defect ( 3.96 ), the sum is finite and can be normalized as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.102)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The @xmath -sum ensures that @xmath is quotient invariant, but does not
alter the overall contribution to the OPE. This follows since the @xmath
terms in the sum each give equivalent contributions due to conformal
symmetry, or from bulk considerations due to the equality of geodesic
distances discussed in the previous paragraph.

For the massless and massive BTZ cases, the @xmath -sums are infinite
making the normalization appear ambiguous and bringing the convergence
of the sum into question. However, we know that the OPE itself is
convergent in CFTs, and our @xmath represents only a partial
contribution to the full OPE. Again, although an infinite number of
images are included to ensure invariance under the quotient, each image
represents an equivalent contribution by symmetry. We can normalize the
operators using a formal limit

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.103)
     @xmath      (3.104)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In contrast, the full OPE blocks in equations 3.95 , 3.94 and 3.93 are
not sums over equivalent contributions. By convention we can arrange for
the @xmath block to correspond to the minimal operator separation, and
hence the minimal bulk geodesic. All other @xmath blocks are subleading
since they represent operators at greater separation in the vacuum where
there are no complications from the presence of other operators. The
fall off with distance can be seen explicitly in the smeared
representation for vacuum OPE blocks [ 132 ] . The conical defect sum is
finite and can be normalized as in ( 3.102 ), whereas for the BTZ cases,
we see from ( 3.100 ) and ( 3.101 ) that the operators become infinitely
separated for large @xmath , and their contribution becomes negligible.
This is the mechanism by which similar applications of the method of
images for conical defects and BTZ spacetimes produce finite correlators
from infinite sums [ 182 , 142 , 183 ] .

#### 3.4.2 Lorentzian analysis

The Lorentzian case is slightly different because the boundary is not
parametrized by a complex coordinate. Still, we can rely on invariance
under the quotient action to guide us. OPE blocks in the quotient
coordinate @xmath transform to vacuum OPE blocks using eq. ( 3.88 ) with
the asymptotic maps ( 3.61 )-( 3.63 ). For simplicity, we will
specialize to @xmath . Once again, these maps are not invariant under
@xmath meaning there is an ambiguity in the transformation of the naive
defect OPE blocks. To define single-valued OPE blocks we sum over
images, ensuring consistency with the @xmath boundary limits of ( 3.31
)-( 3.33 ). We then have the following transformations for OPE blocks

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.105)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.106)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.107)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

For the BTZ case we have written the single sided OPE block above. The
OPE block relating operators on different boundaries is related by the
analytic continuation of one of the @xmath coordinates,

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.108)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

This matches nicely with the analytic continuation found both in the
coordinate transformations ( 3.63 ) and in the geodesic lengths ( 3.86
).

As before we can reorganize the sums, writing them as a decomposition
into quotient invariant partial OPE blocks

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.109)
     @xmath      (3.110)
     @xmath      (3.111)
     @xmath      (3.112)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -- -------- -- ---------
        @xmath      (3.113)
        @xmath      
        @xmath      (3.114)
        @xmath      (3.115)
  -- -- -------- -- ---------

For the BTZ partial OPE blocks, the above equations encompass both signs
of the @xmath coordinates allowed in ( 3.63 ).

The partial OPE blocks @xmath give the contribution to the full OPE
block from image operators at a fixed separation in @xmath , indicated
by the label @xmath . Each vacuum OPE block included in the sum gives an
identical contribution, as is apparent by the conformal symmetry of the
vacuum state, but the sum is necessary for manifest invariance under the
quotient. This can be compared with the geodesic distance formulae,
equations 3.84 , 3.83 and 3.82 and ( 3.86 ). Acting with the quotient
generator @xmath times on point @xmath , and @xmath times on point
@xmath gives

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.116)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.117)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.118)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.119)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

In every case the dependence on @xmath drops out, showing a precise
matching between the behaviour of geodesics and the structure of @xmath
. Since each term gives an equivalent contribution, the partial OPE
blocks can be normalized in the same way as described in Section 3.4.1 .

Each @xmath block is invariant when the quotient acts on both @xmath ,
while blocks with different @xmath are related by repeated action on
only one of @xmath . Winding or crossing geodesics of different lengths
are related by the repeated quotient action on one endpoint, and each is
invariant under the action on both endpoints. Hence, we also interpret
the @xmath as giving the contribution to the full OPE block from the
dual bulk field integrated over a single geodesic, which may be minimal,
winding, or horizon crossing as appropriate.

### 3.5 Discussion

In this chapter we have explored generalizing the holographic duality
between OPE blocks and geodesic integrated fields to non-trivial locally
AdS @xmath spacetimes, both in the Euclidean case and for the Poincaré
disk of Lorentzian AdS @xmath . Such spacetimes can be described as
quotients of AdS @xmath by discrete subgroups of the isometry group. We
found that the transformations between AdS @xmath and its quotients
involve non-analyticities which lead to branch cuts in OPE blocks for
the dual excited CFT states. We proposed that the branch cuts should be
removed by summing over image points of the quotient action, while also
noting a natural decomposition of the OPE blocks into quotient invariant
contributions. These contributions, partial OPE blocks, are observables
in and of themselves, carrying more fine-grained information than the
full OPE block. We explained how this decomposition arises from the
coordinate transformations, and offered a dual interpretation of the
partial OPE blocks as bulk fields integrated over individual winding or
crossing geodesics.

On the bulk side we presented coordinate transformations between pure
AdS @xmath and the conical defect, the massless BTZ black hole, and
massive BTZ geometries. These maps incorporate the corresponding
quotient identifications, which are expressed as a monodromy of the
complex coordinate describing the defect spacetime. The identifications
map sets of boundary anchored geodesics between distinct pairs of points
in pure AdS @xmath to geodesics with identical endpoints in the new
spacetime, differentiated by their winding around the defect. We showed
how the lengths of these geodesics transform emphasizing the relation to
monodromy.

In the CFT we showed that branch cuts appear in OPE blocks after the
transformation from pure AdS @xmath to the quotient spacetime. Removing
these branch cuts by summing over images led to a new quotient invariant
quantity, the partial OPE block. This process can also be seen as
requiring the OPE blocks to be invariant under a discrete gauge symmetry
induced by the quotient. The various partial OPE blocks are related by
applying the quotient generator to one of the insertion points. The same
action distinguishes geodesics with different winding. In view of the
duality known for pure AdS @xmath , we conjecture that partial OPE
blocks are dual to fields integrated over the individual geodesics in
the bulk which can be minimal, non-minimal, or even horizon crossing.

In the case of the conical defect, the discrete quotient group is finite
and therefore isomorphic to @xmath . However, for both BTZ cases, the
group is infinite and the interpretation of how the orbifold CFT is
properly defined is less clear. The idea of orbifolding by these
infinite discrete groups is not new [ 184 ] , but our interpretation of
how these discrete gauge symmetries affect the OPE blocks and their dual
is. We have not proven explicitly that the partial OPE blocks are dual
to fields integrated over the minimal or non-minimal geodesics, as this
would require a greater understanding of the intertwining relation for
the Radon transform in non-pure AdS @xmath [ 132 ] .

Differences arise between the Euclidean and Lorenztian descriptions for
the obvious reason: the monodromy of the @xmath coordinate only exists
if @xmath is complex. In Euclidean signature the boundary is naturally
described by a complex coordinate and the monodromy affecting OPE blocks
is easily understood. In Lorentzian signature we restricted our
considerations to the upper half plane description of the Poincaré disk
to accord with this. In the full Lorentzian case, it is difficult to see
how we could reduce the action of the quotient into the monodromy of a
complex coordinate as it is unclear what the correct combination of
coordinates would be. In addition, for Lorentzian AdS @xmath there are
no geodesics between timelike separated boundary points, whereas OPE
blocks for timelike separated insertions remain well-defined. It would
be interesting to understand the duality in these cases, and also to
find maps analogous to those displayed here for coordinate systems other
than Poincaré, in both the Euclidean and Lorentzian cases.

There is a superficial similarity of our discussions about the monodromy
of OPE blocks with other works that have considered monodromies. Some
papers, such as [ 185 , 186 , 187 ] , focus on correlators with large
numbers of light operators in the background of two heavy insertions.
Monodromy is used to relate the possible OPE channels of the overall
correlator. Other papers, such as [ 157 , 165 ] , use monodromy as a way
to pick out different channels of four point functions by switching
heavy OPE exchanges with lighter ones. There are two main differences in
what we have discussed. First, we are considering a single OPE block,
not the full OPE, so the exchanged operators are fixed. All the works
mentioned above involve multiple operators, which can fuse in different
channels. In contrast the OPE block is a single operator; there is no
notion of different fusion channels. Second, we implement sums to
conform to the discrete gauge symmetry that is present on the base but
not on the cover, which differs from the above works.

## Chapter 4 Interlude

In the remainder of this thesis we will shift our focus towards quantum
information theory in general, not specifically with a focus on its
applications to quantum gravity. We will study the dynamical properties
of several measures of quantum information, all of which have been
applied in holography but have been more widely used in nearly every
branch of quantum physics. We seek to provide analysis for aspects of
dynamics in as much generality as possible, so as to leave applications
to QFT or holography available, but without discounting the more
traditional quantum mechanical uses. Because of the shift in motivation,
in this chapter we briefly recount the primary objective of quantum
information theory, the quantification of entanglement. Many in-depth
reviews of this topic are available elsewhere [ 14 , 188 ] .

### 4.1 Entanglement in quantum information theory

Entanglement is not an observable in quantum theory, but simply a
property of a state together with a partition of the theory’s Hilbert
space. For our purposes it will be sufficient to consider bipartite
entanglement, where the Hilbert space @xmath of the system under
consideration is divided into two parts, @xmath . A pure state of the
theory @xmath is separable if it can be written as a product of states
on the subsystems, @xmath . This type of state exhibits no correlations,
quantum or classical, between measurements performed on the two
subsystems, and hence has no entanglement. If a state cannot be written
as a product in any basis, then it is entangled. This definition of
entanglement is not practical however, since for any given separable
state it may be inconvenient to find a basis that expresses the product
nature. Instead we can introduce a measure of entanglement such as the
entanglement entropy

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is zero for all pure separable states, and positive definite for
all entangled states. Instead of searching for a satisfactory basis, one
can compute @xmath in any basis to determine if a state is entangled or
not.

For large enough systems, it can still be challenging to compute @xmath
, since this typically requires a diagonalization of @xmath . It can be
easier to work in a preferred basis which diagonalizes both subsystems,
usually known as the Schmidt basis,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Such a decomposition always exists for pure states, with orthonormal
subsystem bases @xmath and @xmath , and positive real Schmidt
coefficients @xmath such that @xmath for normalized states. One benefit
is that the entanglement entropy can be computed simply as @xmath .
Clearly, separable states have only one non-zero Schmidt coefficient.
The number of non-zero coefficients is called the Schmidt rank, and is
itself a rudimentary test for entanglement. We also note that @xmath is
maximized when all @xmath are equal, meaning that the reduced density
matrix @xmath is proportional to the identity.

Quantum correlations can only be established in a bipartite system by
interacting the two subsystems together. In particular, local unitary
operations which act only on one subsystem cannot change the
entanglement entropy; from ( 4.2 ) an operation like @xmath with @xmath
unitary only rotates the @xmath basis, but does not affect the @xmath or
@xmath . More generally, entanglement entropy cannot be increased by any
local quantum operation @xmath (LO) or by classical communication (CC)
between the parties controlling subsystems @xmath and @xmath . This
singles out LOCC as a useful set of protocol for ordering states
according to their amount of entanglement; a state @xmath is more
entangled than @xmath if @xmath can be achieved with LOCC, but @xmath
cannot. The partial ordering helps to define entanglement as a resource
for performing operational tasks, such as quantum teleportation, quantum
cryptography, or quantum computation, since states with greater
entanglement allow these tasks to be performed better or to a greater
extent. These observations will allow us to define what is meant by an
entanglement measure, but first there is one additional confounding
factor to consider.

When the exact state of the system is unknown, there being some
probabilities @xmath for the system to be in a number of different
states @xmath , it is best described by a density matrix @xmath . Such a
state is no longer pure, but mixed, and will exhibit classical
correlations in addition to any quantum correlations. Quantities like
the entanglement entropy are sensitive to these correlations as well. A
state like @xmath is a mixture of product states, each with no
entanglement, yet the overall state has an entropy from the classical
distribution, @xmath . This already suggests that entanglement entropy
has undesirable traits for a mixed state entanglement measure. Even more
generally, we could have a mixture of products of mixed states

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

which still has no entanglement, but even larger subsystem entropies.
Such states are the most general class of separable states. States which
cannot be written in this way are entangled.

With these complications in mind, we can define a number of properties
which an entanglement measure @xmath should obey. First, @xmath should
be a positive function on the space of density matrices, and achieve its
lower bound of zero if @xmath is separable. In addition, @xmath should
be non-increasing under LOCC ¹ ¹ 1 Some authors use the term
entanglement monotone for @xmath with these properties, referring to
monotonicity under LOCC, and insist that entanglement measures for mixed
states must reduce to the entanglement entropy for pure states [ 14 ] .
. Other desirable properties include (sub)additivity, which requires
that @xmath for a composite system is (less than or) equal to the sum of
the entanglement in the subsystems, and convexity which means that
@xmath is a convex function of the density operator. Some classic
examples of entanglement measures include the distillable entanglement [
189 ] , and entanglement of formation [ 190 ] . Notably, entanglement
entropy fails to satisfy @xmath for mixed separable states, but due to
its simplicity for pure states it is still commonly used.

Two measures in particular will be the focus of our next chapters. First
is actually a family of measures introduced briefly before in ( 1.14 ),
the quantum Rényi entropies [ 191 ] ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

defined for integer values @xmath . These constitute an extension of the
entanglement entropy, which is obtained as the limit @xmath . In
general, @xmath is decreasing in @xmath [ 51 ] . Individually, they are
each positive when acting on density matrices, zero if and only if
@xmath is overall pure and separable, invariant under local unitaries,
non-increasing under LOCC, and for pure states are symmetric @xmath .

The primary reason to prefer Rényi entropies over entanglement entropy
alone is that information about the entanglement properties of a state
cannot be completely characterized by a single number @xmath . The
different measures we have already mentioned are complementary, each
having a distinct operational meaning. For instance, two states can have
the same entanglement entropy, but if one has less than maximal Schmidt
rank, while the other has full Schmidt rank, then only for the latter
will the entanglement allow us to express an operation on one subsystem
as a related operation on the other subsystem as in ( 1.23 ) [ 27 ] .
This statement can be viewed as a quantum mechanical version of the
cyclicity property discussed in the context of the Reeh-Schlieder
theorem [ 13 ] . For the Rényi entropies, having information about each
@xmath is equivalent to knowing the full eigenvalue distribution of
@xmath , the @xmath in the Schmidt decomposition ( 4.2 ) for pure states
² ² 2 If the dimensionality @xmath of @xmath is finite, then only @xmath
Rényi entropies are sufficient to determine the spectrum. . This
constitutes much more information than @xmath alone provides. For pure
states, the Schmidt coefficients are the local-unitarily invariant
quantities of the state that completely describe its entanglement
properties, and the Rényi entropies determine them.

The second measure that we will consider is the entanglement negativity,
a measure whose origins can roughly be traced to 1996, with Peres’
Positive Partial Transpose (PPT) condition [ 192 ] : if a bipartite
state is separable, the transpose taken with respect to either subsystem
is positive. The PPT condition, stronger and more efficient than
entropic criteria based on the Rényi entropies [ 193 ] , was shown by
the Horodeckis to be sufficient for the separability of @xmath and
@xmath systems [ 194 ] . We summarize this as follows:

###### Theorem (Peres-Horodecki Criterion).

Let @xmath be the partial transposition map with respect to system
@xmath . Then @xmath Furthermore, if @xmath , then @xmath .

It is easy to demonstrate the first implication. For a separable state (
4.3 ), the partial transpose acts as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now, the transpose map is positive, and in fact acting on each reduced
density matrix @xmath preserves its eigenvalues, meaning each @xmath is
still positive semidefinite, and hence @xmath is as well. In general,
transposition is a positive map, but not completely positive, which
means the composition we have called partial transposition @xmath is not
always positive. For a general state @xmath , if @xmath is found to have
negative eigenvalues then by the above argument @xmath cannot be
separable. However, for systems larger than @xmath , there exist states
which are entangled, yet have @xmath so that the partial transposition
test is inconclusive. States of this type are said to be bound
entangled.

From the Peres-Horodecki Criterion emerges the negativity, @xmath , of
@xmath [ 195 , 196 ] , which encodes the degree to which the partial
transpose of @xmath is negative. Negativity is defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the @xmath ’s are the eigenvalues of @xmath . It is worth noting
that @xmath , so that the choice of transposing @xmath rather than
@xmath is not significant. Negativity is a positive function on density
matrices, zero for all separable states, monotonic under LOCC, and
convex but it is not additive [ 197 ] . Although there exist entangled
states for which @xmath vanishes (it is not a faithful measure),
negativity has an important advantage over other measures in that it is
easily computable, even for mixed states [ 198 ] . For some purposes it
is useful to define the logarithmic negativity , @xmath , which is
monotonic and additive but not convex [ 197 ] . Relationships between
the logarithmic negativity, distillable entanglement, entanglement cost,
and teleportation capacity have been demonstrated in the literature [
196 , 199 ] .

In the following chapters we will study the evolution of Rényi entropies
and negativity perturbatively to shed light on how entanglement can be
generated in dynamical systems. Our goal is to keep the analysis as
broadly applicable as possible. For the Rényi entropies, we refrain from
specifying any particular Hamitonian to generate the dynamics, instead
looking at a general class of initial states to extract universal
behaviour. For negativity, no restriction on the type of dynamics is
required. Our main outcomes are mathematical tools for handling
derivatives with respect to constrained matrices, in particular the
Hermitian density matrices, which allows us to write analytical
expressions for the time derivatives of negativity.

## Chapter 5 Universal timescale for Rényi entropies

This chapter is based on the paper [ 121 ] published in Phys. Rev. A.

### 5.1 Introduction

Composite quantum systems exhibit correlations among subsystems which
cannot be explained in terms of classical probabilities. For pure
states, these quantum correlations are known as entanglement. In this
chapter, we study how entanglement is generated by the mutual
interactions among subsystems as the overall state evolves in time.

The time evolution of entanglement has become a focus in a variety of
research fields. Its early study in quantum optical systems [ 200 , 201
] has bloomed into a major area of research in many-body and
condensed-matter systems [ 18 , 19 , 202 , 203 , 204 ] , and conformal
field theories dual to theories of quantum gravity [ 1 , 45 , 46 ] . For
some classes of systems, general features have been found, including
scaling laws [ 205 , 206 ] and generic linear growth [ 207 , 208 , 209 ,
210 ] .

The growth of entanglement is especially important in experimental
systems where entanglement between the system and its environment leads
to decoherence [ 211 ] . A complete understanding of the evolution of
entanglement requires solving the dynamics of the overall state. This is
often not feasible, including for decoherence where the Hamiltonian
describing interactions with the environment is not known explicitly.

It is therefore interesting to ask what aspects of entanglement growth,
if any, are shared by all quantum systems. Broad statements can be made
in this direction with minimal assumptions about system dynamics by
relying on special initial conditions instead.

To begin, bipartite entanglement between subsystems must be defined with
respect to a partition of the system’s degrees of freedom, represented
as a fixed factorization of the Hilbert space @xmath . The Hamiltonian
for the full system can be expressed as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where each @xmath is an operator acting on subsystem @xmath , and each
@xmath acts on @xmath . Any number of terms may be included as long as
@xmath is Hermitian. Since the algebra of operators acting on @xmath is
isomorphic to the tensor product of subsystem algebras, any Hamiltonian
can be represented this way [ 212 ] .

Recently it was shown by Yang [ 213 ] (see also the earlier work [ 214 ]
) that starting from a pure, unentangled state

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

the growth of entanglement under the unitary evolution generated by (
5.1 ) is characterized by a universal timescale,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here the expectation values are taken in the initial state. The
timescale is universal in the sense that it takes this form for any
quantum system that satisfies the requirements ( 5.1 ) and ( 5.2 ). The
entanglement timescale was derived by studying one particular measure of
the entanglement between subsystems @xmath and @xmath , namely, the
purity @xmath of the reduced density matrix @xmath . By the assumption (
5.2 ), the purity is initially maximal so that its dynamics are governed
at lowest order in @xmath by @xmath . The second derivative is
proportional to @xmath which is entirely determined by the expectation
values of the interaction Hamiltonian operators in the initial state.

In this chapter, we show that the same entanglement timescale ( 5.3 )
governs the growth of entanglement as measured by the entire family of
quantum Rényi entropies ( 4.4 ). As a family, the Rényi entropies
provide complete information about the eigenvalue distribution of the
reduced density matrix @xmath , and hence completely characterize the
entanglement in an overall pure, bipartite state [ 215 , 51 ] .
Therefore, the entanglement timescale ( 5.3 ) is a universal feature of
bipartite entanglement.

The most common measure of entanglement, the entanglement entropy @xmath
, corresponds to the @xmath limit of ( 4.4 ). Its second time derivative
can be obtained by an analytic continuation in @xmath from our general
results for @xmath after which ( 5.3 ) appears with a logarithmically
divergent prefactor, reflecting the sensitivity of @xmath to small
eigenvalues of the density matrix. We provide an example of these
results by working with the Jaynes-Cummings model [ 216 ] .

In Sec. 5.4 we extend the leading order analysis to the next-to-leading
order. At this order, several additional terms appear in the derivatives
of the Rényi entropies with @xmath . One might expect at first glance
that the @xmath case should behave differently from the rest of the
family. However, we find surprising cancellations between all of the
additional terms which leaves the evolution identical for all Rényi
entropies at this order as well. The next-to-leading order behaviour is
characterized by a second universal timescale for all @xmath . This
pattern cannot continue to all orders in perturbation theory because the
Rényi entropies are truly distinct functions. It is likely to break at
fourth order around @xmath , since there are additional classes of new
terms which arise for @xmath and @xmath , and it is difficult to imagine
perfect cancellations between them all. We remark on some of the
properties of the third order timescale, and how it relates to the
leading order timescale.

Notably, the entanglement timescale can be computed without the need to
solve for the dynamics of the system. For a given experimental
preparation of an unentangled state, our results provide an easily
calculable estimate of when entanglement will become significant.
Advances in the optical control of atoms have led to the first direct
measurement of a Rényi entropy in a many-body system, and subsequently
to measurements of its growth [ 217 , 218 , 219 , 220 , 221 ] . We
return to these measurements for comparison to the entanglement
timescale in Sec. 5.5 .

### 5.2 The entanglement timescale for Rényi entropies

In this section, we derive an entanglement timescale for the Rényi
entropies of a pure bipartite state ( 5.2 ) evolving under a general
Hamiltonian ( 5.1 ). Initially the subsystems are pure, @xmath , because
( 5.2 ) is separable, and therefore @xmath . As the state evolves, the
interactions between subsystems will generate entanglement. Starting at
a minimum of @xmath , the first time derivative is initially zero. We
will calculate the second derivative to obtain a Taylor expansion around
@xmath of the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

We will find that the entanglement timescale @xmath takes the same form
for all Rényi entropies, with @xmath a constant.

Since the Rényi entropies are initially minimal, their first derivatives
must vanish. We find

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note that in general, @xmath . However, inside the @xmath trace, we can
cyclically permute each term produced by the derivative into a common
ordering as shown. Using the von Neumann equation @xmath with @xmath and
using ( 5.1 ) and ( 5.2 ) in the @xmath limit, we find

  -- -- -- -------
           (5.6)
  -- -- -- -------

The leading order of the time evolution comes from the second
derivative,

  -- -- -- -------
           (5.7)
  -- -- -- -------

The second term vanishes when the @xmath limit is taken; this was the
result of the first derivative calculation. We are left with the first
term of ( 5.7 ) for which we find

  -- -- -- -------
           (5.8)
  -- -- -- -------

The @xmath sum keeps track of the non-commuting factors which cannot be
permuted into a common ordering. Applying the von Neumann equation leads
to

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath               (5.9)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Before simplifying ( 5.9 ) for general @xmath , it is useful to look at
the unique case of @xmath which corresponds to the purity studied in [
213 ] . In this case, the @xmath sum contains only a single term. Using
the assumption of purity at @xmath allows us to write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that we have not assumed that @xmath . Instead, we have used the
symmetry of
@xmath in the @xmath , @xmath indices to exchange @xmath and @xmath .
Indeed, ( 5.10 ) exactly matches the main result of [ 213 ] when we
account for the difference in the definitions of the purity and Rényi
entropy. Defining the @xmath -purity, @xmath , we have under our
assumptions @xmath

Returning to the general case, it is possible to greatly simplify ( 5.9
) by using the idempotency of @xmath , and @xmath where @xmath is the
identity operator for subsystem @xmath . The special case of @xmath only
occurs in the @xmath sum when @xmath takes on its extreme values of 0
and @xmath . Each other term in the sum vanishes. The general result for
@xmath is

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath               
              @xmath      (5.11)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where we have used the simplification @xmath for pure @xmath as shown in
[ 213 ] .

Equation ( 5.2 ) is our main result and shows that the second derivative
of every Rényi entropy for @xmath is of the same universal form as the
@xmath case studied previously. In fact, the coefficient incorporates
the @xmath case in Eq. ( 5.10 ) as well. The only remaining case is
@xmath , which we turn to now.

The entanglement entropy @xmath is the most widely used entanglement
measure in the literature. It corresponds to the @xmath limit of @xmath
after an analytic continuation in @xmath [ 18 , 19 ] . Inserting @xmath
at intermediate steps in the derivation leading to ( 5.2 ) produces
ill-defined quantities since the density matrix @xmath is pure, and
therefore singular. Nevertheless, we emphasize that inverse powers of
@xmath do not appear in the final result ( 5.2 ). The prefactor @xmath
can be analytically continued in @xmath and is analytic away from the
simple pole at @xmath . Taking the limit of @xmath as @xmath along the
real axis shows that @xmath is proportional to the entanglement
timescale with a divergent prefactor. This reflects the entanglement
entropy’s sensitivity to small eigenvalues of @xmath via the logarithm.

To make this point more clear, let @xmath be the eigenvalues of @xmath
such that @xmath and @xmath ( @xmath ). Then the second derivative of
the entanglement entropy, @xmath , in the @xmath limit is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Generically, @xmath is divergent since @xmath is not required to be zero
initially. Still, the divergence of @xmath at @xmath does not imply that
the entanglement entropy itself diverges; on the contrary, @xmath is
strictly bounded above by the dimension of the Hilbert space of
subsystem @xmath . Rather, @xmath appears in the Taylor series as the
coefficient of @xmath which tames the logarithmic divergence. It should
be noted that higher derivatives also diverge logarithmically at @xmath
, but are suppressed by higher powers of @xmath .

### 5.3 Example - Jaynes-Cummings model

Equation ( 5.12 ) shows that the divergence of @xmath at @xmath for an
initially pure product state found in ( 5.2 ) is not an artifact of the
analytic continuation in @xmath . This is the generic behavior of the
entanglement entropy for an initially separable state. To explore the
physical significance of the entanglement timescale, and to check the
divergence of @xmath , we work with the Jaynes-Cummings model (JCM) of a
two-level atom interacting with a quantized radiation field [ 222 , 216
] . This system has been extensively studied in quantum optics because
of its interesting entanglement properties [ 200 , 223 ] and quantum
revivals [ 224 , 225 ] . In this section, we calculate the entanglement
timescale for initially separable states, first by finding an analytic
solution for the Rényi entropies at all times, and then by studying the
expectation values of the interaction terms in the initial state as
dictated by ( 5.2 ). We explicitly show that the divergence of @xmath is
only logarithmic.

In the rotating-wave approximation, the JCM Hamiltonian is [ 216 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath is the atomic transition frequency, @xmath is the
characteristic field frequency, and @xmath is a coupling constant. For
simplicity, we impose the resonance condition @xmath and set @xmath .
The Pauli operators can be written in terms of the atomic ground state
@xmath and excited state @xmath as @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . The
field mode has a Fock basis @xmath on which the creation and
annihilation operators @xmath , @xmath act in the usual way. Notice that
this Hamiltonian is of the assumed product form ( 5.1 ) and is time
independent.

Let the overall initial state be the product of an arbitrary atomic
state @xmath and field state @xmath . Then the overall state at any time
is [ 201 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is entangled for most times. Since the exact solution for the
state is available, the Rényi entropies can be calculated directly for
either subsystem after a partial trace. When the atom is initially
excited @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

For comparison, if the atom is initially in the ground state, then the
result in ( 5.15 ) changes slightly by the replacement @xmath in the
first sum.

The entanglement timescale can alternatively be computed from the
Hamiltonian and initial state by using the definition in ( 5.2 ). This
is much simpler because it does not require solving for the time
evolution of the system. When the atom is initially excited, the only
nonzero term in ( 5.2 ) is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Similarly for the ground-state case, we find a single nonzero term,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is like ( 5.16 ) but with @xmath in the first sum.

The growth of entanglement is always controlled by the strength of the
coupling @xmath between subsystems. Indeed, it was pointed out in early
studies of the JCM that @xmath is proportional to the time period over
which the reduced states remain approximately pure [ 201 ] . The
positivity of Rényi entropies requires that @xmath is positive. This is
ensured by the results of [ 213 ] , but can be seen here as a
consequence of the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality which implies @xmath , etc.

From these general expressions, we can easily examine the growth of
entanglement for some common field states. Consider when the field is
initially in a Fock state, @xmath . For the initially excited state, we
find @xmath and for the ground state, @xmath . Figure 5.1 shows @xmath
and @xmath for @xmath , and @xmath , along with the quadratic timescale
approximation. Whereas @xmath for @xmath is @xmath smooth in this
example, we see that @xmath diverges at @xmath as expected, while @xmath
is continuous at @xmath .

Instead, if the field starts in a coherent state,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

then the excited state timescale is @xmath , whereas for the ground
state, @xmath . Notably, these timescales are independent of @xmath .
Figure 5.2 shows @xmath and @xmath for the coherent state with @xmath
and @xmath , @xmath . Once again, @xmath diverges at @xmath , while
@xmath is continuous at @xmath .

For comparison, the coherent state with @xmath and @xmath , @xmath
remains effectively separable for some time, as shown in Fig. 5.3 . The
divergence of the entanglement timescale in this case means one must
look to higher orders in the Taylor expansion of @xmath to see the
growth of entanglement. This is one example of an initial state where
the correlated quantum uncertainty defined in [ 213 ] vanishes.

Equation ( 5.15 ) shows that the second time derivative of the
entanglement entropy typically will be divergent in separable states.
This is not a flaw of taking the @xmath limit of the Rényi entropy, but
is the actual behavior of the entanglement entropy. From the state (
5.14 ), we can calculate the entanglement entropy directly for all times
by diagonalizing the reduced density matrix of the atom @xmath and
finding its eigenvalues, @xmath , and @xmath in terms of the Bloch
vector @xmath [ 226 ] . For instance, starting with the atom in its
excited state, we find @xmath Using ( 5.12 ) leads to the
logarithmically divergent result,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

A similar logarithmic divergence occurs for the atom initially in its
ground state.

### 5.4 Universal growth at third order

A natural extension of the results so far is to consider the growth of
Rényi entropies at third order around pure, separable states. Although
the leading order behaviour is physically identical for all @xmath , we
would not expect this to be the case at all orders. The measures in this
family are, in general, independent of each other. Surprisingly, a
universal timescale also emerges at third order in @xmath around the
initial state. We proceed in the same manner as Sec. 5.2 .

Acting with another derivative on ( 5.7 ) produces four distinct terms.
As a result of the first order calculation, any of these terms
proportional to a single derivative of @xmath will vanish in the @xmath
limit. This leaves only the term with a third order derivative,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (5.20)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

For small values of @xmath there are not enough factors of @xmath to
produce terms with multiple factors of @xmath . In order to treat all
values of @xmath simultaneously we introduce step functions @xmath which
equal unity if @xmath , and are zero otherwise.

Acting with the third derivative appears to produce six distinct types
of terms. However, by relabeling the summation indices and cyclically
permuting terms we realize that there are only three truly distinct
possibilities,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

At this point we can apply the von Neumann equation for each factor
@xmath . For instance, the first term involves @xmath and simplifies to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Upon using the simplification that the state is initially pure, this
term reduces to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

We note that already dependence on @xmath has dropped out. The second
type of term in ( 5.21 ) goes similarly, except that the @xmath and
@xmath cases must be treated separately when applying the initial
conditions. This is one place where we could begin to see differing
behaviour for different Rényi entropies. However, due to some remarkable
cancellations, the result ends up being the same, and no dependence on
@xmath remains:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally, the third type of term in ( 5.21 ) only exists for @xmath , so
we may expect that Rényi entropies with @xmath will have deviations in
their third order growth compared to the @xmath measure due to these
contributions. The cases @xmath and @xmath should be treated separately,
since in the former the sums collapse to a single term. In both cases,
after a sequence of seemingly magical cancellations due to the initial
conditions, we find that this type of term vanishes identically ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Despite numerous opportunities for new contributions to appear for
@xmath , every possible difference cancels out perfectly leaving the
final result for the third order growth of Rényi entropies around pure,
separable states

  -- -- -------- -- --------
        @xmath      (5.26)
        @xmath      
        @xmath      
  -- -- -------- -- --------

The only dependence on @xmath is through the normalization factor, but
the dynamics is completely universal for all Rényi entropies ¹ ¹ 1 For
the entanglement entropy we can take the @xmath limit after an analytic
continuation and find the same dynamical behaviour, with a divergent
prefactor. This exactly mirrors the situation found for the second order
derivative discussed in Sec. 5.2 . We also note that the result is
totally symmetric in @xmath , and does not receive contributions from
self-energy terms in the Hamiltonian, only from non-local interaction
terms. Furthermore, since the Rényi entropies are bounded below by zero,
and the @xmath term in the Taylor expansion is odd, this result must
vanish if the second order timescale vanishes. Indeed this can be
verified to occur by going to the basis where @xmath initially [ 213 ] .

At fourth order the remarkable cancellations leading to universal
behaviour will almost certainly not continue. Here, and for any higher
order, there will be more than one term in the initial step similar to (
5.7 ) that does not contain a term proportional to a single derivative
of @xmath . Furthermore, in the step similar to ( 5.21 ) there will be
terms which only appear for @xmath or @xmath , etc. Universality at
higher orders would require each of these types of terms to vanish
identically, which becomes increasingly unlikely to imagine. In any
case, the Rényi entropies are truly independent functions so the common
behaviour must cease at some order. Our result in this section shows
that non-universal behaviour does not appear at the lowest possible
order.

### 5.5 Discussion

The main result of [ 213 ] showed that for any unentangled pure
bipartite state evolving under an arbitrary Hamiltonian, the growth of
entanglement is characterized by a timescale which takes the universal
form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where entanglement is measured by the purity of subsystems. In this
chapter, we have shown that the same timescale characterizes the growth
of entanglement as measured by any Rényi entropy. Since the family of
Rényi entropies constitutes a complete determination of the entanglement
in a pure bipartite system, the entanglement timescale universally
describes the initial growth of bipartite entanglement. A universal
timescale with similar properties also governs the next-to-leading order
growth as a result of several non-trivial cancellations between terms
that appear for @xmath but not @xmath .

It is easy to prove that the entanglement timescale obeys several
properties expected of the Rényi entropy. As shown in [ 213 ] , @xmath
is a manifestly positive quantity so that the Rényi entropies initially
increase from their minimum value. It is also symmetric between the
subsystems @xmath and @xmath which reflects the symmetry @xmath for
overall pure states. Furthermore, the coefficient @xmath in ( 5.2 ) is
monotonically decreasing in @xmath , which is required by the general
condition @xmath .

Rényi entropies are widely used theoretically and have recently been
measured in isolated many-body systems [ 219 ] , including their time
dependence after an interaction is turned on [ 220 ] . The first such
measurement was performed on a Bose-Einstein condensate trapped in an
optical lattice and evolving under the Bose-Hubbard Hamiltonian in one
dimension,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

The first sum is over nearest-neighbor pairs and represents tunneling
between neighboring sites at a rate @xmath . The second sum over each
lattice site represents the attractive energy among bosons sharing a
site. In the experiment [ 220 ] , a product of one-particle Fock states
was prepared on six adjacent lattice sites with a barrier on each end.
After a quench in which the interaction in ( 5.28 ) was turned on, the
second Rényi @xmath was measured in time for all unique partitions of
the six sites.

The only interaction term in ( 5.28 ) that couples @xmath to @xmath is
@xmath , where sites @xmath and @xmath are neighbors across the
partition. Thus, for any nontrivial partitioning, the entanglement
timescale is the same, @xmath @xmath . Using the experimental value of
@xmath Hz, we can estimate that the entanglement will become significant
within a time @xmath , which agrees with the experimental result
displayed in Fig. 3 of Ref. [ 220 ] . This comparison is only
approximate since the actual initial states prepared in the experiment
were not free of entanglement.

The original motivation to determine the entanglement timescale was to
estimate how quickly a generic quantum system will decohere due to
entanglement with gravitational degrees of freedom [ 211 , 227 , 228 ] .
This question is relevant to the black-hole information problem [ 38 ,
39 ] , where the Hawking quanta escaping from the black-hole horizon
region may entangle with the geometry itself. To make any concrete
statements about entanglement with gravitational degrees of freedom, one
needs to work with quantum field theory or, better yet, quantum gravity.
Since our derivation of the entanglement timescale assumes that the
initial state is pure and unentangled, it is difficult to generalize
these results to quantum field theory, where typical states are highly
entangled on all scales [ 24 , 20 , 21 ] . UV divergent entanglements
can be avoided by considering the entanglement difference between
states, for example with the relative entropy, which lends hope for our
analysis of @xmath [ 229 , 230 ] . One can otherwise avoid divergences
by considering causally separated subregions, but this comes at the cost
of losing purity for the combined system [ 231 ] . Moreover, for gauge
field theories, or in the algebraic approach to QFT, the Hilbert space
does not factorize across spatial boundaries, invalidating our
assumptions [ 15 , 232 ] . Still, the growth of entanglement in quantum
field theory states is a major area of research in many-body,
condensed-matter, and high-energy physics [ 233 , 234 , 235 , 236 , 237
] , and it would be interesting to develop an entanglement timescale in
these regimes.

## Chapter 6 Perturbative expansion of negativity using patterned matrix
calculus

This chapter is based on the paper [ 122 ] published in Phys. Rev. A.

### 6.1 Introduction

In 1935, Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen imagined a composite quantum
state that did not admit a complete local description. In this kind of
state, outcomes of measurements performed on the subsystems were
perfectly anti-correlated regardless of the chosen measurement basis.
Schrödinger shortly gave this remarkable feature of the quantum
formalism the name entanglement , and the notion continues to be the
subject of extensive theoretical study and experiment [ 238 ] , with
applications like quantum teleportation [ 239 , 240 , 241 , 242 ] ,
quantum-enhanced metrology [ 243 , 244 , 245 , 246 ] , and quantum
cryptography [ 247 , 248 , 249 , 250 ] . We continue this line of study
in this chapter which will provide insight into how entanglement evolves
as the state of a bipartite system is varied.

The dynamics of entanglement, studied initially in quantum-optical
systems, has become an active area of research in many-body systems [
251 , 252 , 253 ] , condensed-matter physics [ 254 , 255 , 256 , 257 ] ,
and quantum field theories [ 258 , 259 , 61 ] . Perturbative approaches
to entanglement dynamics have revealed a universal timescale
characterizing the growth of entanglement in initially pure, separable
states under unitary evolution as measured by the purity of the reduced
density matrix [ 214 , 213 ] , and by the Rényi entropies [ 121 ] .

In this paper we focus on the negativity ( 4.6 ). Although negativity
has been studied for two decades, there is, to our knowledge, no general
perturbative expansion available. This omission is likely owed to three
nuances in the differentiation of negativity: the matrix representation
of the partial transposition map, issues of non-differentiability of the
trace norm, and the computation of the trace norm’s derivative, which
requires a careful consideration of the calculus of complex matrices
with patterns.

To expand on these difficulties, we recast negativity in terms of the
trace norm ¹ ¹ 1 The trace norm, also known as the nuclear norm , is one
of the Schatten norms and one of the Ky Fan norms . @xmath of a matrix,
@xmath , so that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

A perturbative expansion of @xmath as @xmath varies with respect to some
parameter @xmath requires a derivative that we schematically write as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the following sections we will be more precise about how these
derivatives are defined and multiplied. The last factor, @xmath , will
depend on the application at hand, but for concreteness we will mainly
consider time evolution, with @xmath governed by the von Neumann
dynamics of a closed system or the Lindblad dynamics of an open system.
It should be understood that more general variations can be treated in
the same way. The middle factor requires an explicit expression for the
action of the partial transposition map on the density matrix. Some
forms are available in the literature, but in what follows we work in
the vectorized representation where @xmath and @xmath are vectors in
@xmath . The linear map @xmath has a simple representation in this
vector space that is easy to implement numerically, while also providing
a form for @xmath .

The more challenging factor to understand is the derivative of the trace
norm with respect to its argument. One complication is that the trace
norm is only differentiable if its argument is invertible [ 260 ] . At
singular arguments one has the notion of a subdifferential , to which we
return in the discussion. Otherwise, we assume invertibility of @xmath
throughout. More importantly, the derivative @xmath is taken with
respect to a Hermitian matrix whose elements are not independent
variables. This is perilous; it is necessary to represent @xmath in
terms of a set of independent variables before differentiating, which is
the main notion behind patterned matrix calculus [ 261 ] . Generally, we
refer to any matrix whose elements are not independent variables as a
patterned matrix, some other examples of which are symmetric, unitary,
or diagonal matrices. Patterned matrix calculus is an underexplored
branch of mathematics that we find to be crucial in the perturbative
analysis of negativity.

In this chapter, we address the nuances just mentioned to further our
understanding of entanglement dynamics by way of negativity. In Section
6.2 , we provide a means by which to compute the perturbative expansion
of negativity. To this end, we offer new matrix representations of the
partial transposition map, along with explicit computations of the first
and second derivatives of the trace norm with respect to complex,
patterned arguments. The techniques we develop can be straightforwardly
carried out to any order in the expansion for negativity. In Section 6.3
, we apply our results to several physical systems with illustrative
differences and compare them with the behaviour of other entanglement
measures. Section 6.4 explores how patterned derivatives can be used
more broadly in quantum information theory with an application to
quantum speed limits and bounds on entanglement dynamics. Then, in
Section 6.5 we use a more formal version of patterned matrix calculus to
explain why it is necessary when studying some quantities, like
negativity, but not for others, like the Rényi entropies that were the
focus of the previous chapter. Our result is a theorem describing a
class of matrix functions for which patterned derivatives are equal to
their unpatterned counterparts, and hence these subtleties can be safely
ignored. Finally, in Section 6.6 , we discuss in greater detail the
challenges of our approach, the validity of our assumptions, and the
benefits and limitations of our results.

### 6.2 Perturbative expansion of negativity

Let us suppose that the density matrix, @xmath , of a quantum state and
some number of its derivatives are known at a given time, @xmath . To
understand how the entanglement between two subsystems changes near
@xmath due to the evolution of @xmath we can expand the negativity as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Our goal is to provide general expressions for the derivatives of
negativity in this expansion. ² ² 2 The logarithmic negativity, @xmath ,
can be treated analogously. In this section we offer explicit
expressions for the first and second derivatives using a method that can
be carried out systematically to any desired order of precision.

#### 6.2.1 Vectorization formalism and the partial transposition map

Expressions like ( 6.2 ) are cumbersome to work with since @xmath
represents a four-dimensional array that must be contracted against two
matrices to produce a scalar. To avoid such complications we prefer to
work in the vectorization formalism, where we represent the state @xmath
as a column vector, @xmath . In general, the vectorization operation, ,
stacks the columns of an @xmath matrix into an @xmath vector. It admits
two useful identities that we rely on, namely

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are any three compatible matrices, and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are the same size and @xmath [ 262 , 263 ] . In this
formalism we can rewrite the first derivative of negativity as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

With this simple change in notation the middle factor is an ordinary
matrix multiplied by two vectors. To demonstrate the convenience of this
formalism we first consider how the standard matrix transposition map
can be represented, before applying it to the partial transposition and
determining @xmath .

Let @xmath be a superoperator, i.e., a linear map from the space of
@xmath matrices to the space of @xmath matrices. Due to linearity,
@xmath can always be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , the @xmath and the @xmath are @xmath , @xmath , and
@xmath matrices, respectively. If @xmath is instead vectorized as @xmath
, then there is a related operator, @xmath , acting on the space of
@xmath vectors, and represented by the @xmath matrix

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

There is no restriction on the number of terms in each sum, so these
representations will not be unique. The @xmath operator can be viewed as
implementing the linear map @xmath on the vectorized space of matrices,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

which follows from identity ( 6.4 ). This demonstrates the existence of
an isomorphism ³ ³ 3 This is distinct from the Choi-Jamiolkowski
isomorphism. between the space of superoperators acting on @xmath and
those acting on @xmath [ 264 , 265 ] .

Matrix transposition is a linear operation, meaning we can define a
commutation matrix , @xmath , such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath has dimensions @xmath . @xmath is a symmetric permutation
matrix satisfying the useful identities

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.11)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.12)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is @xmath . In the following we only deal with square
matrices and hence use @xmath for ease of notation. The commutation
matrix has a simple representation of the form ( 6.8 ) in the standard
basis of matrices @xmath , where @xmath is the @xmath single-entry
matrix defined through @xmath . In terms of these elements

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the same vein as ( 6.10 ), we can represent the partial transposition
map as a linear superoperator acting on the space of @xmath column
vectors,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the subscript indicates the subsystem to be transposed. We call
@xmath a partial commutation matrix . It is @xmath and is self-inverse.
The advantage of this formalism is that we can immediately identify the
middle factor in ( 6.6 ) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

which follows when we observe that the partial commutation matrix is
constant. To establish this we can investigate the form of @xmath ,
again working with standard basis elements. We find

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.16)
  -- -- -- --------

We note that @xmath is a constant matrix that depends only on the
dimensions @xmath , and @xmath . Furthermore, when @xmath , then @xmath
, as expected. In Sec. 6.7 we show how ( 6.16 ) can be obtained through
the action of the partial transposition map on the standard basis, and
we also present a convenient form for @xmath by identifying its
eigenvectors. For other representations of the transposition and partial
transposition maps, see, for example, [ 266 ] .

With this brief introduction to aspects of algebra on vectorized
matrices, we now turn to calculus in order to identify @xmath , the
remaining factor in ( 6.6 ).

#### 6.2.2 First derivative of the trace norm

In this section we use @xmath to represent an unpatterned @xmath matrix
of complex variables. The unpatterned derivatives of a scalar function
@xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

are found by expressing the differential of @xmath in the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

and reading off the prefactors of @xmath and @xmath . The differentials
@xmath and @xmath are taken to be independent, and when @xmath is
differentiable the unpatterned derivatives are unique [ 262 , 267 ] .

As discussed in Sec. 6.1 , @xmath is Hermitian, meaning its matrix
elements are interdependent and special care must be taken in defining a
derivative with respect to it. With some effort, the derivative of a
scalar function with respect to a Hermitian argument @xmath can be found
in terms of the unpatterned derivatives as in [ 261 ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath means the Hermitian pattern is applied after the
unpatterned derivative has been computed, and @xmath is the commutation
matrix from ( 6.13 ). Sec. 6.5.1 contains an abstract summary of our
general approach to patterned derivatives which can be used to establish
( 6.19 ) rigourously. For a briefer derivation, we note that the
differentials of @xmath are not independent, since @xmath . Hence, when
we apply the Hermitian pattern, ( 6.18 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

and we identify the patterned derivative in ( 6.19 ). We note that
@xmath can be found similarly, but is not independent from @xmath since
@xmath .

The trace norm @xmath is a scalar function of a Hermitian matrix, so in
order to find its derivative we start by computing the differential of
@xmath as in ( 6.18 ). We take @xmath to be invertible so that @xmath is
differentiable, and define @xmath , so that @xmath . Then, by
definition, @xmath , and we can take the differential of both sides to
obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Multiplying by @xmath on the left and taking the trace allows us to
isolate @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

The differential operator @xmath commutes with both the trace and
operations, so this equation actually gives the differential of the
trace norm, @xmath . Identity ( 6.5 ) allows us to express @xmath in the
required form ( 6.18 ),

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.23)
  -- -- -- --------

where we have also used ( 6.10 ) for @xmath . Now we can identify the
derivatives with respect to @xmath and @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

The derivative with respect to a Hermitian argument follows by
substituting ( 6.24 ) in ( 6.19 ), and recalling @xmath :

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.25)
  -- -- -- --------

where we note that @xmath commutes with @xmath . The matrix @xmath
appearing in the derivative is the matrix extension of the sign
function, defined such that @xmath [ 268 ] .

The derivative simplifies even further when we use the
eigendecomposition for @xmath , where @xmath contains the eigenvalues of
@xmath in decreasing order,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

We would like to emphasize that the derivative taken with respect to a
Hermitian argument ( 6.26 ) is twice the unpatterned derivative ( 6.24
), which shows the indispensability of patterned matrix calculus for
understanding derivatives of negativity. Our results ( 6.16 ) and ( 6.26
) can be combined to give the first derivative of negativity ( 6.6 ).
Next, we compute the second derivative explicitly, and then proceed to
show how the perturbative expansion can be carried out to any order.

#### 6.2.3 Second derivative of the trace norm

Taking another derivative of ( 6.6 ) and noting that @xmath is constant
gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

The second line can be computed using the above results if @xmath is
known, but the first line involves the Hessian of @xmath with respect to
a Hermitian argument,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

To our knowledge, Hessians with respect to patterned matrices have not
been discussed in the literature. Therefore, in the following we present
a detailed discussion of such Hessians in general before applying our
new methods to the trace norm to compute ( 6.28 ).

As with Jacobians ( 6.18 ), unpatterned Hessians are defined through the
differential, ⁴ ⁴ 4 We follow the conventions in [ 261 ] .

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (6.29)
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

where we take

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

etc., and note that second differentials of the variables @xmath and
@xmath are zero by definition. Since the four Hessians here are not
independent, there is some freedom to exchange terms in the form ( 6.29
). To compute the Hessians, one must write the second differential of
@xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since partial derivatives commute, the @xmath and @xmath Hessians should
be symmetric, while @xmath and @xmath should be transposes of one
another. One can conclude that

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.32)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.33)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.34)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

When the argument of @xmath is a Hermitian matrix, this procedure must
be modified to account for the interdependence of @xmath and @xmath . We
can define a Hessian with respect to a Hermitian argument by noting that
the patterned Jacobian for scalar @xmath , Eq. ( 6.19 ), also applies to
a vector function @xmath , since it applies elementwise:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then, the Hessian of @xmath with respect to Hermitian @xmath can be
found by applying ( 6.35 ) to the Jacobian @xmath , resulting in

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.36)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

One way to gauge the correctness of this result is to use expression (
6.29 ) for the second differential of a scalar function @xmath . Then,
letting @xmath and recalling @xmath gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can see that the part of expression ( 6.37 ) in square brackets –
defined to be @xmath – matches Eq. ( 6.36 ). This result can also be
confirmed using the formal calculus described in Sec. 6.5.1 . Whereas
there are three independent Hessians of @xmath with respect to
combinations of @xmath , there is only one independent Hessian in the
Hermitian case. The Hessians are related by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

We now use our result ( 6.36 ) to compute ( 6.28 ) from the unpatterned
Hessians of the trace norm. Taking the differential of both sides of Eq.
( 6.21 ) and noting @xmath gives us

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

Once again we left-multiply by @xmath and take the trace,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

which becomes

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.41)
  -- -- -- --------

To find @xmath , we may vectorize both sides of Eq. ( 6.21 ) and use
identity ( 6.4 ) which results in

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

For compact notation, let us introduce the Kronecker sum @xmath and
define

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then, since @xmath is invertible, ⁵ ⁵ 5 Notice that @xmath , where we
have used the fact that @xmath and @xmath are positive semidefinite and
@xmath is nonsingular. Hence @xmath is invertible. Eq. ( 6.21 ) is a
Sylvester equation for which solvability conditions are known and met in
our case.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

Inserting this in Eq. ( 6.41 ) brings us to the desired form ( 6.31 )
from which we can read off the @xmath matrices, and combine them to form
the Hessians in Eqs. ( 6.32 ) to ( 6.34 ).

All that remains is to merge the unpatterned Hessians as in ( 6.36 ) to
obtain the Hessian with respect to a Hermitian variable. We show these
computations in more detail in Sec. 6.8 . The result is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

For computational efficiency we can simplify this expression in terms of
the eigendecomposition of @xmath , as we did for the first derivative.
We find

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.46)
  -- -- -- --------

This form provides additional insight into the behaviour of negativity
since the Hessian vanishes when the eigenvalues of @xmath are all
positive. This Hessian, along with the results of Secs. 6.2.1 and 6.2.2
, allows the second derivative of negativity ( 6.27 ) to be written in
terms of the density matrix and derived quantities.

#### 6.2.4 Summary of method

In this section we summarize our results in an algorithm for computing
the perturbative expansion for negativity ( 6.3 ) to second order:

(1) Determine the derivatives of the density matrix at @xmath , e.g.
from an equation of motion.

(2) Construct the commutation matrix @xmath from ( 6.13 ) and partial
commutation matrix @xmath from ( 6.16 ) appropriate for subsystem
dimensions @xmath from the basis of single-entry matrices @xmath .

(3) Compute the eigendecomposition for the initial state @xmath .

(4) Use the above in the first derivative of negativity, found from (
6.6 ) using ( 6.15 ) and ( 6.26 ):

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.47)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

(5) Use the above in the second derivative of negativity, found from (
6.27 ) using ( 6.15 ), ( 6.26 ), and additionally ( 6.46 ) for the
patterned Hessian of the trace norm @xmath . We summarize it as

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.48)
  -- -- -- --------

In light of Sections 6.2.2 and 6.2.3 , it is clear that higher
differentials @xmath , with @xmath , can be computed iteratively by
solving the equation @xmath for the differentials @xmath . Each such
equation takes the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath only contains differentials of order less than @xmath , and
each equation can be solved as in ( 6.44 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

In terms of lower-order differentials of @xmath , then,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally, the form of higher-order derivatives of @xmath with respect to
its Hermitian argument can be generalized from the methods we will
present in Sec. 6.5.1 and read off from ( 6.51 ). This extends the steps
in Section 6.2.3 for a perturbative expansion of negativity to any
order.

We conclude this section by noting that, for certain classes of systems,
all terms involving higher derivatives of the trace norm vanish. In
these cases we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the expansion ( 6.3 ) resums to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

The simplified Eq. ( 6.53 ) holds for a number of systems, but we have
yet to find an a priori condition that guarantees its validity.
Necessary and sufficient conditions for the vanishing of terms
containing higher derivatives of the trace norm merit further study.

### 6.3 Negativity growth in various systems

The derivatives of negativity can now be calculated by knowledge of the
density matrix and its derivatives at a specific instant in time @xmath
. This is often much simpler than computing @xmath for all times,
finding all of the eigenvalues, and then differentiating the sum in Eq.
( 4.6 ). Moreover, the latter method can be difficult to implement
numerically, as it relies on derivatives of absolute value functions,
which can lead to spurious results if not treated carefully. Here we
introduce some physical systems to exemplify the usefulness and
robustness of our method.

#### 6.3.1 Jaynes-Cummings model

A commonly used model in quantum optics is the Jaynes-Cummings model
(JCM), which characterizes a two-level atom interacting with a single
quantized mode of a bosonic field. The JCM has been the subject of much
theoretical and experimental work [ 216 , 269 ] , including recent
theoretical studies of its entanglement properties [ 223 , 121 ] . The
JCM Hamiltonian is given in units of @xmath by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the bosonic annihilation operator for the field, @xmath
lowers the atom from the excited state @xmath to the ground state @xmath
, @xmath is the frequency of the bosonic mode, @xmath is the detuning
between the mode and the atomic transition frequency, and @xmath is a
coupling constant [ 223 ] . The Hamiltonian conserves total excitation
number @xmath , restricting the dynamics to systems of size @xmath ,
where @xmath is the number of Fock states of the bosonic mode that are
coupled to by the initial conditions. This subsumes systems for which
the PPT criterion is sufficient ( @xmath ), as well as systems that can
have vanishing negativity yet remain entangled ( @xmath ). We use this
model to explore both types of systems, as delineated by the
Peres-Horodecki Criterion .

As a first example we choose the initial conditions @xmath ; the atom is
in its excited state and the field has three excitations. The state of
the system for all time is given by @xmath , where

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.55)
  -- -- -- --------

and we have defined the Rabi frequency through @xmath . The negativity
can be calculated analytically for this system, which has an effective
dimension of @xmath at all times; the atom Hilbert space is spanned by
@xmath and @xmath while the field Hilbert space is spanned by @xmath and
@xmath , with excitations trading between the two subsystems. We find,
using ( 6.47 ), that

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (6.56)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

which agrees with the result obtained by differentiating ( 4.6 ) with
respect to time. We plot the negativity, second-order Rényi entropy, and
logarithmic negativity for this system versus time for some fiducial
parameters in Fig. 6.1 . All of these quantities act as entanglement
measures for the @xmath system, as guaranteed by the PPT criterion. Of
note, the measures involving negativity are initially more sensitive
than the Rényi entropy, as the former grow linearly with time from
separable states while the latter grows only quadratically [ 121 ] .

To investigate a system for which the PPT criterion is not sufficient,
let us choose the initial state

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath            
              @xmath   
                       
  -- -------- -------- --

which was shown in Ref. [ 223 ] to have zero negativity while remaining
entangled (these states are ‘bound’ entangled [ 270 , 271 ] ). The
negativity and second-order Rényi entropy are plotted in Fig. 6.2 for
the same fiducial parameters as in Fig. 6.1 . There are distinct regions
in which the negativity fails to witness entanglement, i.e., in which
negativity is zero and Rényi entropy is nonzero (such as @xmath ). The
first and second derivatives, given by Eqs. ( 6.47 ) and Eq. ( 6.48 ),
agree to machine precision with the results obtained by differentiating
( 4.6 ). We also plot in Fig. 6.2 the second-order expansion found using
Eqs. ( 6.47 ) and ( 6.48 ) about an assortment of time points to show
that our equations capture the negativity dynamics even in regions where
negativity is constant, in intervals when @xmath is positive
semi-definite, and in the presence of bound entanglement. One may also
use our method to analyze how negativity changes with respect to the
system parameters @xmath and @xmath in order to explore how entanglement
in the JCM is sensitive to the entire parameter landscape.

#### 6.3.2 Open system dynamics: entangled cavity photons

The perturbation theory developed above admits variations of negativity
with respect to any parameter @xmath , given the derivatives @xmath . In
the JCM examples, we used time as the perturbation parameter, with the
unitary evolution equation @xmath . A natural extension of our method is
to parametrize non-unitary evolution; we can ask how negativity changes
with time in systems whose dynamics are coupled to other, external
systems. Sometimes the external systems themselves are responsible for
the entanglement generated with time [ 272 ] . We can also ask how
negativity changes with respect to other parameters, including dynamical
parameters and initial conditions. In this section we exhibit the
versatility of our method in another quantum-optical context.

Negativity has recently been studied in the open system of a pair of
cavities coupled to a pair of reservoirs with a flat spectrum [ 273 ,
274 ] . The authors of Ref. [ 274 ] showed that an initial mixture of
maximally-entangled pairs of cavities, with states given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath            (6.57)
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --------

can exhibit entanglement sudden death ; viz., negativity can decay to
zero in finite time [ 275 , 276 ] . Furthermore, the cavity states
coupled to by the dynamics are of dimension @xmath , so the PPT
criterion does not hold in this system. The authors supply an analytic
expression for @xmath (see Sec. 6.9 below), which can be compared to our
perturbation theory method (Fig. 6.3 ).

In Fig. 6.3 (a) we see a perfect agreement between our perturbation
theory and the evolution of negativity with respect to time in this open
system for a particular value of @xmath . The dynamics are fully
captured, including the time beyond which negativity decays to 0 and
remains unchanged.

Fig. 6.3 (b) shows negativity and its derivatives from Eq. ( 6.47 ) with
respect to the initial mixing parameter @xmath at various time points.
The derivatives again match those found by differentiating Eq. ( 4.6 )
to machine precision. They give insight into the entanglement sudden
death phenomenon, showing its dependence on initial conditions, as
studied in depth in Ref. [ 274 ] . Depending on the amount of initial
mixing between the two entangled states @xmath and @xmath , negativity
decays at different rates with respect to time. For time evolution,
negativity eventually reaches zero and remains there. With respect to
@xmath , negativity exhibits another sudden death feature: it decays to
zero with shrinking @xmath at sufficiently long times. However, at
shorter times, negativity reaches a minimum at intermediate values
@xmath , then grows again for increasing @xmath , where the @xmath
values are are highly sensitive to the time at which they are being
evaluated. Our perturbation theory is an excellent tool for probing
these complex phenomena or the dependence of negativity on any parameter
@xmath in all systems for which @xmath is known.

### 6.4 Quantum speed limits and bounds on negativity growth

The techniques we have developed can also be readily adapted to other
functions of quantum states and observables. For example, our
perturbation theory can immediately be applied to any dynamics involving
the trace norm. This includes the trace distance @xmath between two
states, which has been used, for instance, to investigate non-Markovian
systems [ 277 , 278 , 279 , 280 ] . It has been shown that
non-Markovianity holds when the trace distance between two states
undergoing the same dynamics increases over time [ 277 ] , a condition
that can now be investigated using our matrix calculus techniques. The
fidelity between quantum states @xmath , the Hilbert-Schmidt distance
@xmath , and other norm-based functions of the density matrix are all
matrix functions for which the argument’s patterns must be considered,
as we will prove in the following section. In this section we give an
example of how our techniques can be applied more broadly in quantum
physics by studying quantum speed limits, which usually involve bounds
on @xmath for some norm (see [ 281 ] for a recent review).

The original quantum speed limit, the Mandelstam-Tamm bound, applied a
generalized version of the Heisenberg uncertainty principle to find a
lower bound on the time @xmath for any pure state of a quantum system
@xmath to evolve into an orthogonal state @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

As the Mandelstam-Tamm bound was an attempt at formalizing the
energy-time uncertainty relation @xmath , which is not the consequence
of any canonical commutation relation as opposed to @xmath , it
naturally is phrased in terms of the uncertainty in the Hamiltonian,
@xmath . While this bound always holds, it is not always tight. A second
approach to the derivation of the minimal time for orthogonal evolution
used the time-dependent Schrödinger equation and resulted in the
slightly different Margolus-Levitin bound,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

In fact both bounds hold true, and it can be show that the unified bound
is tight,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

When extending quantum speed limits to the case of mixed states one can
no longer simply consider orthogonality as the obvious endpoint of
evolution. In same spirit, though, we can instead consider measures of
distinguishability, and determine the time required for a state to
evolve to a certain distinctness. Orthogonal pure states are perfectly
distinguishable, but we cannot expect perfect distinguishability for
generic mixed state evolutions. Even so, there are many valid measures
of distinguishability, such as the trace distance, fidelity, or
Hilbert-Schmidt distance mentioned above. For our purposes, we notice
that all of these measures can be reduced to matrix norms in the
representative form @xmath . The rate of change of this type of quantity
is then telling us about the speed of quantum evolution through the
space of density matrices, according to a distance measure determined by
the choice of norm [ 282 ] . An upper bound on this evolution speed, for
any appropriate norm, would represent a fundamental limitation on the
speed at which a quantum system can evolve,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

and, if desired, a speed limit @xmath could be turned into a speed limit
time by averaging,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

As we have pointed out, explicit computation of derivatives of this type
must be carried out with careful attention to the Hermitian pattern of
@xmath .

The patterned derivatives for the trace norm from ( 6.25 ) already leads
to an interesting bound of the form ( 6.61 ) on the evolution of quantum
systems, but in the following we will consider the much more general set
of Schatten @xmath -norms

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

By computing the patterned derivatives of this norm, we will be able to
bound the evolution speed @xmath in terms of @xmath which is directly
connected to the equations of motion of the system.

Following the same procedure as before we start with the unpatterned
derivatives. The differential is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

and from @xmath this can be reexpressed as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

At this point it is convenient to vectorize,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

which allows us to read off the derivatives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

For the application to quantum systems, we require the Hermitian
derivative for @xmath as in ( 6.19 ) which simplifies to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

As a check, putting @xmath reproduces the trace norm results ( 6.24 )
and ( 6.25 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

Another interesting intermediate result comes from setting @xmath ,
which gives the derivatives of the Hilbert-Schmidt norm

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

The desired quantity @xmath is now found through a simple application of
identity ( 6.5 ),

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.73)
  -- -- -- --------

We can bound the evolution speed in terms of @xmath by first using the
operator inequality @xmath , leading to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

Next we can apply Hölder’s inequality for the Schatten norms

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are chosen such that the norms are dual, @xmath . With the
judicious choices @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath , Hölder’s
inequality precisely dictates that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

This relation was derived without reference to the particular dynamics
of the system @xmath , so it will be valid for open or closed systems
and for von Neumann, Lindbladian, or even non-Markovian dynamics. Simply
put, @xmath is a fundamental quantum speed limit for the evolution
velocity through state space measured with respect to the Schatten
@xmath -norm distance.

We now turn to another bound on quantum dynamics that can be proven as
an extension of our results on negativity in this chapter. This time the
focus will be on the rate of entanglement generation rather than the
state evolution itself. In particular, we will bound the rate of change
of negativity in terms of @xmath , similar to the quantum speed limit
above.

Since negativity is, broadly, just the trace norm of the partial
transpose, we will focus on the representation presented in Sec. 6.2.1 .
With the partial transpose map ( 6.16 ) acting as in ( 6.14 ), we find
from ( 6.8 ) the necessary matrix superoperator ( 6.7 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

The trace norm of this expression can be bounded by applying the
triangle inequality for each term in the sums,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

and then with two applications of Hölder’s inequality ( 6.75 ) with
@xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

The operator norm @xmath appearing here gives the largest singular value
of its argument, as opposed to the trace norm which gives the sum of all
singular values. This is a useful characterization since singular values
combine simply under the Kronecker product. If @xmath has non-zero
singular values @xmath for @xmath , and @xmath has @xmath for @xmath ,
then @xmath will have rank @xmath , and its singular values are all the
possible combinations @xmath . Given that singular values are
non-negative and listed in decreasing order, the operator norm of the
Kronecker product is @xmath . The previous line then simplifies greatly
to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

These factors are quite manageable since @xmath , while @xmath , since
the eigenvalues of @xmath are 0 for @xmath and 1 for @xmath . Our
explicit representation for the partial transpose has allowed us to
determine

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

Before introducing dynamics, we can quickly improve this bound by noting
that @xmath , which means @xmath . Hence, the bound should be symmetric
in @xmath and @xmath . Indeed, repeating the above computation for the
partial transpose with respect to the other subsystem

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.83)
  -- -------- -- --------

This proves the stricter bound

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

In fact this bound is tight, since maximally entangled states saturate
it. Take the generalized Bell state between two @xmath -dimensional
qudits,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

Its density matrix @xmath is normalized to unity in the trace norm,
whereas the partial transpose @xmath has @xmath singular values equal to
@xmath . Hence @xmath for this class of states.

We can now make use of our first main result of this section, ( 6.76 ),
to find a bound on the rate of change of our proxy for negativity,
@xmath , from ( 6.84 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

The quantum speed limit ( 6.76 ) has allowed us to bound the growth of
negativity directly in terms of the system’s dynamics. As an example,
the basic case of unitary evolution under Hamiltonian @xmath could be
treated by first rewriting the dynamical term as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

These steps use the triangle inequality, sub-multiplicitivity which all
Schatten @xmath -norms obey, and the normalization of @xmath . If we
also reinstate the negativity according to its definition ( 6.1 ) we
have a new bound on entanglement dynamics

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.88)
  -- -------- -- --------

We note that self-energy terms in the Hamiltonian will not produce
entanglement, so one would expect that a bound on entanglement dynamics
should involve only the interaction terms of @xmath . To resolve this
issue we note that constant terms in @xmath do not contribute to
entanglement either, but do still affect its trace norm. Therefore this
upper bound ( 6.88 ) can be lowered by adding a constant multiple of the
identity to @xmath such that @xmath is minimized. Doing so can be
thought of as cancelling out the influence of any self-energy terms on
the @xmath side of the bound, while not affecting @xmath .

### 6.5 When is patterned matrix calculus required?

It may seem inconsistent that this chapter has emphasized the importance
of taking into account the Hermiticity of the density matrix for
derivatives of negativity, while in Chapter 5 this issue was ignored
completely. Indeed, the subtleties of patterned matrix calculus have
been ignored in many calculations in the literature, yet are unavoidable
when studying negativity as done here. In this section we explain the
major difference between negativity and, for example, Rényi entropies,
which entails that patterns can be ignored for the latter, but not the
former when taking derivatives. Our result is a theorem stating that for
complex analytic matrix functions, that is, for functions @xmath that do
not depend explicitly on the complex conjugate @xmath , there is no
functional difference between patterned and unpatterned derivatives.
First, we recount the calculus of complex, patterned matrices developed
in [ 267 , 283 , 284 , 285 ] and summarized in [ 261 ] . This calculus
was used in [ 261 ] to rigorously compute the derivative of a scalar
function with respect to a Hermitian argument ( 6.19 ), and also
provides a rigourous derivation of our result on patterned Hessians (
6.36 ). After this introduction to the formal calculus, we leverage it
to prove a theorem on the types of functions for which patterned and
unpatterned derivatives are not equal.

#### 6.5.1 Formal calculus of complex patterned matrices

Consider @xmath , a differentiable, complex matrix-valued function of a
real matrix variable @xmath , a complex matrix variable @xmath and its
complex conjugate @xmath . The differential of such a function is given
by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.89)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the differentials of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are independent,
and the Jacobian @xmath , for example, is

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.90)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Fortuitously, the differential commutes with vectorization, tracing,
transposition, and conjugation:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.91)
  -- -------- -- --------

Also, derivatives in this formalism satisfy a chain rule; for a
composite function

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.92)
  -- -------- -- --------

we have

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.93)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.94)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.95)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

We must employ a careful strategy for taking derivatives with respect to
a matrix if there are any elements in that matrix which are (possibly
constant) functions of the other elements. Such an approach was
developed in [ 283 , 284 , 285 ] and we summarize it here for a
differentiable function @xmath of a complex patterned matrix @xmath :

(1) Let @xmath be a function that acts on a set of unpatterned matrices
@xmath to make a patterned matrix @xmath . This function must be
differentiable with respect to @xmath @xmath , and @xmath , and a
diffeomorphism between the sets of patterned and unpatterned matrices.
That is, @xmath must be a smooth, bijective function whose inverse is
also smooth. The number of independent parameters contained in @xmath
that fully parametrize the set of patterned matrices should be minimal.

(2) Let @xmath be an unpatterned matrix with the same size as @xmath .
Extend @xmath to act on unpatterned matrices and find its derivatives
@xmath and @xmath . Use the chain rule for @xmath as in ( 6.92 ) to find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.96)
  -- -------- -- --------

etc., where patterns are applied after differentiation.

(3) The derivative of @xmath with respect to the patterned matrix @xmath
is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.97)
  -- -------- -- --------

In other words, one should find a minimal basis to represent the set of
patterned matrices @xmath , compute derivatives in this basis, then
transform back to the standard basis. The diffeomorphism @xmath
represents the transformation from the minimal basis to the standard
basis, while its inverse @xmath produces a vector of matrices @xmath .

#### 6.5.2 Analytic functions of matrices

In this section we discuss a sufficient condition for when consideration
of matrix patterns is unnecessary in taking derivatives of functions
with respect to those matrices. Let @xmath be a matrix-valued function
that is differentiable in matrices @xmath . Suppose that @xmath is
analytic in the sense that it is independent of @xmath , i.e., @xmath .
Let @xmath be a patterned matrix with the same size as @xmath , and
@xmath an appropriate diffeomorphism acting on the minimal set of matrix
parameters @xmath such that @xmath . Define @xmath so that @xmath as in
the beginning of Sec. 6.5.1 . We have, from Eq. ( 6.96 ), that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.98)
  -- -------- -- --------

and similarly for @xmath and @xmath . This means that Eq. ( 6.97 ) now
reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.99)
  -- -------- -- --------

But, by construction, the diffeomorphism @xmath satisfies,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.100)
  -- -------- -- ---------

since this amounts to changing from the standard basis to the minimal
basis and back [ 261 ] . Thus we can see that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.101)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The conclusion we draw is as follows: for functions independent of the
complex conjugate of their argument, taking the patterned derivative is
equivalent to differentiating with respect to the unpatterned argument
and evaluating it at the patterned matrix. The Schatten @xmath -norms,
including the trace norm, do not obey this condition, and we found their
patterned derivatives to have a different form compared to the
unpatterned counterparts.

### 6.6 Discussion

In the preceding sections, we have provided a means of computing the
perturbative expansion of the entanglement negativity. The complete
expressions require knowledge of the partial transpose @xmath at the
expansion point; of the partial commutation matrix @xmath , which we
have presented explicitly in various convenient forms; and of the
dynamics of @xmath .

Because the trace norm is not differentiable at points where @xmath is
singular, we assumed that @xmath was invertible in our discussion. It
would be interesting to know the conditions for @xmath to be invertible
based on properties of @xmath . There is, to our knowledge, no
straightforward relationship between the rank of a general density
matrix and the rank of its partial transpose. On the other hand, we can
make some conclusions by considering pure states. Let @xmath be a pure
state in a bipartite Hilbert space with dimensions @xmath and let @xmath
be the Schmidt rank of @xmath , the number of non-zero coefficients in
its Schmidt decomposition. From [ 286 ] , we know that the matrix rank
of @xmath is @xmath . Since @xmath is bounded from above by the minimum
of @xmath , @xmath having maximal rank implies that @xmath . For pure
states, then, @xmath is invertible if and only if the Schmidt rank of
@xmath is maximal and the dimensions of the subsystems are equal.

For singular @xmath it might be possible to apply our analysis to the
evolution of @xmath in an @xmath - dimensional subspace where @xmath is
supported. Otherwise, the trace norm still has a well defined
subdifferential because it is convex [ 260 ] . It may be possible to
optimize over the set of subgradients given extra input, such as the
global bound @xmath , to determine the evolution of @xmath around
singular points and find a one-sided derivative. We leave these ideas
for future exploration.

Many calculations have been presented in the literature involving
functions of density matrices that seemingly did not require patterned
matrix calculus, including those of the previous chapter. We addressed
this intriguing discrepancy by showing that negativity and Rényi
entropies belong to very different classes of functions from the point
of view of patterned matrix calculus. We proved that analytic matrix
functions, those that do not explicitly depend on the complex conjugate
of the argument, will have equivalent patterned and unpatterned
derivatives. It is only for non-analytic functions that one needs to
recruit these more subtle techniques. This coincidence allows one to
gloss over the patterns of the density matrix when studying common
functions like Rényi entropies @xmath [ 214 , 121 ] . In contrast, the
trace norm @xmath explicitly depends on the complex conjugate @xmath ,
so that the negativity is not analytic in this sense. The most common
examples of non-analytic matrix functions are matrix norms, like the
family of Schatten @xmath -norms studied in Sec. 6.4 .

The primary challenge in our perturbative expansion was in the correct
application of patterned matrix calculus to the problem. The salient
pattern was the Hermiticity of the density operator, which implies
Hermiticity of its partial transpose. We were able to extend the
approach taken in [ 261 ] to compute the first and second derivatives of
the trace norm with respect to a Hermitian argument. However,
Hermiticity may not be the only pattern at play. Density matrices are
also normalized to have unit trace, and evolution may conspire to endow
additional structure to the partial transpose.

As we have discussed, patterned derivatives can be found by first
computing unpatterned derivatives, and subsequently imposing patterns on
the result. Hermiticity is a strong condition which, as we showed in
Sec. 6.2.2 , destroys the independence of the complex differentials
@xmath and @xmath . Hence, imposing Hermiticity greatly alters the
functional form of the derivatives, resulting in ( 6.19 ).

By contrast, the unit trace condition for @xmath introduces some
dependencies among the diagonal elements, but this structure does not
affect the patterned derivatives. The unit trace condition is a
numerical constraint that does not change the functional form of the
derivatives, and can simply be applied to the unpatterned derivative.
For this reason we have not endeavoured to treat it with the same rigour
as Hermiticity.

Additionally, some readers may also have been perturbed to notice that
no consideration was given to the patterns of @xmath when computing
@xmath in ( 6.15 ). One way to explain this is that the function that
maps @xmath to its partial transpose @xmath is constant, depending only
on the dimensions of @xmath , and hence is functionally independent of
@xmath . It is an analytic matrix function, and Sec. 6.5.2 shows that
its patterned and unpatterned derivatives must be equivalent.

Since we allow for general dynamics of @xmath , in theory its evolution
might induce patterns on the partial transpose beyond Hermiticity. For
example, one can conceive of a Hamiltonian that keeps @xmath positive
semidefinite for some time interval, indicating a protracted
separability or bound entanglement. In such a scenario the patterned
derivatives may be functionally different from the Jacobian ( 6.19 ) or
Hessian ( 6.36 ), and would need to be treated on a case-by-case basis.
However, we have seen in Section 6.3.2 that our expansion correctly
predicts zero evolution of the negativity when @xmath is positive
semidefinite for an example system.

Our analysis can be applied to probe changes in negativity in a broad
assortment of physical systems, and the techniques we employ can be
readily adapted to other functions of quantum states and observables.
Studies of phenomena as disparate as phase transitions [ 287 ] , quantum
quenches [ 259 , 253 ] , and beam propagation [ 288 ] can harness our
methods in their investigations of negativity. In Sec. 6.4 we
demonstrated two distinct uses of our techniques to bound the rate of
evolution of general quantum systems with a quantum speed limit, as well
as providing a bound on entanglement dynamics through negativity. The
first main result, eq. ( 6.76 ), limits the rate at which any quantum
state can evolve in state space, according to the distance measure
induced by the Schatten @xmath -norm. This hearkens back to the original
quantum speed limits for a pure state to evolve to an orthogonal state.
Our quantum speed limit also allowed us to also provide a bound on the
growth of negativity ( 6.88 ) in terms of the Hamiltonian for closed
systems.

One especially interesting application of our calculus is to the linear,
or nearly linear, growth of entanglement observed in a large class of
many-body systems using entanglement entropy [ 207 , 210 ] and, more
recently, negativity [ 258 , 259 ] . In critical systems,
quasi-particles produced by a quench spread at a uniform velocity,
leading to an emergent lightcone-like behaviour and exactly linear
growth of logarithmic negativity. For more general systems,
quasi-particles can propagate at varying speeds, leading to an
approximate linear growth that has been studied numerically [ 259 , 253
] . Our approach to the derivatives of negativity provides a new avenue
to analytically explore the conditions under which second and higher
derivatives of the negativity will vanish.

Our techniques can even be employed for classical applications of
complex patterned matrices, such as analyzing the condition number for
Mueller matrices [ 289 ] , whose patterns are discussed in [ 290 ] .
Understanding the evolution of entanglement and other functions of
complex patterned matrices will have ramifications for an expansive
range of fields in the near future.

The remainder of this Chapter contains technical details.

### 6.7 Vectorized representation of the partial transposition map

Here we derive Eq. ( 6.16 ), where the partial transposition map @xmath
is recast to act on vectorized @xmath matrices as in ( 6.9 ), and takes
the form of ( 6.8 ), namely @xmath . This is accomplished by finding the
action of @xmath on each element of the standard basis of matrices, and
then vectorizing.

The standard basis consists of single-entry matrices @xmath with the
following ordering (we reserve @xmath with no subscript for the @xmath
case):

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.102)
  -- -------- -- ---------

If we parametrize @xmath and @xmath by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.103)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath and @xmath , then we can decompose @xmath as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.104)
  -- -------- -- ---------

using @xmath single-entry matrices @xmath . From this we can read off
the action of the partial transposition transformation on the basis
elements

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.105)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In the vectorized representation we use the basis @xmath , and the
action of @xmath on basis elements is determined by vectorizing both
sides of ( 6.105 ) such that @xmath . @xmath is a @xmath permutation
matrix whose elements can be expressed in terms of the single-entry
matrices @xmath , with @xmath . Note that these matrices are larger than
the matrices @xmath with no subscripts. The @xmath basis element has its
non-zero entry in position @xmath . Hence, the @xmath column of @xmath
is equal to @xmath . From ( 6.105 ) we see that partial transposition
takes @xmath and @xmath , so the @xmath column only has a non-zero entry
in the @xmath row, where @xmath . This non-zero element of @xmath can be
expressed as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.106)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Every vectorized basis element @xmath matches with an element @xmath ,
so that @xmath is the sum of all such elements:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.107)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This is the form we presented in ( 6.16 ).

Another representation of @xmath involves a more optimal basis choice.
Consider a symmetric matrix, @xmath , an antisymmetric matrix, @xmath ,
and an arbitrary matrix, @xmath . Notice that

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.108)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.109)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

Therefore the partial transposition map has as its eigenoperators
matrices of the form @xmath (eigenvalue 1) and @xmath (eigenvalue -1).
With this in mind, we can define bases @xmath and @xmath of the
symmetric and antisymmetric matrices, respectively:

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.110)
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.111)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

which gives us a basis for the combined system

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.112)
  -- -------- -- ---------

@xmath is diagonal in the (vectorized) basis @xmath ; if we assume the
basis matrices are all normalized by their Frobenius norm and order the
basis so that the symmetric matrices come first, it has the form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.113)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the @xmath identity matrix with @xmath , and @xmath is
the @xmath identity matrix with @xmath . We can thus write

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.114)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath has as its column vectors the vectorized matrices from
@xmath .

### 6.8 Simplifying the Hessian of the trace norm

To obtain the simplified expressions for the trace norm Hessian
presented in Eqs. ( 6.45 ) and ( 6.46 ), we use identity ( 6.12 ) as
well as a commutation rule for the matrix @xmath and the inverse of a
Kronecker sum. Supposing @xmath is invertible, and remembering that
@xmath is self-inverse, we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.115)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We can now write down the @xmath matrices introduced in Eq. ( 6.31 )
using ( 6.44 ) in ( 6.41 ),

  -- -- -- ---------
           (6.116)
  -- -- -- ---------

The unpatterned Hessians are then

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
              @xmath      
                          (6.117)
     @xmath               
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

These are combined to form the patterned Hessian with respect to a
Hermitian matrix @xmath ( 6.36 ),

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.118)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which was presented in ( 6.45 ). We can simplify this equation with the
eigendecomposition @xmath by noting

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.119)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and so on. Continuing in this manner, the patterned Hessian can be
written solely in terms of the eigendecomposition as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.120)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Here, we use that all the matrices involving @xmath are diagonal and
commute to simplify the Hessian. The final line was presented in ( 6.46
).

### 6.9 Details of open system dynamics

As per Ref. [ 274 ] , the initial state of the pair of cavities is given
by Eq. ( 6.57 ), and each cavity is coupled to a reservoir with @xmath
modes. Defining two amplitudes @xmath and @xmath , where @xmath is
measured in units of some dissipative constant, the state evolves to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.121)
  -- -------- -- ---------

in the @xmath basis, where the matrix elements are given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.122)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This can be used to calculate @xmath and @xmath in Eqs. ( 6.47 ) and (
6.48 ), and can also be used to explicitly calculate the eigenvalues of
@xmath for use in Eq. ( 4.6 ).

## Chapter 7 Conclusion

In this thesis we have focused on applications of quantum information
theory to quantum gravity through the AdS/CFT correspondence, with
additional work on the dynamics of entanglement in general quantum
systems.

The main results of Chapters 2 and 3 describe the refinement of a
holographic duality that was originally established for the maximally
symmetric case of pure AdS, dual to the conformally invariant vacuum
state of a CFT [ 132 ] . The duality allows OPE blocks, contributions to
the OPE from a conformal primary and its descendants, to be expressed as
an integral of a dual bulk field over a geodesic. The OPE block is a
bilocal operator, depending on the two boundary points where the OPE is
applied, and this feature can be traced as the origin of the geodesic
integrated operator’s diffeomorphism invariance. This was a significant
advance in our understanding of how the CFT can encode the
diffeomorphism invariance of a gravitational theory, as most
constructions of bulk fields from boundary data focus on local fields [
36 , 104 ] which are not diffeomorphism invariant observables [ 134 ,
135 ] . The major shortcoming of this duality was its heavy reliance on
the symmetry of the vacuum state to determine the metric on kinematic
space and the equations of motion for OPE blocks. In the bulk, the same
symmetry ensures that there is a unique geodesic connecting the two
spacelike separated boundary insertion points. This leaves the duality
in an uncertain state for any less symmetric setting, as the kinematic
space will not be entirely determined by symmetry, while in the bulk
there will often be several geodesics connecting pairs of boundary
points.

We have argued that the duality continues to hold with some
modifications in quotients of AdS @xmath , dual to CFT @xmath states
excited by the insertion of heavy primary operators. We chose to work in
quotient spacetimes as they have a rich spectrum of non-minimal
geodesics which can wind around singularities, or cross through black
hole horizons, while the spacetimes still retain some symmetries of AdS.
In the CFT we explained how OPE blocks decompose into more fine-grained,
quotient-invariant observables which we termed partial OPE blocks. These
new observables compute the contribution to the OPE from a conformal
family but each differ from the others by the monodromy of the OPE
around the heavy primary operator insertion in the state. We presented
two different arguments that each partial OPE block is dual to a
geodesic integrated bulk field, where the geodesic can be minimal,
non-minimal, or even horizon crossing. In Section 2.4 , utilizing the
residual symmetries of quotient spacetimes (the conical defects in
particular) we were able to show that geodesic integrated fields obey a
wave equation on a region of kinematic space, in a one-to-one
correspondence with the partial OPE blocks. More generally, in Chapter 3
we showed that the coordinate maps taking us from pure AdS @xmath to
various quotient spacetimes have non-analyticities which induce
non-minimal geodesics; acting with these transformations asymptotically
on OPE blocks and requiring observables to be single-valued induces the
decomposition into partial OPE blocks. Having the same origin, we argued
that these quantities will in general be dual in AdS @xmath /CFT @xmath
.

The significance of the partial OPE block / non-minimal geodesic
integrated field duality is in its ability to access information deep in
the bulk of AdS. As mentioned in the Introduction, one major goal of the
AdS/CFT program is to reconstruct the gravitational theory entirely in
terms of CFT data without assuming anything about the bulk ab initio .
Entanglement entropy data has proven to be a useful starting point as
the metric of the bulk can be extracted using the Ryu-Takayangi relation
( 1.40 ) wherever boundary anchored minimal surfaces reach. We noted,
however, that typical CFT states will have a dual geometry with
entanglement shadows, regions where minimal surfaces do not reach. The
CFT @xmath observable called entwinement [ 102 , 103 , 291 ] has been
proposed to be dual to the length of non-minimal boundary anchored
geodesics present in non-pure AdS @xmath spacetimes. As we have seen in
several classes of locally AdS @xmath spacetimes, non-minimal geodesics
can reach all parts of the spacetime. Hence, entwinement is a potential
path to reconstructing the entire bulk.

Unlike the entanglement entropy of a boundary subregion, which is a
measure of correlations among spatially organized degrees of freedom,
entwinement measures correlations among internal, discretely gauged
degrees of freedom. This is very similar to the way we constructed
partial OPE blocks in Ch. 2 , first removing a discrete gauge symmetry
by lifting operators to the covering CFT, considering the OPE in the
cover, and finally projecting down to gauge invariant observables.

In a similar manner to how entwinement allows reconstruction of the
metric deep in the bulk, our proposal could allow reconstruction of bulk
fields beyond the entanglement wedge. In the case of pure AdS @xmath the
reconstruction of fields from OPE blocks has already been established [
132 ] . The OPE blocks are first related to geodesic integrated fields,
after which the geodesic integral can be inverted to leave the bare AdS
field smeared over boundary operators, the same representation as
established by other methods [ 36 ] . The geodesic integral in this case
is a Radon transform on the hyperbolic disk, and explicit inversion
formulae are known for this highly symmetric scenario [ 292 , 159 ] .
When the bulk geometry is not pure AdS, it may be possible to achieve
bulk reconstruction within the entanglement shadow by starting with
partial OPE blocks. This would require inverting geodesic integrals in
more complicated, locally AdS backgrounds, a mathematical problem not
yet solved in general. Another issue encountered for general spacetimes
in three dimensions is that some regions never contain geodesic turning
points, a situation analogous to entanglement shadows called
entanglement shade [ 293 ] . This potentially blocks reconstruction of
these regions from entanglement or entwinement information in the CFT,
but has been resolved by using entanglement of purification ( 1.44 ) and
its dual, the area of entanglement wedge cross sections ( 1.45 ). It is
not yet known if entanglement of purification or its dual has a useful
manifestation in kinematic space.

Other considerations of non-extremal bulk surfaces in higher dimensional
theories have been adressed in [ 294 ] , where differential entropy (
2.18 ) was extended by including shape derivative information. It would
be interesting to extend the higher dimensional kinematic space program
to less symmetric spacetimes using these ideas.

To date, kinematic space has mainly been used to examine general
features of AdS/CFT that can be constrained by conformal symmetry alone.
It would be interesting to apply the kinematic space proposal to a
particular realization of AdS/CFT. For instance, one could study a
chiral primary state in the D1-D5 CFT in the limit where it is dual to a
conical defect in the bulk [ 150 ] . This theory could be used to study
the behaviour of holographic complexity in black hole models through
kinematic space [ 169 , 170 ] .

In Chapters 5 and 6 we studied the dynamics of entanglement through the
Rényi entropies and negativity. For Rényi entropies we considered
arbitrary von Neumann type dynamics starting from initially pure,
unentangled states, and showed that each Rényi entropy exhibits the same
leading order dynamics characterized by a timescale ( 5.2 ). Since the
family of Rényi entropies is sufficient to completely characterize the
entanglement of pure states, this timescale is a universal feature of
bipartite entanglement. We also showed similar results for
next-to-leading order dynamics that only arise due to surprising
cancellations of terms that appear for a subset of the family of
measures.

For pure states, negativity can be considered as the Rényi entropy for
the parameter @xmath ¹ ¹ 1 Technically logarithmic negativity has this
property, not negativity. [ 196 , 60 ] . One may then wonder if the
results of Ch. 5 also apply to negativity, but a review of the
assumptions made in our derivations shows that @xmath is explicitly
excluded. Indeed, negativity has drastically different behaviour around
pure separable states compared to the standard Rényi measures. For one
thing, negativity grows at first order in @xmath whereas Rényi growth
started at second order, which could be interpreted as negativity being
a more sensitive measure of entanglement around separable states. In
order to compare these measures, we sought a perturbative expansion of
negativity, but failed to find analytic expressions for its derivatives
presented in the literature.

In Ch. 6 we explained why this may have been overlooked previously, and
why the calculus of patterned matrices was necessary to solve the
problem ² ² 2 We find it interesting that the mathematical theory of
patterned matrix calculus that we extended and applied to the problem [
284 , 285 ] was developed several years after negativity was introduced
[ 196 ] . . We identified that an expansion of negativity would involve
derivatives of a matrix norm with respect to a Hermitian argument which
does not constitute a set of independent variables as usually required
in matrix calculus. After developing mathematical tools for computing
higher derivatives of matrix functions with respect to Hermitian
arguments, we applied them to the negativity and presented analytic
expressions for its derivatives. We also proved a condition for when the
subtleties of patterned matrix calculus can be ignored, as had been done
in much of the quantum information literature; matrix functions which do
not explicitly depend on the complex conjugate of their argument
(analytic matrix functions) will have patterned derivatives that equal
their unpatterned counterparts. Rényi entropies are examples of analytic
matrix functions, whereas negativity is not analytic due to the matrix
norm used in its definition.

Finally, we applied patterned matrix calculus techniques to the larger
class of Schatten @xmath -norms in the context of quantum speed limits.
@xmath -norms can be used as distance measures on Hilbert space to
quantify how quickly evolving states @xmath become distinguishable from
the initial state @xmath . We produced a bound on the rate of change of
distinguishability in terms of the @xmath -norm of @xmath ( 6.76 ). We
then extended this result to a bound on entanglement generation by
considering the @xmath case relevant to negativity. Using our explicit
expressions for the partial transpose operation we bounded the rate of
change of negativity in terms of the Hamiltonian’s norm ( 6.88 ).

To end this thesis we will present a question to be answered in the
future. A different avenue to explore which is concerned with the
entanglement structure of holographic theories involves the inequalities
satisfied by Ryu-Takayanagi entropies. For ordinary quantum systems
entanglement entropies satisfy a number of inequalities with important
physical meanings. These include subadditivity ( 1.32 ) and, related by
purification symmetry, the Araki-Lieb inequality @xmath for two
subregions, as well as strong subadditivity ( 1.33 ) and its equivalents
for three subregions. To see the structure behind these inequalities, it
is helpful to introduce an abstract entropy space, where each direction
corresponds to the entropy value of states for a certain subsystem [ 295
] . Then, the entropy inequalities restrict what vectors in this space
can be realized by the entropies of a quantum state.

To make this picture concrete, consider the entropy space for two
subregions @xmath and @xmath . This space is @xmath with axes
corresponding to @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . Subadditivity and the
Araki-Lieb inequality imply that there are three hyperplanes
constraining attainable entropy vectors, explicitly

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Allowed entropy vectors lie within the convex cone delimited by these
hypersurfaces in entropy space. For three subregions @xmath , @xmath ,
and @xmath the entropy space is @xmath , and valid entropy vectors lie
within a cone defined by upliftings of the two-party inequalities, as
well as instances of strong subadditivity. Generally, for @xmath
regions, entropy space is @xmath , but for @xmath the inequalities
defining the entropy cone are not completely known . This is a major
shortcoming of our current understanding of entanglement in general
quantum systems.

Slightly more can be said for holographic entanglement entropies which
also satisfy subadditivity, strong subadditivity, and inequalities
related by symmetry [ 54 ] . In addition, they satisfy the three-party
inequality called monogamy of mutual information (MMI) ( 1.43 ) [ 55 ] .
While the two-party holographic entropy cone is identical to its general
counterpart, MMI further constrains the three party holographic entropy
cone [ 56 ] . Going to four parties, the known inequalities are
sufficient in holography, whereas for five parties there are five
additional types of inequality satisfied by the Ryu-Takayanagi entropy
which are not always obeyed in general quantum systems [ 56 ] . Very
recently a complete description of the holographic entropy cone for five
regions was presented [ 296 ] . For even larger numbers of subsystems
some new inequalities for holographic entropy are known, but it is
undetermined if there are additional unknown inequalities or not.

Holographic entropy inequalities directly put constraints on the
geometries which can emerge through entanglement in AdS/CFT. We can
learn about the limitations of emergent spacetimes by studying the
extreme edges of allowed entropy space. Spacetimes with Ryu-Takayanagi
entropies that saturate the entropy inequalities are on the verge of
failing to be holographic, so if we are able to construct such
geometries we may be able to extract insights about quantum gravity.

For subadditivity it is extremely simple to classify all the states
which saturate the inequality: only product states of the form @xmath
have @xmath , since these are the only states with no correlations
between @xmath and @xmath . This pattern of entropies appears for
subsystems of holographic states on one side of entanglement phase
transitions as the minimal area bulk surface jumps between connected and
disconnected configurations ³ ³ 3 In quantum field theories spatial
subregions are never completely uncorrelated, and the vacuum sector of
Hilbert space does not factorize, points we belaboured when discussing
the Reeh-Schlieder theorem in Ch. 1 . The Ryu-Takayanagi entropy
produces @xmath for widely separated subregions, and hence implies a
factorization structure, only to leading order in the @xmath expansion,
which is the regime we will discuss. Quantum corrections from bulk
fields ensure that expectations from the Reeh-Schlieder theorem are not
violated [ 100 ] . [ 51 , 297 ] .

It is much more difficult to establish the class of states which
saturate strong subadditivity [ 298 , 299 ] , but it is not to
troublesome to describe them: states @xmath saturate the inequality (
1.33 ) when the Hilbert space of subsystem @xmath factorizes as @xmath ,
and the state takes the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a probability distribution, @xmath and @xmath . This
type of state is known as a quantum Markov chain, since the subsystem
@xmath mediates all correlations between @xmath and @xmath . When @xmath
is traced out, we are left with the uncorrelated product @xmath .
Non-trivial quantum Markov chains cannot be realized in holographic
systems because they are ruled out by the stronger inequality MMI ( 1.43
).

We are then lead to ask, what class of states saturates MMI, and what
geometrical interpretation do they have in holography ? This is an
unsolved question, as pointed out in [ 300 , 301 ] , but we can present
some expectations for its resolution. It will be convenient to introduce
the quantity @xmath called tripartite information which is constrained
to be negative by MMI,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

First of all, every pure three party state @xmath has @xmath , as does
the maximally mixed state @xmath , so we only consider sub-maximally
mixed states. Secondly, the question is meaningless for general quantum
systems since MMI does not hold for entanglement entropy. There are even
theories where every state has @xmath [ 302 ] . In any case, one can
consider two states with @xmath , and form the product @xmath such that
the combined state has @xmath . Hence, there is no special structure for
states with @xmath in general. Conveniently the MMI inequality rules out
this trivializing example, so we can still hope for interesting
structure holographically.

To build some intuition, we can consider the analogous question in
classical probability theory. Defining @xmath in the same manner as (
7.3 ), but with Shannon entropies @xmath , for a three variable joint
probability distribution @xmath the tripartite information is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Marginal probability distributions are defined as @xmath and all are
normalized. Each term in the sum in ( 7.4 ) can be positive or negative,
meaning that in general there is no special structure of distributions
with @xmath for the same reasons as above. Motivated by MMI, we can
consider only the subset of distributions for which the quantity @xmath
is positive. It is then not hard to see that within this class, the only
distributions with @xmath are of the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here we have introduced the conditional probability distributions @xmath
and noted a symmetry ⁴ ⁴ 4 This structure expresses that the level of
correlation between any two variables is unaffected by the value of the
third variable, and has sometimes been called a uniformly associative
distribution [ 303 , 304 ] . This class of distributions has appeared in
statistics literature, but only rarely as it cannot be expressed as a
Bayesian network, nor uniquely as a random Markov field; see p. 87ff of
[ 305 ] for a discussion. .

We conjecture that, to leading order in the @xmath expansion, subsystem
density matrices @xmath of holographic states with @xmath always have
the structure

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

which requires the Hilbert spaces to factorize as @xmath etc. The class
( 7.6 ) shares similarities with ( 7.5 ) in its cyclic structure and
interpretation. This class of states has no shared three-party
correlations, but has arbitrary two-party correlations among any pair of
regions. States of this form were considered for independent reasons in
[ 57 ] . In that work it was shown that the structure ( 7.6 ) appears in
holographic settings on one side of entanglement phase transitions as
the bulk Ryu-Takayanagi surface jumps from disconnected components to a
multi-legged connected surface joining @xmath .

The form ( 7.6 ) is implied by another recent conjecture concerning the
form of holographic states in general [ 59 ] . Using an alternative
approach to holographic entanglement entropy called bit-threads, which
are based on maximally packed vector fields rather than minimal
surfaces, the authors posited that any pure 3-party holographic state
should decompose as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

with only bipartite entanglement. Furthermore, for a pure state on four
subregions the conjectured holographic state decomposition is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Each two-party @xmath is bipartite entangled, while the state @xmath is
a four-party perfect tensor defined such that the reduced state on any
two subsystems is maximally mixed. It can be shown that all perfect
tensor states have @xmath between any three parties. Hence, the only way
for the conjectured state ( 7.8 ) to have @xmath after tracing out one
subsystem is if the perfect tensor factor is trivial. Removing the
perfect tensor factor and tracing out any of the 4 parties reproduces
our conjectured state ( 7.6 ). However, the conjectured form ( 7.8 ) has
stronger connotations than ( 7.6 ) alone, and we note that the implied
Hilbert space factorizations like @xmath do not necessarily correspond
to spatial factorizations. That is, the conjecture ( 7.8 ) does not
imply that each Hilbert space factor @xmath , for example, corresponds
to some disjoint spatial subregion of @xmath , but instead refers to
some internal organization of degrees of freedom [ 59 ] .

Although ( 7.6 ) is implied by the conjecture in [ 59 ] , it will likely
be much easier to prove ( 7.6 ) directly than to prove the form ( 7.8 ).
One promising approach that leverages the properties of holographic
theories follows as an extension of work disseminated in [ 56 ] . In
that paper Ryu-Takayanagi surface configurations are encoded into a
graph model, and entropy inequalities are expressed in terms of cuts of
the graph. This model can be used to prove MMI and the other holographic
inequalities, but it can also be used to study the conditions for
inequalities to be saturated. Work in this direction is in progress.
