In this thesis we apply techniques from quantum information theory to
study quantum gravity within the framework of the anti-de Sitter /
conformal field theory correspondence (AdS/CFT). A great deal of
interest has arisen around how quantum information ideas in CFT
translate to geometric features of the quantum gravitational theory in
AdS. Through AdS/CFT, progress has been made in understanding the
structure of entanglement in quantum field theories, and in how
gravitational physics can emerge from these structures. However, this
understanding is far from complete and will require the development of
new tools to quantify correlations in CFT.

This thesis presents refinements of a duality between operator product
expansion (OPE) blocks in the CFT, giving the contribution of a
conformal family to the OPE, and geodesic integrated fields in AdS which
are diffeomorphism invariant quantities. This duality was originally
discovered in the maximally symmetric setting of pure AdS dual to the
CFT ground state. In less symmetric states the duality must be modified.
Working with excited states within AdS @xmath /CFT @xmath , this thesis
shows how the OPE block decomposes into more fine-grained CFT
observables that are dual to AdS fields integrated over non-minimal
geodesics. These constructions are presented for several classes of
asymptotically AdS spacetimes.

Additionally, this thesis contains results on the dynamics of
entanglement measures for general quantum systems, not necessarily
confined to quantum gravity. The quantification of quantum correlations
is the main objective of quantum information theory, and it is crucial
to understand how they are generated dynamically. Results are presented
for the family of quantum Rényi entropies and entanglement negativity.
Rényi entropies are studied for general dynamics by imposing special
initial conditions. Around pure, separable initial states, all Rényi
entropies grow with the same timescale at leading, and next-to-leading
order. For negativity, mathematical tools are developed for the
differentiation of non-analytic matrix functions with respect to
constrained arguments. These tools are used to construct analytic
expressions for derivatives of negativity. We establish bounds on the
rate of change of state distinguishability under arbitrary dynamics, and
the rate of entanglement growth for closed systems.

\degree

Doctor of Philosophy \department Physics \gradyear 2019

{preliminary} {dedication}

To my parents Kimberley and Larry
