Current object category learning and recognition approaches are
typically designed for static environments in which it is viable to
separate the training (off-line) and testing (on-line) phases. In such
scenarios, the learned object category models are static, in the sense
that the representation of the known categories does not change after
the training stage. However, to migrate a robot to a new environment one
must often completely redesign and remodel the knowledge-base that it is
running with.

The thesis contributes in several important ways to the research area of
3D object category learning and recognition. To cope with the mentioned
limitations, we look at human cognition, in particular at the fact that
human beings learn to recognize object categories ceaselessly over time.
This ability to refine and extend knowledge from the set of accumulated
experiences facilitates the adaptation to new environments. Inspired by
this capability, we seek to create a cognitive object perception and
perceptual learning architecture that can learn 3D object categories in
an open-ended fashion. In this context, “open-ended” implies that the
set of categories to be learned is not known in advance, and the
training instances are extracted from actual experiences of a robot, and
thus become gradually available, rather than being available since the
beginning of the learning process. This architecture provides perception
capabilities that will allow robots to incrementally learn object
categories from the set of accumulated experiences and reason about how
to perform complex tasks. This framework integrates detection, tracking,
teaching, learning and recognition of objects.

An important part of this work is concerned with the object
representation. This is one of the most challenging problems in robotics
because it must provide reliable information in real-time to enable the
robot to physically interact with the objects in its environment. We
have first tackled the problem of object representation, by proposing a
new global object descriptor named Global Orthographic Object Descriptor
(GOOD).This descriptor distinguishes itself from alternative 3D global
object representations in that it is very fast to compute, robust
against variations in pose and sampling density, and copes well with
noisy sensor data. We also propose an extension of Latent Dirichlet
Allocation to learn structural semantic features (i.e. topics) from
local feature co-occurrences for each object category independently.

Open-ended learning for 3D object category recognition is the core
problem in this thesis. Both instance-based and model-based approaches
were explored for incrementally scaling-up to larger sets of categories.
Finally, a novel experimental evaluation methodology, that takes into
account the open-ended nature of object category learning in
multi-context scenarios, is proposed and applied. An extensive set of
systematic experiments, in multiple experimental settings, was carried
out to thoroughly evaluate the described learning approaches.
Experimental results show that the proposed system is able to interact
with human users, learn new object categories over time, as well as
perform complex tasks. The contributions presented in this thesis have
been fully implemented and evaluated on different standard object and
scene datasets and empirically evaluated on different robotic platforms.
