The blockchain concept forms the backbone of a new wave technology that
promises to be deployed extensively in a wide variety of industrial and
societal applications. Governments, financial institutions, banks,
industrial supply chains, service companies, and even educational
institutions and hospitals are investing in a substantial manner in the
hope of improving business efficiency and operational robustness through
deployment of blockchain technology. This thesis work is concerned with
designing trustworthy business-to-business (B2B) market platforms
drawing upon blockchain technology and game theory.

The proposed platform is built upon three key ideas. First, we use
permissioned blockchains with smart contracts as a technically sound
approach for building the B2B platform. The blockchain deploys smart
contracts that govern the interactions of enterprise buyers and sellers.
Second, the smart contracts are designed using a rigorous analysis of a
repeated game model of the strategic interactions between buyers and
sellers. We show that such smart contracts induce honest behavior from
buyers and sellers. Third, we embed cryptographic regulation protocols
into the permissioned blockchain to ensure that business sensitive
information is not revealed to the competitors. We believe our work is
an important step in the direction of building a powerful B2B platform
that maximizes social welfare and enables trusted collaboration between
strategic enterprise agents.

{frontmatter} \submitdate

MAY 2018 \dept Computer Science and Automation \degreein Computer
Science and Engineering \mscengg \iisclogotrue \tablespagetrue
\blankpage {dedication}

DEDICATED TO

[2em] My Parents and My Grandmother

for

Their Unending Love and Support

\blankpage \acknowledgements

My first and foremost gratitude is towards my advisor, Prof Y Narahari.
He took me as a student despite my lack of understanding of game theory
and proved to be the most understanding of advisors. In the last two
years, he has been encouraging, kind, and supportive along each and
every turn. His patience and kindness are virtues I hope to inculcate
within myself. It was also thanks to him that I got an opportunity to
spend a summer at IBM research where the work presented in this thesis
began. I am hugely indebted to Pankaj and Vinayaka who introduced me to
the field of blockchains and bore with my shortcomings with grace. None
of the work presented in this thesis would have been possible without
their guidance. Many thanks to Pankaj for putting up with my incessant
questions all through the summer, despite his busy schedule. A big
thanks to Megha, for her technical contributions as well as her
emotional support in the last year. This work would have been incomplete
without her presence, patience, and warmth. Despite her many other
obligations, she enthusiastically helped me at every step. I’m very
grateful to have met someone with whom my thinking and tastes match. I
hope we can continue our many adventures as long as possible. My biggest
supporters are my parents. Without them, their love, and their support,
none of the things I consider my achievements would have been possible.
Thank you so much for putting up with my rants and tirades all these
years, for always giving me the freedom to dream, for helping me get
centered on the many occasions I lost my cool. Thank you for teaching me
to be self-reliant and independent. You both were my first teachers,
and, all my accomplishments are a result of your teachings. A lot of
people helped make this thesis, and I would like to take this
opportunity to thank all of them. Shweta and Ganesh, you both have been
helping me out since the first version of this work was written up.
Thank you so much for taking out the time from your busy schedules to
guide me and my clumsy writing. A big thank you to Mayank and Vishakha
for working even after their exams were over and helping proofread this
thesis. Thanks to Arpita for her early inputs on this work and all the
encouragement. A big thank you to everybody who had to sit through my
mock presentations. I know they were nothing short of torture, but thank
you for being so gracious. Emotional support goes a long way in bringing
a work like this to fruition. So a big thank you to Megha, Pooja, and
Urvashi for being there for me, listening to my many rants, cheering me
up, and going along with my crazy plans. Pooja and Urvashi, our tastes
may not match in some things but thank you for going along with me
anyways. Thank you guys also for being awesome company these last two
years. Lastly, but not the least, I’d like to thank my Nani. I wish you
were here with me today. You are as much a parent to me as Mama and
Papa. You raised me for thirteen years, and gave me the courage to
believe in myself. I miss you every single day, especially on such
occasions, which I want to share with you. Thank you for your love and
warmth. I hope wherever you are, you’re happy. \blankpage \makecontents
\notations

\blankpage
