## 1 Financial Terminology

### 1.1 Bond

#### 1.1.1 Definition

In finance, a bond is an instrument of indebtedness of the bond issuer
to the holders, under which the issuer owes the holders a debt and is
obliged to pay them interest at fixed intervals(semiannual, annual,
sometimes monthly) and to repay the principal at a later date, termed
the maturity date. [ 1 ] On the one hand, bonds are applied as one of
the methods that government and corporations commonly use to borrow
money from investors. On the other hand, bonds are considered as one of
the ways that investors make profits of. Bond can be thought as a form
of loan or IOU: the holder of the bond is the lender (creditor), the
issuer of the bond is the borrower (debtor), and the coupon is the
interest. Bonds provide the borrower with external funds to finance
long-term investments, or, in the case of government bonds, to finance
current expenditure. Certificates of deposit (CDs) or short-term
commercial paper are considered to be money market instruments and not
bonds: the main difference is the length of the term of the instrument.
[ 1 ] Thus, bonds provide a solution for both sides to quench their
financial need. Very often the bond is negotiable, that is, the
ownership of the instrument can be transferred in the secondary market.
This means that once the transfer agents at the bank medallion stamp the
bond, it is highly liquid on the secondary market. It was first issued
by Venetian government in thirteen century designed to pay 5% interest
rate twice a year and never mature. During the World War II the United
States government raised almost two hundred billion U.S. dollars solely
in war bonds and the money solidified the foundation of Allies’ victory.
[ 34 ]

#### 1.1.2 The Functionality of Bond

When governments or corporations urge to acquire money for long-term
investments or to finance current expenditure in the case of government
bond, they may issue bonds. Since the bonds are not only the contracts
between issuers and buyers but also assets, most of the bonds can be
traded publicly or over-the-counter(OTC) from one bond holder to another
where over-the-counter(OTC) refers to the process of how securities are
traded for the companies that are not listed on a formal exchange. Such
securities are traded via a broker-dealer network as opposed to on a
centralized exchange, since the securities do not fulfill the
requirements of being listed on a standard market exchange. The bond is
asset due to its par value (face value) paid at maturity and its
interest rate paid periodically at certain intervals. To be addressed,
some bonds do not have interest rate, which will be introduced later. In
addition, it is also common for a bond issuer to repurchase bonds from
buyers if the interest rate decline or the credit of the issuer has
improved, which allows the issuer to reissue new bonds at a lower cost.
[ 20 ]

#### 1.1.3 Characteristics of Bond

There are few concepts to be introduced in this paragraph, such as face
value, coupon rate, coupon date, the maturity date, the issue price, the
market value.

1.  Face value

    This is the dollar value of a bond that is to be repaid at maturity.
    In other words, this is what the investor has loaned to the issuer
    and will get back. Generally, bonds are issued in denominations of
    US $1,000, but some can be in denominations of US $5,000 or even
    larger. [ 34 ]

2.  Coupon rate

    Coupon rate is the amount of interest paying on quarterly,
    semiannual, or annual basis in a percentage term. The coupon rate
    retains in the entire life span of a bond. Some bonds, such as
    nominal bonds, have a fixed interest rate at each interval of
    payment. On the contrary, the other bonds, such as inflation-indexed
    bonds, have a floating rate of interest, where the rate is adjusted
    periodically in line with some measures of market rates. The
    floating interest rate only correlates to the interest-rate
    conditions, and has no correlation with the issuer’s
    creditworthiness. In the case of inflation-indexed bonds, they are
    issued by U.S. department of treasury. The Coupon rate of a bond as
    compared to the interest rates in the economy determines whether a
    bond will trade at par, below par, or above its par value.

3.  Coupon date

    One of the dates on which bondholders are sent coupon payments. That
    is, the coupon dates are the dates on which bondholders receive the
    interest that they are guaranteed. Coupon dates are fixed for bonds,
    and usually occur twice a year.

4.  Maturity date

    In finance, maturity or maturity date refers to the final payment
    date of a loan or other financial instrument, at which point the
    principal (and all remaining interest) is due to be paid.

5.  Issue price

    The issue price of shares is the price at which they are offered for
    sale when they first become available to the public.

6.  Market value

    Market value is the price an asset would fetch in the marketplace.
    Market value is also commonly used to refer to the market
    capitalization of a publicly traded company, and is obtained by
    multiplying the number of its outstanding shares by the current
    share price. Market value is easiest to determine for
    exchange-traded instruments such as stocks and futures, since their
    market prices are widely disseminated and easily available, but is a
    little more challenging to ascertain for over-the-counter
    instruments like fixed income securities. However, the greatest
    difficulty in determining market value lies in estimating the value
    of illiquid assets like real estate and businesses, which may
    necessitate the use of real estate appraisers and business valuation
    experts respectively. [ 8 ]

#### 1.1.4 Zero-Coupon Bond

One of the special cases is zero-coupon bond. A zero-coupon bond is a
bond where the face value is repaid at the time of maturity. [ 33 ]
Zero-coupon bonds do not have a periodic interest payment. Instead,
zero-coupon bonds are sold at deep discounts to their face value. For
example, the United States department of treasury sold 26-week bills
with $100 face value for the price $98.78 on October 18th, 2018. The gap
between its sold value and face value reveals a total annual yield of
2.479%. Since zero-coupon bonds do not hold a coupon rate and its face
value is fixed, we can calculate and estimate the “interest rate” of a
coupon bond. Such “interest” is defined as imputed interest, which is an
estimated interest rate for the bond and not an established interest
rate. Though there is no transaction of coupon payment before the coupon
bond matures, bond holders still have the obligation to pay federal,
state, and local income taxes based on the impute interest. Thus, the
imputed interest on the bond is subject to income tax.

### 1.2 Inflation

#### 1.2.1 Definition

Inflation is a quantitative measure of the rate at which the average
price level of a basket or selected goods and services in an economy
arising over a period of time. In another word, inflation indicates an
erosion of purchasing power in an unit currency. [ 6 ]

There is a controversial problem of defining inflation, as well as the
relations among products and services: the relative value of any two
products/services changes with time. This relation indicates that the
inflation, ”value of money”, is subjective to some extent. This is the
reason why one often refers to a basket or a scale of goods and services
to determine the level of inflation.

#### 1.2.2 Importance

Inflation affects economies in various positive and negative ways. The
negative effects of inflation include an increase in the opportunity
cost of holding money, uncertainty over future inflation which may
discourage investment and savings, and if inflation were rapid enough,
shortages of goods as consumers begin hoarding out of concern that
prices will increase in the future. Positive effects include reducing
unemployment due to nominal wage rigidity, [ 28 ] allowing the central
bank more leeway in carrying out monetary policy, encouraging loans and
investment instead of money hoarding, and avoiding the inefficiencies
associated with deflation.

#### 1.2.3 Inflation Rate

The inflation rate measures the percentage change in purchasing power of
a currency which has a positive correlation with the cost of price and a
negative correlation with the purchasing power.

### 1.3 Price Index

#### 1.3.1 Definition

Price index is a normalized average (typically a weighted average) of
price relatives for a given class of goods or services in a given
region, during a given interval of time. It is a statistic designed to
help to compare how these price relatives, taken as a whole, differ
between time periods or geographical locations. [ 54 ]

#### 1.3.2 Importance

The price index is not only meaningful toward the calculation of
inflation, more importantly, is used widely in informing government
economic policy, monetary policy, wage bargaining, the level of pension
increases etc.

#### 1.3.3 How to calculate the price index

Given a set @xmath of goods and services, the total market value of
transactions in @xmath in some period @xmath would be

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

@xmath represents the prevailing price of @xmath in period @xmath

@xmath represents the quantity of @xmath sold in period @xmath

If, across two periods @xmath and @xmath , the same quantities of each
good or service were sold, but under different prices, then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

would be a reasonable measure of the price of the set in one period
relative to that in the other, and would provide an index measuring
relative prices overall, weighted by quantities sold. Of course, for any
practical purpose, quantities purchased are rarely if ever identical
across any two periods. As such, this is not a very practical index
formula.

One might be tempted to modify the formula slightly to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

#### 1.3.4 Criteria of constructing a price Index

The criteria of constructing a price index differs from country to
country. For example, the Bureau of Labor Statistics(BLS) publishes the
index called Consumer Price Index(CPI): CPI reflects spending patterns
for each of two population groups: all urban consumers and urban wage
earners and clerical workers. The all urban consumer group represents
about 93 percent of the total U.S. population. It is based on the
expenditures of almost all residents of urban or metropolitan areas,
including professionals, the self-employed, the unemployed, and retired
people, as well as urban wage earners and clerical workers. Not included
in the CPI are the spending patterns of people living in rural
non-metropolitan areas, those in farm households, people in the Armed
Forces, and those in institutions, such as prisons and mental hospitals.
Consumer inflation for all urban consumers is measured by two indexes,
namely, the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers (CPI-U) and the
Chained Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers (C-CPI-U). The
Consumer Price Index for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers (CPI-W)
is based on the expenditures of households included in the CPI-U
definition that also meet two additional requirements: more than
one-half of the household’s income must come from clerical or wage
occupations, and at least one of the household’s earners must have been
employed for at least 37 weeks during the previous 12 months. The CPI-W
population represents about 29 percent of the total U.S. population and
is a subset of the CPI-U population. Similarly, in the UK the Office for
National Statistics(ONS) measures the retail price index(RPI).
Meanwhile, the ONS also calculates the Consumer price index(CPI) which
mainly differs from CPI by excluding the housing-related expenses such
as mortgage payments,council tax. In France, the INstitut National de la
Statistique et des Etudes Economiques(INSEE) publishes the consumer
price index for all France(FCPI) for French inflation-linked bonds.
Moreover, the Thus, each country or region has its unique method on
calculating the price index by constructing the index formula based on
its unique category of goods and services based on a unique weighted
scale.

### 1.4 Consumer Price Indices (CPI)

#### 1.4.1 Definition

The CPI is a statistical estimate constructed using the prices of a
sample of representative items whose prices are collected periodically
and it is used to measures changes in the price level of market basket
of consumer goods and services purchased by households.

In fact, different countries and different regions utilize distinct
indices to measure the inflation in their own countries and regions. For
example, the government of US uses CPI (Consumer Price Index) to measure
the inflation in USA and the government of United Kingdom uses RPI
(Retail Price Index) to measure the inflation.

#### 1.4.2 Explanation of CPI

CPI reflects spending patterns for each of two population groups: all
urban consumers and urban wage earners and clerical workers. The all
urban consumer group represents about 93 percent of the total U.S.
population. It is based on the expenditures of almost all residents of
urban or metropolitan areas, including professionals, the self-employed,
the unemployed, and retired people, as well as urban wage earners and
clerical workers. Not included in the CPI are the spending patterns of
people living in rural non-metropolitan areas, those in farm households,
people in the Armed Forces, and those in institutions, such as prisons
and mental hospitals. Consumer inflation for all urban consumers is
measured by two indexes, namely, the Consumer Price Index for All Urban
Consumers (CPI-U) and the Chained Consumer Price Index for All Urban
Consumers (C-CPI-U). The Consumer Price Index for Urban Wage Earners and
Clerical Workers (CPI-W) is based on the expenditures of households
included in the CPI-U definition that also meet two additional
requirements: more than one-half of the household’s income must come
from clerical or wage occupations, and at least one of the household’s
earners must have been employed for at least 37 weeks during the
previous 12 months. The CPI-W population represents about 29 percent of
the total U.S. population and is a subset of the CPI-U population.

#### 1.4.3 Relation between CPI and inflation rate

The inflation rate formula uses the Consumer Price Index announced by
the Bureau of Labor Statistics in the United States. Meanwhile, some
other similar indices may be applied to the inflation rate formula. If
another index is applied, the terms of CPI in the inflation rate formula
are substituted by the alternative index.

The subscript ”i” indicates the initial consumer price index at the time
interval i that the formula intakes. As such, the subscript ”j”
indicates the ending consumer price index at the time interval j.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where

@xmath indicates the initial consumer price index at the time interval
@xmath

@xmath indicates the ending consumer price index at the time interval
@xmath

In UK’s economic system, the calculation of year-on-year inflation rate
has a different method and is based on a different index, compared to US
economic system.

### 1.5 Inflation-Indexed Bond (IIB)

#### 1.5.1 Definiton

Daily inflation-indexed bonds (also known as inflation-linked bonds or
colloquially as linkers) are bonds where the principal is indexed to
inflation or deflation on a daily basis. They are thus designed to hedge
the inflation risk of a bond. [ 49 ] The inflation-linked market
primarily consists of sovereign bonds, with privately issued
inflation-linked bonds constituting a small portion of the market. [ 5 ]

#### 1.5.2 History

The earliest recorded inflation-indexed bonds were issued by the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts in 1780 during the Revolutionary War. [ 19
] Much later, emerging market countries began issuing ILBs in the 1960s.
In the 1980s, the UK was the first major developed market to introduce
“linkers” to the market. Several other countries followed, including
Australia, Canada, Mexico and Sweden. In January 1997, the U.S. began
issuing Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities (TIPS), now the largest
component of the global ILB market. [ 37 ] Today inflation-linked bonds
are typically sold by governments in an effort to reduce borrowing costs
and broaden their investor base. Corporations have occasionally issued
inflation-linked bonds for the same reasons, but the total amount has
been relatively small. [ 21 ]

#### 1.5.3 The purpose of IIB

Though the main reason of supplying inflation-indexed bonds to investors
is to preserve a certain real return and the main reason of offering
inflation-indexed bonds from issuers is to obtain a real debt burden,
however, inflation-indexed bonds cannot secure complete real value
certainty due to the three reasons following.

1.  Every index has its own limitation on providing the precise
    consumption basket to individual investors. For example, different
    market baskets (or commodity bundles) has their own numerical
    proportions on a different collection of selected price categories.
    (One of the ubiquitous market baskets is the basket of consumer
    goods, which conducts the Consumer Price Index(CPI). Specifically,
    the categories included in the basket are food and beverages,
    housing, apparel, transportation, medical care, recreation,
    education and communication, other goods are services. )Only if the
    proportional collection of goods and services from given index has
    the complete match with investors’ need of consuming, otherwise the
    index cannot provide the precise consumption basket to investors. [
    35 ] There exists a time difference between when the price index
    value is calculated and when the price index value is announced.
    Thus, by the time when the price index is published, the published
    price index applies to the price index where the collections of
    goods and services have been collected. Though this time lagging
    does not cause much effect in a country where the inflation rate is
    stable, it causes influences in the countries with highly variable
    price indices. In fact, the calculation of price index takes from
    days to over a year, which indicates the essentialness of the
    concern.

2.  The last reason is due to the complexity of the system of tax. It is
    citizens free choice to decide how they split their income as
    pre-tax or post-tax. In the case of pre-tax, citizens pay income tax
    as usual; however, in the case of post-tax, citizens do not pay tax
    but only can withdraw the money from their bank accounts when they
    are retired. Thus, the fact of existence of pre-tax and post-tax
    causes an instability of the cash flow influencing the inflation.
    Meanwhile, the uncertainty of that tax regimes maintain or renovate
    the tax policy as the same during the life time of an indexed bond
    evokes a third factor that addresses the concern when modelling the
    inflation-indexed bond.

#### 1.5.4 Characteristics

There are three influential factors of inflation-indexed bond yields:

1.  Current and expected future short-term real interest rates

2.  Differences in expected returns on long-term and short-term real
    bonds caused by risk premia (which can be negative if
    inflation-indexed bonds are valuable hedges)

3.  Differences in expected returns on long-term and short-term bonds
    caused by liquidity premia or technical factors that segment the
    bond market.

The priority of considering the three factors above in our model is
hierarchy of the number from first to third. The generic hypothesis of
the term structure indicates that the only time-varying factor is the
current and expected future short-term real interest rates; while the
other two are constant. On the contrary, in the case of constructing
models of nominal treasury bonds, it is essential to consider the
possibility that risk and liquidity premia are time-varying. [ 37 ]

Daily inflation-indexed bonds pay a periodic coupon that is equal to the
product of the principal and the nominal coupon rate.

For some bonds, such as in the case of TIPS, the underlying principal of
the bond changes, which results in a higher interest payment when
multiplied by the same rate. For example, if the annual coupon of the
bond were 5% and the underlying principal of the bond were 100 units,
the annual payment would be 5 units. If the inflation index increased by
10% ,the principal of the bond would increase to 110 units. The coupon
rate would remain at 5% , resulting in an interest payment of 110 x 5% =
5.5 units.

For other bonds, such as the Series I United States Savings Bonds, the
interest rate is adjusted according to inflation. [ 20 ]

The relationship between coupon payments, break-even daily inflation and
real interest rates is given by the Fisher equation. A rise in coupon
payments is a result of an increase in inflation expectations, real
rates, or both. [ 37 ]

#### 1.5.5 Index of IIB

In general, indexed bond has the property of which the cash flows are
linked to a specific price index; especially to the movement of the
price index. The major price index has been broadly used by different
countries is the domestic Consumer Price Index (CPI) of their own
countries, since CPI reflects all income and principal payments adjusted
for inflation. Meanwhile, some other types of inflation indices are
occasionally used, such as wholesale prices, average earnings and the
GDP deflator. (page 6 of the book: inflation – indexed securities:
bonds, swaps and other derivatives.) According to Deacon
(Inflation-Indexed Securities: Bonds, Swaps and Other Derivatives, P74),
In reality, index-linked bonds are not perfectly indexed to inflation.
Most fundamentally, the index used to inflate the cash flows may not be
an accurate measure of “true” inflation. Most index-linked bonds
currently in existence are linked to a consumer price index(CPI). As
discussed in Chapter 3, for many classes of investors consumer price
inflation is unlikely to be the most relevant measure – pension funds,
for example, often have liabilities linked to wage growth (in addition
to those linked to consumer prices), and so only a bond indexed to a
measure of wage inflation will provide them with a real bond that truly
allows them to hedge such liabilities. In this case the inflation terms
in Equation (5.2) cannot cancel one another because the measure used in
the numerator to scale up cash flows will not be the same as the one
used by investors in the denominator to discount them. Even for those
investors for whom the Consumer Price Index (CPI) is the relevant one,
there is often debate over how this index is best constructed. For
example, monetary authorities in the UK monitor at least four measures:
the standard Retail Prices Index (RPI), the Retail Prices Index
including mortgage, and the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP).
Whereas the nominal cash flows of index-linked gilts are defined using
the RPI measure, the government’s inflation target is currently defined
with reference to RPIX. If RPIX is viewed to be the “true” measure of
consumer price inflation in the UK, then index-linked gilts will be
imperfect real bonds to the extent that RPI differs from RPIX.

#### 1.5.6 The value of IIB

The payment of inflation-indexed bond has reflection on fixed real value
(inflation adjusted), which has its correspondence of currency’s buying
power at mature time. On the contrary, the payment of nominal bond has
fixed amount on payment at maturity. (Thus, in order to simulate the
price of inflation-indexed bond in mathematical models, there are
additional volatility factors involved than the traditional models for
nominal bonds. ) Specifically, the inherent value of indexed bond can be
summarized and decomposed as two factors:

1.  The real rate of return

2.  The compensation of seizing the purchasing power caused by inflation

The real rate of return is predictable and calculated directly by
applying the seasonal return rate: accumulating the seasonal return rate
season by season until the bond matures. Meanwhile, the nominal return
at maturity is uncertain because the nominal return depends on the
future movement path of price index.

#### 1.5.7 Real yield

The real yield of any bond is the annualized growth rate, excluding the
rate of inflation over the same period. This calculation is often
difficult in principle in the case of a nominal bond, because the yields
of such a bond are specified for future periods in nominal terms, while
the inflation over the period is an unknown rate at the time of the
calculation. However, in the case of inflation-indexed bonds such as
TIPS, the bond yield is specified as a rate in excess of inflation, so
the real yield can be easily calculated using a standard bond
calculation formula.

#### 1.5.8 Calculating the yield of Inflation Coupon Bond

The nominal interest rate is not the ”true return” that an investor
gains from the inflation-indexed bond. Meanwhile, the ”true return”
relates to the purchasing power of a currency. For example, if the
inflation happens, the return in currency that investor obtained from
the bond devalues, as well as the face value of the bond. Thus, the real
return rate gained by investor are calculated by eliminating the
inflation rate from the nominal interest rate. [ 22 ] Furthermore, the
calculation of real rate is calculated as:
@xmath where r represents the real rate, n represents the nominal rate,
and i represents the inflation rate.
In addition, when the inflation rate turns to remain in a low rate, the
relation between real rate and nominal rate becomes: @xmath .
Indeed, this is Fisher equation:
@xmath
@xmath
where @xmath is real rate, @xmath is nominal rate, and @xmath is
inflation rate.

#### 1.5.9 Primary Inflation-linked Instruments

1.  Year-on-Year Inflation-Indexed Swap(YYIIS)

    The Year-on-Year Inflation-Indexed Swap(YYIIS) is a standard
    derivative product over Inflation rate. The underlying is a single
    Consumer Price Index (CPI). The reason why it is called swap is that
    each year there is a swap of a fixed amount against a floating
    amount. However, in reality, there is only one way payment
    transacted: fixed amount - floating amount. [ 56 ]

2.  Zero-Coupon Inflation-Indexed Swap(ZCIIS)

    The Zero-Coupon Inflation Swap (ZCIS) is a standard derivative
    product which payoff depends on the Inflation rate realized over a
    given period of time. The underlying asset is a single Consumer
    price index (CPI). It is called Zero-Coupon because there is only
    one cash flow at the maturity of the swap, without any intermediate
    coupon. It is called Swap because at maturity date, one
    counter-party pays a fixed amount to the other in exchange for a
    floating amount (in this case linked to inflation). The final cash
    flow will therefore consist of the difference between the fixed
    amount and the value of the floating amount at expiry of the swap. [
    57 ]

3.  What is the market and who trades

    A market is one of the many varieties of systems, institutions,
    procedures, social relations and infrastructures whereby parties
    engage in exchange. In mainstream economics, the concept of a market
    is any structure that allows buyers and sellers to exchange any type
    of goods, services and information. The exchange of goods or
    services, with or without money, is a transaction.[1] Market
    participants consist of all the buyers and sellers of a good who
    influence its price, which is a major topic of study of economics
    and has given rise to several theories and models concerning the
    basic market forces of supply and demand. [ markets ]

4.  Inflation swap

    An inflation swap is a contract used to transfer inflation risk from
    one party to another through an exchange of fixed cash flows. In an
    inflation swap, one party pays a fixed rate cash flow on a notional
    principal amount while the other party pays a floating rate linked
    to an inflation index, such as the Consumer Price Index (CPI). The
    party paying the floating rate pays the inflation adjusted rate
    multiplied by the notional principal amount. Usually, the principal
    does not change hands. Each cash flow comprises one leg of the swap.
    [ 18 ]

#### 1.5.10 Risk

As with other investments, the price of IIBs can fluctuate, and if real
yields rise, the market value of an IIB will fall. Real yields can rise
due to an increase in inflation, without a corresponding increase in
nominal yields. If held to maturity however, the market value
fluctuations are irrelevant and an investor receives the par amount. In
theory, a period of deflation could reduce this par amount. However, in
practice most IIBs are issued with a deflation floor to mitigate this
risk. [ 37 ]

### 1.6 Hedge with Inflation-Iinked Bond

Inflation can have a dampening effect on fixed-income investments,
reducing their purchasing power and cutting deeply into the real value
of returns over time. This happens even if the inflation rate is
relatively low. For example, if you have a portfolio that returns 9% 
but the inflation rate is 3%  the true value of your returns has been
cut by about a third. Inflation-linked bonds (IIBs), however, can help
to offset (or hedge) that risk because they increase in value during
inflationary periods. [ 23 ]

### 1.7 US treasury

Treasury Inflation-Protected Security (TIPS) is a Treasury bond that is
indexed to inflation to protect investors from the negative effects of
rising prices. The principal value of TIPS rises as inflation rises.
Inflation is the pace at which prices increase throughout the U.S.
economy as measured by the Consumer Price Index or CPI. [ 9 ]

The United States Department of Treasury has started issuing Treasury
Inflation-Protected Securities(TIPS), of which the price is linked to
CPI-U, since 1997. The is currently over 300 billion USD outstanding
with maturities up to thirty years. The uniqueness of US’s TIPS is The
most common derivatives are zero coupon bond and YoY swap. [ 3 ]

### 1.8 Inflation Derivatives

#### 1.8.1 Definition

Inflation derivatives are a subclass of derivative used by investors to
manage the potential negative impact of rising inflation levels. It is
announced by entities, such as governments, financial institutions and
corporations, entities. Like other derivatives including options or
futures, inflation derivatives allow individuals to participate in price
movements of a market or index, in this case, a Consumer Price Index, a
measurement of the general cost of goods and services in an economy.
Doing so can help investors hedge against the risk of increasing prices
eroding the real value of their investment portfolio. [ 7 ]

Inflation-indexed derivatives are financial products announced by
entities, such as governments, financial institutions and corporations,
entities. The purpose of issuing inflation-indexed derivatives is to
regulate the risks associated with variable rates of inflation. [ 31 ]

#### 1.8.2 Nominal interest rate swap vs Real rate swap

Nominal interest rate refers to the interest rate before taking
inflation into account. Real rate swap is equal to nominal interest swap
rate minus the corresponding inflation rate swap. As for modelling, the
trend has been either to provide:

1.  A model describing the relationship among: nominal rate, real rate,
    and the inflation rate, which is represented as the exchange rate
    between nominal rate and real rate.

2.  A market model that represents the inflation and applies the similar
    ideology as the representation of inflation returns in Brace Gatarek
    model. The first type of model alone these lines has been developed
    by Blegrade, Benhamou, Koehler. The advanced version of models in
    this type has been developed by Fabio Mercurio and Nicola Moreni.

#### 1.8.3 Forward rate vs Expected spot rate

The forward rate is a negotiated rate, which will be applied in the
future, between two parties on a certain derivative. The forward rate
applies to both parties to trade at this rate at a certain time in the
future regardless what the exchange rate will be. In a short word, it is
a rate on contract agreed by two parties. [ 16 ] The expected spot rate
is the rate of a financial instrument that on a future given date. Thus,
the spot rate is the rate admitted by the entire market rather than a
negotiated rate in a contract form. [ 11 ]

#### 1.8.4 Discount Rate

There are two different categories of defining the term of discount
rate. The first definition of discount rate is the rate that is charged
to financial institutions when they borrow money from the Federal
Reserve. The second definition of discount rate is that the converting
rate from a cash flow in the future to the cash flow in the present. In
another word, it is the compensated rate from future value(maturity in
most cases) to present value of a bond. Only the second definition is
applied in this thesis. In the process of converting the value at
maturity to the value at present, the major factors to be concerned are
time value of money and uncertainty risk, which are analyzed in this
thesis.

#### 1.8.5 Lag

Regardless what the instrument is, the term lag refers to the delay of
time. To be specific with inflation-indexed bond, there exists a lag of
few months in the indexation. Due to the consumption of time to collect
data and calculation for an index, the lag will at least one month out
of date. If a cash flow requires to be fixed in advance, the lag can be
even greater.(Cash flow, also known as cash flow loan, is a format of
loan that requires time to be arranged.)

#### 1.8.6 Swap

Swap is the arrangement of an exchange of two securities, interest
rates, or currencies. Swap happens between two entities. The purpose of
swap is to secure the mutual benefit of the both exchange parties.

#### 1.8.7 Notional Principle amount

The notional principal amount, in an interest rate swap, is the
predetermined dollar amounts, or principal, on which the exchanged
interest payments are based. The notional principal never changes hands
in the transaction, which is why it is considered notional, or
theoretical. Neither party pays nor receives the notional principal
amount at any time; only interest rate payments change hands.

#### 1.8.8 Benchmark

A benchmark is a standard against which the performance of a security,
mutual fund or investment manager can be measured. Generally, broad
market and market-segment stock and bond indexes are used for this
purpose.

#### 1.8.9 London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR)

The London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR) is a benchmark interest rate
at which major global banks lend to one another in the international
interbank market for short-term loans. It indicates borrowing costs
between banks and is calculated and published each day by the
Intercontinental Exchange (ICE).

#### 1.8.10 Leg

A leg is one component of a derivatives trading strategy in which a
trader combines multiple options contracts, futures contracts or—in rare
cases—combinations of both to hedge a position, benefit from arbitrage
or profit from a spread. Within these strategies, each derivative
contract or position in the underlying security is called a leg. The
cash flows exchanged in a swap are also referred to as legs.

#### 1.8.11 Breakeven Inflation rates

The breakeven inflation rate is a market-based measure of expected
inflation. It is the difference between the yield of a nominal bond and
an inflation-linked bond of the same maturity.

## 2 Model

### 2.1 Stochastic Discount Factor(Pricing Kernel)

The term kernel is a common mathematical term used to represent an
operator. The pricing kernel, as well as stochastic discount factor, is
generally used in pricing the adjustment of the risk.

## 3 the construction of the model

### 3.1 Set-ups

As inflation is introduced earlier in the paper, Inflation is a change
in price as measured by a price index, which defined in term of a basket
of products and services. Thus, price index is one of the factors to
influence inflation. The money-based economy which includes inflation is
the nominal economy. On the contrary, the real economy is defined as
inflation-free.

### 3.2 Model developed by Manning and Jones

The methodology of this model is boot-strapping. The model of inflation
derivatives by Manning and Jones has the following conditions:
1.Nominal price: @xmath
2.Real price: @xmath
3.Index value: @xmath
4.Price of nominal zero-coupon bond at time t with maturity T: @xmath
5.Price of real zero-coupon bond at time t with maturity T: @xmath
6.Determined forward index value at T from t: @xmath
7.At time t enter into contract @xmath , short(sell) real ZCBs and long
nominal ZCBs(buy): @xmath
8.Forward inflation rate: @xmath
9.k=n,r, for the nominal and real forward rates: @xmath
10. Combine (8) and (9), we have: @xmath Essentially, in this form the
nominal rates include real rate and nominal rate; however, the nominal
rates also include a third component,a risk premium. In this model, the
risk premium term has been absorbed into the inflation term.(The risk
premium term exists due to the unpredictability of inflation rate before
the maturity.)
Since the nominal curve has been already simulated, the next step is
either to produce a curve of forward index values and infer the
real-rate term structure from it, or to produce a real-rate curve and
imply the forward index values. The names of the methods are index
projection(or inflation compensation), and real-rate methods,
respectively. Meanwhile, the two methods are only the matters of
approaching to the same solution.
11.The real dirty price per unit of real principle of a bond at time t:
@xmath where c is the real coupon and the remaining coupons to be paid
at times @xmath . 12. The nominal price generated by real price: @xmath
, where @xmath is the base value of the reference index for the bond.
13. Inflation reference at day(d): @xmath
@xmath : price index of @xmath
@xmath : price index of @xmath
nbd: actual number of days since the start of the month
NDm: number of days in @xmath
For example, if the given index reference date is July 25, 2006.
The inflation reference = @xmath
14.The nominal price: @xmath = @xmath
15. @xmath
16. @xmath
17. @xmath
18. The dynamics of the ZCBs: @xmath
19.ZCB(Zero Coupon Bond) volatility: @xmath
20. the price at t of calls and puts on the index struck at K and
expiring at T: @xmath where @xmath for a call and @xmath for a put.
21. @xmath
@xmath
where
@xmath
in which @xmath is a correlation matrix
defining
@xmath
If the inflation rate between @xmath and @xmath is defined as: @xmath ,
for a strike of K the option pay-off at @xmath is max[ @xmath ].
22. The value of the option: @xmath
where: @xmath , @xmath
23. @xmath
24. @xmath , @xmath 25. @xmath and
@xmath

### 3.3 Equivalent measure

Two probability measures are said to be equivalent if they define the
same null sets. The Girsanov theorem characterizes the transformation of
semi-martingales under equivalent changes of measure. [ 10 ]

In finance, the methodology of changing measures contributes to
providing a bridge to connect the statistical market data to
mathematical models.
The statistical measure, denoted by @xmath , reflects the real-world
dynamics of financial assets. The P-measure is a method of measuring
probability based on historical data rather than based on assumptions of
the existence of a risk-free rate and absence of arbitrage in the
market. The P-measure has contributions in risk measurement. Moreover,
the current value of a financial asset is the sum of the expected future
payoffs discounted at their own rates reflecting the risk of the asset.
Statistical and econometric tools are used to estimate the rates and
predict the future value of assets.
A risk-neutral measure(Equivalent Martingale Measures), denoted by
@xmath , is the measure of choice for valuation of derivative
securities.
Q-measure is a method of measuring probability such that the current
value of a financial asset is the sum of the expected future payoffs
discounted at the risk-free rate(The risk free rate is the return on
investment on a risk-less asset.). Q-measure has contributions in the
pricing of financial derivatives under the assumption that market is
free of arbitrage. In mathematical models, prices of traded assets are
supposed to be (local) Q-martingales, and hence their dynamics(as seen
under Q) differ from their actual behavior(as modeled under P).There is
certainly a gap between P-probability space and Q-probability space.

###### Definition 3.1

Let P,Q be two probability measures defined on a measurable space (
@xmath ). We say that Q is absolutely continuous with respect to
P,denoted by Q @xmath P, if all P-zero sets are also Q-zero sets. If Q
@xmath P and P @xmath Q, we say that P and Q are equivalent, denoted by
P @xmath Q. In other words, two equivalent measures have the same zero
sets.

Let Q @xmath P. BY the Radon-Nikodym theorem there exists a density
@xmath so that for @xmath we can calculate its expectation with respect
to Q by @xmath
We call the martingale @xmath the density process of Q. The Bayes
formula tells us how to calculate conditional expectations with respect
to Q in terms of P. Let @xmath and @xmath be @xmath and in @xmath . We
then have
@xmath
As consequence of Baye’s formula, we get that if @xmath is a
Q-martingale then @xmath is a P-martingale and @xmath . Hence, we can
turn any Q-martingale into a P-martingale by just multiplying it with
the density process. It follows that the martingale property is not
invariant under equivalent measure change.
Some important objects like stochastic integrals and quadratic
variations retain invariant under equivalent measure changes, although
they depend on some probability measure by their definition. This can be
illustrated by a concrete example of quadratic variation of a
semi-martingale @xmath . This is defined to be the limit in
P-probability of the sum of the squared S-increments over a time grid,
for vanishing mesh size. Since the convergence in P-probability implies
convergence in Q-probability if @xmath , the convergence in
P-probability is equivalent to the convergence in Q-probability when P
and Q are equivalent. This implies that quadratic variations remain the
same under a change to an equivalent probability measure.

In addition, the changing of measures has a broad application and not
only restricted to changing between Q-measure and P-measure. For
example, in some models, a measure only consists of the bonds with the
same maturity date. The bonds with distinct maturities are under
different measures.

## 4 The History of developed Models

### 4.1 Perspective of Models

#### 4.1.1 Empirical Models vs Theoretical Models

The term structure of interest rates refers to the quantified
relationship between the interest rate(or the yield) and the evolution
of financial instrument until the maturity. In order to describe the
quantified the yield curve, as well as the relations among different
financial instruments, different types mathematical models are
introduced and analyzed. [ 25 ]

In the past few decades, the development of interest rate models has
intrigued attention from researchers in academy. Depending on the
methodology of behind each model, the interest models can be classified
into two categories: empirical model and theoretical model. The
empirical model does not reserve the property of arbitrage-free. They
involve along the price curve of desired financial instruments, which
means the parameters are derived explicitly from the data set. On the
contrary, the theoretical model approaches this problem from a pure
mathematical perspective. Though it is derived from the observation of
the market, does not have dependence on the data set. Meanwhile, it has
the property of arbitrage-free and reserve its meaning along the
intrinsic mathematical proofs.

From the perspective of empirical models, the pricing model(bond pricing
model) has assumption that it is only subject to the short rate . The
model has the form of stochastic differential equation with the
assumption of distribution as normal, log-normal, or non-central
chi-square distribution. [ 30 ] The one-factor short rate models attempt
to generate a process to describe movements of the yield curve by only
using the short-term interest rate. A realistic method to approach the
same problem would include the consideration of additional factors, such
as (but not only subject to) the long term interest, the difference
between short term interest rate and long term interest rate, the mean
of short rate, and the volatility of short term rate.

From the perspective of theoretical model, the construction of
no-arbitrage(arbitrage-free) is the main goal that we look for. Based
upon the short rate, the discount bond prices, and instantaneous forward
rates, a stochastic model is expected to have the consistence of
arbitrage-free at any time point along the pricing curves. In our case,
the price of nominal coupon bond should agree with the price of
Inflation-indexed bond at each maturity date, such as 1 year, 2 years, 5
years and 10 years. Thus, though there is a break-even curve between the
nominal bond pricing curve and the inflation-indexed bond pricing curve,
the integration of the break-even curve should compensate to zero at
each maturity, as the expected price of nominal bond and expected price
of inflation-indexed bond equivalent to each other at each maturity.

#### 4.1.2 Multi-factor Models

Another way to classify the type of models is by the number of factors
existing in the models. The factors in the model have revealed the
uncertainty to simulate the term structure. The advantage of
single-factor models is to generate a perfect correlation among the
prices at different spots. Meanwhile, the advantage of multi-factor
models indicates the movement of term structure along time. Thus, the
relationship among all the adjusted factors is expected to be computed
explicitly in order to reserve the property of abitrage-free. [ 43 ]

A factor model has the format:

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (1)
  -- -------- -- -----

@xmath = interest return in period t
@xmath = constant term
@xmath = factor k value in period t
@xmath = exposure  of  the  financial  instrument i to factor k
(this is also referred to as beta , sensitivity, or factor loading)
@xmath = noise for financial instrument i in period t
(this is the return not explained by the model)

Factor models has two advantages when the historical market data is
applied to compute covariance and correlation. First, factor models do
not require a large amount of data in order to be applied. Second, the
factor model has its generality on all types financial instruments,
including stocks, bonds, derivatives. However, statistical analysis is
still required to ensure the accuracy of the result. In result, factor
models supplies the analysis with a fit on simulating the overall
covariance and correlation structure between the financial instrument
and the market where it belongs to.
In summary of the calculating method, the parameters in the model are
calculated via ordinary least squares(OLS) regression analysis.
Regression analysis reveals the relationship among multi-variables by
using historical data. The ideology is to assume that the relationship
or trend existed in the past continues to exist in the present and
future.

#### 4.1.3 Levy Process

From the perspective of Geometric Brownian motion(which is a special
case in Levy process), there are two types of interest rate models,
which are the type of GBM-based(Geometric Brownian Motion) model and the
type of rational models.
The GBM-based model developed by Hughston (1998) considers the consumer
price index and the nominal and real interest rate systems as the
jointly driven by a multi-dimenional Brownian motion. In methodology,
GBM-based models treat CPI as a foreign exchange rate. Similarly, the
real interest rate system is treated as if it were the foreign interest
rate system associated with the foreign currency. In the model developed
by Jarrow and Yildirim(2003), this methodology has been adapted with a
three-factor model(i.e.,driven by three Brownian motions). The CPI is
modelled as a geometric Brownian motion, with the time-dependent
volatility. The two interest rate systems are considered as extended
Vasicek-type (or Hull-White) models.Similarly to Jarrow and
Yildirim(2003), Dodgson and Kainth(2006) applied their short-rate
approach where both nominal and inflation rates are developed by
Hull-White processes. The advantage of GBM-based model is that it
develops the framework of how to imply the volatility. However, the
limitation of GBM-bases model has been that it does not reproduce
volatility smiles. Thus, the rational model stands out for its
productivity on simulating the volatility smiles.

### 4.2 Pricing Model

The most representative pricing model(no-path-track) is Black-Scholes.

### 4.3 Forward Rate model

#### 4.3.1 Merton

Merton provokes a one-factor model to describe the price of discount
bond with the only uncertainty as the short rate. [ 32 ]
The stochastic process of Merton model is summarized as a Brownian
motion process with a drift parameter. In Merton model, the assumption
includes that the risk of market price is a constant.

@xmath
where @xmath
@xmath
@xmath = Theoretical value of a company’s equity
@xmath = Value of the company’s assets in period t
@xmath = Value of the company’s debt(liability threshold)
@xmath = Current time period
@xmath = Future time period
@xmath = Risk-free interest rate
@xmath = Cumulative standard normal distribution
@xmath = Exponential term
@xmath = Standard deviation of stock returns
The Merton Model approach uses single-point calibration and requires
values for the equity, debt, and volatility ( @xmath )
This approach solves for ( @xmath ) using a 2-by-2 system of nonlinear
equations. We can solve @xmath by @xmath :
@xmath
The Merton by time series approach requires time series for equity. If
the equity time series has @xmath data points, this approach calibrates
a time series of n asset values @xmath that solve the following system
of equations:
@xmath
@xmath
@xmath
The function directly computes the volatility of assets @xmath from the
time series @xmath as the annualized standard deviation of the log
returns. This value is a single volatility value that captures the
volatility of the assets during the time period spanned by this time
series.
After computing this values of @xmath and @xmath , the function computes
the distance to default (DD) is computed as the number of standard
deviations between the expected asset value at maturity T and debt
threshold:
@xmath
The drift parameter @xmath is the expected return for the assets, which
is equal to risk-free interest rate in this thesis, or any other value
based on expectations for the firm.
The probability of default(PD) is defined as the probability of the
asset value below denotes the relation with liability threshold at the
end of the time horizon T.
@xmath

#### 4.3.2 Vasicek

The Vasicek model is a partial-empirical one-factor short rate model
that describes the evolution of interest rate. It describes interest
rate movement by driving only one source(which is the short rate) of
market risk. The Vasicek model is used in the estimation of interest
rate derivatives, as well as inflation-indexed derivatives. Though the
Vasicek model can not provide the price of bonds in a closed form, it
can generate an explicit solution under the specific case where the risk
of market price is assumed to be constant. The assumption behind this
case is called Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process, which implies a
mean-reverting Gaussian interest rate curve. However, the possibility of
negative interest rate retains in this model while it has been broadly
used in pricing bond options. [ 44 ]

@xmath
where:
W = Random market risk (represented by a Wiener process)
t = Time period
a = Speed of the reversion to the mean, which is the value of b
b = The level of mean in long term, all future trajectories of r will
regroup around b
@xmath = Volatility at time t. The volatility is updated by time t
instantaneously.
W = Random market risk (represented by a Wiener process)
t = Time period
@xmath = Expected change in the interest rate at time t (the drift
factor)
@xmath = Variance in long term, @xmath and @xmath have negative
correlation, because @xmath contributes toward the randomness of the
system and a contributes to the speed of convergence to the mean value
in long term

In Merton model and Vasicek model, the short rate is able to be a
negative value due to the Gaussian distribution as a part in the
interest rate process. Dothan renovated a log-normal distributed
process, thus the short rate is strictly positive. [ 14 ] Unfortunately,
Dothan’s renovation does not provide an explicit formula for the
pricing. Thus, the only way to approach the valuation and solution in
Dothan’s renovation is by numerical methods. [ 43 ]

#### 4.3.3 Cox-Ingersoll-Ross(CIR)

CIR model is introduced in the section of Ito process, thus we skip the
introduction here. CIR model supplies a solution to the problem of
negative interest rate in Merton model and Vasicek model by provoking a
different one-factor short rate model where the interest rate process is
under non-central chi-square distribution. [ 41 ] Due to the feature
that the volatility of short rate is correlated with the , the
volatility is strictly positive. The closed form solution of zero-coupon
bond and European call options are given by the model. More importantly,
CIR model is ubiquitous in pricing methods, such as mortgage-backed
security valuation model, futures and future option pricing models, swap
pricing model, and yield option valuation model. [ 45 ] Instead of
single square-root process, Longstaff advocates the CIR framework by
renovating it into a for the short rate. [ 26 ]
Brennan and Schwartz also improvised a two-factor model of interest
rate. In this model, both short rate and long rate are involved and
follow a log-normal distribution. [ 46 ] Meanwhile, Longstaff and
Schwartz provoke a two-factor method with assumption of that underlying
factors(dependence) as short rate and the volatility. [ 47 ]
Thus, the underlying factors are indeed the choice made by the
researchers who construct the model. As mentioned in the summarizing
work of two-factor models by Subrahmanyam, different two-factor models
conclude different underlying factors, such as short rate and the spread
between short rate and long rate, the short-term forward rate and
inflation rate, the short rate and its mean. [ 51 ]

### 4.4 Inversion Model

#### 4.4.1 Hull-White Model

The Hull-White model can be categorized in two cases, one-factor model
and two-factor model.
In the case of one-factor model, the equation is:
@xmath
@xmath : a term-structure selected in order to let the model fit the
initial condition.
@xmath and @xmath : volatility parameters that are chosen to fit the
current market.To be careful, the functions @xmath and @xmath are chosen
to fit in the model. Thus, these two volatility parameters are expected
to be decided before the calibration process.
@xmath : a standard Wiener process with a zero mean and a variance equal
to @xmath .

Essentially, Hull-White model contains other models by defining its
special cases. For example, when @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath is a
constant, the one-factor Hull-White model becomes the Ho-Lee short rate
model, which is @xmath .(In Ho-Lee’s model, a typical binomial lattice
methodology is applied, which is addressed in the part of SDE’s
solution.) In the case of that @xmath and @xmath , it becomes the
original Hull-White model(1990). In both Ho-Lee and original Hull-White
model, future interest rates of all maturities are normally distributed
and analytic solutions exist for the price of bonds and derivatives.
Moreover, there are other cases as well. When @xmath , it is Pelsser
model(1996). When @xmath , the model is Black-Karasinski model(1991), in
which future short rate is lognormally distributed and rates of all
other maturities are close to lognormal distribution. In addition, in
the case @xmath and @xmath , which is @xmath = @xmath , it becomes
Black-Derman-Toy model, which was initially developed by Goldman Sachs.

where @xmath = the instantaneous short rate at time t
@xmath = value of the underlying asset at option’s expiration
@xmath = instant short rate volatility
@xmath = a standard Brownian motion(Wiener process) under a risk-neutral
probability measure.)
In the case of two-factor model, Hull-White model becomes:
@xmath
where u has the process below with initial value of 0: @xmath
In addition, approaching to the solution from pure mathematical
perspective, if @xmath are constant, Ito lemma can be used to get:
@xmath
Meanwhile, @xmath has distribution:
@xmath
where @xmath denotes the normal distribution with mean @xmath and
variance @xmath
When @xmath is time dependent,
@xmath
Meanwhile, @xmath has distribution
@xmath [ 52 ]

## 5 Korn&Kruse Model

### 5.1 Fundamental Setups

In the model developed by Korn and Kruse, the price index is so called
Monetary Union Index of Consumer Prices(MUICP), which is a weighted
average of European monetary union countries’ Harmonised Index of
Consumer Prices(HICP). Harmonized Index of Consumer Price(HICP) is a
consumer price index which is compiled based on a methodology that has
been harmonised across EU countries. The difference on mainstream
between HICP of EU and CPI of US is from two primary aspects. First,
HICP incorporates both urban and rural consumers. Secondly, HICP
excludes owner-occupied housing, since HICP considers it as investment
rather than consumption. [ 52 ]

### 5.2 Terms

@xmath : nominal interest rate for an investment horizon until time t.
@xmath : real interest rate until time t, which is the gain in real
purchasing power of an investment.
@xmath : expected inflation rate.
We have the relation: @xmath

## 6 HJM model

Compared to the previous models belonging to the categories of pricing
model, forward rate model, and inversion model, HJM belongs to the
category of interest rate structure model. From the perspective of
mathematics, the maturity of a bond is a martingale and is equal to 1.
Thus, under the assumption of no-arbitrage market, the premium factor in
the pricing model of a bond does not exist. Thus, in the traditional Q
measure, the price of a bond is given as:
@xmath

## 7 Jarrow-Yildirim Model

In summary, the model developed by Jarrow-Yildirim is a path-trackable
forward-rate model, with implementation of HJM model in its simulation
of nominal and real zero-coupon bond prices, and CPI-U.

### 7.1 Setups

The model developed by Jarrow and Yildirim prolongs HJM model. The
purpose of Jarrow-Yildirim model is to renovate and apply HJM model to
TIPS, conventional U.S. Treasury bonds, as well as related derivative
securities.

The fundamental assumption of the economy in this model is no-arbitrage
, where nominal dollars correspond to the domestic currency, real
dollars correspond to the foreign currency, and the inflation index
corresponds to the spot exchange rate.
The first step of calculation is to strip the nominal and real
zero-coupon bond prices by applying the prices of the coupon-bearing
conventional U.S. Treasury bonds and TIPS, respectively. The best
fitting piece-wise constant forward rate curve is obtained by using a
nonlinear least square algorithm.
The second step is letting the price curves of time-series evolutions of
the CPI-U, the real zero-coupon bond, and nominal zero-coupon bond to
adjust the three-factor HJM model.
The third step is to utilize the estimated parameters to test the
validity of HJM model through its hedging performance in the secondary
market for TIPs. In return, the hedging analysis assures the validity of
the three-factor extended Vasicek model.
The fourth step is to demonstrate the effect of this model by pricing a
call option based on the CPI-U inflation index. Though this call option
is not traded, such an option is constructed in a closed form by using
standard hedging procedures in this complete market model.

### 7.2 Hypotheses

1.The most important ideology of hypothetical cross-currency economy
introduced by Jarrow-Yildirim model is to treat nominal dollars as
domestic currency, to treat real dollars as the foreign currency, and to
treat the inflation index as the spot exchange rate.
2.The equation @xmath below is a no-arbitrage restriction that holds
under the standard frictionless and competitive market hypotheses. In
particular, it is assumed that there are no transaction costs, no
restrictions on trades, and no differential taxes on coupons vs. capital
gains income.(There is some evidences: the differential state taxes on
corporate vs. government bonds may be important for the determination fo
corporate bond yields(see Elton, Gruber, Agrawal, and Mann(2001))).

### 7.3 Terms

The real price of a derivative corresponds to the foreign currency
price, the nominal price of a derivative corresponds to the domestic
prices, and the CPI-U index corresponds to the exchange rate.
r: real.
n: nominal.
@xmath : real rate.
@xmath : nominal rate.
@xmath : stopping time.
@xmath : time t price of a nominal zero-coupon bond maturing at time T
in dollars.
@xmath : time t CPI-U inflation index, i.e,. dollars per CPI-U
unit(lagged two months).
@xmath : Numeraire at time t.(Numeraire can be considered as an operator
to indicate a quantitative relationship.) @xmath : time t price of a
real zero-coupon bond maturing at time T in CPI-U units.
@xmath : time t forward rates for date T where @xmath
i.e.,
1. @xmath
@xmath
@xmath : Time t money market account value for @xmath
(2) @xmath : Time 0 price of a conventional coupon-bearing bond in
dollars where the coupon payment is C dollars per period, the maturity
is time T, and the face value is F dollars
@xmath .
(3) @xmath .
(4) @xmath .
We consider a continuous trading economy with trading interval @xmath .
The uncertainty in the economy is characterized by a probability space
@xmath where @xmath is a state space, F is the set of possible events(a
@xmath on @xmath ), and @xmath is the statistical probability measure on
( @xmath , @xmath ). Furthermore, let @xmath be the standard filtration
generated by the three Brownian motions @xmath : @xmath . These Brownian
motions are initialized at zero with correlations given by @xmath , and
@xmath . Hence it is a three-factor model.
(5)Based on the initial forward rate curve @xmath , the nominal
T-maturity forward rate evolves as: @xmath where @xmath is random and
@xmath is a deterministic function of time subject to some technical
smoothness and boundedness conditions. The deterministic volatility in
expression (5) implies that the nominal term structure of interest rates
generates a Gaussian economy.
(6) Similarly, by given the initial forward rate curve @xmath , the real
T-maturity forward rate evolves:
@xmath where @xmath and @xmath satisfy the same conditions as in
expression(5).
(7)Most importantly, the inflation index’s evolution is:
@xmath ,
where @xmath is random and @xmath is a deterministic function(based on
data-set rather than a specific variable) of time subject to some
technical smoothness and boundedness conditions. Since the deterministic
volatility in expression (7) indicates that the inflation index follows
a Geometric Brownian motion, so that the logarithm of the inflation
index process is normally distributed.
These evolutions are arbitrage-free and the market is
complete(Amin-Jarrow 2011) if there exists a unique equivalent
probability measure Q such that
(8) @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are Q-martingales.
By Girsanov’s theorem,given that @xmath is a P-Brownian motion and that
Q is a probability measure equivalent to P, then there exist market
prices of risk @xmath such that
(9) @xmath for @xmath are Q-Brownian motions.
The stochastic processes @xmath are the risk premiums for the three risk
factors in the economy.

Moreover, the reason for (9) is explained as the following. suppose
@xmath is an @xmath -adapted process that is right continuous with left
limit of which path are increasing, and suppose @xmath is integrable for
each @xmath . Since @xmath and @xmath , then @xmath , thus @xmath is a
submartingale. By the Doob-Meyer decomposition, there exists a
predictable increasing process @xmath such that @xmath . Thus, it is
equation (9), @xmath . [ 2 ]

### 7.4 Equations

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (2)
  -- -------- -- -----

Moreover, we obtain the following relation under Q-measure:

@xmath
@xmath
@xmath

Furthermore, there is a numeraire to indicate the relation between
initial CPI @xmath with the current CPI @xmath at time t.

The model of Jarrow and Yildilrim provides a method of evolution of the
real and nominal forward rates and nominal zero-coupon bond prices. The
model indicates that both real and nominal forward rates are normally
distributed, and the inflation index follows a geometric Brownian
motion.
In addition, there are two propositions given by Jarrow and Yildirim.
Proposition 1: The arbitrage-free term structures @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath are Q-martingales, if and only if the following condition holds:
@xmath
@xmath
@xmath
@xmath and @xmath are two arbitrage-free forward rate drift restrictions
on nominal rate and real rate.(The difference is that @xmath is from the
original HJM model’s frame work and @xmath is analogous.) The last
equation @xmath indicates the relation among nominal interest rate, real
interest rate, and the expected inflation rate.
Proposition 2:
@xmath , this price process holds under the martingale measure, so
called ”the term structure evolution under the martingale measure.

## 8 Rational Kernel

### 8.1 Terms

@xmath : pricing kernel
@xmath : nominal zero-coupon bond price system
@xmath : CPI (works as exchange rate)
@xmath : Inflation index under the nominal risk-neutral measure
(ps. Jarrow Yildrim Model(2003)):
@xmath
@xmath
@xmath
where @xmath denotes the nominal rate curve, @xmath denotes the real
rate curve, @xmath denotes the CPI curve, @xmath , @xmath ,and @xmath
are dependent Brownian motions, and @xmath and @xmath are functions
chosen to fit the term-structure of interest rates.)
@xmath : real pricing kernel @xmath under @xmath
@xmath : nominal pricing kernel
( @xmath )
@xmath : rational pricing kernel
(R(t) is deterministic function)
@xmath : nominal risk-neutral measure
@xmath : real-risk neutral measure
Benchmark model: Geometric Brownian Motion specification of
Black-Scholes
@xmath
@xmath : payoff function
( @xmath )
@xmath : price of inflation-indexed bond - zero coupon.
Change of Measure: @xmath
@xmath : short rate
@xmath decomposition: @xmath
@xmath : real short rate
@xmath : discount factor
@xmath
Change of Measure (like Girsanov Theorem): @xmath [ 12 ]

### 8.2 Rational Pricing Kernel System

Rational pricing kernel system is one of the methods to calculate and
predict the prices of zero coupon swap and Year-on-Year swap, which
serve to hedge instruments against future risk or loss on asset.

(Rational Pricing Kernel System): Let @xmath be a measure equivalent to
@xmath induced by a Radon-Nikodym process @xmath . Let @xmath and @xmath
be unit-initialised and positive martingales under @xmath . Let @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath be @xmath -integrable for all @xmath . Let the real
pricing kernel @xmath br defined by

@xmath

where @xmath is a and strictly positive deterministic function, and
where @xmath is a deterministic function that satisfies @xmath .

Furthermore, let

@xmath

where @xmath is unit-initialised and strictly positive deterministic
function, and set

@xmath

.
We call @xmath thus specified a rational pricing kernel system(RPKS).

## 9 My model

### 9.1 Motivation

###### Theorem 1

A market model is arbitrage-free if and only if it has a risk-neutral
probability measure. This is the fundamental theorem of asset pricing.

### 9.2 Theoretical Model

In our model, CPI is defined as a function @xmath as the only dependence
is time @xmath .
Following next, the inflation rate over the time period @xmath is
defined as the percentage change of the index, @xmath
Furthermore, the annualized inflation rate is defined as:
@xmath

The zero-coupon inflation-indexed swap(ZCIIS) defines a swap contract
between two parties with a single exchange of payments. Form the
contract starting at time @xmath to the expiration time at time @xmath ,
one party pays the fixed amount:
@xmath
where @xmath is the quote for the contract.
The other party pays the floating rate, which is the inflation rate over
the contract time:
@xmath
The underlying asset of ZCIIS is the zero-coupon bond of which price
varies to the current inflation rate.
The zero-coupon bond has the price:
@xmath
where @xmath denotes @xmath as the function of r and parameter of s.
Thus, the price of bond @xmath is also considered as a discounted
factor.
Meanwhile, for the zero-coupon bond with the same maturity date T
however an earlier issuance date @xmath , the price is defined: @xmath
Since Zero-Coupon bond’s underlying is inflation rate, of which
underlying is CPI, thus the CPI is defined as the ratio of change on
inflation rate. CPI is defined by:
@xmath ,
where @xmath denotes the instantaneous inflation rate.

In most of cases, the theoretical has the structure based on @xmath ,
since this structure offers a solid and sound interpretation not only on
the phenomenon that the price growth follows an exponential growth
speed, but also on the computation to get a converted rate by division
of two exponential numbers. Sometimes, the structure based on @xmath
also offers an approachable structure. However, the interval of
integration requires to be unified before summing up two different terms
of integration, which has the potential possibility to cause extra
computation.

#### 9.2.1 Numeraire

The first step:
Defining a numeraire B as:
@xmath
where @xmath could be a stochastic process.
A classic example would be: @xmath
The second step:
Finding the transaction between statistical measure @xmath and the risk
neutral measure @xmath on the selected instrument @xmath : @xmath
The third step:
To build a correlation under the risk neutral measure among the specific
instrument @xmath and the any given set of derivatives @xmath : @xmath
where @xmath denotes the maturity time and @xmath denote the current
time.
Since we have constructed the risk-neutral measure for @xmath , so the
value of @xmath and @xmath are known, as well as the current value
@xmath .
Thus, we are seeking the relation between @xmath and @xmath
(An example could be: @xmath = @xmath where the correlation curve is
@xmath )
Thus, the goal is to use different techniques to construct an evolving
curve of r, to generate the value of @xmath .
The third step can be interpreted from the perspective of Black-Scholes
as: we have known the price of the chosen instrument @xmath and the
price of the asset @xmath at time @xmath , we also have known the price
of the chosen instrument @xmath at time @xmath , we are evaluating the
price of @xmath . The process of valuing @xmath can be considered as
seeking for the estimated price of the option @xmath at time @xmath .

#### 9.2.2 term

@xmath : CPI at time t
@xmath :Inflation rate at time t
@xmath :real rate
@xmath : nominal rate
@xmath :The price of nominal bond starting at time t and with maturity
time T
@xmath :The price of inflation-indexed bond
@xmath :The break-even (difference on price between the nominal bond and
the inflation-indexed bond)
@xmath : Fixed leg in an inflation swap
@xmath : Floating leg in an inflation swap
@xmath : Risk Neutral measure
@xmath : Statistical measure

### 9.3 Semi Q-measure

The beauty of Semi Q-measure really comes along two ways: the definition
and the application. While there are prerequisites for the setups, it is
still Q-measure from the definition of category. Meanwhile, the
statistical data from market can be applied to the model in order to
predict future movements.
The main obvious difference compared to the previous case, where we
define CPI as @xmath , now we define CPI as @xmath , Thus, we have the
numeraire defined as:
@xmath
@xmath where @xmath
More specifically, the numeraire for the real rate @xmath at time t is:
@xmath
@xmath

#### 9.3.1 Jarrow-Yidilrim Framework

The prerequisite condition of Jarrow-Yildirim Model is:
The arbitrage-free term structures @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are
Q-martingales, if and only if the following condition holds:
@xmath
@xmath
@xmath
@xmath and @xmath are two arbitrage-free forward rate drift restrictions
on nominal rate and real rate.(The difference is that @xmath is from the
original HJM model’s frame work and @xmath is analogous.) The last
equation @xmath indicates the relation among nominal interest rate, real
interest rate, and the expected inflation rate.

Again, The model of Jarrow-Yildirim indicates that both real and nominal
forward rates are normally distributed, and the inflation index follows
a geometric Brownian motion.

Following the framework created by Jarrow-Yidilrim, we have:

###### Definition 9.1

The price of a Zero-Coupon bond under Q-measure is defined as:
@xmath

Note that the payoff of a Zero-Coupon bond at maturity T under Q-measure
is @xmath . Meanwhile, the price of a Zero-Coupon bond at current time t
under Q-measure is @xmath , which is correlated with the price at
maturity by a discounted factor @xmath as @xmath . In addition, price of
a Zero-Coupon bond under P-measure at current time t with maturity T is
defined as:
@xmath
Thus, when the computation @xmath is under operation, the Girsanov’s
theorem will be involved, since we are transforming the price @xmath
under P-measure to @xmath under Q-measure.

###### Definition 9.2

The short rate instantaneous rate at time t is the process:
@xmath

with properties:
1) the short rate dynamics:
@xmath
2) forward rate dynamics:
@xmath
3)Zero-Coupon bond price dynamics:
@xmath

#### 9.3.2 Renovation on JY model

The original verison of JY model is given as:

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (3)
  -- -------- -- -----

Moreover, we obtain the following relation under Q-measure:

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (4)
  -- -------- -- -----

In order to renovate the model, we consider the CPI as:
@xmath
We define the forward inflation rate as: @xmath = @xmath . It can be
considered as the break-even(implied curve), the difference between
nominal rate curve and real rate curve.
The modification further becomes:
CPI’s evolution: @xmath
TIPs(Zero-Coupon bond)’ evolution: @xmath
Nominal bond’s evolution: @xmath

Thus, the value of the drift term in TIPs’ dynamic becomes:
@xmath = @xmath
The value of the drift term in Nominal bond’s dynamic becomes:
@xmath
(p.s. @xmath indicates the one of the correlation factors in the
correlation matrices among Brownian motion @xmath @xmath and @xmath ,
where @xmath is a Brownian motion under @xmath with correlation matrix

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

#### 9.3.3 Monte Carlo Simulation on Semi-Q-measure Model

The market data is imported from ”Fred Economic Data”. The imported TIPS
data was abbreviated as”DFII10”, the imported break-even inflation is
abbreviated as ”T10YIE”, as well as the 10 year Zero-Coupon bond(which
is the nominal bond in our case). Thus, the following python code has
been run: []
[] [] [] [] [] [] [] The simulated price curves for zero-coupon bond and
TIPs are shown above.

### 9.4 Empirical Model

For the inflation bond framework, we adopt it from Korn and Kruse model.
@xmath : nominal interest rate for an investment horizon until time t.
@xmath : real interest rate until time t, which is the gain in real
purchasing power of an investment.
@xmath : expected inflation rate.
We have the relation: @xmath However, the framework does not illustrate
the specific evolution of inflation rate. Hence, I define the inflation
rate as: @xmath
where I denotes the inflation rate.
I(t) denotes the pricing Index (CPI).
Since in general I(t) has positive association(different than
correlation) with the inflation index, so we use @xmath to indicate this
positive association.
where u has the process below with initial value of 0: @xmath
My model is similar to Hull-White model, but with modifications.

### 9.5 Inflation

Digging into the foundation of the pricing model of inflation
derivatives, the core essential factor is price index, which determines
the inflation rate of the country distributing the financial
instruments.
As mentioned by Dam&Macrina&Skovmand&Sloth (page 44 in the paper ”
Rational Models for Inflation-Linked Derivatives):” When
inflation-linked pricing is considered, there is an additional layer of
modelling complexity that needs to be taken care of: the link between
the so-called real and nominal economies, thus the construction of a
stochastic model for the (consumer) price index.”(In this model, CPI
acts like an exchange rate from the nominal to the real economy, due to
@xmath )

Meanwhile, as mentioned by Jarrow & Yildirim [ 40 ] , the inflation
index is given as: @xmath with @xmath random factor and @xmath
deterministic function. Thus, there is no (consumer) price index
involved in the differential equation.
In Manning & Jones’ model, the index is inferred as a regression process
by using the historical data of index: @xmath .
So far, none of the models use stochastic differential equations as
approach to the problem. As the first attempt, I define the price index
as:
@xmath
@xmath

The rate of inflation realized between @xmath and @xmath is adopted from
the models developed by Dodgson-Kainth [ 29 ] , Bezooyen-et-al and
Jarrow-Yildirim: @xmath

### 9.6 Conclusion

In the general form of SDE, e.g. @xmath indicates that the ”small
segement” of difference between @xmath and @xmath is determined by:
1. the historical information of @xmath at only time t. 2. the rate
@xmath of increasing or decreasing in the segment of time @xmath ,

### 9.7 Analytical solution of SDE

If the drift term @xmath and diffusion term @xmath in a SDE satisfies
the conditons below:
1. Global Lipschitz Condition: For all @xmath and @xmath , there exists
a constant @xmath to let:
@xmath
2. Linear Growth Condition: For all @xmath and @xmath , there exists a
constant @xmath to let:
@xmath
Then there exists an unique and continuous strong solution to let:
@xmath
For example, the solutions for Brownian motion and Geometric Brownian
motion are given below:
Brownian Motion:
@xmath
With given initial condition value @xmath , the solution of this SDE is:
@xmath
Geometric Brownian Motion:
@xmath
Given initial value condition @xmath , the solution of the SDE is:
@xmath

### 9.8 Ito Lemma

Suppose X(t) satisfies SDE:
@xmath
Since @xmath is the function of X, then:
@xmath
The expansion of @xmath obeys the following rule:
[]

### 9.9 The application of Ito Lemma

Suppose @xmath satisfies SDE:
@xmath
In order to solve the solution of @xmath , suppose @xmath , then @xmath
, @xmath , According to Ito lemma:
@xmath
Then @xmath is Brownian motion:
@xmath
@xmath
@xmath

### 9.10 Numerical Solution of SDE

Not all stochastic differential equations are capable for discovering an
analytical solution. Another approach is to find a numerical solution
for SDE. There are few catalogs of numerical methods, such as Monte
Carlo simulation, tree method, and traditional numerical methods.

### 9.11 Traditional Numerical Methods

The two typical numerical methods for sovling SDE are Euler method and
Milstein method.
Euler:
@xmath
Milstein:
@xmath
where @xmath denotes the derivative of @xmath with respect to @xmath .
In addition, @xmath , @xmath are normally distributed and independent
from each other.

### 9.12 Monte Carlo Simulation

Monte-Carlo simulation is a standard and widely used numerical method.
The ideology is to simulate the possible paths of the expectation value
that we are seeking for, then average all the simulated values to
calculate the result. The advantage of Monte-Carlo simulation comes to
its generality. For example ,the models of exotic options have jump
processes(which can be exercised before maturity), which involve a lot
of computations, regression-based Monte-Carlo method can simplify the
computation and be applied to solve pricing problem of exotic option.
The disadvantage of Monte-Carlo Simulation is time complexity. In order
to reduce the time complexity, we can use multi-level Monte-Carlo, use
variance reduction, or run on a super computer.

### 9.13 Lattice Based method

The tree method includes binary(binomial) tree and ternary(trinomial)
tree. With known of volatility @xmath , a n-level binary can be
constructed by the formulas(as up-movement and down-movement):
@xmath
@xmath
In the case of backwardation, the initial value of an option can be
calculated by transversing the tree.
In the case of forward rate model, for example Ho-Lee model given by
@xmath , the calculation can be done as following:
Applying Euler method, the differential equation becomes:
@xmath where Z is a standard normal random variable.
Under the property of discrete time, we then have
@xmath
Then the price of zero-coupon bond under no arbitrage condition involves
from:
@xmath
into
@xmath
where @xmath and @xmath denotes the expectation under Q-measure
For example, at time @xmath , the equation becomes:
@xmath
In terms of Variation:
@xmath
Since @xmath is normally distributed:
@xmath
Meanwhile : @xmath
Thus, @xmath
So we have @xmath
With this updated @xmath for each @xmath , we are able to calculate the
forward interest curve.

As for ternary tree, the only ternary tree method working under the
assumption of complete market is:
@xmath
@xmath
@xmath
@xmath
Sometimes, the backward stochastic differential eqation(BSDE) is
invloved in seeking for the solution of a pricing model:
@xmath

### 9.14 PDE method

@xmath Beside approching to the solution of SDE directly by analytical
or numerical method, converting SDEs into PDEs is also commonly adapted.
The generalized method of converting a SDE into a PDE is by applying
Feymann-Kac theorem. Converting the SDE into Feymann-Kac PDE reveals a
connection. Intrinsically, the PDE converted by applying Feymann-Kac is
the Kolmogorov forward equation of its original SDE. Moreover, a single
SDE has two different kinds of operators: forward operator and backward
operator, which correlate with the drift term and volatility term. In
general, forward PDE with forward operator is subject to the initial
value problem, seeking for the solution of final status; backward PDE
with backward operator depends on the boundary condition at final
value(terminal condition), seeking for the solution of initial status.
There is a @xmath , or so called @xmath

### 9.15 Characteristic Function

For the models with Levy process, which is an adapted stochastic process
started from value zero at time zero, with stationary and independent
increments, we can apply Levy-Khintchine formula and seek for its
solution.

Levy-Khintchine:

@xmath is the characteristic function of an infinitely divisible
distribution if and only if:

@xmath

for @xmath , @xmath a quadratic form on @xmath , and @xmath a so-called
Levy measure satisfying @xmath .

@xmath comes from a drift of -a. Note that a deterministic linear
function is a (not especially interesting) Levy process. @xmath comes
from a Brownian part @xmath . The rest corresponds to the jump part of
the process. @xmath

## 10 Math knowledge

### 10.1 The Review of Fundamental Knowledge

The two-variable function @xmath is a stochastic process, @xmath (
@xmath is a sample space). If @xmath , then @xmath is a discrete time
process. If @xmath , then @xmath is a continuous time process, written
as @xmath Sometimes, we use X(t) to represent @xmath .

For a fixed @xmath , @xmath is a sample path(trajectory) for each @xmath

For a fixed t, @xmath is a random variable for each @xmath .

A Gaussian process is a stochastic process for which any joint
distribution is Gaussian. A stochastic process is strictly stationary if
it is invariant under time displacement and it is wide-sense stationary
if there exist a constant @xmath and a function @xmath such that

@xmath

A stochastic process is a martingale if

@xmath

#### 10.1.1 Brownian Motion/The Wiener Process

Brownian motion(also called Wiener process) is the random motion of
particles suspended in a fluid resulting from their collision with the
fast-moving molecules in the fluid. Brownian motion was discovered by a
Scotland biologist, Robert Brown, under the observation of pollen in
fluid by a microscope.

Math property:

Suppose the continuous time process @xmath is a standard Brownian motion
on @xmath where @xmath .

Independence: For @xmath , the stochastic processes @xmath are
independent.

Normal distribution: For any @xmath , @xmath obeys the normal
distribution with average 0 and standard deviation @xmath .

#### 10.1.2 Stochastic Process

In probability theory and related fields, a stochastic or random process
is a mathematical object usually defined as a family of random
variables. [ 55 ] The random variables are defined on a common
probability space @xmath , where @xmath is a sample space, @xmath is a
@xmath -algebra, and @xmath is a probability measure and the random
variables which indexed by some set @xmath and all take values in the
same mathematical space @xmath must be measurable with respect to some
@xmath -algebra @xmath . [ 24 ]

In other words, for a given probability space @xmath and a measurable
space @xmath , a stochastic process is a collection of @xmath -valued
random variables, which can be written as: @xmath . [ 17 ] Every
stochastic process can be viewed as a function of two variables @xmath
and @xmath . For each fixed @xmath , @xmath is a random variable, as
postulated in the definition. [ 58 ]

#### 10.1.3 Markov Process

Markov processes are stochastic processes, traditionally in discrete or
continuous time, that have the Markov property, which means the next
value of the Markov process depends on the current value, but it is
conditionally independent of the previous values of the stochastic
process. [ 42 ] In other words, the behavior of the process in the
future is stochastically independent of its behavior in the past, given
the current state of the process. [ 48 ] The Markov process @xmath is
ergodic if the time average on [0,T] for @xmath of any function @xmath
is equal to its space average with respect to (one of) its stationary
probability densities. [ 38 ] In mathematical language, we denote Markov
Process by: a stochastic process @xmath on @xmath with state space
@xmath is called an @xmath Markov process iff @xmath is adapted w.r.t
the filtration @xmath , and [ 15 ]

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (5)
  -- -------- -- -----

where @xmath -a.s. for any @xmath and @xmath with @xmath .

Theorem:

The solution @xmath of a stochastic differential equation with @xmath is
a Markov process on the interval @xmath with the initial distribution [
4 ]

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (6)
  -- -------- -- -----

and the transition probabilities given by

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (7)
  -- -------- -- -----

for all @xmath . [ 39 ]

#### 10.1.4 Diffusion process

In probability theory and statistics, a diffusion process is a solution
to a stochastic differential equation. It is a continuous-time Markov
process with almost surely continuous sample paths. Brownian motion,
reflected Brownian motion and Ornstein–Uhlenbeck processes are examples
of diffusion processes. [ 53 ]

#### 10.1.5 Ito Integration

Suppose @xmath is a stochastic process based on Brownian motion, and
satisfies:

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (8)
  -- -------- -- -----

Then the Ito integration of X is defined as:

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (9)
  -- -------- -- -----

For example,

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (10)
  -- -------- -- ------

#### 10.1.6 Ito Process

The stochastic process @xmath is written as:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (11)
  -- -------- -- ------

In addition, @xmath and @xmath are two different adapted processes, and
satisfy:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (12)
  -- -------- -- ------

then @xmath is a Ito process.

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (13)
  -- -------- -- ------

Written in form of differential terms:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (14)
  -- -------- -- ------

Sometimes, in a concise form:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (15)
  -- -------- -- ------

@xmath is so called drift term, and @xmath is diffusion term.

There are few representative processes, such as geometric Brownian
motion, Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process (Vasicek process), Cox-Ingersoll-Ross
process.

Geometric Brownian Motion:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (16)
  -- -------- -- ------

Ornstein-Uhlenbeck Process(Vasicek Process):

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (17)
  -- -------- -- ------

When @xmath , this process has the property of mean-reverting, and can
be expressed as:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (18)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is a Wiener process under the risk neutral framework
modelling;

@xmath : ”long term mean level”. All future trajectories of @xmath will
evolve around a mean level @xmath in the long run;

@xmath : ”speed of reversion”. @xmath characterizes the velocity at
which such trajectories will regroup around @xmath in time;

@xmath : ”instantaneous volatility”, @xmath measures the instant by the
quantity of randomness @xmath .

Cox-Ingersoll-Ross Process:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (19)
  -- -------- -- ------

When @xmath , this process is strictly positive, can also be written as:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (20)
  -- -------- -- ------

The Cox-Ingersoll-Ross (CIR) model determines the interest rate as a
product of current volatility, the mean rate and spreads. Since there is
a square root term in the equation, the model indicates the mean
reversion towards a long-term normal interest rate level. In summary,
the CIR is a one-factor equilibrium model utilizing a square-root
diffusion process mainly for forecasting interest rates. The similarity
of CIR model and Vasicek model is that they are both one-factor model.
The difference is that Vasicek model does not include a square-root
component, which allows the growth rate to be negative.

### 10.2 Math tools

#### 10.2.1 Markov Property

The Markov property states as: ”Given the present state, @xmath , any
other information about what happened before time @xmath is irrelevant
for predicting what happens after time @xmath .” Since the Brownian
motion is translation invariant, the Markov property can be simplified
as: ”if @xmath then @xmath is a Brownian motion that is indepedent of
what happened before time s.” This implies that if @xmath and @xmath ,
then @xmath is independent of @xmath .

#### 10.2.2 Ito Lemma

In mathematics, Ito’s lemma is an identity used in Ito calculus to find
the differential of a time-dependent function of a stochastic process.
It serves as the stochastic calculus counterpart of the chain rule. It
can be heuristically derived by forming the Taylor series expansion of
the function up to its second derivatives and retaining terms up to
first order in the time increment and second order in the Wiener process
increment. The lemma is widely employed in mathematical finance, and its
best known application is in the derivation of the Black–Scholes
equation for option values. [ 27 ]

Lemma:

The following equation holds for Brownian motion @xmath and quadratic
derivative functions @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (21)
  -- -------- -- ------

The following equation holds for Brownian motion @xmath and quadratic
derivative functions @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (22)
  -- -------- -- ------

Define the Ito process as a stochastic process that satisfies the
following stochastic differential equations:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (23)
  -- -------- -- ------

The following equation holds for Ito process @xmath and quadratic
derivative functions @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (24)
  -- -------- -- ------

#### 10.2.3 laplace transformation

The Laplace transform is an integral transform. It transforms a function
of a real variable @xmath to a function of a complex variable @xmath . [
13 ] The Laplace transform of a function @xmath , defined for all real
numbers @xmath , is the function @xmath , which is a unilateral
transform defined by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (25)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath with real numbers @xmath and @xmath

#### 10.2.4 Girsanov’s theorem(Change of Measure)

Though the martingale property is not preserved under measure changes,
the semi-martingale property remains under measure change. In addition,
Girsanov’s theorem provides a methodology to sate the precise
semi-martingale decomposition under the new measure Q. [ 50 ]

We begin with a probability space @xmath and a non-negative random
variable @xmath satisfying @xmath . We then define a new probability
measure @xmath by the formula

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (26)
  -- -------- -- ------

Any random variable X now has two expectations, one under the original
probability measure @xmath , which is denoted by @xmath , and the other
under the new probability measure @xmath , which is denoted by @xmath .
These are related by the formula

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (27)
  -- -------- -- ------

If @xmath , then @xmath and @xmath agree which sets have probability
zero and @xmath has the companion formula

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (28)
  -- -------- -- ------

We say @xmath is the Radon-Nikodymn derivative of @xmath with respect to
@xmath , and we write

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (29)
  -- -------- -- ------

This is supposed to remind us that @xmath is like a ratio of these two
probability measures. In the case of a finite probability model, we
actually have

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (30)
  -- -------- -- ------

If we multiply both sides by @xmath and then sum over @xmath in a set A,
we obtain

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (31)
  -- -------- -- ------

#### 10.2.5 Girsanov (One dimension)

Let @xmath , @xmath , be a Brownian motion on a probability space @xmath
, and let @xmath , @xmath , be a filtration for this Brownian Motion.
Let @xmath , @xmath , be an adapted process and define:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (32)
  -- -------- -- ------

and assume that

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (33)
  -- -------- -- ------

Set @xmath , Then @xmath and under the probability measure @xmath given
by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (34)
  -- -------- -- ------

The process @xmath , is a Brownian motion.

#### 10.2.6 Feynman-Kac

The Feynman–Kac formula named after Richard Feynman and Mark Kac,
establishes a link between parabolic partial differential equations
(PDEs) and stochastic processes. When Mark Kac and Richard Feynman were
both on Cornell faculty, Kac attended a lecture of Feynman’s and
remarked that the two of them were working on the same thing from
different directions. [ 36 ]

Theorem:

Consider the artial differential equation

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (35)
  -- -------- -- ------

defined for all @xmath and @xmath , subject to the terminal condition

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (36)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath are known functions, @xmath is a parameter and @xmath is
the unknown. The Feynman-Kac formula tells us that the solution can be
written as a conditional expectation

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (37)
  -- -------- -- ------

under the probability measure @xmath such that @xmath is an Ito process
driven by the equation

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (38)
  -- -------- -- ------

with @xmath is a Wiener rocess (also called Brownian motion) under
@xmath , and the initial condition for @xmath is @xmath .
