The aim of this thesis is to analyze and renovate few main-stream models
on inflation derivatives. In the first chapter of the thesis, concepts
of financial instruments and fundamental terms are introduced, such as
coupon bond, inflation-indexed bond, swap.

In the second chapter of the thesis, classic models along the history of
developing quantified interest rate models are introduced and analyzed.
Moreover, the classification of interest rate models is introduced to
help audiences understand the intrinsic ideology behind each type of
models.

In the third chapter of the thesis, the related mathematical knowledge
is introduced. This part has the contribution on understanding the terms
and relation among terms in each model introduced previously.

In the fourth part of the thesis, the renovation of HJM frame work is
introduced and analysis has been initiated.

\DeclareUnicodeCharacter

2212-

Rational Kernel on Pricing Models of Inflation Derivatives

by

Yue Zhou

A thesis submitted in partial fulfillment

Of the requirements for the degree of

Master of Science

Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences

New York University

September, 2019

Under the Supervision of Professor Leon Tatevossian

Acknowledgements

I sincerely appreciate my advisor, Professor Leon Tatevossian, for his
guidance and the greatest help on my academy, as well as on my life,
especially his motivation and positivity on curing my depression, which
possessed me for the past four years. Every time when I visit my
advisor, I can feel his wisdom and confidence toward both academy and
life. It is truly my honor to have this opportunity to learn from him.

I further wish to thank Professor S. R. Srinivasa Varadhan, for the
guidance on my academy and his kindness to me. Without his
encouragement, I would not get intrigued by mathematics. I sincerely
appreciate Professor Varadhan for giving me this opportunity to take his
real variable class. Moreover, I really appreciate Professor S. R.
Srinivasa Varadhan for his time and effort on reading my thesis.

I gratefully thank Professor Bruce Hughes, who taught me topology during
my undergraduate study. His thoughtfulness is a gift that I will always
treasure. His charming personality definitely retains in my heart as the
lighthouse leading my direction when my mood turns to be foggy.

I sincerely thank Professor Ralph McKenzie, for his guidance and
kindness. I am offered many opportunities from him, on researches,
conferences, and participation in his class. His profound thought has
encouraged me on challenging myself all the time. Without him, I would
not relish in pure mathematics as much as I do.

I sincerely thank my undergrad advisor, Professor Glenn Webb, for
everything that he guides me along, he teaches me, and he helps me on.
His enthusiasm toward academic researches allures me and has been my
guidance. It is my great honor to be his student, having the opportunity
to learn from him, to observe his persistence, time, and effort that he
dedicates to both research and teaching.

I appreciate thank Vanderbilt university for enriching my positive
attitude toward life and academic research. I appreciate New York
University for training me like training a warrior, who enjoy the
process of persisting on challenging myself.

From the bottom of my heart, I appreciate my parents for the companion,
the unlimited support and love through my life. I sincerely appreciate
that every person who expects me to do well. I might have disappointed
them and even myself, but I would never let myself down.

Anyway, what happened in the past remains in past, the attitude toward
life retains: Citius, Altius, Fortius. I once thought academy was dry
and fastidious, which I would think as being fruitful and fascinating. I
once thought competition was for lacking of resources, which I would
think as for training me as a qualified researcher. As time passing by,
materialistic objects shall fade away, meanwhile, knowledge will shine
out. Simply, I decide to utilize my time and effort on thrusting the
boundary of human beings’ acknowledge. Human beings stand as one.

Life is bittersweet, it’s bitter at the beginning, then all the
sweetness comes in.

The last but not the least, I love math for its own beauty.
