# Acknowledgements

  “It was the best of times, it was the worst of times, it was the age
  of wisdom, it was the age of foolishness, it was the season of Light,
  it was the season of Darkness, it was the spring of hope, it was the
  winter of despair, we had everything before us, we had nothing before
  us, we were all going direct to Heaven, we were all going direct the
  other way”

  Charles Dickens, A Tale of Two Cities

First and foremost, I would like to thank my supervisor George
Papadopoulos for his continued guidance and support throughout these
four years of my PhD. His patience, understanding, and profound
knowledge helped me grow both as a person and a researcher. This thesis
would not have been possible without him!

On this note, I would like to thank my collaborator Alexander Haupt for
helpful discussions and insights. I would also like to extend many
thanks to the academic and administrative staff in the Department of
Mathematics for being extraordinarily welcoming and helpful every step
of the way.

Further, I want to thank my fellow PhD students. The above Dickens quote
is an apt summary of our shared plight, and it has been a privilege to
procrastinate with them. A special mention goes to Manya Sahni for being
the most kind, warm-hearted and genuine sister in arms, as well as my
younger academic brother Jake Phillips for giving me invaluable feedback
on early drafts of the manuscript.

Now is the time to thank all the people who had to endure seemingly
endless monologues about string theory and supergravity: my friends and
(chosen) family (at least those I have not already mentioned). I wish to
thank by name Louise Anderson for being a true friend and colleague,
Lucy Dove for eating my pizza despite her severe lactose intolerance,
Magdalena Gebhart for being my younger somewhat high-strung sister,
Colin Gorrie for being a true mensch and fellow “p.j.”, Sebastian Hoof
for jointly surviving Kennington Lane, Frances and Stephen Lipman for
all their help and support, Tome Perrin for counteracting four years of
sedentary lifestyle, and Maria Stillfried for being my younger somewhat
calmer sister. I would like to thank Markus Dollmann for being the best
friend anyone could wish for, he is a veritable (self-declared)
bantersaurus rex I can always count on, and for that I am eternally
grateful.

I could not have completed this work without the unfaltering emotional
support and love of Natasha Lipman. I thank her for being my muse,
“voluntary” proofreader, despite her inexplicable dislike of Fraktur,
and for always calming me down when it all seemed overwhelming.

Finally, I would like to dedicate this thesis to my mother and late
father, I owe them everything. My Maman encouraged me to follow my own
interests from a young age, and I am grateful for knowing I can always
count on her unwavering support and love. My Papschi is the person who
first fostered my passion for physics and mathematics. I am sure he
would have been delighted to read this thesis, and probably not
understand a word of it.

This work was supported by an NMS Faculty Studentship in the Department
of Mathematics.

###### Contents

-    Introduction
-    1 AdS/CFT and Supergravity Backgrounds
    -    1.1 From Superstrings to Supergravity
        -    1.1.1 String Theory
        -    1.1.2 Supergravity as low energy effective theory
        -    1.1.3 The two faces of branes
    -    1.2 AdS/CFT
        -    1.2.1 AdS geometry
        -    1.2.2 Supergravity Backgrounds and Killing spinors
        -    1.2.3 Stacks of D3-branes - a tale of two limits
    -    1.3 The Homogeneity Theorem
        -    1.3.1 Outline of the proof
    -    1.4 Killing Superalgebras
    -    1.5 Homogeneous Spaces
-    2 AdS @xmath Backgrounds with @xmath Supersymmetries in 10 and 11
    Dimensions
    -    2.1 Introduction
    -    2.2 @xmath @xmath solutions in IIB
        -    2.2.1 The Killing spinors
        -    2.2.2 The non-existence of @xmath @xmath solutions in IIB
    -    2.3 @xmath @xmath solutions in (massive) IIA
        -    2.3.1 The Killing spinor equations
        -    2.3.2 @xmath solutions with @xmath in IIA
        -    2.3.3 @xmath
        -    2.3.4 @xmath
        -    2.3.5 @xmath
    -    2.4 @xmath @xmath solutions in 11 dimensions
        -    2.4.1 @xmath solutions in @xmath
        -    2.4.2 The Killing spinors
        -    2.4.3 @xmath solutions with @xmath in 11 dimensions
        -    2.4.4 @xmath
        -    2.4.5 @xmath
        -    2.4.6 @xmath
    -    2.5 Summary
-    3 A Non-existence Theorem for @xmath Supersymmetric AdS @xmath
    Backgrounds
    -    3.1 Introduction
    -    3.2 Symmetries of AdS @xmath backgrounds
        -    3.2.1 Killing superalgebras of AdS @xmath backgrounds
        -    3.2.2 Central terms
        -    3.2.3 On the @xmath structure of internal spaces
    -    3.3 @xmath solutions in 11 dimensions
        -    3.3.1 Fields
        -    3.3.2 The Killing spinors
        -    3.3.3 For @xmath @xmath solutions @xmath is homogeneous
        -    3.3.4 Electric solutions do not preserve @xmath
            supersymmetries
        -    3.3.5 @xmath solutions with left only supersymmetry
        -    3.3.6 @xmath solutions with @xmath
        -    3.3.7 @xmath solutions with @xmath
        -    3.3.8 @xmath solutions with @xmath
        -    3.3.9 @xmath solutions with @xmath
        -    3.3.10 @xmath solutions with @xmath
        -    3.3.11 @xmath solutions with @xmath
    -    3.4 @xmath solutions in (massive) IIA
        -    3.4.1 Field equations and Bianchi identities for @xmath
        -    3.4.2 The Killing spinor equations
        -    3.4.3 @xmath solutions with left only supersymmetry
        -    3.4.4 @xmath solutions with @xmath
        -    3.4.5 @xmath solutions with @xmath
        -    3.4.6 @xmath solutions with @xmath
        -    3.4.7 @xmath solutions with @xmath
    -    3.5 @xmath solutions in IIB
        -    3.5.1 Field equations and Bianchi identities for @xmath
        -    3.5.2 The Killing spinor equations
        -    3.5.3 @xmath solutions with @xmath and @xmath
        -    3.5.4 @xmath solutions with @xmath
        -    3.5.5 @xmath solutions with @xmath
        -    3.5.6 @xmath solutions with @xmath
-    4 A Uniqueness Theorem for warped @xmath Minkowski Backgrounds with
    Fluxes
    -    4.1 Proof of the main statement
-    5 Conclusions
-    A Notation and conventions
-    B @xmath
    -    B.1 @xmath
    -    B.2 @xmath
-    C The Berger space @xmath
-    D @xmath
    -    D.1 @xmath
    -    D.2 @xmath
    -    D.3 @xmath
    -    D.4 @xmath
-    E Coset spaces with non-semisimple transitive groups
-    F @xmath

###### List of Figures

-    1.1 Web of string dualities

###### List of Tables

-    1.1 Decomposition of massless closed string states into irreducible
    representations of @xmath
-    1.2 Killing superalgebras of warped AdS @xmath ( @xmath )
    backgrounds in @xmath supergravity
-    1.3 Killing superalgebras of warped AdS @xmath backgrounds in
    @xmath supergravity
-    2.1 6-dimensional compact, simply connected, homogeneous spaces
-    2.2 Decomposition of ( 2.3.50 ) KSE into eigenspaces
-    2.3 7-dimensional compact, simply connected, homogeneous spaces
-    2.4 Decomposition of () KSE into eigenspaces
-    2.5 Decomposition of ( 2.4.32 ) KSE into eigenspaces
-    2.6 Decomposition of ( 2.4.62 ) KSE into eigenspaces
-    2.7 Decomposition of ( 2.4.75 ) KSE into eigenspaces
-    2.8 Decomposition of ( 2.4.83 ) KSE into eigenspaces
-    2.9 Decomposition of ( 2.4.97 ) KSE into eigenspaces
-    2.10 Decomposition of ( 2.4.103 ) KSE into eigenspaces
-    2.11 Decomposition of ( 2.4.106 ) KSE into eigenspaces
-    2.12 Decomposition of () KSE into eigenspaces
-    3.1 @xmath Killing superalgebras in type II and 11D
-    3.2 8-dimensional compact, simply connected, homogeneous spaces
-    3.3 Decomposition of ( 3.3.40 ) into eigenspaces
-    3.4 Decomposition of () KSE into eigenspaces
-    3.5 Decomposition of ( 3.3.90 ) KSE into eigenspaces
-    3.6 Decomposition of ( 3.3.93 ) KSE into eigenspaces
-    3.7 Homogeneous spaces for @xmath
-    3.8 Decomposition of ( 3.3.120 ) into eigenspaces
-    3.9 7-dimensional compact, simply connected, homogeneous spaces
-    3.10 Decomposition of ( 3.5.24 ) into eigenspaces
-    5.1 @xmath backgrounds preserving more than half maximal
    supersymmetry.

## Introduction

The two major breakthroughs that unequivocally shaped most of
theoretical physics in the past century were general relativity and
quantum field theory. Quantum field theory is the essential framework
for describing our Universe at the very smallest of scales in the form
of the Standard Model. The Standard Model, in particular, has celebrated
unparalleled success in withstanding ever more precise experimental
tests time after time. General relativity, on the other hand, is
critical to our current understanding of the large-scale behaviour of
the Universe. It accurately predicts corrections to Newtonian gravity,
accounting for the perihelion precession of Mercury and the deflection
of light by the Sun, as well as the existence of black holes and
gravitational waves, of which the latter have eluded measurement a
little over a hundred years after being first conjectured.

Unification and striving to describe Nature by ever fewer fundamental
principles has historically been a driving force in the development of
physics. Some of the most prominent examples include Maxwell’s theory of
electromagnetism, Einstein’s concept of spacetime, and the electroweak
theory by Glashow, Salam and Weinberg. Therefore, it is of little
surprise that ever since their discovery, physicists have sought to
reconcile gravity with the remaining three fundamental forces captured
by the Standard Model. However, what is the need for such a quantum
theory of gravity beyond aesthetic aspiration? Consider a black hole for
instance, this has a spacetime singularity at its centre where the
curvature “blows up”, it diverges. Now, this poses a problem, since a
black hole can be formed from a perfectly smooth initial matter
distribution, i.e. there are dynamical processes within general
relativity that take us out of the regime of validity of the classical
theory. As long as we do not fall into the black hole and get to feel
these infinite tidal forces ourselves, we need not worry about this too
much from a computational and practical perspective, since the
singularity is hidden behind a horizon. Unfortunately, this becomes much
more serious when both gravitational and quantum mechanical effects are
important, such as in the early Universe. In four dimensions the
coupling constant of gravity, i.e. Newton’s constant, has mass dimension
minus two, and therefore by a simple power counting argument, Einstein
gravity is non-renomarlisable!

To date, one of the most promising candidates to resolve this conundrum
and to provide a consistent quantum theory of gravity is string theory.
String theory was originally developed in the late 1960s to describe the
strong interaction, but was soon succeeded by quantum chromodynamics in
this purpose. However, not long after its inception it became apparent
that string theory contains a massless spin two state, the gauge boson
of gravity or the graviton. In fact, as we will see, the two basic
topologies of a string - open and closed - correspond to gauge and
gravitational degrees of freedom. Since open strings can close up,
gravity and gauge theory are inextricably connected in string theory,
thereby potentially providing a unified theory of all known fundamental
forces.

The discovery of the AdS/CFT correspondence in the late 1990s [ 90 , 128
, 66 ] , which states that certain string theories on @xmath
-dimensional Anti-de Sitter (AdS @xmath ) backgrounds are dual to @xmath
-dimensional conformal field theories (CFT), marks string theory finding
a way back to its historical roots in the following sense. With this
being a strong-weak coupling duality, string theory offers a framework
for understanding strongly coupled quantum field theories which would
otherwise be inaccessible to conventional perturbative methods.
Initially, AdS backgrounds were studied in the context of supergravity
compactifications or Freund-Rubin solutions [ 37 , 25 ] in the 1980s.
Over the past twenty years, with the inception of the AdS/CFT
correspondence, the problem of classifying AdS backgrounds has sparked
renewed interest, cf. [ 59 ] for a recent review and references therein.
Indeed, this together with the fact that the best understood examples of
the correspondence are highly supersymmetric, e.g. [ 90 , 1 ] ,
constitutes the main motivation for the work described in this thesis.

This thesis is arranged as follows: In chapter 1 , we aim to give a
lightning review of strings, supergravity and AdS/CFT to put our main
results into context. Furthermore, we introduce some of the key
developments that enabled the analysis in this thesis, e.g. the
integration of the Killing spinor equations along AdS, the homogeneity
theorem, as well as the classification of Killing superalgebras. In
chapter 2 , we present our findings on the classification of more than
half maximally supersymmetric warped AdS @xmath backgrounds in
11-dimensional, (massive) type IIA and type IIB supergravity which were
published in [ 76 ] . In chapter 3 , we present our proof of a
non-existence theorem for more than half BPS warped AdS @xmath
backgrounds in 10- and 11-dimensional supergravities, based on work
published in [ 75 ] . In chapter 4 , we demonstrate that all more than
half maximally supersymmetric warped Minkowski backgrounds in 10 and 11
dimensions are necessarily locally isometric to the maximally
supersymmetric flat vacuum. This work was published in [ 87 ] . Finally,
in chapter 5 , we provide a conclusion to this thesis.

## Chapter 1 AdS/CFT and Supergravity Backgrounds

In this chapter, we would like to put the main results of this work in
chapters 2 , 3 and 4 into a wider context, and along the way introduce
some of the tools and techniques which facilitated our analysis. We
proceed by giving a short introduction to string theory, and
consequently supergravity as its low energy limit, thereby turning the
historical development of the subject on its head. By virtue of
space(time) limitations our outline has to be selective, omitting many
details and important contributions, however we aim to give historical
references for some of the milestones in the field. A comprehensive and
much more complete review of the fundamentals of strings, branes and
supergravity may be found in [ 62 , 63 , 105 , 106 , 10 , 36 , 11 ] ,
which heavily influenced the following section.

### 1.1 From Superstrings to Supergravity

One of the two most successful developments of 20th century physics,
quantum field theory (QFT), is fundamentally preoccupied with studying
excitations of fields that may be interpreted as point-like particles.
String theory, as its very name suggests, takes this one step further
and declares one-dimensional extended objects called strings to be the
fundamental entities of matter. Incidentally, and somewhat enticingly,
this approach also yields a consistent theory of quantum gravity,
thereby marrying QFT with the second great achievement of 20th century
physics, General Relativity (GR).

However, from a historical point of view this was an accident. String
theory was originally conceived in the late 1960s by Veneziano, who
constructed an amplitude satisfying the then suspected “duality”
symmetry under the exchange of @xmath - and @xmath -channel diagrams in
hadronic scattering processes [ 124 ] . Unfortunately, this turned out
not to be a particularly fruitful approach for the study of the strong
interaction, and with the discovery of quantum chromodynamics soon
became obsolete ¹ ¹ 1 Arguably, with the conception of the AdS/CFT
correspondence, string theory has come full circle by being used as a
tool to understand strongly coupled gauge theories. . Nonetheless,
Veneziano’s amplitude was not forgotten, and would be reinterpreted as
the scattering of relativistic bosonic strings by Nambu [ 96 ] , Nielsen
[ 100 ] and Susskind [ 120 ] . Subsequently, excitement grew as people
realised the spectrum of the theory contained a massless spin 2 state
corresponding to the graviton, the gauge boson of gravity [ 131 , 113 ]
. Nevertheless, some obvious problems remained, namely the theory did
not include fermioninc matter, and the vacuum featured a tachyonic
state, signalling instability. Enter supersymmetry, a symmetry relating
bosonic degrees of freedom to fermionic ones, which solves both of these
problems at once. This is where we shall begin.

#### 1.1.1 String Theory

A string sweeps out a @xmath -dimensional worldsheet @xmath in
spacetime, which we assume to be @xmath -dimensional Minkowski space
with metric @xmath for now, generalisation to curved backgrounds is
achieved straightforwardly via minimal coupling to @xmath . The
embedding of the string into the target space is given by the functions
@xmath , where @xmath corresponds to proper time and @xmath is the
spatial coordinate of the string, and is usually fixed to take values in
@xmath for closed and @xmath for open strings. Just like the action of a
point particle is given by the length of its worldline, one takes the
action of the string to be proportional to its worldsheet, thus
manifestly ensuring diffeomorphism invariance

  -- -- -- ---------
           (1.1.1)
  -- -- -- ---------

with @xmath and the constant @xmath refers to the inherent length scale
of the problem, the string length @xmath . This is the so-called
Nambu-Goto action [ 95 , 49 , 74 ] . However, the square root makes it
rather hard to quantise, so one usually considers an alternative form,
the Polyakov action ² ² 2 The so-called Polyakov action was actually
discovered independently by Brink, DiVecchia and Howe, and by Deser and
Zumino. Polyakov later used it in the context of the path integral
quantisation of the bosonic string. [ 23 , 13 , 108 ] , where one
introduces a worldsheet metric @xmath as an auxiliary field

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.1.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The Polyakov action can be viewed as a collection of @xmath worldsheet
scalars coupled to two dimensional gravity. Since gravity in two
dimensions is trivial, and by our construction @xmath is a Lagrange
multiplier, it is not surprising that the associated energy momentum
tensor, i.e. the equations of motion for @xmath , vanish identically.
This gives rise to the so called Virasoro constraints. In fact, one may
integrate out @xmath this way to recover the Nambu-Goto action at the
classical level. Turning to the symmetries of the Polyakov action, we
observe that it is invariant under @xmath dimensional Poincaré
transformations, diffeomorphisms of the worldsheet, and Weyl
transformations @xmath , i.e. local rescalings. In that sense, the
bosonic string may be viewed as a gauge theory of the two dimensional
conformal group. We may use diffeomorphism invariance to fix the gauge
to the so-called conformal gauge

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.1.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

With the gauge fixed in this manner and introducing a collection of
@xmath worldsheet Majorana-Weyl spinors @xmath , the supersymmetrised
Polyakov action [ 13 , 109 , 99 ] reads

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (1.1.4)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath , @xmath , and we have chosen the explicit representation

  -- -- -- ---------
           (1.1.5)
  -- -- -- ---------

of the two dimensional Clifford algebra. The signs appearing in the
subscript of the components of @xmath refer to the eigenvalue with
respect to the chirality matrix @xmath . Note that the supersymmetry
variations with parameter @xmath are given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.1.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Varying this action, we find for the equations of motion

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.1.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

i.e. the bosonic degrees of freedom satisfy a free wave equation and the
fermions the free Dirac equation in two dimensions. As always in a free
QFT, we could now diagonalise the Laplacian and promote the modes to
creation/annihilation operators, giving rise to a collection of bosonic
and fermionic harmonic oscillators. However, before acting prematurely,
we need to think carefully about possible boundary conditions for the
string, which we have glossed over in deriving the field equations so
far. In fact, when varying the action by @xmath and @xmath , one obtains
the following boundary terms from integration by parts

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (1.1.8)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where the limits @xmath and @xmath refer to open and closed strings,
respectively. Focusing on the bosonic boundary term for now, we note
that for a closed string, we have to pick periodic boundary conditions
@xmath anyway and so this term vanishes without further ado. In the open
string case on the other hand, we have the choice between von Neumann (
@xmath ) or Dirichlet ( @xmath ) boundary conditions independently for
each endpoint and direction. The former imply that the ends move freely
and no momentum flows off the string, whereas Dirichlet boundary
conditions imply that the corresponding end of the string is fixed to a
hypersurface that can exchange momentum with the open string. These
dynamical and, as it turns out, non-perturbative objects are called
D-branes.

As for the fermionic term in ( 1.1.1 ), in the open string sector the
terms at @xmath and @xmath have to vanish separately, which relates the
components of the Majorana-Weyl fermion as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.1.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

By convention the overall sign is chosen such that @xmath , which leaves
us with the following possbilities

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.1.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

the Ramond (R) sector with integer modes ³ ³ 3 This is only true for NN
or DD boundary conditons, otherwise there is a sign flip at one of the
boundaries and the modes are half integer or

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.1.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

the Neveu-Schwarz (NS) sector with half-integer modes ⁴ ⁴ 4 Again this
only applies for NN or DD conditions, for ND or DN the modes are
integer. .

One then proceeds to promote both the bosonic and fermionic modes to
operators and imposes (anti-)commutation relations. As usual, the
Hilbert space is built up by acting with creation operators on a vacuum,
which is defined as the state being annihilated by all annihilation
operators. Furthermore, one needs to impose physical state conditions
similar to the Gupta-Bleuler quantisation procedure in quantum
electrodynamics in the “weak” sense, i.e. in expectation values. More
concretely, these are the (super-)Virasoro constraints, arising
classically as the modes of the worldsheet energy momentum tensor and
supercurrent. The critical dimension in superstring theory @xmath and a
possible normal ordering constant @xmath as well as the aforementioned
physical state conditions can be obtained in several different ways, be
it the absence of negative norm states in covariant quantisation [ 14 ,
47 ] , or enforcing target space Lorentz invariance in light-cone
quantisation [ 46 ] . A particularly elegant approach is the so-called
BRST quantisation, in which physical states are identified with
cohomology classes of a nilpotent operator @xmath , related to the gauge
symmetry of the underlying theory (in our case superconformal invariance
on the worldsheet). It can be shown that @xmath is nilpotent if and only
if the superconformal anomaly (central term in super-Virasoro algebra)
is cancelled, which depends on the target space dimension [ 85 , 82 , 21
] .

Let us turn our attention to the spectrum in the open string case. In
the NS-sector, one finds that the ground state is once again tachyonic
as for the original bosonic string, and the first excited state is a
massless ten dimensional Lorentz vector i.e. it transforms under the
little group @xmath in the fundamental representation @xmath . In the
R-sector on the other hand, the vacuum is massless but highly degenerate
in return, since the oscillators corresponding to the zero modes take
one ground state into another. They form a representation of the @xmath
-dimensional Clifford algebra, and so the ground state is a spacetime
spinor with spin @xmath . Under @xmath or its cover @xmath this
16-dimensional Majorana-Weyl spinor can be reorganised in the two
8-dimensional irreducible spinor representations of opposite chirality
@xmath and @xmath . Now, in order to get rid of the tachyon and to
obtain a spacetime supersymmetric theory, we define the @xmath -parity
operator as

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.1.12)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the highest rank Clifford algebra element in 10
dimensions and @xmath is the worldsheet fermion number operator. One can
perform a consistent truncation of the spectrum, known as GSO projection
after Gliozzi, Scherk and Olive [ 45 ] , by only keeping states with
positive @xmath -parity, thereby discarding the tachyon in the NS-sector
and the @xmath in the R-sector. Thus we are left with a @xmath gauge
multiplet at the massless level.

In the closed string sector we have four different choices of boundary
conditions, since we can impose these separately on left and right
moving modes. Therefore, we have to consider NS-NS, R-R, NS-R and R-NS
sectors, with the former two giving rise to spacetime bosons, whereas
the mixed sectors are spacetime fermions. Again, one can perform a GSO
projection, which gives rise to only four consistent closed superstring
theories - quite a remarkable cull of the a priori thousands of
possibilities. Only two of these are physically distinct, the so called
type IIA and type IIB theories which are given by

  ----------- -------------------------- ------------------------ ------------------------- --------------------------
  Type IIA:   (NS @xmath , NS @xmath )   (R @xmath , R @xmath )   (R @xmath , NS @xmath )   (NS @xmath , R @xmath )
  Type IIB:   (NS @xmath , NS @xmath )   (R @xmath , R @xmath )   (R @xmath , NS @xmath )   (NS @xmath , R @xmath ),
  ----------- -------------------------- ------------------------ ------------------------- --------------------------

where the subscripts refer to @xmath -parity. We find the bosonic field
content by taking tensor products of two of the three eight dimensional
representations of @xmath corresponding to the above sectors, and
decomposing them into irreducible representations of the little group
again (cf. table 1.1 ). A similar procedure in the mixed R-NS and NS-R
sectors yields dilatinos and gravitinos, i.e. the superpartners of
dilaton and graviton.

There are three more consistent superstring theories in 10 dimensions,
type I which is made up of both open and closed unoriented strings with
gauge group @xmath and the two heterotic string theories with gauge
groups @xmath and @xmath . The name heterotic refers to the fact that
one combines the left-moving degrees of freedom of a 10-dimensional
superstring theory with the right-movers of a 26-dimensional bosonic
string theory. These five different string theories are not independent
though. Instead they are related to one another via a web of dualities,
cf. figure 1.1 , and as it was realised in the mid 1990’s, are all
different limits of a unique 11-dimensional theory of branes containing
no strings, namely M-theory [ 80 , 123 , 126 ] . In figure 1.1 we
mention two types of dualities, T- and S-duality. T-duality relates a
string theory (e.g. IIA) compactified on a circle of radius @xmath with
another theory (e.g. IIB) compactified on a circle of radius @xmath ,
with momentum and winding modes interchanged. S-duality on the other
hand is a strong/weak coupling duality. The string coupling @xmath
governing string perturbation theory is dynamically determined by the
theory itself as the vacuum expectation value of the dilaton @xmath .
S-duality then states that a theory, e.g. type I, with coupling @xmath
is equivalent to a theory with inverse coupling @xmath , e.g. heterotic
@xmath .

#### 1.1.2 Supergravity as low energy effective theory

String theory ultimately aspires to provide a unified description of all
fundamental interactions, including gravity. In the previous section we
found promising hints from the spectrum in that direction, as it
contained a massless spin two particle, a prime candidate for the
graviton. However, the correct particle spectrum alone is meaningless
without knowing how these couple to one another. Besides, at low
energies ⁵ ⁵ 5 By low energy we mean that @xmath , where @xmath denotes
the momentum of an external on-shell state. the massive tower of string
modes freezes out and only the massless modes survive. So, in the
appropriate limit, we should recover the Einstein Hilbert action as well
as gauge theory. How do we go about finding this low energy effective
theory?

One possibility is to write down the free Lagrangian for the massless
fields that are present in the spectrum, and add in interactions that
reproduce the amplitudes computed in string perturbation theory. Further
restrictions arise from spacetime symmetries, such as general coordinate
invariance and supersymmetry, which can be inferred from the structure
of the worldsheet theory, e.g. from conserved currents. Alternatively,
requiring worldsheet superconformal invariance ⁶ ⁶ 6 That is an anomaly
free gauge symmetry on the worldsheet. , the @xmath -functions of the
two-dimensional (non-linear) sigma model coupled to target space
background fields, the massless modes, have to vanish. This yields the
equations of motion and one may then write down an action that
reproduces these.

After GSO projection both type IIA and IIB contain an equal number of
on-shell bosonic and fermionic degrees of freedom (128+128) at the
massless level. As advertised this is a sign of spacetime supersymmetry
which is made manifest in the Green Schwarz formalism [ 64 ] , an
alternative approach to the Ramond-Neveu-Schwarz formalism outlined in
the previous section to obtain superstring theories. We mentioned that
the mixed R-NS and NS-R sectors in both type IIA and IIB contain two
gravitinos @xmath ( @xmath ), i.e. massless spin @xmath fields. In the
case of IIA these are of opposite chirality, whereas IIB is chiral. Now,
just like the presence of a massless vector boson implies a gauge
symmetry in a consistent QFT, the occurrence of a gravitino, the
superpartner of the graviton, implies that spacetime supersymmetry has
to be local. Therefore, the low energy effective theories will be
supergravities . Furthermore, the presence of two independent gravitinos
is linked to the existence of two independent @xmath supersymmetry
algebras ⁷ ⁷ 7 Hence the name type II. in 10 dimensions, differing by
the chirality of their two Majorana-Weyl supercharges. In fact, it turns
out this is also the maximum number of supersymmetry one can have in 10
dimensions, if we demand not to exceed spin two in the supermultiplets [
94 ] . The effective action to lowest order in @xmath of the bosonic
fields in type IIA [ 15 , 41 , 81 ] and IIB ⁸ ⁸ 8 In the case of IIB,
this is really more of a pseudo-action, since one still has to impose
self-duality of the 5-form @xmath at the level of the equations of
motion. [ 114 , 115 , 79 ] (in the string frame) is of the form

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.1.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the common sector of both theories given by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.1.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and @xmath is the field strength of the Kalb-Ramond field. @xmath
denotes the 10-dimensional gravitational constant

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.1.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Moreover, @xmath contains the kinetic terms of the R-R-gauge fields and
@xmath are Chern-Simons terms, so of a topological nature. In the case
of type IIA one finds

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.1.16)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

where

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.1.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

For IIB this reads

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.1.18)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

with

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.1.19)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

The action of type IIA supergravity may also be derived via dimensional
reduction of 11-dimensional supergravity. Supergravity in 11 dimensions
is unique in the sense that this is the maximal spacetime dimension in
which the massless multiplets only contain particles of spin less or
equal than two. The bosonic part of the action of 11-dimensional
supergravity is given by [ 20 ]

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.1.20)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is a 3-form gauge potential with field strength @xmath and
@xmath denotes the gravitational coupling in 11 dimensions. Just like
the UV completions of type IIA and type IIB supergravity are type IIA
and type IIB string theory, respectively, the strong coupling limit of
11-dimensional supergravity was conjectured to be M-theory [ 123 , 126 ,
116 ] .

#### 1.1.3 The two faces of branes

So far we have been preoccupied with the quantisation of open and closed
strings, as well as the low energy effective theory of closed strings.
In section 1.1.1 , we have briefly alluded to the fact that D-branes are
not merely hyperplanes on which open strings can end, but are dynamical
objects in their own right [ 22 , 88 , 107 ] . In fact, they gravitate
by coupling to closed strings in the NS-NS sector, that is they have a
mass and hence deform spacetime. On the other hand, they are naturally
charged under R-R form potentials, and one finds a gauge theory living
on the worldvolume.

The derivation of the low energy effective action of open strings
proceeds along similar lines as the one of closed strings in section
1.1.2 , except that now boundary conditions specified by D-branes have
to be taken into account. The endpoints of a string are charged, and so
couple to a gauge field @xmath living on the D-brane. Again one has to
impose constraints, namely the worldsheet energy momentum tensor has to
vanish. One obtains restrictions on the equations of motion, and thus
the form of the gauge field. These may be reformulated as the field
equations of the D-brane action. To this end, let @xmath be coordinates
on the worldvolume of a Dp-brane. Analogously to how the Nambu-Goto
action encoded the area swept out by a string, the bosonic part of the
Dirac-Born-Infeld (DBI) action of a @xmath -dimensional brane is given
by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.1.21)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath and @xmath denote the pullback of the target space metric
and Kalb-Ramond field

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.1.22)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and the coupling constant @xmath denotes the brane tension. The field
strength @xmath is that of the @xmath gauge field @xmath propagating
along a single Dp-brane. If we embed such a Dp-brane into flat space
with vanishing Kalb-Ramond field and constant dilaton, i.e. @xmath , and
expand the square root to leading order, we obtain the kinetic term of
Maxwell theory or put differently, (Abelian) Yang-Mills (YM) theory

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.1.23)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which matches open string scattering computations. From ( 1.1.23 ) we
may read off the YM coupling

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.1.24)
  -- -------- -- ----------

To lowest order, an R-R-form field @xmath (pulled back to the brane)
naturally couples to a Dp-brane @xmath as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.1.25)
  -- -------- -- ----------

with charge @xmath . Note that this is invariant under Abelian gauge
transformations of the form @xmath for some @xmath -form @xmath .
Finally, the full (bosonic) action of a Dp-brane also contains a
Chern-Simons term

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.1.26)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which is of the form

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.1.27)
  -- -------- -- ----------

It is understood that all forms are pulled back appropriately and the
exponential power series has to be expanded in terms of the wedge
product. In order to obtain non-Abelian gauge theories, we would have to
look at several coincident branes, for instance a stack of @xmath
coincident D-branes gives rise to @xmath YM theory.

Now, let us turn our attention to the second viewpoint of branes as
gravitational solitons, that is higher dimensional analogues of black
holes [ 78 ] . These (extremal) black branes solve the equations of
motion of a particular supergravity theory and are so-called half BPS
solutions, i.e. they preserve half of the original supersymmetry of the
(flat) background (cf. section 1.2.2 ). In 10 dimensions, the presence
of a Dp-brane breaks 10-dimensional Poincaré invariance @xmath down to
@xmath . It can be shown that

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.1.28)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

solves the equations of motion, see [ 118 ] and references therein.
Here, @xmath with @xmath denote coordinates along the brane and @xmath
with @xmath are the transverse coordinates. The radial coordinate @xmath
is defined as usual as @xmath and the function @xmath has to be harmonic

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.1.29)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and thus may be written as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.1.30)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Note that this spacetime is asymptotically flat, i.e. as @xmath , we
recover Minkowski space. The characteristic length scale @xmath may be
determined from the R-R-charge of the Dp-brane, which can be computed by
integrating the R-R-flux through an @xmath - dimensional sphere at
infinity surrounding the brane. One can show by a Dirac string-type
argument that such a charge has to be quantised [ 98 , 121 , 122 ] and
basically counts the number @xmath of branes in units of @xmath . Thus
one finds

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.1.31)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In type IIA or IIB string theory, Dp-branes with @xmath even or odd,
respectively, are stable since the R-R-fields @xmath present in the
their spectra can couple to the branes. From the supergravity
persepective, Dp-branes are extremal in the sense that they saturate the
BPS bound, since their mass @xmath is poportional to their charge @xmath
.

In 11-dimensional supergravity, we only have one 3-form field @xmath at
our disposal that could couple to branes. Indeed, one finds that there
are two different supergravity solitons, the so-called M2-branes which
couple electrically to @xmath , and M5-branes which couple magnetically
to the 3-form. A stack of @xmath coincident M2-branes is given by [ 27 ]

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.1.32)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

where the harmonic function @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.1.33)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Similarly, the fields sourced by a stack of their magnetic duals, namely
M5-branes [ 67 ] , are

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.1.34)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

with

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.1.35)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and @xmath is the magnetic dual of @xmath , that is @xmath .

In section 1.2.3 , we will get back to stacks of (D3-)branes and in
particular investigate the near-horizon limit @xmath in more detail,
which will ultimately lead us to the AdS/CFT correspondence.

### 1.2 AdS/CFT

Most of this thesis is dedicated to studying AdS supergravity
backgrounds which are of paramount importance for the AdS/CFT
correspondence. Thus, we devote this section to collect some of the
necessary tools on the supergravity side to hopefully make sense of most
words in the previous sentence. Further, we will give a crude and by no
means exhaustive introduction to the original correspondence. In
preparing this outline, we found the textbooks [ 4 , 97 ] as well as the
review [ 3 ] most helpful, from which we have freely drawn inspiration.

#### 1.2.1 AdS geometry

Anti-de Sitter spacetime (AdS) is the maximally symmetric spacetime with
negative cosmological constant, i.e. constant negative scalar curvature.
@xmath -dimensional AdS @xmath can be constructed as a hypersurface in
@xmath as follows

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.2.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the radius of AdS. Observe that this construction is the
non-Euclidean analogue of how one would embed an n-dimensional
hyperboloid in @xmath . As for the isometries of AdS @xmath , we note
that ( 1.2.1 ) is manifestly invariant under @xmath , in particular,
this justifies our earlier claim that AdS @xmath is maximally symmetric,
since @xmath . Furthermore, given the isometry group of AdS @xmath , it
may alternatively be identified with the coset space @xmath . In order
to see this, consider @xmath as a base point without loss of generality.
This satisfies ( 1.2.1 ), and we may reach any other point in AdS @xmath
by acting with an element of @xmath . Finally, the point @xmath is
invariant under the left action of @xmath , i.e. @xmath is the
stabiliser of a point in AdS @xmath . Let us consider some explicit
coordinate systems of AdS @xmath . For instance, one may parametrise the
hyperboloid ( 1.2.1 ) by

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.2.2)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . This coordinate system is usually
referred to as global coordinates, since it covers the entire
hypersurface ( 1.2.1 ). Pulling back the flat metric on @xmath to AdS
@xmath , one finds

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.2.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath denotes the metric on the sphere @xmath . Note that this
features a global timelike Killing vector field @xmath , however the
associated time coordinate is perdiodic, so we can end up with closed
timelike curves. Therefore, to avoid a grandfather paradox-like
situation, we should really unwrap the time coordinate and allow @xmath
, thereby going to the universal cover of AdS @xmath .

Another widely used coordinate system, and probably the most useful in
the context of AdS/CFT, are Poincaré patch coordinates. Introducing
@xmath and @xmath , the parametrisation is given by

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.2.4)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

The metric of AdS @xmath then reads

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.2.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and so we observe that AdS @xmath is foliated by leaves of @xmath
-dimensional Minkowski space, hence the name Poincaré patch. In fact,
this is our first example of a warped product metric, which we will come
back to later in this section. First, let us note that the conformally
equivalent metric @xmath exhibits a boundary at @xmath and it is in this
sense that Minkowski space is the conformal boundary of AdS. On the
other hand, the slice at @xmath is a Killing horizon, since the
time-like Killing vector @xmath has vanishing norm on that plane. As
convenient as these coordinates are, we want to stress it is not a
coincidence that their very name contains the word “patch”; indeed they
only cover half the hyperboloid ( 1.2.1 ). The plane @xmath is just a
coordinate singularity though, and the metric may be extended through
the Killing horizon, e.g. using the global coordinates ( 1.2.1 ).

A first hint that a theory on AdS might be holographic comes from the
causal structure of AdS. To this end, let us perform the following
gedankenexperiment. Imagine we were a stationary observer in the bulk of
AdS at @xmath in global coordinates ( 1.2.1 ), and we sent out a light
signal radially towards the boundary where it is reflected. Setting
@xmath , an outward radial null geodesic is parametrised by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.2.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

thus we find that the signal reaches us in finite proper time as
measured on our clock, namely

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.2.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Therefore, the conformal boundary is in causal contact with the bulk.

#### 1.2.2 Supergravity Backgrounds and Killing spinors

A supergravity background is a solution to the classical equations of
motion for the metric, fluxes, and scalar fields of a particular theory.
One may then treat any fluctuations around this background quantum
mechanically. The fermionic fields are all set to zero, since they have
to vanish classically ⁹ ⁹ 9 Consider Minkowski space @xmath for example,
fermions are spinors and as such will transform non-trivially under
@xmath . A non-vanishing VEV would break the Lorentz invariance of the
vacuum. . We will mostly be interested in supersymmetric backgrounds,
that is solutions preserving some residual (rigid) supersymmetry of the
original (local) supergravity, and thus we require that the SUSY
variations leave the fields invariant. Since SUSY transforms bosons into
fermions, and we have set the latter to zero, this will not give us any
new conditions. However, the SUSY variations with parameter @xmath of
the fermions, in particular that of the gravitino @xmath , which is
present in every SUGRA theory, and those of any other remaining fermions
@xmath yield

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.2.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath denotes the supercovariant derivative

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.2.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which contains the spin connection @xmath . Here, @xmath etc. denote
spacetime indices, @xmath are frame indices, and @xmath just
collectively denotes fluxes in the theory contracted into Clifford
algebra elements. Any SUSY parameters @xmath which solve these first
order partial differential equations and possibly algebraic conditions
are called Killing spinors and hence the set of equations ( 1.2.8 ) are
referred to as Killing spinor equations (KSEs). The number @xmath of
linearly independent solutions to ( 1.2.8 ) is referred to as the number
of preserved supersymmetries of the background.

For the most part, we will focus on warped products of AdS or Minkowski
space, and some so called internal space. Backgrounds of this type were
originally considered in the context of Kaluza Klein and flux
compactifications cf. [ 25 , 61 ] for a comprehensive review. More
recently, there has been renewed interest in such solutions as gravity
duals of supersymmetric field theories, which we aim to give a flavour
of in section 1.2.3 . Requiring that these backgrounds be invariant
under the isometries of AdS @xmath or @xmath respectively, the most
general metric one can write down is of the form

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Here @xmath denotes the dimension of the supergravity theory under
consideration and @xmath is the so-called warp factor, which may depend
on the coordinates of the transverse space @xmath .

It turns out that the metric of warped AdS backgrounds can be written in
the form of a black hole near horizon geometry [ 55 ] , so that
techniques from studying black hole horizons [ 69 , 70 , 71 , 65 , 56 ,
57 , 51 , 52 ] can be carried over to the analysis of AdS solutions [ 68
, 8 , 6 ] . Near an extremal black hole horizon, one can adapt
coordinates such that the metric becomes [ 91 , 38 ]

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the one-form @xmath and function @xmath depend on the coordinates
of the horizon section @xmath . In horizon calculations one usually
assumes that @xmath is compact without boundary, but we are not making
this assumption here. If we recall the Poincaré patch metric on AdS
@xmath ( 1.2.5 ) and let @xmath , we obtain

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

for the metric on the warped product space. For @xmath we introduce a
kind of rescaled light cone coordinates

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

so that we end up with

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (1.2.14)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath refers to the remaining spatial coordinates of the
Minkowski leaves. Note that this is indeed of the form ( 1.2.11 ) with

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.2.15)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

Similarly, one can cast the metric of warped product spaces containing
an AdS @xmath -factor in the form of a near horizon metric [ 55 ] ,
however we are only concerned with @xmath in this thesis, and so we
shall omit this here.

It is natural to introduce a pseudo-orthornormal frame as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

so that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath . Since we required that all fields in our background be
invariant under the isometries of AdS @xmath , any @xmath -form fluxes
@xmath will generically have to be of the form

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.2.18)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath and @xmath are forms on the internal manifold @xmath of
degree @xmath and @xmath , respectively. Taking this setup as a starting
point, the authors in [ 68 , 8 , 6 ] explicitly solved the Killing
spinor equations on the AdS subspace in 11-dimensional, type IIB and
(massive) IIA supergravity to find

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (1.2.19)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

where the spinors @xmath , @xmath only depend on the transverse space,
and satisfy the light cone projection conditions @xmath . The remaining
independent KSEs are schematically a parallel transport equation along
the internal manifold (with supercovariant connection @xmath )

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.20)
  -- -------- -- ----------

restrictions of algebraic KSEs to the transverse space

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.21)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and an additional algebraic KSE

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.22)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which arises as an integrability condition from integrating the KSEs
along the AdS-factor. Details of the supercovariant connection @xmath ,
as well as the Clifford algebra operators @xmath are theory dependent,
and will be introduced as and when we need them in chapters 2 and 3 .
The field equations are for the most part more or less naive reductions
on the transverse space with the notable exception of the Einstein
equation along AdS, which leads to an equation of motion for the warp
factor

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.23)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Depending on the dimension of the AdS subspace, @xmath and @xmath come
in different multiplicities, i.e given some linearly independent
solutions of type @xmath , one can generate @xmath and possibly @xmath
-type spinors via Clifford algebra operators. The number of
supersymmetries a background preserves is then given by the number of
multiplets times the number of linearly independent spinors in each
multiplet.

Lastly, we would like to point out the importance of assuming the
transverse space to be compact without boundary as discussed in [ 50 ] .
Going back to the hyperboloid ( 1.2.1 ), we can introduce a slightly
different set of global coordinates with @xmath as

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.2.24)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

so that the metric becomes

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.25)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Next, we set

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.2.26)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , which yields

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (1.2.27)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

for the metric. Thus AdS @xmath may be foliated by AdS @xmath -leaves,
the result being a warped product with the real line and warp factor
@xmath . Repeating this procedure multiple times, the solution AdS
@xmath in 11-dimensional supergravity could then be reinterpreted as an
AdS @xmath background with some non-compact internal space, for
instance. Of course, all solutions obtained in this fashion are locally
isometric to the parent solution, and therefore do not represent a
genuinely new background. Hence, in order to exclude such “fake” AdS
vacua and to make it unambiguously clear what constitutes distinct
backgrounds, we usually assume the internal manifold @xmath to be
compact without boundary. As we will see in section 1.4 , compactness
also guarantees that certain Killing spinor bilinears vanish and thus
the bosonic part of the Killing superalgebra decomposes into a direct
sum of the isometry algebra of AdS @xmath and that of the the transverse
space @xmath .

#### 1.2.3 Stacks of D3-branes - a tale of two limits

Finally, we have collected all necessary ingredients to formulate and at
least “justify” the AdS/CFT correspondence, and so without further ado,
let us see what this is all about. In its strongest conjectured form,
the AdS/CFT correspondence relates a superstring theory on an AdS
background to a (super-) conformal field theory living on the conformal
boundary of AdS. The original and most prominent example of the
correspondence is that type IIB superstring theory on @xmath with radius
@xmath and @xmath units of five-form flux is dual to @xmath Super
Yang-Mills theory on @xmath and gauge group @xmath [ 90 , 66 , 128 ] .
The coupling constants of these theories are identified as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.28)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Note that this is a strong-weak coupling duality; for instance in the
limit @xmath and @xmath , we recover supergravity on the AdS side,
whereas on the CFT side this corresponds to the limit of large ’t Hooft
coupling @xmath , i.e. a strongly coupled gauge theory.

In order to motivate this correspondence, let us consider a stack of
@xmath coincident D3-branes extending in the @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath direction in type IIB. As we mentioned in section 1.1.3 , we
may take two points of view. The first point of view is that D-branes
are the endpoints of open strings and we know how to treat these
perturbatively provided that @xmath . Furthermore, we saw that at low
energies @xmath , i.e. when we can neglect the massive tower of string
excitations, the effective theory of the massless open string modes is a
supersymmetric Yang-Mills theory with gauge group @xmath and effective
coupling @xmath living on the worldvolume. Therefore, this open string
perspective is really valid for @xmath .

The effective action of this configuration is of the form

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.29)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath and @xmath describe closed and open string modes,
respectively. Further, @xmath encompasses the interaction between these
two sectors. The bulk action @xmath is that of 10-dimensional
supergravity plus higher order derivative terms. Expanding the metric
around the flat Minkowski background, that is @xmath , schematically to
leading order one has

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.30)
  -- -------- -- ----------

with the gravitational coupling constant @xmath given by @xmath . Note
that introducing a stack of coincident branes breaks half the
supersymmetry and so the massless open string excitations can be
collected in a @xmath -dimensional @xmath gauge multiplet consisting of
a gauge field @xmath , six real scalars @xmath ( @xmath ) and fermionic
superpartners. Coordinates transverse to the brane are identified with
the worldvolume scalars as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.31)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Now, the remaining contributions to the effective action ( 1.2.29 )
follow from plugging ( 1.2.31 ) into the DBI-action plus a Wess-Zumino
term as given in ( 1.1.26 ) and expanding @xmath and @xmath so that only
terms to leading order in @xmath remain. One finds the following
expressions

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.2.32)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

Thus, we may identify the leading term of @xmath in ( 1.2.3 ) as the
bosonic part of the action of @xmath Super Yang-Mills with coupling

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.33)
  -- -------- -- ----------

as in ( 1.2.28 ). Due to the fact that the interaction between the open
and closed sector is @xmath , we are now tempted to take the limit
@xmath , in which we obtain @xmath SYM on the worldvolume and free IIB
supergravity on @xmath . However, we have to be a bit more careful than
that due to eqn. ( 1.2.31 ). In fact, the vacuum expectation values
(VEVs) of the scalars parametrise the transverse position of the brane,
and as such should be kept fixed when taking the decoupling limit.
Therefore we should really be taking the so-called Maldacena limit

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.34)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is kept fixed and @xmath is some distance which will play a
role in the closed string perspective of our brane setup.

The second point of view is that Dp-branes can be identified with
extremal p-brane solutions in supergravity, i.e. the low energy
effective theory of closed strings. We found that these D-branes viewed
as gravitational solitons curve the spacetime around them. In order for
the (classical) supergravity approximation to hold, that is so we do not
have to invoke @xmath -corrections, we should consider the regime in
which the characteristic length scale @xmath is large and so curvature
is weak. More precisely, we require @xmath . Since for our stack of
D3-branes @xmath , this closed string perspective may be employed when
@xmath .

In section 1.1.3 , we found the solution for general Dp-branes, and in
our particular case, that is a stack of @xmath coincident D3-branes,
this reads

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.2.35)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

where

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.36)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and we have introduced spherical polar coordinates transverse to the
brane. Note that this manifestly preserves @xmath and one can verify
that half of the original 32 real Poincaré supercharges are broken
again. The solution ( 1.2.3 ) interpolates between two different
regions. For @xmath , @xmath and we recover the @xmath -dimensional
Minkowski vacuum. If on the other hand @xmath , the harmonic function
@xmath is approximately @xmath and the metric becomes that of @xmath
(cf. eqn. ( 1.2.5 )):

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (1.2.37)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

Thus, there are really two different kinds of closed string modes in
this background; those propagating in flat space far away from the
branes and those propagating in the vicinity of the AdS-throat. Upon
taking the Maldacena limit, these two types of closed strings decouple
from one another. In order to see this, we consider a closed string
excitation with energy @xmath at some fixed radial position @xmath .
Even if @xmath in the near-horizon region, we cannot just integrate
these modes out at low energies, since the energy @xmath measured by an
observer at infinity is red-shifted as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.38)
  -- -------- -- ----------

for @xmath but fixed @xmath . Hence an observer at infinity sees both
supergravity (i.e. massless string modes) modes propagating in @xmath ,
as well as closed string excitations in the throat region @xmath .
Similarly to the field theory side, these decouple when we take the
Maldacena limit, since

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.39)
  -- -------- -- ----------

as @xmath with @xmath kept fixed. Thus, what we are really doing here,
is zooming in on the near-horizon region, hence the alternative name
near-horizon limit for ( 1.2.34 ).

All in all, we discovered two decoupled low energy effective theories in
both pictures, namely type IIB supergravity on @xmath and type IIB
supergravity on @xmath in the closed string picture, and
(3+1)-dimensional @xmath Super Yang-Mills and type IIB supergravity on
@xmath in the open string picture. These two perspectives should yield
equivalent descriptions of the same underlying physics and, since IIB
supergravity in flat space is present in both of them, this led
Maldacena to conjecture that type IIB superstring theory on @xmath is
dual to @xmath Super Yang-Mills ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 A little caveat here is what
happened to the @xmath in @xmath . We originally stated that the gauge
group is @xmath and not @xmath . The reason for this is that the @xmath
multiplet is free but in IIB on @xmath everything has to couple to
gravity and no field is free. From the gravity perspective, the @xmath
modes are singletons only living on the boundary of AdS and unable to
propagate into the bulk [ 43 , 127 , 3 ] . in four dimensions.

As a first consistency check of the correspondence, let us compare the
symmetries on both sides, since these should match up. @xmath SYM is
superconformal, i.e. the operators form representations of the conformal
group in four dimensions @xmath . Furthermore, as the theory is also
supersymmetric, there are @xmath Poincaré supercharges associated with
translations and 16 superconformal charges associated with conformal
boosts, that is we have 32 supersymmetries in total. Last but not least,
the R-symmetry group rotating these supercharges amongst one another is
@xmath . On the gravity side, we find both @xmath and @xmath (at least
on the Lie algebra level) as the isometry groups of AdS @xmath and the
internal manifold @xmath . Besides, @xmath is maximally supersymmetric [
115 , 33 ] , which is curious considering we started out with a half BPS
brane configuration. Such supersymmetry enhancement near the horizon is
a very common feature and has been studied in [ 71 , 57 , 51 , 52 ] .

One may then go on to exploit the representations of these symmetry
groups to establish the dictionary between operators on the field theory
side and the spectrum of IIB on the gravity side. This allows us for
example to compute correlation functions in supergravity with relative
ease, whose field theory dual would be computationally inaccessible by
other methods. Let us give an example of how this matching on both sides
works. An important class of gauge invariant operators are the half BPS
chiral primaries of conformal dimension @xmath given by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.40)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the elementary scalars @xmath transform in the @xmath of @xmath ,
and the coefficients @xmath form the rank @xmath symmetric traceless
tensor representation of @xmath . Their conformal dimension is protected
from any quantum corrections by supersymmetry, hence these operators
provide a non-trivial check of the correspondence, as in that case we
have control over both sides. Now, on the supergravity side, we have a
compact space with transitive group @xmath , namely @xmath , and so we
can expand the fields into Kaluza-Klein modes. In our case, these are
the spherical harmonics @xmath of @xmath constituting irreducible
representations of @xmath . In particular, viewing @xmath as embedded in
@xmath with coordinates @xmath , these can be written as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.41)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the @xmath are again symmetric traceless tensors of @xmath . On a
five-sphere of radius @xmath , the spherical harmonics diagonalise the
Laplacian

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.42)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Suppressing any spacetime indices, a supergravity field @xmath has a
Kaluza-Klein expansion of the form

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.43)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath are the coordinates on AdS @xmath and @xmath denotes those
on @xmath . Plugging this ansatz into the SUGRA equations of motion [ 86
] , one finds masses @xmath (and couplings) for the AdS @xmath fields
@xmath which correspond to operators @xmath in @xmath SYM with scaling
dimension @xmath [ 128 ] . The mass @xmath and conformal dimension
@xmath are related by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.44)
  -- -------- -- ----------

A similar heuristic derivation to the one we have outlined here can be
performed for stacks of M2- and M5-branes in 11-dimensional
supergravity, whose near-horizon limits are the maximally supersymmetric
@xmath and @xmath M-theory backgrounds, resepectively.

### 1.3 The Homogeneity Theorem

The common theme of this thesis is to classify supergravity backgrounds
in 10 and 11 dimensions preserving more than half maximal supersymmetry.
In this section, we are going to address why such a setup is
particularly tractable, and will allow us to classify a large class of
supergravity backgrounds.
In particular, we will be concerned with the so-called homogeneity
theorem, which states the following:

###### Theorem (Homogeneity Theorem).

All 10- and 11-dimsensional supergravity backgrounds preserving @xmath
supersymmetries are locally Lorentzian homogeneous spaces.

This is an absolutely crucial result for our analysis and was proven in
[ 29 ] , which we will be following in our outline of the proof. Before
we proceed though, we should clarify what the main statement entails.
Homogeneity in this context means that there is a Lie group acting
transitively ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 A Lie group @xmath acts transitively on a manifold
@xmath , if it only possesses a single group orbit. More concretely,
@xmath there is a group element @xmath that satisfies @xmath . on the
spacetime and preserving all the bosonic fields present in the
background, e.g. the metric and fluxes. However, the truly relevant
notion for our purposes is that of local homogeneity, i.e. at the level
of the Lie algebra, since all our computations are performed locally.
This translates to the Killing vectors spanning the tangent space at
every point and leaving the bosonic fields invariant, in the sense that
their Lie derivatives with respect to any of these isometries vanish.

#### 1.3.1 Outline of the proof

From a mathematical persepective, the main ingredients of a supergravity
background are a Lorentzian spin manifold @xmath and a spinor bundle
@xmath with a connection @xmath , which depends on the bosonic fields
(contracted into Clifford algebra operators) of the particular theory.
@xmath is a vector bundle associated with a representation @xmath of the
spin group. The tangent bundle @xmath is the vector bundle associated to
the vector representation @xmath of the orthogonal group corresponding
to the spin group. A Killing spinor is then defined as a section of
@xmath which is parallel with respect to the supercovariant connection
@xmath . In line with how we introduced Killing spinors in section 1.2.2
, this corresponds to setting the supersymmetry variaton of the
gravitino equal to zero. Depending on the background in question, there
might be additional algebraic Killing spinor equations arising from the
variation of additional fermionic fields, e.g. the dilatino. We note
that the Killing spinor equations are linear, so the Killing spinors
form a vector space which we shall denote by @xmath . As the KSEs are at
most first order in the derivatives, a Killing spinor is specified by
its value at a point @xmath . Therefore, having chosen a point @xmath ,
the vector space @xmath can be regarded as a subspace of the fibre
@xmath , which in turn can be identified with the representation @xmath
. In that sense, the space of Killing spinors @xmath is a vector
subspace of @xmath .

Probably one of the most important features in analysing supergravity
backgrounds is the fact that given a spin invariant, real valued inner
product @xmath on @xmath and some Killing spinors @xmath , bilinears of
the form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.3.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

are Killing vectors, where @xmath ( @xmath ) is a basis of @xmath . With
that in mind, in order to prove the homogeneity theorem, we have to show
that these Killing spinor bilinears span the tangent space @xmath at
every point, if there are more than @xmath of them, i.e.

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.3.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

restricted to @xmath is onto @xmath , if @xmath . To proceed, we assume
that @xmath is not onto, then there exists a vector @xmath , @xmath such
that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.3.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

so @xmath is orthogonal to the image of @xmath . We may now take the
point of view that @xmath defines a linear map @xmath , taking Killing
spinors and mapping them to @xmath , the orthognal complement of @xmath
in @xmath with respect to the inner product @xmath . Let us first
consider the case that @xmath is space-like or time-like, that is @xmath
. Then, as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.3.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

@xmath has trivial kernel and as such is an injection. However, this
leads to a contradiction with our assumption that @xmath , and since
@xmath , @xmath cannot be one-to-one. Hence @xmath must be onto.

All that remains to consider is the case that @xmath is null, for which
the proof depends on the explicit form of the inner product @xmath of a
particular supergravity theory. The argument in all cases is very
similar though, and so we shall illustrate the general idea in the
framework of 11-dimensional supergravity for definiteness. In 11
dimensions, @xmath is the 32-dimensional Majorana representation of
@xmath and we can choose @xmath to be

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.3.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath and @xmath a pseudo-orthonormal frame on @xmath defined by
@xmath . The inner product on the space of spinors is defined by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.3.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Taking @xmath for @xmath , observe that this has a non-vanishing
component along @xmath

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.3.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Therefore X is either null or time-like, since if X were space-like, one
could perform a Lorentz transformation such that @xmath . If @xmath in
eqn. ( 1.3.3 ) is null, the orthogonal complement of the image of @xmath
is a totally null subspace of @xmath . As the tangent space is
Lorentzian, any such subspace is at most one-dimensional and must be
spanned by @xmath . Without loss of generality, let us choose a basis
@xmath of @xmath such that @xmath . Thus, the image of @xmath is spanned
by @xmath and @xmath . Now, as eqn. ( 1.3.7 ) implies that for all
@xmath , @xmath cannot be space-like, this must lie along @xmath , i.e.
@xmath , for some function @xmath . Note that @xmath is a symmetric
bilinear map and as such satisfies the polarisation identity which gives

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (1.3.8)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

Hence, we find that the image of @xmath is contained in the linear null
subspace spanned by @xmath . This, however, is a contradiction again,
since we assumed that the original complement of the image of @xmath is
one dimensional and spanned by @xmath . Therefore, @xmath must be onto
and the homogeneity theorem holds.

### 1.4 Killing Superalgebras

Having established that backgrounds preserving @xmath supersymmetries
are homogeneous spaces, this naturally raises the question which Lie
groups or, since we are always working locally, which Lie algebras act
on the spacetime. This leads us to the notion of a Killing superalgebra
(KSA) in this section.

The Killing spinors, and their associated Killing vectors, from taking
bilinears, form a representation of a residual (global) supersymmetry
algebra, superalgebra for short, of the background. A (Lie) superalgebra
is a @xmath -graded algebra @xmath consisting of two vector subspaces,
the even @xmath , a Lie subalgebra, and the odd subspace @xmath , a
representation of @xmath [ 84 ] . If @xmath with grading @xmath , the
bracket @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.4.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and it satisfies the super-Jacobi identity

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.4.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

If both generators in ( 1.4.1 ) are fermionic (odd), this becomes an
anti-commutator @xmath ; in all other cases, the bracket @xmath is just
the usual commutator @xmath . Specifically, in the case of a Killing
superalgebra [ 40 , 34 ] , the odd subspace @xmath is spanned by @xmath
, where every fermionic generator is associated with a linearly
independent Killing spinor @xmath @xmath of the background. Analogously,
the bosonic generators @xmath span @xmath , where each of them is
associated with a Killing spinor bilinear of the form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.4.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

As in section 1.3 , @xmath denotes a suitable spin invariant inner
product on the space of spinors, such that the last equality in ( 1.4.3
) holds; usually we will take @xmath or the real part thereof. The
brackets are computed geometrically

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.4.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath denotes the usual Lie bracket of vector fields and the
spinorial Lie derivative with respect to a vector field @xmath is
defined as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.4.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Closure of the KSAs in 11-dimensional and IIB SUGRA has been verified in
[ 32 , 31 ] and it is expected that the KSAs in all supergravity
theories satisfy the super-Jacobi identity.

For what follows, we will outline the main results in [ 5 , 58 ] , where
the authors classified the Killing superalgebras of all warped AdS
@xmath , @xmath backgrounds. Let @xmath be the KSA of a warped AdS
@xmath background. Calculating bilinears of the form ( 1.4.3 ), one
finds that the bosonic subalgebra of @xmath contains @xmath
corresponding to the isometries of AdS @xmath , as is to be expected.
One may further suspect that the bosonic subalgebra decomposes ¹² ¹² 12
This is actually only true for @xmath . AdS @xmath is locally a group
manifold and thus the algebra decomposes into left and right
superalgebras @xmath corresponding to the left and right action. We will
get back to this point. into a direct sum of the isometries of AdS
@xmath , and those on the transverse space @xmath as @xmath . However,
this does not necessarily have to be the case. For instance, consider
what would happen, if we did not require the transverse space be
compact. Following the argument at the end of section 1.2.2 , an AdS
@xmath solution may be rewritten as an AdS @xmath background with @xmath
. Since generally one cannot write @xmath for some Lie algebra @xmath ,
a decomposition into a direct sum of isometries on AdS @xmath and those
on the transverse space is not possible from the perspective of the
lower dimensional AdS @xmath subspace. We also pointed out in section
1.2.2 that in order to avoid these “fake” vacua, one should really
consider closed, i.e. compact without boundary, transverse spaces.
Indeed, it is this assumption together with a Hopf maximum principle
type argument, like the one following eqn. ( 3.3.19 ), that implies

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.4.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

for all Killing spinors @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Note that for
@xmath , spinors of type @xmath can be generated from the @xmath , which
renders some of the above conditions redundant. Furthermore, the
algebraic KSE implies that @xmath and @xmath are orthogonal (cf. eqn. (
2.2.23 ))

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.4.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and one may construct a Killing spinor bilinear @xmath along the
internal manifold, such that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.4.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath denotes the Levi-Civita connection on @xmath . The latter
means that the warp factor @xmath is invariant under the entire bosonic
subalgebra @xmath and @xmath is Killing on the transverse space. One may
then proceed to show that these conditions guarantee that the Killing
spinor bilinears split into components along AdS @xmath and the internal
manifold @xmath , which mutually commute and are independently Killing.
Therefore, one finds the aforementioned decomposition

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.4.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

as a consequence of the transverse space being compact without boundary.
Equivalently, one could also simply assume that the KSA of the
background decomposes in this fashion to exclude “fake” vacua.

Let us first consider AdS @xmath backgrounds with @xmath . Since the
KSEs have been explicitly solved along the AdS factor, and so the
Killing spinors’ explicit dependence on the coordinates of the AdS
subspace is known, one may directly calculate the brackets

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.4.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

One might expect the commutator @xmath to be the trickiest to compute,
as one would need knowledge of the underlying geometry of the transverse
space. Quite remarkably, this turns out not to be the case, and the
super-Jacobi identity completely fixes both @xmath as well as the last
remaining bracket @xmath . However, we shall not dwell on how these are
explicitly obtained, and refer the curious reader to [ 5 ] for the nitty
gritty details. The results are displayed in table 1.2 .

Most importantly for our analysis in chapters 2 and 3 , we would like to
point out that in order for the KSA to be closed, the isometry algebra
@xmath has to act (almost) effectively on the transverse space @xmath .
A Lie group acts (almost) effectively on a manifold, if the only group
element that leaves a point invariant is the identity or, for an almost
effective action, an element in the centre of the Lie group. At the
level of the Lie algebra this translates to every generator being mapped
to a non-trivial Killing vector field on the manifold.

Finally, we would like to focus on the somewhat more subtle case of AdS
@xmath backgrounds. First of all, we note that AdS @xmath is locally a
group manifold and so the KSA @xmath decomposes into left and right
superalgebras @xmath with @xmath . We choose to associate the left
superalgebra with the @xmath spinors and the right superalgebra with the
@xmath spinors, resepectively. Since these are independent, and results
obtained for @xmath will also apply to @xmath , we shall focus on the
left superalgebras for what follows. Starting with the minimal case of
@xmath real supercharges, one finds that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.4.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath . The @xmath are the generators of @xmath and the @xmath
are fermionic generators corresponding to the Killing spinors @xmath .
There are no Killing spinor bilinears along the transverse space,
i.e. the isometry algebra is @xmath . All in all, we conclude that this
KSA is isomorphic to @xmath . Next, consider the case of @xmath
preserved supersymmetries, @xmath being the number of linearly
independent @xmath type spinors. Similarly to the analysis of higher
dimensional AdS backgrounds, we can perform the following calculations
explicitly

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.4.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

with @xmath and @xmath . Again the isometries of the internal space
acting on the supercharges turns out to be the key bracket to compute.
Since the spinorial Lie derivative with respect to the isometries of the
transverse space does not affect the dependence of the Killing spinors
on the coordinates of AdS @xmath , one finds

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.4.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the structure constants @xmath still need to be determined. The
super-Jacobi identity together with the inner product of the @xmath
spinors being invariant under the isometries of the transverse space

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.4.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

imply that @xmath is a 4-form. One can then further show that @xmath is
invariant under the representation @xmath of @xmath acting on the
supercharges in @xmath as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.4.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The KSA @xmath may have central terms @xmath , however the centre is
trivial apart from one case where it can be at most 3-dimensional, cf
table 1.2 . In order to identify possible representations @xmath , we
take two vectors @xmath and contract them into @xmath , which yields an
element @xmath generating @xmath rotations in the plane spanned by
@xmath and @xmath . To see that @xmath indeed generates rotations, note
that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.4.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath lies in the plane spanned by @xmath so that @xmath . Since
these @xmath rotations act transitively on the 2-plane, and one can
repeat this argument for arbitrary @xmath , it follows that @xmath acts
transitively (and almost effectively so the super-Jacobis are satisfied)
on @xmath . Lie groups acting transitively and effectively on spheres
have been classified in [ 92 ] and have been used in the context of the
Berger classification of irreducible simply connected Riemannian
manifolds [ 117 ] . The resulting possible KSAs for warped AdS @xmath
backgrounds that the authors of [ 5 ] obtained have been tabulated in
table 1.3 .

The AdS @xmath Killing superalgebras may be identified with the left
superalgebras @xmath in the AdS @xmath case [ 58 ] .

### 1.5 Homogeneous Spaces

In the following section, we shall collect some useful properties of
homogeneous spaces which have facilitated our analysis of the AdS
backgrounds in chapters 2 and 3 . A more detailed review can be found in
e.g. [ 112 , 93 ] .

Consider the left coset space @xmath , where @xmath is a compact
connected semisimple Lie group @xmath which acts effectively from the
left on @xmath and @xmath is a closed Lie subgroup of @xmath . Let us
denote the Lie algebras of @xmath and @xmath with @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively. As there is always an invariant inner product on @xmath ,
it can be used to take the orthogonal complement of @xmath in @xmath and
so

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.5.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Denote the generators of @xmath by @xmath , @xmath and a basis in @xmath
as @xmath , @xmath . In this basis, the brackets of the Lie algebra
@xmath take the following form

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (1.5.2)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

If @xmath , that is @xmath , the space is symmetric.

Let @xmath be a local section of the coset. The decomposition of the
Maurer-Cartan form in components along @xmath and @xmath is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.5.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which defines a local left-invariant frame @xmath and a canonical
left-invariant connection @xmath on @xmath . The curvature and torsion
of the canonical connection are

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.5.4)
     @xmath      (1.5.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

respectively, where the equalities follow after taking the exterior
derivative of ( 1.5.3 ) and using ( 1.5 ). If @xmath is symmetric, then
the torsion vanishes.

A left-invariant @xmath -form @xmath on @xmath can be written as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.5.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the components @xmath are constant and satisfy

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.5.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The latter condition is required for invariance under the right action
of @xmath on @xmath . All left-invariant forms are parallel with respect
to the canonical connection.

It remains to describe the metrics of @xmath , which are left-invariant.
These are written as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.5.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the components @xmath are constant and satisfy

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.5.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

For symmetric spaces, the canonical connection coincides with the
Levi-Civita connection of the invariant metrics. So all non-vanishing
left-invariant forms are harmonic and represent non-trivial elements in
the de Rham cohomology of @xmath . However, if @xmath is strictly
homogeneous, this is not the case, since the canonical connection has
non-vanishing torsion.

Suppose @xmath is homogeneous and equipped with an invariant metric
@xmath . To describe the results in this thesis, we require the
Levi-Civita connection of @xmath and its curvature. Let @xmath be the
Levi-Civita connection in the left-invariant frame. As the difference of
two connections is a tensor, we set

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.5.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

As @xmath is metric and torsion free, we have

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.5.11)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

These equations can be solved for @xmath to find that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.5.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In turn, the Riemann curvature 2-form @xmath is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.5.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This is required for the investigation of the gravitino KSE. Note that
the expression for @xmath is considerably simplified whenever the coset
space is naturally reductive, because in that case the structure
constants @xmath are skew symmetric.

## Chapter 2 AdS@xmath Backgrounds with @xmath Supersymmetries in 10 and
11 Dimensions

In this chapter, we explore all warped AdS @xmath backgrounds with the
most general allowed fluxes that preserve more than 16 supersymmetries
in @xmath - and @xmath -dimensional supergravities. Assuming that either
the internal space @xmath is compact without boundary or that the
isometry algebra of the background decomposes into that of AdS @xmath
and that of @xmath , we find that there are no such backgrounds in IIB
supergravity. Similarly in IIA supergravity, there is a unique such
background with 24 supersymmetries locally isometric to AdS @xmath , and
in @xmath supergravity all such backgrounds are locally isometric to the
maximally supersymmetric AdS @xmath solution. This work was conducted in
collaboration with Alexander Haupt and George Papadopoulos and was
published in [ 76 ] .

### 2.1 Introduction

AdS backgrounds in 10 and 11 dimensions that preserve @xmath
supersymmetries with @xmath have found widespread applications both in
supergravity compactifications and in the AdS/CFT correspondence, for
reviews see [ 25 , 3 ] and references therein. One of the features of
such backgrounds in AdS/CFT [ 90 ] is that the CFT R-symmetry group acts
transitively on the internal space of the solution and this can be used
to establish the dictionary between some of the operators of the CFT and
spacetime Kaluza-Klein fields [ 128 ] . Therefore the question arises
whether it is possible to find all such AdS solutions. Despite the
progress that has been made over the years, a complete description of
all AdS solutions that preserve @xmath supersymmetries remained an open
problem until recently [ 9 , 72 , 76 , 75 , 58 ] .

There have been several significant developments which facilitated
progress in this direction for a large class of warped flux AdS
solutions. In [ 68 , 8 , 6 ] , the Killing spinor equations (KSEs) of
supergravity theories have been solved in all generality and the
fractions of supersymmetry preserved by all warped flux AdS backgrounds
have been identified. Furthermore, global analysis techniques have also
been introduced in the investigation of AdS backgrounds which can be
used to a priori impose properties like the compactness of the internal
space and the smoothness of the fields. Another key development was the
proof of the homogeneity theorem (cf. section 1.3 ) [ 29 ] which for the
special case of AdS backgrounds states that all such backgrounds
preserving @xmath supersymmetries are Lorentzian homogeneous spaces.

The maximally supersymmetric AdS backgrounds ¹ ¹ 1 The maximally
supersymmetric AdS backgrounds are of the type considered previously in
[ 37 ] . have been classified in [ 33 ] and it has been found that they
are locally isometric to the @xmath [ 26 ] and @xmath [ 104 ] solutions
of 11-dimensional supergravity, and to the @xmath solution of IIB
supergravity, see [ 115 ] and comment within. There are no @xmath
backgrounds that preserve @xmath supersymmetries [ 68 , 8 , 6 ] and no
smooth @xmath backgrounds that preserve @xmath supersymmetries with
compact without boundary internal space [ 72 ] . More recently, it has
been demonstrated under the same assumptions on the internal space that
there are no smooth @xmath backgrounds that preserve @xmath [ 9 ] ; see
[ 28 , 2 , 39 ] for applications to AdS/CFT. Moreover, it has been shown
in [ 58 ] that there are no smooth AdS @xmath backgrounds in 10- and
11-dimensional supergravities with compact without boundary internal
space that preserve @xmath supersymmetries. Product solutions @xmath
with @xmath a symmetric space have been classified in [ 35 , 30 , 130 ,
129 ] . Furthermore the geometry of all heterotic AdS @xmath backgrounds
has been investigated in [ 7 ] and it has been found that there are no
solutions that preserve @xmath supersymmetries.

The main task in this chapter is to describe all warped AdS @xmath
backgrounds that admit the most general fluxes in 10 and 11 dimensions
and preserve more than 16 supersymmetries. It has been shown in [ 68 , 8
, 6 ] that such backgrounds preserve @xmath supersymmetries. Therefore,
we shall investigate the backgrounds preserving 20, 24 and 28 as those
with 32 supersymmetries have already been classified in [ 33 ] . In
particular, we find that

-   IIB and massive IIA supergravity do not admit AdS @xmath solutions
    with @xmath supersymmetries.

-   Standard IIA supergravity admits a unique solution up to an overall
    scale preserving 24 supersymmetries, locally isometric to the AdS
    @xmath background of [ 103 ] .

-   All AdS @xmath solutions of 11-dimensional supergravity that
    preserve @xmath supersymmetries are locally isometric to the
    maximally supersymmetric AdS @xmath solution of [ 37 , 26 ] .

These results have been established under certain assumptions ² ² 2 Some
assumptions are necessary to exclude the possibility that a warped AdS
@xmath background is not locally isometric to an AdS @xmath background
with @xmath . This has been observed in [ 119 ] and explored in the
context of KSEs in [ 50 ] . . We begin with a spacetime which is a
warped product @xmath , for @xmath or @xmath , and allow for all fluxes
which are invariant under the isometries of AdS @xmath . Then we shall
assume that

1.  either the solutions are smooth and @xmath is compact without
    boundary

2.  or that the even part of the Killing superalgebra of the background
    decomposes as a direct sum @xmath , where @xmath is the Lie algebra
    of isometries of AdS @xmath and @xmath is the Lie algebra of the
    isometries of @xmath .

It has been shown in [ 5 ] that for all AdS backgrounds, the first
assumption implies the second. In addition for @xmath AdS @xmath
backgrounds ³ ³ 3 In what follows, we use “ @xmath AdS backgrounds”
instead of “AdS backgrounds that preserve @xmath supersymmetries” for
short. , the second assumption implies the first. This is because @xmath
is the Lie algebra of a compact group and all internal spaces are
compact without boundary. Smoothness also follows from only considering
invariant solutions.

The proof of the main statement of this chapter is firstly based on the
results of [ 68 , 8 , 6 ] that the number of supersymmetries preserved
by AdS @xmath backgrounds are @xmath and so the solutions under
consideration preserve 20, 24, 28 and 32 supersymmetries. Then the
homogeneity theorem of [ 29 ] implies that all such backgrounds are
Lorentzian homogeneous spaces. Moreover, it has been shown in [ 5 ]
under the assumptions mentioned above that the Killing superalgebra of
warped AdS @xmath backgrounds preserving @xmath supersymmetries is
isomorphic to @xmath , see also [ 19 ] , and that the even subalgebra
@xmath acts effectively on the spacetime, with @xmath acting on the
internal space. Thus, together with the homogeneity theorem @xmath acts
both transitively and effectively on the spacetime. Then we demonstrate
in all cases that the warp factor @xmath is constant. As a result all
@xmath AdS @xmath backgrounds are product spaces @xmath . So the
internal space @xmath is a homogeneous space, @xmath , and @xmath .
Therefore, we have demonstrated the following,

-   The internal spaces of AdS @xmath backgrounds that preserve @xmath
    supersymmetries are homogeneous spaces admitting a transitive and
    effective action of a group @xmath with @xmath .

Having established this, one can use the classification of [ 17 , 111 ,
102 , 101 ] to identify all the 6- and 7-dimensional homogeneous spaces
that can occur as internal spaces for @xmath AdS @xmath backgrounds, see
also tables ⁴ ⁴ 4 These tables list the simply connected homogeneous
spaces. This suffices for our purpose because we are investigating the
geometry of the backgrounds up to local isometries. As @xmath is simple
the universal cover of @xmath with @xmath is compact and homogeneous,
see e.g. [ 12 ] . So the internal space can be identified with the
universal cover @xmath of @xmath for which @xmath can be chosen to be
simply connected. 2.1 and 2.3 . Incidentally, this also means that if
@xmath backgrounds were to exist, the R-symmetry group of the dual CFT
would have to act transitively on the internal space of the solution.

With regards to the classification of 6-dimensional homogeneous spaces
@xmath in table 2.1 , one finds that the a priori possible candidates
for internal spaces of AdS @xmath backgrounds with @xmath in 10
dimensions are

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.1.1)
     @xmath      (2.1.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath denotes the expected number of supersymmetries that can be
preserved by the background, and we always take @xmath to be simply
connected. Observe that there are no maximally supersymmetric AdS @xmath
solutions in 10-dimensional supergravities in agreement with the results
of [ 33 ] . The proof of our result in IIB supergravity is based on a
cohomological argument and does not use details of the 6-dimensional
homogeneous spaces involved. However in (massive) IIA supergravity, one
has to consider details of the geometry of these coset spaces. Solutions
with strictly @xmath and @xmath supersymmetries are ruled out after a
detailed analysis of the KSEs and dilaton field equation. In standard
IIA supergravity there is a solution with 24 supersymmetries and an
internal space locally isometric to the symmetric space @xmath . This
solution has already been found in [ 103 ] . The homogeneous space
@xmath , which is diffeomorphic to @xmath , also gives rise to a
solution in a special region of the moduli space of parameters. This
solution admits @xmath supersymmetries and is locally isometric to that
with internal space @xmath .

The classification of 7-dimensional homogeneous spaces @xmath in table
2.3 reveals that possible candidates for internal spaces of @xmath AdS
@xmath backgrounds in 11 dimensions are

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.1.3)
     @xmath      (2.1.4)
     @xmath      (2.1.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath denote the maximal and diagonal embeddings of
@xmath in @xmath , respectively, and @xmath is chosen to be simply
connected. It is known that there is a maximally supersymmetric solution
AdS @xmath with internal space @xmath [ 37 , 26 ] . After a detailed
investigation of the geometry of the above homogeneous spaces, the
solutions of the KSEs and the warp factor field equation, one can also
show that the rest of the coset spaces do not give solutions with
strictly 20, 24 and 28 supersymmetries. However, as the homogeneous
spaces @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are diffeomorphic to @xmath , there is
a region in the moduli space of their parameters which yields the
maximally supersymmetric AdS @xmath solution.

This chapter is organised as follows. In section 2.2 , we show that
there are no IIB @xmath @xmath solutions. In section 2.3 , we show that
up to an overall scale there is a unique solution in IIA supergravity
that preserves 24 supersymmetries. In section 2.4 , we demonstrate that
all @xmath AdS @xmath backgrounds of 11-dimensional supergravity are
locally isometric to the maximally supersymmetric @xmath solution. In
section 2.5 we state our conclusions. Our conventions may be found in
appendix A . Details of the geometry of homogeneous spaces admitting a
transitive action of one of the groups with Lie algebra @xmath or @xmath
are outlined in appendices B , C and D .

### 2.2 @xmath @xmath solutions in IIB

To investigate IIB AdS @xmath backgrounds, we shall use the approach and
notation of [ 8 ] where Bianchi identities, field equations and KSEs are
first solved along the AdS @xmath subspace of @xmath and then the
remaining independent conditions along the internal space @xmath are
identified. The bosonic fields of IIB supergravity are the metric, a
complex 1-form field strength @xmath , a complex 3-form field strength
@xmath and a real self-dual 5-form @xmath . Imposing the symmetry of AdS
@xmath on the fields, one finds that the metric and form field strengths
are given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.2.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the metric has been written as a near-horizon geometry [ 55 ] with

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.2.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The warp factor @xmath is a function on the internal manifold @xmath ,
@xmath is the complex 3-form on @xmath , @xmath is a complex 1-form on
@xmath and @xmath is a real 1-form on @xmath . The @xmath coordinates
are @xmath and we introduce the null orthonormal frame

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.2.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath . All gamma matrices are taken with respect to this null
orthonormal frame.

The Bianchi identities along @xmath which are useful in the analysis
that follows are

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.4)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the pull-back of the canonical connection of the
upper-half plane on the spacetime with respect to the dilaton and axion
scalars of IIB supergravity. Similarly, the field equations of the warp
factor is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.2.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and those of the scalar and 3-form fluxes are

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.6)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

The full set of Bianchi identities and field equations can be found in [
8 ] . Note in particular that ( 2.2.5 ) implies that if @xmath and the
other fields are smooth, then @xmath is nowhere vanishing on @xmath .

#### 2.2.1 The Killing spinors

After solving the KSEs along AdS @xmath , the Killing spinors of the
background can be written as

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.2.7)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where we have used the light-cone projections

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.2.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and @xmath and @xmath are @xmath Weyl spinors depending only on the
coordinates of @xmath . The remaining independent KSEs are

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.2.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

as well as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.2.12)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.2.13)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

and @xmath is the charge conjugation matrix followed by standard complex
conjugation. For further explanation of the notation see appendix A .
Equations ( 2.2.9 ) and ( 2.2.10 ) can be thought of as the naive
restriction of gravitino and dilatino KSEs of IIB supergravity on @xmath
, respectively. The equations ( 2.2.11 ) are algebraic and arise as
integrability conditions of the integration of the IIB KSEs over the AdS
@xmath subspace of the background. We do not assume that the Killing
spinors factorize as Killing spinors on AdS @xmath and Killing spinors
on the internal manifold. It has been observed in [ 8 ] that if @xmath
is a Killing spinor, then

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

are also Killing spinors. As a result AdS @xmath solutions preserve
@xmath supersymmetries.

#### 2.2.2 The non-existence of @xmath @xmath solutions in IIB

##### Conditions on spinor bilinears

As it has already been mentioned, the two assumptions we have made in
section 2.1 are equivalent for all IIB, (massive) IIA and 11-dimensional
AdS @xmath backgrounds that preserve @xmath supersymmetries. Hence in
what follows, we shall focus only on the restrictions on the geometry of
the spacetime imposed by the first assumption which requires that the
solutions are smooth and the internal space is compact without boundary.

To begin our analysis, note that a consequence of the homogeneity
theorem [ 29 ] for solutions which preserve @xmath supersymmetries is
that the IIB scalars are constant which in turn implies

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

As @xmath is the pull-back of the canonical connection of the upper half
plane with respect to the scalars and these are constant, @xmath as
well.

Setting @xmath and after using the gravitino KSE ( 2.2.9 ), we find

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Next, observe that the algebraic KSE ( 2.2.11 ) implies

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which, when substituted back into ( 2.2.16 ), yields

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

However, the gravitino KSE ( 2.2.9 ) also implies that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.19)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Thus, in conjunction with ( 2.2.18 ), we obtain

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.20)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The Hopf maximum principle then implies that @xmath is constant, so (
2.2.16 ) and ( 2.2.18 ) give the conditions

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.21)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.22)
  -- -------- -- ----------

respectively. The above equation can equivalently be written as @xmath .

The spinors @xmath and @xmath are linearly independent as can easily be
seen from ( 2.2.11 ). Moreover as a consequence of ( 2.2.22 ), they are
orthogonal

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.23)
  -- -------- -- ----------

To see this take the real part of @xmath . The conditions ( 2.2.19 ), (
2.2.23 ) as well as @xmath being constant can also be derived from the
assumption that the isometries of the background decompose into those of
AdS @xmath and those of the internal manifold [ 5 ] .

##### The warp factor is constant and the 5-form flux vanishes

AdS @xmath backgrounds preserving @xmath supersymmetries admit @xmath
linearly independent Killing spinors @xmath . For every pair of such
spinors @xmath and @xmath define the bilinear

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.24)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Then the gravitino KSE ( 2.2.9 ) implies that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.25)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Therefore W is a Killing vector on @xmath .

Next consider the algebraic KSE ( 2.2.11 ) and take the real part of
@xmath to find that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.26)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where we have used ( 2.2.22 ).

Similarly, taking the real part of the difference @xmath and after using
the condition ( 2.2.23 ), we find

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.27)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The conditions ( 2.2.26 ) and ( 2.2.27 ) are valid for all IIB AdS
@xmath backgrounds. However if the solution preserves more than 16
supersymmetries, an argument similar to the one used for the proof of
the homogeneity theorem in [ 29 ] implies that the Killing vectors
@xmath span the tangent spaces of @xmath at each point. As a result, we
conclude that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.28)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Therefore the warp factor @xmath is constant and the 5-form flux @xmath
vanishes. So, the background is merely a product @xmath , and, as was
pointed out in section 2.1 , @xmath is one of the homogeneous spaces in
( 2.1.2 ).

##### Proof of the main statement

First of all, it has been shown in [ 53 ] that all IIB AdS backgrounds
preserving @xmath supersymmetries are locally isometric to the maximally
supersymmetric ones. As there is no maximally supersymmetric AdS @xmath
background in IIB, we conclude that AdS @xmath solutions which preserve
@xmath supersymmetries do not exist.

To investigate the @xmath and @xmath cases, we substitute ( 2.2.28 )
into the Bianchi identities and field equations to find that @xmath is
harmonic and

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.29)
  -- -------- -- ----------

If @xmath were real, this condition would have implied @xmath and, in
turn, would have led to a contradiction. This is because the field
equation for the warp factor ( 2.2.5 ) cannot be satisfied. Thus, we can
already exclude the existence of such backgrounds.

Otherwise for solutions to exist, @xmath must be a compact, homogeneous,
six dimensional Riemannian manifold whose de-Rham cohomology @xmath has
at least two generators and which admits a transitive and effective
action of a group with Lie algebra isomorphic to either @xmath or @xmath
for @xmath and @xmath , respectively [ 5 ] . The homogeneous spaces that
admit a transitive and effective action of @xmath or @xmath have already
been listed in ( 2.1.2 ) and none of them satisfy these cohomology
criteria. All compact homogeneous 6-manifolds have been classified in [
102 ] and the complete list of the simply connected ones relevant here
is given in table 2.1 . Therefore, we conclude that there are no AdS
@xmath backgrounds preserving @xmath supersymmetries in IIB supergravity
⁵ ⁵ 5 Note that the possibility of IIB @xmath backgrounds preserving
@xmath supersymmetry is also excluded, where @xmath is a discrete
subgroup of @xmath , as there are no IIB @xmath local geometries that
preserve @xmath supersymmetries. .

### 2.3 @xmath @xmath solutions in (massive) IIA

To begin, let us summarise the solution of Bianchi identities, field
equations and KSEs for (massive) IIA @xmath backgrounds as presented in
[ 6 ] , whose notation we follow. The bosonic fields of (massive) IIA
supergravity are the metric, a 4-form field strength @xmath , a 3-form
field strength @xmath , a 2-form field strength @xmath , the dilaton
@xmath and the mass parameter @xmath of massive IIA dressed with the
dilaton. Imposing the symmetries of AdS @xmath on the fields, one finds
that

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.3.1)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and the frame @xmath is defined as in ( 2.2.3 ). Note that
the fields @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath do not have a component
along AdS @xmath and so we use the same symbol to denote them and their
component along @xmath . The warp factor @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are
functions of @xmath , whereas @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are 4-form,
3-form and 2-form fluxes on @xmath , respectively. The conditions
imposed on the fields by the Bianchi identities and field equations
after solving along the AdS @xmath subspace can be found in [ 6 ] .
Relevant to the analysis that follows are the Bianchi identities

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.3.2)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

and the field equations for the fluxes

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.3.3)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

along @xmath . Moreover, we shall use the field equation for the warp
factor @xmath and the Einstein field equation along @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.3.4)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath denote the Levi-Civita connection and the Ricci
tensor of @xmath , respectively.

#### 2.3.1 The Killing spinor equations

The solution to the (massive) IIA supergravity KSEs along the @xmath
subspace can again be written as ( 2.2.1 ), where now @xmath and @xmath
are @xmath Majorana spinors that satisfy the lightcone projections
@xmath and depend only on the coordinates of @xmath . After the
lightcone projections are imposed, @xmath and @xmath have 16 independent
components. These satisfy the gravitino KSEs

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.3.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

the dilatino KSEs

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.3.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and the algebraic KSEs

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.3.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.3.8)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

The first two equations arise from the naive restriction of the
gravitino and dilatino KSEs of the theory on @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively, while the last algebraic equation is an integrability
condition that arises from the integration of the IIA KSEs on AdS @xmath
. As in the IIB case, the solutions of the above KSEs are related as in
( 2.2.14 ) and so such backgrounds preserve @xmath supersymmetries.

#### 2.3.2 @xmath solutions with @xmath in IIA

##### Conditions on spinor bilinears

The methodology to establish conditions on the Killing spinor bilinears
following from our assumption that either the solutions are smooth and
the internal space is compact without boundary, or that the even
subalgebra of the Killing superalgebra decomposes as stated in section
2.1 , is the same as that presented for IIB. However, the formulae are
somewhat different. Setting @xmath and using the gravitino KSE ( 2.3.5
), one finds

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.3.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

After multiplying the algebraic KSE ( 2.3.7 ) with @xmath , one gets

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath               
              @xmath      (2.3.10)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

Using this, one can rewrite ( 2.3.9 ) as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

On the other hand, the gravitino KSE ( 2.3.5 ) gives

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Therefore, taking the divergence of ( 2.3.11 ), one finds

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Now, the Hopf maximum principle implies that @xmath is constant, which
when inserted back into ( 2.3.9 ) and ( 2.3.11 ) yields

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

respectively. The above condition can also be expressed as @xmath for
any two solutions @xmath and @xmath of the KSEs.

As in IIB, the algebraic KSE ( 2.3.7 ) implies that @xmath . This,
together with ( 2.3.15 ), gives that @xmath and so the @xmath and @xmath
Killing spinors are orthogonal.

##### The warp factor is constant

To begin with, for every pair of solutions @xmath and @xmath of the KSEs
we define the 1-form bilinear

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Then, the gravitino KSE ( 2.3.5 ) implies that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

therefore @xmath is an Killing vector on @xmath .

Next, the difference @xmath implies that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where we have used ( 2.3.15 ).

So far we have not made use of the fact that the solutions preserve
@xmath supersymmetries. However, assuming this, ( 2.3.18 ) implies that
the warp factor @xmath is constant. This is a consequence of an
adaptation of the homogeneity theorem on @xmath . The homogeneity
theorem also implies that @xmath and @xmath are constant. @xmath is
constant as well due to the Bianchi identity ( 2.3 ). Therefore, we have
established that if the backgrounds preserve @xmath supersymmetries,
then

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.19)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Since the warp factor is constant, all backgrounds that preserve @xmath
supersymmetries are products of the form @xmath . In addition, as
pointed out in section 2.1 , @xmath is a homogeneous space admitting a
transitive and effective action of a group @xmath with Lie algebra
@xmath . These homogeneous spaces have been listed in ( 2.1.2 ). In what
follows, we shall explore all these 6-dimensional homogeneous spaces
searching for IIA solutions that preserve @xmath supersymmetries.

#### 2.3.3 @xmath

There are no maximally supersymmetric AdS @xmath backgrounds in
(massive) IIA supergravity [ 33 ] . So the next case to be investigated
is that with 28 supersymmetries. In such a case @xmath admits a
transitive and effective action of a group with Lie algebra @xmath .
Amongst the homogeneous spaces presented in ( 2.1.2 ), the only one with
this property is @xmath .

Since @xmath is a symmetric space, all left-invariant forms are parallel
with respect to the Levi-Civita connection and thus represent classes in
the de-Rham cohomology. As @xmath , one concludes that @xmath . Using
this and ( 2.3.19 ), the dilatino KSE ( 2.3.6 ) implies that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.20)
  -- -------- -- ----------

As this is the sum of two commuting terms, one Hermitian and one
anti-Hermitian, the existence of solutions requires that both vanish
separately. Hence @xmath . Therefore, all fluxes must vanish. This in
turn leads to a contradiction, because the warp factor field equation (
2.3 ) does not admit any such solutions. Thus there are no (massive) IIA
AdS @xmath backgrounds preserving 28 supersymmetries.

#### 2.3.4 @xmath

The internal space of AdS @xmath backgrounds preserving 24
supersymmetries admits a transitive and effective action of a group with
Lie algebra @xmath . The only space in ( 2.1.2 ) compatible with such an
action is @xmath . Again, this is a symmetric space and so all invariant
forms are parallel with respect to the Levi-Civita connection. In turn
they represent classes in the de-Rham cohomology. As @xmath , this
implies that @xmath .

It is well-known that this homogeneous space is a Kähler manifold and
the left-invariant metric is given by the standard Fubini-Study metric
on @xmath . The even cohomology ring of @xmath is generated by the
Kähler form @xmath . As a result the 2- and 4-form fluxes can be written
as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.21)
  -- -------- -- ----------

for some real constants @xmath and @xmath to be fixed.

To determine @xmath and @xmath , let us first consider the dilatino KSE
( 2.3.6 ) which after imposing ( 2.3.19 ) reads

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.22)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The Hermitian and anti-Hermitian terms in this equation commute and so
we may impose these conditions separately. Notice that the only
non-trivial commutator to check is @xmath which vanishes because @xmath
is proportional to the Kähler form while @xmath is a (2,2)-form with
respect to the associated complex structure. Thus, we have

  -- -- -- ----------
           (2.3.23)
  -- -- -- ----------

and

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.24)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Inserting these into the algebraic KSE ( 2.3.7 ) simplifies to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.25)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The integrability condition of this yields

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.26)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Next, let us focus on ( 2.3.23 ) and ( 2.3.24 ). Without loss of
generality choosing @xmath , ( 2.3.23 ) can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.27)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and similarly ( 2.3.24 ) as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.28)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where we have chosen an orthonormal frame for which @xmath .

To solve ( 2.3.27 ) and ( 2.3.28 ), we decompose @xmath into eigenspaces
of @xmath and @xmath and find that this leads to the relations

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.29)
  -- -------- -- ----------

for the eigenspaces @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.30)
  -- -------- -- ----------

for the eigenspace @xmath .

Before we proceed to investigate the KSEs further, let us focus on the
field equations for the fluxes and the warp factor. Observe that @xmath
. Indeed if @xmath , then the KSEs would imply that @xmath . As @xmath ,
the dilaton field equation in ( 2.3 ) implies that all fluxes vanish. In
such a case, the warp factor field equation in ( 2.3 ) cannot be
satisfied.

Thus @xmath . Then the field equation for the 3-form flux in ( 2.3 )
becomes @xmath and so this implies that @xmath . This contradicts the
results from KSEs in ( 2.3.29 ) and ( 2.3.30 ) above unless @xmath .
Setting @xmath in the dilaton field equation in ( 2.3 ), it is easy to
see that this satisfied if and only if @xmath and so @xmath lies in the
eigenspaces @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . As @xmath , ( 2.3.26 ) implies
that @xmath and so @xmath . The algebraic KSE ( 2.3.25 ) now reads
@xmath . As @xmath , the common eigenspace of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
on @xmath spinors has dimension 6. Thus, the number of supersymmetries
that the background

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.31)
     @xmath      (2.3.32)
     @xmath      (2.3.33)
  -- -------- -- ----------

with @xmath , can preserve is 24.

To establish that ( 2.3.33 ) indeed preserves 24 supersymmetries, it
remains to investigate the gravitino KSE ( 2.3.5 ). Since @xmath is
simply connected, it is sufficient to investigate the integrability
condition

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.34)
  -- -------- -- ----------

of the gravitino KSE. The Riemann tensor of @xmath is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.35)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Then a substitution of this and the rest of the fluxes into the
integrability condition reveals that it is satisfied without further
conditions. In a similar manner, one can check that the Einstein
equation along @xmath is also satisfied. This is the IIA @xmath solution
of [ 103 , 24 ] .

#### 2.3.5 @xmath

The internal space of AdS @xmath backgrounds preserving 20
supersymmetries admits an effective and transitive action of a group
with Lie algebra @xmath . Inspecting the homogeneous spaces in table 2.1
, one finds that there are two candidate internal spaces namely the
symmetric space @xmath and the homogeneous space @xmath . The symmetric
space is the space of complex structures on @xmath which are compatible
with the quaternionic inner product, while the homogeneous space is
identified with the coset space of the sphere @xmath , @xmath , with
respect to the action @xmath , @xmath . The latter is diffeomorphic to
@xmath .

##### @xmath

The geometry and algebraic properties of this symmetric space are
described in appendix D . The most general left-invariant metric is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.36)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is a constant and @xmath , and @xmath are the
left-invariant and orthonormal frames, respectively, and where @xmath
and @xmath . The invariant forms are generated by the 2-form

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.37)
  -- -------- -- ----------

@xmath is a Kähler manifold with respect to the pair @xmath .

In order to proceed, we choose the metric on the internal manifold as (
2.3.36 ) and the fluxes as in the @xmath case, i.e.

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.38)
  -- -------- -- ----------

but now @xmath is given in ( 2.3.37 ), and where @xmath and @xmath are
constants. Since there are no invariant 3-forms on @xmath , this implies
@xmath . Performing a similar analysis to that in section 2.3.4 , we
find that @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , and @xmath satisfies the same
Clifford algebra projections as in e.g. ( 2.3.27 ). This requires an
appropriate re-labeling of the indices of the orthonormal frame @xmath
so that the left-invariant tensors take the same canonical form as those
of @xmath expressed in terms of the orthonormal frame @xmath . As a
result, there are 24 spinors that solve the KSEs so far.

It remains to investigate the solutions of the gravitino KSE ( 2.3.5 ).
As in the @xmath case in section 2.3.4 , we shall investigate the
integrability condition instead. This is again given as in ( 2.3.34 ).
The curvature of the metric of this symmetric space is presented in (
D.1.6 ). Using this, the integrability condition ( 2.3.34 ) may be
written as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.39)
     @xmath      (2.3.40)
     @xmath      (2.3.41)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Contracting with @xmath , one finds that there are solutions preserving
more than 8 supersymmetries provided that @xmath . Then, taking the
trace of ( 2.3.41 ) with @xmath , we find that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.42)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which is in contradiction to the condition ( 2.3.23 ) arising from the
dilatino KSE. The symmetric space @xmath does not yield ⁶ ⁶ 6 @xmath can
also be excluded as a solution because it is not a spin manifold [ 111 ]
. AdS @xmath solutions that preserve 20 supersymmetries.

##### @xmath

The @xmath homogeneous space is described in appendix D . Introducing
the left-invariant frame @xmath , the most general left-invariant metric
is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.43)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where we have introduced the orthonormal frame @xmath , @xmath , and
where @xmath and @xmath . The invariant forms are generated by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.44)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and their duals, where

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.45)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The matrices @xmath are a basis in the space of self-dual and anti-self
dual 2-forms in @xmath and are defined in ( D.2.4 ). Imposing the
Bianchi identities ( 2.3 ), one finds the relation

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.46)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and that the fluxes can be written as

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.3.47)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath and @xmath are constants.

The dilatino KSE ( 2.3.6 ) is the sum of Hermitian and anti-Hermitian
Clifford algebra elements which commute and thus lead to the two
independent conditions

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
              @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.3.48)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

Using this to simplify the algebraic KSE ( 2.3.7 ), one finds

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.49)
  -- -------- -- ----------

If we then insert the fluxes ( 2.3.5 ) into the above KSEs and set
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath , we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.3.50)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

As @xmath are commuting Hermitian Clifford algebra operators with
eigenvalues @xmath , the KSE ( 2.3.49 ) can be decomposed along the
common eigenspaces as described in table 2.2 .

From the results of table 2.2 , there are two possibilities to choose
five @xmath Killing spinors, namely those in eigenspaces (1) and (3) and
those in eigenspaces (1) and (4). For both of these choices, the Bianchi
identity ( 2.3.46 ) and the dilaton field equation give

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.51)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In either case notice that these conditions imply the existence of six
@xmath Killing spinors, as the conditions required for both @xmath and
@xmath to be solutions are satisfied. So potentially this background can
preserve @xmath supersymmetries. To summarize, the independent
conditions on the Killing spinors arising from those in ( 2.3.5 ) and
those in table 2.2 are

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.3.52)
  -- -------- -- ----------

These are the same conditions as those found in section 2.3.4 for @xmath
.

It remains to investigate the gravitino KSE ( 2.3.5 ) or, equivalently,
as @xmath is simply connected, the corresponding integrability condition
is again of the form ( 2.3.34 ). The curvature of the metric is given in
( D.2.9 ). Moreover the Einstein equation ( 2.3 ) yields @xmath . Using
these and substituting the conditions ( 2.3.51 ) into the integrability
condition, one can show that this is automatically satisfied provided
that ( 2.3.52 ) holds. As a result, there are no AdS @xmath backgrounds
with internal space @xmath which strictly preserve 20 supersymmetries.
However as shown above, there is a solution which preserves 24
supersymmetries for @xmath . This is locally isometric to the @xmath
solution found in section 2.3.4 . Note that there are no @xmath
solutions as can be seen by a direct computation or by observing that
@xmath does not admit an effective and transitive action by the @xmath
subalgebra of the Killing superalgebra of such backgrounds. However,
there are @xmath solutions which preserve 4 supersymmetries [ 18 ] .

### 2.4 @xmath @xmath solutions in 11 dimensions

#### 2.4.1 @xmath solutions in @xmath

Let us first summarise some of the properties of @xmath backgrounds in
11-dimensional supergravity as described in [ 68 ] that we shall use
later. The bosonic fields are given by

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.4.1)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where the null orthonormal frame @xmath is as in ( 2.2.3 ), but now
@xmath , and the metric on the internal space @xmath is @xmath . @xmath
and @xmath are a function and 4-form on @xmath , respectively.

The Bianchi identities of 11-dimensional supergravity evaluated on an
@xmath background yield

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.4.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Similarly, the field equations give

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.4.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.4.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.4.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the Levi-Civita connection on @xmath .

#### 2.4.2 The Killing spinors

The solution of the KSEs of @xmath supergravity along the AdS @xmath
subspace of @xmath given in [ 68 ] can be expressed as in ( 2.2.1 ), but
now @xmath and @xmath are @xmath Majorana spinors that depend on the
coordinates of @xmath . Again they satisfy the lightcone projections
@xmath . The remaining independent KSEs are

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.4.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.4.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.4.8)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.4.9)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

The former KSE is the restriction of the gravitino KSE on @xmath and
@xmath while the latter arises as an integrability condition from
integrating the gravitino KSE of 11-dimensional supergravity over the
AdS @xmath subspace of @xmath .

#### 2.4.3 @xmath solutions with @xmath in 11 dimensions

##### Conditions on spinor bilinears

The conditions that arise from the assumption that @xmath be compact
without boundary and the solutions be smooth are similar to those
presented in the (massive) IIA case. In particular, one finds

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The proof follows along the same lines as in the (massive) IIA case, and
so we shall not repeat it here.

##### The warp factor is constant

Using arguments similar to those presented in the (massive) IIA case,
one finds that @xmath are Killing vectors on @xmath for any pair of
Killing spinors @xmath and @xmath and that @xmath .

Next, let us suppose that the backgrounds preserve @xmath
supersymmetries. Then, an argument similar to the one presented in the
proof of the homogeneity conjecture implies that the vector fields
@xmath span the tangent space of @xmath at every point and so @xmath is
constant. From the Bianchi identity ( 2.4.2 ) it then follows that
@xmath is constant as well. Thus we have established that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

As a result, the spacetime is a product @xmath , where @xmath is a
homogeneous space. Further progress requires the investigation of
individual homogeneous spaces of dimension 7 which have been classified
in [ 101 , 12 ] and are listed in table 2.3 . Requiring in addition that
the homogeneous spaces which can occur as internal spaces of @xmath AdS
@xmath backgrounds must admit an effective and transitive action of a
group that has Lie algebra @xmath , one arrives at the homogeneous
spaces presented in ( 2.1.5 ). In what follows, we shall investigate the
geometry of these homogeneous spaces in detail searching for @xmath AdS
@xmath backgrounds in 11-dimensional supergravity.

#### 2.4.4 @xmath

The maximally supersymmetric solutions have been classified before [ 33
] where it has been shown that all are locally isometric to @xmath with
@xmath . The only solution that may preserve @xmath supersymmetries is
associated with the homogeneous space @xmath , see ( 2.1.5 ). The Lie
algebra @xmath is again spanned by matrices @xmath as in ( D.0.1 )
satisfying the commutation relations ( D.0.2 ) where now @xmath . Let us
denote the generators of the @xmath subalgebra of @xmath and those of
the module @xmath , @xmath , with @xmath and @xmath , respectively.
These are defined as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the fundamental @xmath 3-form, @xmath is its dual and
@xmath is the duality operation along the 7-dimensional internal space.
The non-vanishing components of @xmath and @xmath can be chosen as

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.4.13)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

and we have raised the indices above using the flat metric. We have used
the conventions for @xmath and @xmath of [ 60 ] , where also several
useful identities involving @xmath and its Hodge dual are presented. In
particular, observe that @xmath . The @xmath generators can be written
as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and, using this, we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.4.15)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

Clearly, @xmath is a homogeneous space. As @xmath acts with the
irreducible 7-dimensional representation on @xmath , the left-invariant
metric on @xmath is unique up to scale, therefore we may choose an
ortho-normal frame @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is a constant. The left-invariant forms are

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and its dual @xmath . So the @xmath flux can be chosen as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Using this, the algebraic KSE ( 2.4.7 ) can be expressed as

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.4.19)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath are mutually commuting, hermitian Clifford algebra
operators with eigenvalues @xmath . The solutions of the algebraic KSE
on the eigenspaces of @xmath have been tabulated in table 2.4 .

For backgrounds preserving @xmath supersymmetries, one has to choose the
first set of solutions in table 2.4 and so impose the condition

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.20)
  -- -------- -- ----------

However, the field equation for the warp factor @xmath ( 2.4.4 ) gives

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.21)
  -- -------- -- ----------

These two equations imply that @xmath , hence @xmath .

As @xmath , the algebraic KSE is simplified to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.22)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and so @xmath lies in one of the 8-dimensional eigenspaces of @xmath
provided that @xmath . Thus, instead of preserving 28 supersymmetries,
the solution can be maximally supersymmetric. Indeed, this is the case,
as we shall now demonstrate. The integrability condition of the
gravitino KSE ( 2.4.6 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.23)
  -- -------- -- ----------

To investigate whether this can yield a new condition on @xmath , we
find after a direct computation using the results of section 1.5 that
the Riemann tensor in the orthonormal frame is given by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.24)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Therefore, @xmath is equipped with the round metric. For supersymmetric
solutions, one must set @xmath . In such a case, the integrability
condition of the gravitino KSE is automatically satisfied and thus the
solution preserves 32 supersymmetries. This solution is locally
isometric to the maximally supersymmetric AdS @xmath solution.

#### 2.4.5 @xmath

As @xmath , it follows from ( 2.1.5 ) that the internal space of an AdS
@xmath solution with 24 supersymmetries is the 7-dimensional homogeneous
manifold @xmath . The geometry of this homogeneous space is described in
appendix B . The left-invariant metric can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.25)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where we have introduced an orthonormal frame @xmath , and @xmath . The
most general left-invariant 4-form flux @xmath can be chosen as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.26)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath are constants and the left-invariant 4-forms are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.4.27)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.4.28)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

expressed in terms of the orthonormal frame. Having specified the
fields, it remains to solve the KSEs. For this define the mutually
commuting Clifford algebra operators

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.29)
     @xmath      (2.4.30)
  -- -------- -- ----------

with eigenvalues @xmath , where @xmath . Then upon inserting @xmath into
the algebraic KSE ( 2.4.7 ) and using the above Clifford algebra
operators, we obtain

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.31)
     @xmath      (2.4.32)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The algebraic KSE ( 2.4.7 ) can then be decomposed into the eigenspaces
of @xmath and @xmath . The different relations on the fluxes for all
possible sets of eigenvalues of these operators are listed in table 2.5
.

The only possibility to obtain solutions with @xmath supersymmetries is
to choose the first set of eigenspinors in table 2.5 . This leads to the
integrability condition

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.33)
  -- -------- -- ----------

from the remaining KSE. This together with the warp factor field
equation ( 2.4.4 )

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.34)
  -- -------- -- ----------

implies

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.35)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and so @xmath . Therefore @xmath and the solution is electric. As a
result, the algebraic KSE ( 2.4.4 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.36)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and so for @xmath it admits 8 linearly independent @xmath solutions. So
potentially, the background is maximally supersymmetric.

It remains to investigate the gravitino KSE. First of all, we observe
that for @xmath the Einstein equation ( 2.4.5 ) along the internal space
becomes

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.37)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Therefore, the internal space is Einstein. After some computation using
the results in appendix B , one finds that the homogeneous space @xmath
is Einstein, provided that @xmath . In that case, the curvature of the
metric in the orthonormal frame becomes

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.38)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and so the internal space is locally isometric to the round 7-sphere. As
expected from this, the integrability condition of the gravitino KSE (
2.4.6 )

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.39)
  -- -------- -- ----------

has non-trivial solutions for @xmath , i.e. @xmath and @xmath . With
this identification of parameters, @xmath is locally isometric to the
maximally supersymmetric @xmath background.

To summarise, there are no @xmath solutions with internal space @xmath
which preserve @xmath supersymmetries. However, for the choice of
parameters for which @xmath is the round 7-sphere, the solution
preserves 32 supersymmetries as expected.

#### 2.4.6 @xmath

As mentioned in section 2.1 , the internal space of AdS @xmath
backgrounds that preserve 20 supersymmetries admits an effective and
transitive action of a group which has Lie algebra @xmath . The field
equation for @xmath ( 2.4.3 ) is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.40)
  -- -------- -- ----------

As @xmath is constant, note that for generic 4-forms @xmath this defines
a nearly-parallel @xmath -structure on @xmath , see e.g. [ 110 ] for
homogeneous @xmath structures. However, in what follows we shall not
assume that @xmath is generic. In fact in many cases, it vanishes.

Amongst the 7-dimensional compact homogeneous spaces of ( 2.1.5 ), there
are three candidate internal spaces. These are the Berger space @xmath ,
@xmath , and @xmath , corresponding to the three inequivalent embeddings
of @xmath into @xmath . We will in the following examine each case
separately, starting with the Berger space @xmath .

##### @xmath

The description of the Berger space @xmath as a homogeneous manifold is
summarized in appendix C . @xmath is diffeomeorphic to the total space
of an @xmath bundle over @xmath with Euler class @xmath and first
Pontryagin class @xmath [ 48 ] . As a result @xmath and @xmath is a
rational homology 7-sphere. Since @xmath and @xmath , one writes @xmath
and the subalgebra @xmath acts irreducibly on @xmath with the @xmath
representation. So @xmath admits a unique invariant metric up to an
overall scale that is Einstein. As the embedding of @xmath into @xmath
factors through @xmath , it also admits an invariant 3-form @xmath given
in ( 2.4.13 ) which is unique up to a scale. Because there is a unique
invariant 3-form @xmath , @xmath and @xmath is a nearly parallel @xmath
manifold. Using these, we find that the invariant fields of the theory
are

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.41)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where we have introduced the ortho-normal frame @xmath , @xmath is given
in ( 2.4.13 ) and @xmath are constants with @xmath .

As the pair @xmath exhibits the same algebraic relations as that of the
@xmath case, the algebraic KSE ( 2.4.4 ) can be solved in the same way
yielding the results of table 2.4 . To find @xmath AdS @xmath solutions,
one should consider the first set of eigenspinors of the table which in
turn imply the relation ( 2.4.20 ) amongst the fluxes. This together
with the field equation of the warp factor ( 2.4.21 ) leads again to the
conclusion that @xmath and so @xmath .

As a result of the analysis of the algebraic KSE, so far the background
can admit up to 32 supersymmetries. It remains to investigate the
solutions of the gravitino KSE. The curvature of @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.42)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is given in appendix C . The integrability condition of the
gravitino KSE for @xmath is given in ( 2.4.23 ). To solve this
condition, we decompose the expression into the @xmath and @xmath
representations of @xmath using the projectors

  -- -------- -------- -- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath         
     @xmath   @xmath         (2.4.43)
  -- -------- -------- -- -- ----------

and noting that @xmath as 2-forms are in the @xmath representation. The
integrability condition along the @xmath representation gives @xmath
while along the @xmath representation it implies that the Killing
spinors must be invariant under @xmath . It turns out that there are two
such @xmath spinors, however taking into account the remaining
projection arising from the algebraic KSE, see ( 2.4.22 ), we deduce
that the solution preserves 4 supersymmetries in total. This solution
has already been derived in [ 17 ] .

##### @xmath

The decomposition of the Lie algebra @xmath suitable to describe this
homogeneous space can be found in appendix D . Writing @xmath for the
left-invariant frame, @xmath and @xmath , the most general
left-invariant metric is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.44)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is a positive definite symmetric @xmath -matrix, @xmath a
constant, and the left-invariant forms are generated by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.45)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In order to simplify the analysis of the geometry in what follows, we
note that without loss of generality the matrix @xmath can be chosen to
be diagonal. To see this, perform an orthogonal transformation @xmath to
bring @xmath into a diagonal form. Such a transformation can be
compensated with a frame rotation

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.46)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Demanding that @xmath is invariant implies that @xmath has to transform
as @xmath . Indeed, we observe that such a transformation is an
automorphism of @xmath that preserves the decomposition ( D.1.4 ),
i.e. the structure constants of the Lie algebra remain the same. As a
result, we can diagonalise the metric and simultaneously use the same
structure constants to calculate the geometric quantities of the
homogeneous space. Under these orthogonal transformations the first two
left-invariant forms are invariant while there is a change of basis in
the space of left-invariant 3-forms.

To continue, take ⁷ ⁷ 7 We have performed the analysis that follows also
without taking @xmath to be diagonal producing the same conclusions.
@xmath . Then introduce the orthonormal frame @xmath and @xmath . In
this frame the most general left-invariant metric and @xmath flux can be
written as

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.4.47)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath are constants,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.48)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.49)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The Bianchi identity for @xmath is automatically satisfied. On the other
hand, the field equation for @xmath in ( 2.4.3 ) yields the conditions

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.50)
     @xmath      (2.4.51)
     @xmath      (2.4.52)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where we have chosen the top form on @xmath as @xmath .

Before we proceed to investigate the various cases which arise from
solving the linear system ( 2.4.52 ), let us first consider the case in
which @xmath is electric, i.e. proportional to the volume form of AdS
@xmath . In such a case @xmath . The algebraic KSE then gives

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.53)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and the field equations along @xmath imply that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.54)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and so @xmath is Einstein. The Einstein condition on the metric of
@xmath requires that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.55)
  -- -------- -- ----------

To investigate whether there are solutions preserving 20
supersymmetries, it remains to consider the integrability condition of
the gravitino KSE ( 2.4.39 ). Indeed, using the expressions ( D.3.3 )
and ( D.3.4 ) for the curvature of this homogeneous space, the
integrability condition along the directions @xmath and @xmath gives
@xmath while along the @xmath and @xmath directions additional
projections are required. For example, after taking the trace with
@xmath and setting @xmath and @xmath , the condition is @xmath which
leads to solutions that preserve 16 supersymmetries or less, where the
gamma matrices are in the orthonormal frame and @xmath . Hence there are
no @xmath AdS @xmath solutions.

Next let us turn to investigate the solutions of the linear system (
2.4.52 ). The last condition implies that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.56)
  -- -------- -- ----------

To continue, first consider the case that @xmath . @xmath

Substituting the second equation in ( 2.4.56 ) into the linear system (
2.4.52 ), one finds that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.57)
     @xmath      (2.4.58)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Now there are several cases to consider. First, suppose that the
parameters of the metric @xmath are such that the only solutions of the
linear system above are @xmath . In such case @xmath and @xmath has the
same algebraic properties as that of the @xmath case with @xmath and
@xmath . As a result, the algebraic KSE together with the Einstein
equation for the warp factor imply that @xmath as well and so @xmath .
This violates our assumption that @xmath . In any case, the 4-form flux
@xmath is electric which we have already investigated above and found
that such a configuration does not admit solutions with @xmath
supersymmetries.

Next, suppose that the parameters of the metric are chosen such that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.59)
  -- -------- -- ----------

These two cases are symmetric, so it suffices to consider one of the
two. Suppose that @xmath and @xmath . In such a case

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.60)
  -- -------- -- ----------

with @xmath . Setting @xmath and @xmath , the algebraic KSE can be
written as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.61)
     @xmath      (2.4.62)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Since @xmath commute and have eigenvalues @xmath , the above algebraic
equation decomposes into eigenspaces as tabulated in table 2.6 .

To find solutions with 20 supersymmetries or more, we can either choose
one of the two eigenspaces with 3 linearly independent eigenspinors and
both eigenspaces with a single eigenspinor or both eigenspaces with 3
linearly independent eigenspinors. In the former case the algebraic KSE
will admit 20 Killing spinors and in the latter 24 Killing spinors.

Let us first consider the case with 20 Killing spinors. In such a case,
we find that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.63)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.64)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where we have considered the second eigenspace with 3 eigenspinors in
table 2.6 . The case where the first such eigenspace with 3 eigenspinors
is chosen can be treated in a similar way. The condition ( 2.4.64 )
follows as an integrability condition of the remaining algebraic KSE
involving @xmath and @xmath . On the other hand, the field equation for
the warp factor ( 2.4.4 ) implies that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.65)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which, together with ( 2.4.64 ), gives @xmath and so @xmath . The
solution cannot preserve @xmath supersymmetries.

Next consider the case with 24 Killing spinors. In this case, we find
that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.66)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and the integrability condition of the remaining algebraic KSE yields

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.67)
  -- -------- -- ----------

On the other hand the field equation of the warp factor ( 2.4.4 ) gives

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.68)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Comparing this with ( 2.4.67 ), one finds that the @xmath ’s vanish and
so @xmath . Thus there are no solutions with @xmath for either @xmath or
@xmath non-vanishing.

It remains to investigate the case that all @xmath . This requires that
the determinant of the coefficients of the linear system ( 2.4.58 ) must
vanish, i.e.

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.69)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Taking the difference of the two equations, we find that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.70)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Substituting @xmath above into ( 2.4.69 ), we find that @xmath . So
without loss of generality, we set @xmath . Then the linear system (
2.4.58 ) can be solved to yield

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.71)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Setting

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.72)
     @xmath      (2.4.73)
  -- -------- -- ----------

the algebraic KSE ( 2.4.7 ) can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.74)
     @xmath      (2.4.75)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath and @xmath . Again, these Clifford algebra operators
commute and have eigenvalues @xmath , so we list the restrictions of
this equation to the eigenspaces of @xmath and @xmath in table 2.7 .

To find solutions with 20 supersymmetries, one needs to consider the
eigenspace with 6 eigenspinors in table 2.7 . In such a case the
integrability of the remaining KSE requires that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.76)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Comparing this with the field equation of the warp factor

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.77)
  -- -------- -- ----------

we find that all @xmath ’s must vanish and so @xmath . Thus, the flux
@xmath is electric and, as we have demonstrated, such a background does
not admit @xmath AdS @xmath supersymmetries.

@xmath

Since the backgrounds with electric flux @xmath cannot preserve @xmath
supersymmetries, we have to assume that at least one of the pairs @xmath
and @xmath do not vanish. If either the pair @xmath or @xmath is
non-vanishing, the investigation of the algebraic KSE proceeds as in the
previous case with @xmath . In particular, we find that the algebraic
KSE ( 2.4.7 ) together with the field equation for the warp factor imply
that all @xmath ’s vanish and the flux @xmath is electric. So there are
no solutions preserving @xmath supersymmetries.

It remains to investigate the case that @xmath . If this is the case,
the determinant of the linear system ( 2.4.52 ) must vanish which in
turn implies that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.78)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The solution of these equations is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.79)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Substituting the latter equation into ( 2.4.78 ), one again finds that
@xmath . So, without loss of generality, we take @xmath in which case

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.80)
  -- -------- -- ----------

For the latter case, the linear system ( 2.4.52 ) gives

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.81)
  -- -------- -- ----------

After setting @xmath , the investigation of the algebraic KSE can be
carried out as that described in table 2.7 . As a result, after
comparing with the field equation for the warp factor, the @xmath ’s
vanish and @xmath is electric. Thus there are no solutions preserving
@xmath supersymmetries.

It remains to investigate the case that @xmath in ( 2.4.80 ). In this
case, the linear system ( 2.4.52 ) gives

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.82)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Using the @xmath and @xmath as in ( 2.4.73 ), the algebraic KSE ( 2.4.7
) becomes

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.83)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and the solutions in the eigenspaces of @xmath and @xmath are described
in table 2.8 . To preserve @xmath supersymmetries, one has to consider
either one of the eigenspaces with 3 eigenspinors and the eigenspace
with 2 eigenspinors or both of the eigenspaces with 3 eigenspinors. In
either case, one finds that all @xmath ’s vanish and so @xmath . Then
@xmath is electric and such solutions do not preserve @xmath
supersymmetries. Therefore we conclude that the homogenous space @xmath
does not give rise to AdS @xmath backgrounds with @xmath .

##### @xmath

The geometry of this homogeneous space is described in appendix D where
the definition of the generators of the algebra and expressions for the
curvature and invariant forms can be found. A left-invariant frame is
given by @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath . Then, the most general
left-invariant metric is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.84)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is a constant and @xmath is any constant @xmath positive
definite symmetric matrix.

To simplify the computations that follow, it is convenient to use the
covariant properties of the decomposition of @xmath as described in (
D.2.3 ) to restrict the number of parameters in the metric. In
particular, observe that the decomposition ( D.2.3 ) remains invariant
under the transformation of the generators

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.85)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath and @xmath defined as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.86)
  -- -------- -- ----------

since @xmath are the gamma matrices of the Majorana spinor
representation of @xmath on @xmath . Furthermore notice that @xmath as
@xmath is generated by the @xmath which commute with all @xmath . The
orthogonal rotations @xmath act on the matrix @xmath as @xmath . As
@xmath is an automorphism of @xmath which leaves the decomposition (
D.2.3 ) invariant, we can use @xmath to put the matrix @xmath into
diagonal form. So from now on, without loss of generality, we set @xmath
with @xmath , see also [ 132 ] .

The left-invariant 4-forms are generated by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.87)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.88)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Therefore, the 4-form flux @xmath can be chosen as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.89)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath and @xmath are constants. Then it is straightforward to
find that the Bianchi identity @xmath implies that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.90)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Furthermore, define @xmath and choose as top form @xmath . Then the
field equation for @xmath , @xmath , gives the linear system

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.91)
     @xmath      (2.4.92)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where there is no summation over the indices @xmath and @xmath on the
left-hand side of the last equation and @xmath .

Before we proceed to investigate the solutions of the linear system,
notice that if @xmath , then @xmath and so @xmath is electric. The
supersymmetry preserved by these solutions will be investigated later.
We will show that such solutions cannot preserve more than 16
supersymmetries.

Furthermore writing @xmath , where @xmath , the field equation of the
warp factor in ( 2.4.4 ) can be written as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.93)
  -- -------- -- ----------

As we shall demonstrate, the compatibility of this field equation with
the algebraic KSE rules out the existence of @xmath backgrounds.

Returning to the solutions of ( 2.4.92 ), let us focus on @xmath with
@xmath . There are several cases to consider.

Either @xmath for all @xmath or @xmath for all @xmath

If @xmath , @xmath , are all non-vanishing, the last equation in (
2.4.92 ) implies that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.94)
  -- -------- -- ----------

As a result, the metric is invariant under @xmath and this can be used
to bring @xmath into diagonal form. Of course @xmath is also diagonal if
@xmath for all @xmath .

So, without loss of generality, we can assume that @xmath is diagonal.
Setting

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.95)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where all gamma matrices are in the orthonormal basis and @xmath , the
algebraic KSE can be written as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.96)
     @xmath      (2.4.97)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The decomposition of the algebraic KSE into the eigenspaces of the
commuting Clifford algebra operators @xmath is illustrated in table 2.9
.

To construct @xmath solutions, we have to include the eigenspace with
four eigenspinors. The integrability condition of the remaining KSE
described in table 2.9 gives

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.98)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Comparing ( 2.4.98 ) with the field equation for the warp factor (
2.4.93 ), we find that @xmath . Therefore @xmath , so @xmath is
electric.

@xmath and @xmath

As the other two cases for which either @xmath or @xmath with the rest
of the components non-vanishing can be treated in a similar way, we
take, without loss of generality, that @xmath and @xmath . In such a
case, the last condition in ( 2.4.92 ) gives

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.99)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The metric is invariant under an @xmath symmetry which acts with the
vector representation on the vector @xmath and leaves the form of @xmath
invariant. As a result up to an @xmath transformation, we can set @xmath
as well. Furthermore, if @xmath , the diagonal terms in the last
condition in ( 2.4.92 ) give

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (2.4.100)
  -- -------- -- -----------

On the other hand if @xmath the analysis reduces to that of the previous
case. Therefore for @xmath , @xmath can be written as

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (2.4.101)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Introducing the Clifford algebra operators

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (2.4.102)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath , the algebraic KSE can be written as

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (2.4.103)
  -- -------- -- -----------

The decomposition of the algebraic KSE into the eigenspaces of the
commuting Clifford algebra operators @xmath is illustrated in table 2.10
.

To construct solutions preserving more than 16 supersymmetries, we have
to include the eigenspace with four eigenspinors leading again to the
integrability condition ( 2.4.98 ). Comparing again with the field
equations of the warp factor ( 2.4.93 ), we deduce that @xmath is
electric.

@xmath

All three cases for which only one of the three off-diagonal components
of @xmath is non-zero can be treated symmetrically. So, without loss of
generality, one can take @xmath but @xmath . In this case, the last
equation in ( 2.4.92 ) has four branches of solutions depending on the
choice of the @xmath , @xmath and @xmath components of the metric.

1.  @xmath
    The last equation in ( 2.4.92 ) then implies @xmath and the
    aforementioned residual @xmath symmetry can be used to set @xmath to
    be diagonal.

2.  @xmath , @xmath
    The last equation in ( 2.4.92 ) then implies @xmath and @xmath . The
    aforementioned residual @xmath symmetry can be used to put @xmath
    into diagonal form.

3.  @xmath , @xmath
    The last equation in ( 2.4.92 ) then implies @xmath and @xmath . In
    such a case, @xmath reads

      -- -------- -- -----------
         @xmath      (2.4.104)
      -- -------- -- -----------

    Choosing

      -- -------- -- -----------
         @xmath      (2.4.105)
      -- -------- -- -----------

    the algebraic KSE can be written as

      -- -------- -- -----------
         @xmath      (2.4.106)
      -- -------- -- -----------

    The decomposition of the algebraic KSE into the eigenspaces of
    @xmath is illustrated in table 2.11 .

    Again the eigenspace with four eigenspinors has to be included in
    the construction of @xmath backgrounds. As a result, this leads to
    the integrability condition ( 2.4.98 ) which together with the warp
    factor field equation ( 2.4.93 ) imply that @xmath is electric.

4.  @xmath , @xmath
    The last equation in ( 2.4.92 ) then implies

      -- -------- -- -----------
         @xmath      (2.4.107)
      -- -------- -- -----------

    In such a case, @xmath reads

      -- -------- -- -----------
         @xmath      (2.4.108)
      -- -------- -- -----------

    With the choice of commuting Clifford algebra operators as in (
    2.4.102 ), the algebraic KSE can be written as

      -- -------- -------- -- -----------
         @xmath   @xmath      
                  @xmath      
                  @xmath      (2.4.109)
      -- -------- -------- -- -----------

    The decomposition of the algebraic KSE into the eigenspaces of
    @xmath is illustrated in table 2.12 .

    To construct @xmath solutions, we again have to include the
    eigenspace with four eigenspinors which leads to the integrability
    condition ( 2.4.98 ). Comparing with the warp factor field equation
    ( 2.4.93 ), we once again deduce that @xmath is electric.

It remains to investigate the number of supersymmetries preserved by the
solutions for which @xmath is electric. For this, one has to investigate
the integrability condition of the gravitino KSE ( 2.4.39 ). Using the
expression for the curvature in ( D.4.3 )-( D.4.6 ) and requiring that
the solution preserves @xmath , we find that

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (2.4.110)
  -- -------- -- -----------

implies

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (2.4.111)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Next requiring again that @xmath , one finds that the condition

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (2.4.112)
  -- -------- -- -----------

gives

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (2.4.113)
     @xmath      (2.4.114)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Substituting ( 2.4.111 ) into the second equation in ( 2.4.114 ), one
finds after a bit of analysis that

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (2.4.115)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Setting @xmath and substituting this back into ( 2.4.111 ) and ( 2.4.114
), one deduces that

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (2.4.116)
  -- -------- -- -----------

As @xmath , we have @xmath and @xmath . The rest of the integrability
condition is satisfied without further conditions. Therefore, every
solutions that preserves @xmath supersymmetries is maximally
supersymmetric and so locally isometric to @xmath .

One can confirm this result by investigating the Einstein equation (
2.4.5 ). As all solutions with electric @xmath are Einstein @xmath , it
suffices to identify the left-invariant metrics on @xmath that are
Einstein. There are two Einstein metrics [ 132 , 42 ] on @xmath given by

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (2.4.117)
  -- -------- -- -----------

and

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (2.4.118)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where the first one is the round metric on @xmath , see also [ 83 ] .
The second one does not give @xmath supersymmetric solutions.

### 2.5 Summary

Up to local isometries, we have classified all warped AdS @xmath
backgrounds with the most general allowed fluxes in 10- and
11-dimensional supergravities that preserve @xmath supersymmetries. We
have demonstrated that up to an overall scale, the only solutions that
arise are the maximally supersymmetric solution @xmath of 11-dimensional
supergravity [ 37 , 26 ] and the @xmath solution @xmath of IIA
supergravity [ 103 ] . These two solutions are related via dimensional
reduction along the fibre of the Hopf fibration @xmath .

The assumption we have made to prove these results is that either the
solutions are smooth and the internal space is compact without boundary
or that the even part @xmath of the Killing superalgebra of the
backgrounds decomposes as @xmath . In fact, these two assumptions are
equivalent for @xmath AdS @xmath backgrounds. It may be possible to
weaken these assumptions but they cannot be removed altogether. This is
because otherwise additional solutions will exist. For example, the
maximally supersymmetric @xmath solution of 11-dimensional supergravity
[ 104 ] can be re-interpreted as a maximally supersymmetric warped AdS
@xmath solution. However, in such a case the “internal” 7-dimensional
manifold @xmath is not compact and the even subalgebra of the Killing
superalgebra @xmath does not decompose as @xmath (cf.  sections 1.2.2
and 1.4 ).

We have identified all AdS @xmath backgrounds up to a local isometry.
Therefore, we have specified all the local geometries of the internal
spaces @xmath of these solutions. However, the possibility remains that
there are more solutions which arise via additional discrete
identifications @xmath , where @xmath is a discrete subgroup of @xmath .
The @xmath solutions will preserve at most as many supersymmetries as
the @xmath solutions. As in IIB and massive IIA supergravities there are
no @xmath @xmath solutions, there are no @xmath @xmath solutions either.
In IIA theory, the possibility remains that there can be @xmath
solutions with 24 and 20 supersymmetries. In @xmath supergravity as
@xmath preserves 32 supersymmetries, there may be @xmath solutions
preserving 28, 24 and 20 supersymmetries. Such solutions have been used
in the context of AdS/CFT in [ 1 ] . A systematic investigation of all
possible @xmath @xmath backgrounds will involve the identification of
all discrete subgroups of @xmath . The relevant groups here are @xmath
and @xmath , see e.g. [ 73 ] for an exposition of discrete subgroups of
@xmath and references therein.

It is clear from our results on AdS @xmath backgrounds that
supersymmetric AdS solutions which preserve @xmath supersymmetries in
10- and 11-dimensions are severely restricted. Consequently there are
few gravitational duals for superconformal theories with a large number
of supersymmetries which have distinct local geometries. For example,
the superconformal theories of [ 28 , 2 , 39 ] have gravitational duals
which are locally isometric to the @xmath maximally supersymmetric
background as there are no distinct local AdS @xmath geometries that
preserve strictly 24 supersymmetries [ 9 ] . In general, our results
also suggest that there may not be a large number of backgrounds that
preserve @xmath supersymmetries in 10- and 11-dimensional
supergravities.

## Chapter 3 A Non-existence Theorem for @xmath Supersymmetric AdS@xmath
Backgrounds

In this chapter, we show that there are no smooth warped AdS @xmath
solutions with a compact without boundary internal manifold in 10- and
11-dimensional supergravities preserving strictly more than 16
supersymmetries. The following work was conducted in collaboration with
Alexander Haupt and George Papadopoulos and published in [ 75 ] .

### 3.1 Introduction

The main purpose of this chapter is to complete the classification of
AdS backgrounds that preserve strictly more than 16 supersymmetries in
10- and 11-dimensional supergravities. After our analysis of AdS @xmath
solutions in chapter 2 , the only class of backgrounds that remains to
be investigated are the warped AdS @xmath backgrounds with the most
general allowed fluxes in 10-dimensional type II and 11-dimensional
supergravity theories preserving @xmath supersymmetries. For these, we
shall demonstrate a non-existence theorem provided that the solutions
are smooth and their internal spaces are compact manifolds without
boundary. It suffices to establish the non-existence theorem up to local
isometries. The more general result follows, as there are no new
geometries that can be constructed by taking quotients by discrete
groups.

The method used to establish this result again relies on a number of
previously mentioned recent developments, namely the integration of the
KSEs along the AdS @xmath subspace [ 68 , 8 , 6 ] , the homogeneity
theorem (cf. section 1.3 ), as well as the classification of the Killing
superalgebras (cf. section 1.4 ). Then the strategy of the proof is as
follows. First, one establishes that for all @xmath backgrounds that
preserve @xmath supersymmetry, the warp factor is constant. Therefore,
the geometry is a product @xmath . To show this, either one uses that
the solutions are smooth and the internal space is compact without
boundary as well as techniques from the proof of the homogeneity theorem
or that the even subalgebra @xmath of the Killing superalgebra @xmath of
@xmath decomposes as @xmath , where @xmath is the isometry algebra of
AdS @xmath and @xmath is the isometry algebra of the internal space
@xmath .

Having established that the @xmath AdS @xmath backgrounds are products,
@xmath , and that @xmath , where @xmath is an algebra of isometries on
@xmath , we obtain by virtue of the homogeneity theorem that the
internal space is a homogeneous space @xmath with @xmath . In addition,
the theorem requires that all fields are invariant under the left action
of @xmath on @xmath .

The final part of the proof involves the identification of all
homogeneous spaces ¹ ¹ 1 As we are investigating supersymmetric
backgrounds, we require that all the internal spaces are spin. in seven
and eight dimensions that admit a transitive and an almost effective
action of a group @xmath with Lie algebra @xmath . For @xmath
semisimple, one can identify the relevant homogeneous spaces using the
classification results of (simply connected) 7- and 8-dimensional
homogeneous manifolds in [ 17 , 111 , 102 , 101 , 12 ] ; for a concise
description see [ 111 ] . We also need to find a procedure to help us
determine whether a @xmath can act effectively on a given homogeneous
space @xmath . In section 3.2 , we refer to this as “modification” of a
homogeneous space. A similar approach can be used for the case that
@xmath is not semisimple. After identifying all the suitable homogeneous
spaces, a substitution of the geometric data into the field equations
and KSEs of supergravity theories in 10- and 11-dimensions establishes
our non-existence theorem.

Before we proceed with the proof, let us investigate the necessity for
the assumptions we have made. First, one can establish that if @xmath is
smooth and @xmath is compact without boundary, then the even subalgebra
of the Killing superalgebra of @xmath will decompose as @xmath [ 5 ] .
The requirement that @xmath must be compact without boundary may be
weakened but not completely removed. If it is removed, then @xmath may
not decompose as stated above. In addition, the warp factor of @xmath
backgrounds with @xmath supersymmetries may not be constant and there
exist AdS @xmath backgrounds that preserve @xmath supersymmetries, see [
50 ] for a detailed exposition. In particular the maximally
supersymmetric @xmath and @xmath backgrounds of 11-dimensional
supergravity can be viewed as warped AdS @xmath backgrounds but the
internal spaces are not compact without boundary.

This chapter is organised as follows. In section 3.2 , we describe the
Killing superalgebras of AdS @xmath backgrounds and introduce the notion
of a modification of a homogeneous space, which will allow us to test
whether an algebra can act effectively on a given space. In sections 3.3
, 3.4 and 3.5 we prove the main result of this chapter for
11-dimensional, IIA and IIB supergravities, respectively. Our
conventions can be found in A . In appendix E , we present some aspects
of the structure of homogeneous spaces admitting a transitive action by
a compact but not semisimple Lie group which are useful in the proof of
our results. In appendix F , we describe the geometry of the homogeneous
space @xmath .

### 3.2 Symmetries of AdS@xmath backgrounds

#### 3.2.1 Killing superalgebras of AdS@xmath backgrounds

Since AdS @xmath is locally a group manifold, the Killing superalgebras
of warped AdS @xmath backgrounds with the most general allowed fluxes
decompose as @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath are associated with the
left and right actions. The left and right Killing superalgebras @xmath
and @xmath have been identified in [ 5 ] . This has been done under the
assumption that either the internal space is compact without boundary or
that the even subalgebra decomposes as @xmath and similarly for @xmath .
As @xmath , @xmath is isomorphic to either @xmath or @xmath if the
background has only either left or right supersymmetries, respectively,
or @xmath if the background has both left and right supersymmetries.
Furthermore @xmath .

It has been shown in [ 5 ] that for AdS @xmath backgrounds @xmath may
not be semisimple and in addition may admit central terms @xmath which
commute with all other generators of the superalgebra. We shall show
below that in all cases bar one @xmath . If @xmath , it will have at
most dimension 3. The left and right superalgebras are isomorphic and so
it suffices to present only the left ones. These are tabulated in table
² ² 2 Throughout this thesis @xmath , @xmath , denotes the compact
symplectic Lie algebras. These have been denoted with @xmath in [ 5 ] to
distinguish them from the non-compact ones. 3.1 .

#### 3.2.2 Central terms

We shall focus on @xmath , as the description that follows below also
applies to @xmath . It has been observed in [ 5 ] that the Killing
superalgebras of AdS @xmath backgrounds may exhibit central terms. Such
terms may occur in all cases apart from @xmath and @xmath . However, it
has been shown in [ 5 ] that both @xmath and @xmath do not admit central
extensions. The superalgebra @xmath can exhibit up to three central
terms though. This is because @xmath arises as a special case of @xmath
at certain values of the parameter @xmath . For those values, three of
the R-symmetry generators of @xmath span the R-symmetry algebra @xmath
of @xmath and the other three become central.

It can also be shown that @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , @xmath , do not
exhibit central terms either. This can be seen after an analysis of the
condition

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

of [ 5 ] , where @xmath are the generators of @xmath and @xmath is
described in [ 5 ] . For @xmath , @xmath , the central terms that can
occur are (2,0) and (0,2) components of the @xmath . However one can
show that these do not satisfy ( 3.2.1 ) unless they vanish. Thus @xmath
.

It remains to investigate the superalgebra with @xmath . The central
generators that may occur are the @xmath which lie in the complement of
@xmath in @xmath . Taking the trace of ( 3.2.1 ) with one of the three
complex structures that are associated with @xmath , one can demonstrate
that all such generators @xmath must also vanish. Thus again @xmath .
Therefore, apart from @xmath , all the other superalgebras in table 3.1
do not admit central terms.

#### 3.2.3 On the @xmath structure of internal spaces

We shall demonstrate later that the spacetime of all AdS @xmath
backgrounds that preserve more than 16 supersymmetries in 10- and
11-dimensional supergravities is a product @xmath and that @xmath is a
homogeneous space @xmath such that @xmath . Of course, @xmath acts
transitively on @xmath . In addition, @xmath is required to act “almost
effectively” on @xmath . This means that the map of @xmath into the
space of Killing vector fields of @xmath is an inclusion, i.e. for every
generator of @xmath there is an associated non-vanishing Killing vector
field on @xmath . We shall also refer to this property as @xmath acting
“effectively” on @xmath . This latter property is essential as otherwise
the super-Jacobi identities of the AdS Killing superalgebra will not be
satisfied. It is also essential for the identification of the manifolds
that can arise as internal spaces of all AdS, and in particular AdS
@xmath , backgrounds preserving some supersymmetry.

For AdS @xmath backgrounds, there are two cases to consider. The first
case arises, whenever @xmath is a simple Lie algebra. Then the internal
spaces can be identified, up to a factoring with a finite group, using
the classification of the simply connected 7- and 8-dimensional
homogeneous spaces in [ 17 , 111 , 102 , 101 , 12 ] . This is sufficient
to identify the internal spaces of all such AdS @xmath backgrounds that
preserve @xmath supersymmetries.

However for most AdS @xmath backgrounds @xmath is not simple. Typically,
it is the sum of two Lie algebras, @xmath , one arising from the left
sector and another from the right sector. In addition, it may not be
semisimple. For example, we have seen that @xmath for the @xmath Killing
superalgebra and @xmath for the @xmath superalgebra with a central term
@xmath . Furthermore, @xmath is not semisimple for all AdS @xmath
backgrounds that exhibit either @xmath or @xmath supersymmetries. Given
that @xmath may not be simple, the question then arises how one can
decide, given a @xmath space from the classification results of [ 17 ,
111 , 102 , 101 , 12 ] whether @xmath acts both transitively and
effectively on @xmath .

Let us illustrate this with some examples. It is known that both @xmath
and @xmath act transitively and effectively on @xmath . Thus @xmath and
@xmath . However for @xmath , it is @xmath which appears as a subalgebra
of @xmath and so @xmath is expected to act transitively and effectively
on the internal spaces instead of @xmath . From this perspective @xmath
can arise as a potential internal space of an AdS @xmath background
whereas @xmath should be discarded. Since it is not apparent which
description is used for a given homogeneous space in the classification
results but it is essential for the classification of AdS @xmath
backgrounds, let us investigate the above paradigm further. To see how
@xmath can be modified to be written as a @xmath , consider the group
homomorphism @xmath from @xmath into @xmath as

  -- -- -- ---------
           (3.2.2)
  -- -- -- ---------

In fact @xmath has kernel @xmath and so factors to @xmath . Next
consider @xmath and the group homomorphism @xmath of @xmath into @xmath
as

  -- -- -- ---------
           (3.2.3)
  -- -- -- ---------

Again @xmath has kernel @xmath and so factors to @xmath . Then @xmath
with @xmath acting almost effectively on @xmath . Furthermore one can
verify that @xmath acts effectively on @xmath , as expected.

The key point of the modification described above is the existence of
@xmath such that @xmath and that this @xmath acts on both @xmath and the
@xmath subgroup of @xmath . Observe that after the modification the
isotropy group is larger and so the invariant geometry of @xmath as a
@xmath homogeneous space is more restrictive than that of @xmath .

Another example that illustrates a similar point and which will be used
in the analysis that follows is @xmath . It is known that @xmath can
also be described as @xmath , where @xmath and similarly for @xmath .
The modification required to describe @xmath as an @xmath coset starting
from @xmath is as follows. View the elements of @xmath as @xmath
matrices with quaternionic entries and consider the inclusion @xmath of
@xmath in @xmath as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath are quaternions of length one. Then the map
@xmath from @xmath into @xmath is constructed as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

One finds that @xmath is diffeomorphic to @xmath , with @xmath acting
almost effectively and descending to an effective action of @xmath .
Again the additional @xmath introduced in the isotropy group acts both
on @xmath and the additional @xmath introduced in the transitive group.
The geometry of the homogeneous space @xmath is more restrictive than
that of @xmath . In fact, the former is a special case of the latter. As
a final example @xmath can be seen as a modification of the homogeneous
space @xmath . From now on we shall refer to such constructions as
“modifications” of a homogeneous space.

On the level of Lie algebras the modifications can be viewed as follows.
Suppose @xmath decomposes as @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath are Lie
algebras, and that there is a homogeneous space @xmath with @xmath . To
see whether @xmath can be modified to admit an effective action of the
whole @xmath algebra, it is first required that @xmath is a subalgebra
of @xmath , where @xmath . Then, up to possible discrete
identifications, @xmath can be modified to @xmath , where now @xmath
with @xmath acts on both the @xmath and @xmath subgroups of the
transitive group.

All 7- and 8-dimensional @xmath homogeneous spaces with @xmath
semisimple are known up to possible modifications. Because of this, for
@xmath semisimple, one can systematically search for all modifications
of @xmath homogeneous spaces to determine whether a Lie algebra @xmath
can act transitively and effectively on a modified homogenous space. If
@xmath is not semisimple, we have argued in appendix E that up to
discrete identifications one can construct all the homogeneous spaces
@xmath with @xmath as the product of a modification of @xmath with the
abelian group @xmath , where @xmath is semisimple.

As we shall see the modifications of homogeneous spaces are necessary to
identify all possible internal spaces of AdS @xmath backgrounds that can
preserve some supersymmetry. For such modifications of @xmath to exist,
a necessary condition is that the rank of @xmath must be strictly
smaller than that of @xmath . It turns out that this is rather
restrictive in the analysis that follows.

Let us now turn to investigate the homogeneous geometry of a
modification @xmath of the homogenous @xmath space. One can show that
this can be explored as a special case of that of @xmath . Indeed
suppose that @xmath . Then, we observe that we can choose the generators
of @xmath such that @xmath , where @xmath is the inclusion of the
modification. Therefore, the tangent space at the origin of the original
@xmath space and that of the modification @xmath can be identified with
the same vector space @xmath . The only difference is that @xmath as the
tangent space at the origin of @xmath is the module of a representation
of @xmath while after the modification @xmath is the module of a
representation of @xmath . Thus, all the local homogeneous geometry of
the modification @xmath is that of @xmath which in addition is invariant
under the representation of @xmath on @xmath .

### 3.3 @xmath solutions in 11 dimensions

#### 3.3.1 Fields

We consider warped AdS @xmath backgrounds with internal space @xmath ,
@xmath , and the most general allowed fluxes invariant under the
symmetries of the AdS @xmath subspace. The bosonic fields of
11-dimensional supergravity are a metric @xmath and a 4-form field
strength @xmath . Following the description of @xmath backgrounds
presented in [ 68 ] , these can be written as

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.3.1)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath are the coordinates of AdS @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.3.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

@xmath is the AdS @xmath radius, @xmath is the warp factor which is a
function of @xmath , and @xmath and @xmath are a 1-form and 4-form on
@xmath , respectively. The dependence of the fields on the AdS @xmath
coordinates @xmath is explicit, while @xmath depend only on the
coordinates @xmath of @xmath . Next we define a null orthonormal frame
as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.3.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath . The Bianchi identity @xmath of @xmath implies that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.3.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The field equations for @xmath give that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.3.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.3.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where our Hodge duality conventions can be found in appendix A .
Similarly, the Einstein equation along @xmath gives rise to a field
equation for the warp factor @xmath

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.3.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and the Einstein equation along @xmath reads

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.3.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the Ricci tensor of the internal manifold @xmath . Note
in particular that ( 3.3.7 ) implies that @xmath is nowhere vanishing,
provided that @xmath and all other fields are smooth.

#### 3.3.2 The Killing spinors

Here, we summarise the solution of the gravitino KSE in 11-dimensional
supergravity for warped @xmath backgrounds in [ 68 ] . In this approach,
the KSE of 11-dimensional supergravity is first solved along the AdS
@xmath subspace and then the remaining independent KSEs along the
internal space @xmath are identified. The Killing spinors can be
expressed ³ ³ 3 The gamma matrices are always taken with respect to the
null-orthonormal frame ( 3.3.3 ). as

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.3.9)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where the dependence on the AdS @xmath coordinates is explicit and
@xmath and @xmath are Majorana @xmath spinors that depend only on the
coordinates of @xmath and satisfy the light-cone projections

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The remaining independent KSEs on @xmath are

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.3.13)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.3.14)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

The conditions ( 3.3.11 ) can be thought of as the restriction of the
gravitino KSE of 11-dimensional supergravity on @xmath while ( 3.3.12 )
arises from integrating the gravitino KSE along the @xmath subspace.

To make a connection with the terminology used to describe the Killing
superalgebras of AdS @xmath backgrounds in section 3.2 , the Killing
spinors @xmath that depend only on the @xmath type of spinors are in the
left sector while those that depend on @xmath spinors are in the right
sector. The existence of unrelated ⁴ ⁴ 4 In AdS @xmath , @xmath ,
backgrounds the @xmath and @xmath spinors are related by Clifford
algebra operations. @xmath and @xmath types of spinors is the reason
that the Killing superalgebra @xmath of AdS @xmath decomposes as @xmath
. Furthermore, it has been noted in [ 68 ] that if @xmath and @xmath
solve the KSEs ( 3.3.11 ) and ( 3.3.12 ), so do

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Therefore the number of Killing spinors @xmath of AdS @xmath backgrounds
is always even, where @xmath and @xmath is the number of Killing spinors
of the left and right sector, respectively.

#### 3.3.3 For @xmath @xmath solutions @xmath is homogeneous

##### Factorization of Killing vectors

It has been shown in [ 5 ] that for compact without boundary internal
spaces @xmath , the even part of the Killing superalgebra @xmath
decomposes into the algebra of symmetries of AdS @xmath and those of the
internal space @xmath . This, together with the homogeneity theorem of [
29 ] , can be used to show that the internal space @xmath is homogeneous
for @xmath backgrounds.

For AdS @xmath backgrounds, the condition [ 5 ] for @xmath is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

for all @xmath and @xmath spinors that satisfy ( 3.3.11 ) and ( 3.3.12
). This can be derived using the compactness of @xmath as follows.
Setting @xmath and making use of the gravitino KSE ( 3.3.11 ), one finds

  -- -- -- ----------
           (3.3.17)
  -- -- -- ----------

Now, note that the algebraic KSE ( 3.3.12 ) implies

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which, after multiplying by @xmath and substituting back into ( 3.3.17
), gives

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.19)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Furthermore, the gravitino KSE ( 3.3.11 ) also yields

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.20)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Combining this with ( 3.3.19 ), one ends up with

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.21)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The Hopf maximum principle then implies that @xmath is constant, thus (
3.3.19 ) yields ( 3.3.16 ).

One consequence of ( 3.3.16 ) is that the linearly independent spinors
@xmath and @xmath , on account of ( 3.3.12 ), are also orthogonal

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.22)
  -- -------- -- ----------

One can see this by taking @xmath and using ( 3.3.16 ).

##### @xmath is constant and @xmath is homogeneous

Let us define the spinor bilinear

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.23)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath either stands for @xmath or @xmath . The gravitino KSE (
3.3.11 ) then implies

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.24)
  -- -------- -- ----------

i.e. @xmath is a Killing vector ⁵ ⁵ 5 If the bilinear in ( 3.3.16 ) does
not vanish, then the associated @xmath is not a Killing vector over the
whole spacetime. on @xmath . From ( 3.3.16 ) it follows that the only
non-vanishing Killing vector fields @xmath are those that are
constructed as bilinears of either @xmath or @xmath spinors.

As a consequence of the algebraic KSEs ( 3.3.12 ), one has @xmath and
@xmath . Expanding these, one finds that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.25)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is a bilinear of either @xmath or @xmath spinors.

As we have mentioned, ( 3.3.16 ) implies that the only non-vanishing
Killing vectors @xmath on @xmath are those constructed from either
@xmath or @xmath spinors. Therefore ( 3.3.25 ) will be valid for all
non-vanishing Killing vectors @xmath on @xmath . Suppose now that @xmath
. A similar argument to that used for the proof of the homogeneity
theorem in [ 29 ] implies that the set of all Killing vectors @xmath
span the tangent space of @xmath . Thus, @xmath is constant and @xmath
is homogeneous. It should be noted that if ( 3.3.16 ) is not valid, then
the vector fields @xmath in ( 3.3.25 ) may not span all Killing vectors
on @xmath .

Therefore we conclude that all @xmath supersymmetric AdS @xmath
backgrounds are products AdS @xmath , where @xmath is a homogeneous
space. In the analysis that follows, which includes that of AdS @xmath
backgrounds in type II 10-dimensional supergravities, we shall focus
only on such product spaces.

#### 3.3.4 Electric solutions do not preserve @xmath supersymmetries

A consequence of the warp factor being constant is that it rules out the
existence of electric solutions that preserve @xmath supersymmetries.
Indeed, for electric solutions @xmath . The algebraic KSE ( 3.3.12 ) on
@xmath reduces to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.26)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which implies the integrability condition

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.27)
  -- -------- -- ----------

On the other hand the field equation for the warp factor ( 3.3.7 )
yields @xmath which is a contradiction as the radius of AdS @xmath is
finite.

#### 3.3.5 @xmath solutions with left only supersymmetry

Suppose first that the solutions only have left-hand supersymmetry. In
such a case, the Lie algebras that must act transitively and effectively
on the internal spaces are

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.28)
     @xmath      (3.3.29)
     @xmath      (3.3.30)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath as there are no AdS @xmath solutions which preserve maximal
supersymmetry. Furthermore, solutions that preserve @xmath
supersymmetries have already been excluded in [ 54 ] . An inspection of
the list of homogeneous spaces reveals that the only possibility that
can occur is @xmath which can preserve 18 supersymmetries. However
@xmath is a symmetric space and there are no invariant 1- and 4-forms.
Thus @xmath which in turn implies @xmath . This leads to a
contradiction, as the field equation for the warp factor cannot be
satisfied.

#### 3.3.6 @xmath solutions with @xmath

For @xmath there are no right isometries and so all the symmetries of
the internal space are generated by @xmath . The Lie algebras @xmath
that act transitively and effectively on the internal spaces are

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.31)
     @xmath      (3.3.32)
     @xmath      (3.3.33)
     @xmath      (3.3.34)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the last case is associated with the Killing superalgebra @xmath .
An inspection of the 8-dimensional homogeneous spaces in table 3.2
reveals that there are only two possibilities that can occur

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.35)
     @xmath      (3.3.36)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Observe that @xmath could have been included as a potential internal
space of an AdS @xmath background with @xmath supersymmetries, provided
that it admitted an effective @xmath action. However, this is not the
case, since the rank of the isotropy group @xmath is the same as that of
@xmath and so it does not admit a modification such that @xmath acts
almost effectively on @xmath . For confirmation, we have also excluded
this case with an explicit calculation which we shall not present here.

In addition @xmath can also be excluded as a solution with an identical
argument to the one we produced in the previous case with no
right-handed supersymmetries. The remaining case is investigated below.

##### @xmath

For the analysis that follows, we use the description of the geometry of
the homogeneous space @xmath presented in [ 76 ] , where more details
can be found. The metric on the internal space @xmath is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.37)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.38)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and @xmath , @xmath , @xmath is a left-invariant frame ⁶ ⁶ 6 In [ 76 ] ,
the left-invariant frame on @xmath has been denoted as @xmath @xmath ,
@xmath instead. on @xmath and @xmath is a left-invariant frame on @xmath
. Moreover @xmath are constants. As there are no invariant 1-forms
@xmath . The most general invariant 4-form is

  -- -------- -------- -- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath         (3.3.39)
  -- -------- -------- -- -- ----------

where @xmath are constants, @xmath and @xmath are invariant 2-forms on
@xmath whose properties can be found in [ 76 ] and @xmath .

The closure and co-closure of @xmath give a relation between @xmath and
@xmath , and between @xmath and @xmath , but they are not essential
here. Also @xmath implies that @xmath .

On the other hand the algebraic KSE ( 3.3.12 ) can be written as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.40)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . We have chosen the orientation such
that @xmath . The decomposition of the algebraic KSE into the
eigenspaces of @xmath and @xmath as well as the relations implied
amongst the fluxes for each eigenspace can be found in table 3.3 .

As each common eigenspace of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath has dimension
two for solutions with @xmath supersymmetries one has always to consider
either one of the eigenspinors @xmath and @xmath or all the eigenspinors
@xmath and @xmath . In the former case, we have that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.41)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where we have chosen, without loss of generality, the eigenvalue @xmath
of @xmath . Taking the difference of the equation above with the warp
factor field equation

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.42)
  -- -------- -- ----------

we find that @xmath , and so @xmath , which is a contradiction. In the
latter case we have that @xmath and @xmath . Comparing this with the
warp factor field equation above again leads to a contradiction. There
are no solutions with internal space @xmath that preserve @xmath
supersymmetries.

#### 3.3.7 @xmath solutions with @xmath

The only right superalgebra that gives rise to 4 supersymmetries is
@xmath which in turn leads to an @xmath right-handed symmetry. Therefore
the Lie algebras that act both transitively and effectively on the
internal spaces @xmath are

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.43)
     @xmath      (3.3.44)
     @xmath      (3.3.45)
     @xmath      (3.3.46)
     @xmath      (3.3.47)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Up to a finite cover, the allowed homogeneous spaces are

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.48)
     @xmath      (3.3.49)
     @xmath      (3.3.50)
     @xmath      (3.3.51)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Observe that all the cases that arise, up to discrete identifications,
are products of 7-dimensional homogeneous spaces with @xmath . This is
because it is not possible to modify the 8-dimensional homogeneous
spaces which admit an effective and transitive action of the @xmath Lie
algebras in ( 3.3.47 ) to homogeneous spaces on which @xmath acts
transitively and effectively. Note that this is due to the fact that for
all candidate homogeneous spaces which may occur the rank of the
isotropy group is the same as the rank of @xmath .

However a modification has been used to include the homogeneous space
@xmath . An AdS @xmath solution with internal space @xmath , is expected
to preserve @xmath supersymmetries as @xmath and so should be discarded,
while with internal space @xmath we expect it to preserve @xmath
supersymmetries, as it is associated with the @xmath subalgebra in (
3.3.47 ) and therefore we need to include it. We have also used a
modification to include @xmath as a candidate space, since @xmath should
have been discarded.

The coset space @xmath can immediately be excluded as the 4-form field
strength @xmath is electric and we have shown there are no electric
solutions which preserve @xmath supersymmetries. It remains to
investigate the rest of the cases.

##### @xmath

The metric on the homogeneous space @xmath can be chosen as

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.3.52)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

where the geometry of @xmath can be found in [ 76 ] whose conventions we
follow, @xmath are constants and @xmath is an invariant frame on @xmath
, @xmath .

The most general invariant fluxes are

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.53)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath and @xmath are the fundamental @xmath forms and @xmath are
constants. Furthermore, the Bianchi identity @xmath implies that @xmath
.

It is straightforward to observe that the investigation of the number of
supersymmetries preserved by the algebraic KSE is exactly the same as
that for the AdS @xmath backgrounds with internal space @xmath in [ 76 ]
, where instead of @xmath we have @xmath . In particular, the algebraic
KSE can be written as

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.3.54)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath are mutually commuting, Hermitian Clifford algebra
operators with eigenvalues @xmath . The solutions of the algebraic KSE
on the eigenspaces of @xmath have been tabulated in table 3.4 .

To preserve @xmath supersymmetries, it is required to consider the
subspace in table 3.4 with 7 eigenspinors. The integrability condition
of the remaining algebraic KSE gives

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.55)
  -- -------- -- ----------

while the warp factor field equation implies

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.56)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Clearly, these are mutually inconsistent. So there are no AdS @xmath
solutions that preserve @xmath supersymmetries with internal space
@xmath .

##### @xmath

Let us briefly summarise the homogeneous geometry of @xmath which is
useful for our investigation of other cases below as well. There is a
left-invariant frame @xmath , @xmath , on @xmath such that the invariant
metric can be written as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.57)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath are constants. The invariant forms on @xmath are generated
by the invariant 1-form @xmath and the 2-form @xmath which can be chosen
as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.58)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Furthermore

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.59)
  -- -------- -- ----------

For more details see e.g. [ 76 ] , where the homogeneous geometry of
@xmath is also described.

Turning to the investigation at hand, the metric on @xmath can be
written as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.60)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is as in ( 3.3.57 ), @xmath is the invariant frame on
@xmath , @xmath , and @xmath is constant.

The most general invariant fluxes @xmath and @xmath that satisfy the
Bianchi identities ( 3.3.4 ), @xmath , are

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.61)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath are constants.

Next consider the Einstein equation along @xmath . As @xmath does not
have non-vanishing components along @xmath and the metric factorises
into that of @xmath and @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.62)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the Ricci tensor along @xmath . This must vanish, @xmath
. Thus @xmath . Then the warp factor field equation cannot be satisfied
and so there are no AdS @xmath solutions with internal space @xmath .

##### @xmath

The modification of @xmath to @xmath has already been described in
section 3.2.3 and in particular in ( 3.2.5 ). The geometry of this
homogeneous space is a special case of that of @xmath . In particular,
the invariant forms on @xmath are those on @xmath which are invariant
under both @xmath ’s in the isotropy group.

Using the notation in [ 76 ] , we introduce a left-invariant frame
@xmath on @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath . Then imposing invariance
under both @xmath ’s, one finds that there are no invariant 1- and
2-forms on @xmath . However there are two invariant 3-forms and two
invariant 4-forms given by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.63)
  -- -------- -- ----------

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.64)
  -- -------- -- ----------

respectively, where @xmath and @xmath is a basis of self-dual 2-forms on
@xmath . Moreover,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.65)
  -- -------- -- ----------

After imposing the Bianchi identities @xmath , the most general fluxes
can be written as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.66)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is an invariant frame on @xmath , @xmath .

The metric can be chosen as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.67)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath are constants. Substituting the metric and fluxes into the
Einstein equation along the @xmath direction, we find again ( 3.3.62 )
which implies @xmath . So there are no AdS @xmath solutions with
internal space @xmath .

##### @xmath

The metric can be chosen as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.68)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.69)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and where @xmath are constants, @xmath is a constant symmetric positive
definite matrix. @xmath , @xmath , is a left-invariant frame on @xmath
viewed as a @xmath symmetric space and @xmath , @xmath , is a
left-invariant frame on the group manifold @xmath with

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.70)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and @xmath is an invariant frame on @xmath , @xmath . Note that @xmath
can be chosen up to an @xmath transformation. This can be used to take
@xmath , without loss of generality, to be diagonal.

The most general invariant fluxes are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.3.71)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

As the Bianchi identities require that @xmath , one finds that @xmath .
Since @xmath is also co-closed, we have that @xmath which in turn gives
@xmath .

Suppose first that @xmath . In that case, the algebraic KSE can be
written as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.72)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath and @xmath are commuting Hermitian Clifford algebra
operators and @xmath . To find solutions with @xmath supersymmetries we
have to consider at least two of the common eigenspaces of @xmath and
@xmath , each of which has dimension 4. This is possible if either
@xmath or @xmath vanishes. If @xmath , then @xmath and the solution is
purely electric. Such solutions cannot preserve @xmath supersymmetries.
On the other hand if @xmath , the integrability condition of the KSE
implies that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.73)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Comparing this with the warp factor field equation, it leads to an
inconsistency. Thus, there are no such AdS @xmath solutions which
preserve @xmath supersymmetries with internal space @xmath .

Suppose now that @xmath . In such a case @xmath does not have components
along @xmath . As a result the Einstein equations along @xmath can be
written as in ( 3.3.62 ) and so @xmath . There are no such AdS @xmath
solutions with internal space @xmath .

#### 3.3.8 @xmath solutions with @xmath

The only right-handed superalgebra with 6 odd generators is @xmath .
This gives rise to an @xmath action on the internal space. Therefore the
symmetry algebras that act transitively and effectively on the internal
spaces are

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.74)
     @xmath      (3.3.75)
     @xmath      (3.3.76)
     @xmath      (3.3.77)
     @xmath      (3.3.78)
  -- -------- -- ----------

An inspection of the homogeneous spaces in table 3.2 reveals that, up to
a finite covering, these are either @xmath or @xmath , where @xmath and
@xmath are homogeneous 6- and 5-dimensional spaces. So we have

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.79)
     @xmath      (3.3.80)
     @xmath      (3.3.81)
     @xmath      (3.3.82)
     @xmath      (3.3.83)
     @xmath      (3.3.84)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The homogeneous space @xmath has been excluded as there is no
modification that can be made such that @xmath can act almost
effectively on it. Nevertheless we have performed the analysis to
demonstrate that it cannot be the internal space of an AdS @xmath
solution that preserves @xmath supersymmetries. On the other hand,
@xmath has been included because @xmath and so @xmath admits an @xmath
effective and transitive action giving rise to @xmath supersymmetries
with @xmath and @xmath . @xmath could have been considered as a
background that preserves @xmath supersymmetries as well but it cannot
be modified to admit an effective @xmath action.

The homogeneous spaces @xmath and @xmath can immediately be excluded as
giving potential solutions. For @xmath , @xmath and so the warp factor
field equation cannot be satisfied. The same is true for @xmath after
applying the Bianchi identity @xmath to show that @xmath .

##### @xmath

This homogeneous space is considered as an internal space because @xmath
and so it may give rise to a solution which preserves 18
supersymmetries. The most general invariant metric in the conventions of
[ 76 ] is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.85)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath , @xmath , is a left-invariant frame on @xmath and @xmath
@xmath , is a left-invariant frame on @xmath and @xmath are constants.
The invariant forms are generated by the volume form on @xmath

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.86)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and the Kähler form on @xmath

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.87)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Hence, the most general invariant fluxes are

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.88)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The Bianchi identities are trivially satisfied but the field equation
for @xmath gives the condition

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.89)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Therefore, either @xmath or @xmath . It remains to investigate the KSEs.

@xmath

For @xmath , the flux @xmath is simply @xmath . Going to an orthonormal
frame, in which the Kähler form is @xmath , we find for the algebraic
KSE ( 3.3.12 )

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.90)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath and @xmath are mutually commuting Clifford algebra
operators with eigenvalues @xmath . The decomposition in terms of the
common eigenspaces is summarised in table 3.5 . A similar analysis
applies to @xmath , except that the right-hand side is @xmath .

To find solutions that preserve @xmath supersymmetries, one has to
choose spinors from the eigenspaces (1) in table 3.5 . In such a case,
the integrability condition of the remaining @xmath projection on the
spinors is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.91)
  -- -------- -- ----------

whereas the field equation for the warp factor ( 3.3.7 ) requires

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.92)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Thus there is a contradiction and there are no AdS @xmath solutions
preserving @xmath supersymmetries.

@xmath

For @xmath , the 4-form flux becomes @xmath . Going to an orthonormal
frame, in which @xmath and @xmath , we find for the algebraic KSE (
3.3.12 )

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.93)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the Clifford algebra operators @xmath are defined as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.94)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.95)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The decomposition of the algebraic KSE ( 3.3.93 ) into the eigenpaces of
these mutually commuting Clifford algebra operators is illustrated in
table 3.6 . A similar analysis applies to the @xmath spinors with the
right-hand side replaced by @xmath .

For solutions to preserve @xmath supersymmetries, we need to consider
the eigenspinors given in row (1) of table 3.6 . This gives

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.96)
  -- -------- -- ----------

while the field equation for the warp factor ( 3.3.7 ) leads to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.97)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Clearly this is a contradiction. There are no AdS @xmath backgrounds
that preserve @xmath supersymmetries with internal space @xmath .

##### @xmath

The geometry on @xmath as a @xmath homogeneous space can be described in
a similar way as that for @xmath which can be found in section 3.3.7 .
In particular the metric is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.98)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath are constants. The invariant forms on @xmath are generated
by the 1-form @xmath and the 2-form @xmath . Again @xmath .

The existence of AdS @xmath solutions with internal space @xmath can be
ruled out with a cohomological argument. Indeed, let @xmath be a
left-invariant frame on @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.99)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The most general invariant 1-form @xmath can be written as

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.3.100)
  -- -------- -- -----------

The Bianchi identity, @xmath , in ( 3.3.4 ) implies that @xmath . So, we
have @xmath .

Furthermore, the Bianchi identities ( 3.3.4 ) also imply that @xmath ,
and as @xmath the field equation ( 3.3.5 ) also implies that @xmath .
Thus @xmath is harmonic and represents a class in @xmath . However
@xmath and so @xmath . This leads to a contradiction as the field
equation for the warp factor ( 3.3.7 ) cannot be satisfied.

Note that the above calculation rules out the existence of AdS @xmath
solutions with internal space @xmath as this is a special case of the
background examined above.

##### @xmath

The most general invariant metric is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.3.101)
              @xmath   @xmath      (3.3.102)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath are constants, @xmath , @xmath , is a left-invariant frame
on @xmath viewed as the symmetric space @xmath , and @xmath and @xmath
are left-invariant frames on the two @xmath ’s, respectively.

As there are no invariant 1-forms, @xmath . Moreover, @xmath can be
written as

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.3.103)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Since @xmath , which follows from the field equation of @xmath , we have
that @xmath . If @xmath , then the integrability condition of the
algebraic KSE will give

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.3.104)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Comparing this with the field equation of the warp factor leads to a
contradiction. This is also the case if instead @xmath . There are no
supersymmetric AdS @xmath solutions with internal space @xmath .

##### @xmath

The existence of AdS @xmath solutions with @xmath internal space can be
ruled out by a cohomological argument. Observe that @xmath acts on
@xmath with the @xmath representation. Using this, one concludes that
there are no invariant 1-forms on @xmath and so @xmath . In such a case
@xmath is both closed and co-closed and so harmonic. However, @xmath as
@xmath and so @xmath . This in turn leads to a contradiction as the
field equation for the warp factor cannot be satisfied.

#### 3.3.9 @xmath solutions with @xmath

The right-handed superalgebras with 8 supercharges are @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath . These give rise to right-handed isometries with Lie
algebras @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , respectively. In the latter case
there can also be up to three additional central generators. As @xmath ,
it suffices to consider @xmath and @xmath , and, for the latter, include
up to 3 central generators. Furthermore, since @xmath , one has @xmath .
Collecting the above and using the results of table 3.1 , the allowed
algebras that act transitively and effectively on the internal space are
the following.

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.3.105)
     @xmath      (3.3.106)
     @xmath      (3.3.107)
     @xmath      (3.3.108)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath is either @xmath or @xmath with @xmath spanned by up to 3
central generators. The homogeneous spaces that can admit a transitive
and an effective action by the above Lie algebras have been tabulated in
table 3.7 .

A detailed examination of the homogeneous spaces that may give rise to
supersymmetric AdS @xmath solutions with @xmath reveals that the only
cases that have not been investigated so far are @xmath , @xmath with
@xmath either @xmath or @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . The remaining
homogeneous spaces have already been excluded as internal spaces in the
analysis of AdS @xmath backgrounds with @xmath backgrounds. The presence
of additional right-handed supersymmetries here for @xmath are not
sufficient to bring these backgrounds into the range of @xmath
supersymmetries. So again they are excluded as solutions.

##### @xmath

The most general invariant metric is

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.3.109)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath , @xmath , is a left-invariant frame on @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath is a left-invariant frame on @xmath and @xmath , @xmath , is a
left invariant frame on @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are constants and
@xmath is a positive definite matrix. The invariant forms on this @xmath
are generated by @xmath and the top forms on @xmath and @xmath . Hence,
the 4-form flux @xmath is

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.3.110)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath and @xmath are constant parameters and @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath . Furthermore

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.3.111)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath are constants. As @xmath is parallel, the field equation
for @xmath , ( 3.3.6 ), gives @xmath and so we obtain the condition that
either @xmath or @xmath . Let us proceed to investigate @xmath , as the
case for @xmath can be dealt with analogously. As @xmath , the algebraic
KSE ( 3.3.12 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.3.112)
  -- -------- -- -----------

The integrability condition of this is

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.3.113)
  -- -------- -- -----------

On the other hand the warp factor field equation ( 3.3.7 ) gives

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.3.114)
  -- -------- -- -----------

The last two equations are incompatible and so there are no
supersymmetric solutions.

##### @xmath

Here we shall consider two cases that with @xmath and that with @xmath .
The latter can be excluded immediately. As @xmath is a product of
symmetric spaces all left-invariant forms are parallel and represent
classes in the de-Rham cohomology of @xmath . As @xmath , we have that
@xmath . The solution becomes electric and as we have seen such
solutions cannot preserve @xmath supersymmetries.

Next suppose that @xmath . The metric on @xmath can be chosen as

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.3.115)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where

  -- -------- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.3.116)
  -- -------- -------- -- -----------

and where @xmath are constants. The invariant forms are generated by
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . The independent differential
relations between the invariant forms are

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.3.117)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where we have used the description of the geometry on @xmath as in
section 3.3.8 . Since @xmath , we have that @xmath . Furthermore after
imposing @xmath the most general flux @xmath is

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.3.118)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath are constants.

The algebraic KSE gives

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.3.119)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Squaring this, we find

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.3.120)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath and @xmath . The decomposition of this condition on @xmath
into eigenspaces of @xmath and @xmath is given in table 3.8 .

Each common eigenspace of @xmath and @xmath has dimension 4. So, to find
solutions with @xmath supersymmetries, we have to consider at least two
of these eigenspaces. Hence, this would necessarily involve either one
of the eigenspinors @xmath and @xmath or both eigenspinors @xmath . In
the former case taking the difference of the condition that arises on
the fluxes with the warp factor field equation

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.3.121)
  -- -------- -- -----------

one finds that @xmath which is a contradiction. In the latter case, we
find that @xmath . Using this and comparing the condition on the fluxes
in table 3.8 with the warp factor field equation above, again leads to a
contradiction. There are no AdS @xmath solutions that preserve @xmath
supersymmetries with internal space @xmath .

We have also performed the calculation for @xmath which gives rise to an
@xmath flux with additional terms to those in ( 3.3.118 ) because of the
presence of an invariant complex (2,0) form. After some investigation,
we find that again there are no solutions with @xmath supersymmetry.

##### @xmath

In this context @xmath is viewed, up to a discrete identification, as a
homogeneous space with isotropy group @xmath and almost effective
transitive group @xmath , where the inclusion map of @xmath in @xmath is

  -- -- -- -----------
           (3.3.122)
  -- -- -- -----------

As we have mentioned the geometry of such cosets is more restrictive
than that of @xmath viewed as the homogeneous space @xmath . Thus it
suffices to investigate whether @xmath is a solution. As @xmath does not
admit closed 1-forms, @xmath . In such case @xmath is harmonic. However,
@xmath and so @xmath . This leads to a contradiction, since the warp
factor field equation cannot be satisfied.

##### @xmath

Let us denote the left-invariant frame along @xmath with @xmath , @xmath
. @xmath can be thought of as a modification of @xmath and so for the
analysis that follows we can use the description of the geometry of
@xmath in appendix F . In particular, the most general @xmath flux is

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.3.123)
  -- -------- -- -----------

As @xmath , we deduce that @xmath and set @xmath . The most general
invariant metric is

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.3.124)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath , @xmath , is a left-invariant frame on @xmath , @xmath is
a left-invariant frame on @xmath and @xmath are constants. Next @xmath
can be chosen as

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.3.125)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath are constants. Since @xmath , one deduces that @xmath .
Choosing an orthonormal frame as

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.3.126)
     @xmath      (3.3.127)
  -- -------- -- -----------

the algebraic KSE can be written as

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.3.128)
  -- -------- -- -----------

The form of this KSE is the same as that in ( 3.3.119 ). A similar
analysis again shows that there are no solutions preserving @xmath
supersymmetries.

#### 3.3.10 @xmath solutions with @xmath

The only superalgebra that gives rise to ten right-handed
supersymmetries is @xmath with @xmath . As we are investigating
backgrounds with @xmath and we have chosen that @xmath , we conclude
that @xmath . Using this and the results of table 3.1 , the allowed
algebras that can act transitively and effectively on the internal
spaces are

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.3.129)
     @xmath      (3.3.130)
     @xmath      (3.3.131)
     @xmath      (3.3.132)
     @xmath      (3.3.133)
  -- -------- -- -----------

The only 8-dimensional homogeneous space that admits such an action by
the algebras presented above is

  -- -- -- -----------
           (3.3.134)
  -- -- -- -----------

It remains to examine whether such a background solves the KSE and field
equations of 11-dimensional supergravity.

##### @xmath

The most general invariant metric on @xmath is

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.3.135)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath are constants and @xmath ( @xmath ), @xmath , and @xmath (
@xmath ), @xmath , are the left-invariant (orthonormal) frames of the
two @xmath ’s, respectively. There are no invariant 1-forms on @xmath ,
and therefore @xmath . The invariant 4-forms are just the volume forms
on the two spheres, hence the most general 4-form flux is

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.3.136)
  -- -------- -- -----------

where @xmath are constants. The field equation for @xmath , ( 3.3.6 ),
yields the condition that either @xmath or @xmath . Without loss of
generality, we take @xmath . Substituting @xmath into the algebraic KSE
( 3.3.12 ), one finds

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.3.137)
  -- -------- -- -----------

and hence obtains

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.3.138)
  -- -------- -- -----------

as an integrability condition. However, the warp factor field equation (
3.3.7 ) implies that

  -- -------- -- -----------
     @xmath      (3.3.139)
  -- -------- -- -----------

Thus, we get a contradiction and there are no such supersymmetric
solutions.

#### 3.3.11 @xmath solutions with @xmath

Imposing the restriction that @xmath , it is easy to see that there are
no homogeneous spaces that admit a transitive and effective @xmath
action. This follows from a detailed examination of the classification
results of [ 17 , 111 , 102 , 101 , 12 ] , as well as their
modifications.

### 3.4 @xmath solutions in (massive) IIA

#### 3.4.1 Field equations and Bianchi identities for @xmath

The bosonic fields of (massive) IIA supergravity are the metric @xmath ,
a 4-form field strength @xmath , a 3-form field strength @xmath , a
2-form field strength @xmath , the dilaton @xmath and the cosmological
constant dressed with the dilaton @xmath . Following the description of
warped AdS @xmath backgrounds in [ 6 ] , we write the fields as

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.4.1)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where we have used a null-orthonormal frame @xmath , @xmath , defined as
in ( 3.3.3 ) and @xmath . The fields @xmath and the warp factor @xmath
are functions, @xmath is a 1-form, @xmath is a 2-form, @xmath is a
3-form and @xmath is a 4-form on @xmath . As the 2-form field strength
@xmath is purely magnetic we have denoted the field and its component on
@xmath by the same symbol. This is also the case for @xmath and @xmath .
The dependence of the fields on the AdS @xmath coordinates is hidden in
the definition of the frame @xmath and @xmath . The components of the
fields in this frame depend only on the coordinates of @xmath .

As we have demonstrated in 11-dimensional supergravity, the description
for the fields simplifies considerably for AdS @xmath backgrounds
preserving @xmath supersymmetries. In particular, a similar argument to
the one presented for 11-dimensional backgrounds gives that the warp
factor @xmath is constant. The proof of this is very similar to that
given in eleven dimensions and so we shall not repeat the analysis.
Furthermore, it is a consequence of the homogeneity theorem and the
Bianchi identities of the theory that the scalars @xmath and @xmath are
constant.

Focusing on the analysis of the IIA AdS @xmath backgrounds that preserve
@xmath supersymmetries, we shall impose these conditions on the Bianchi
identities, field equations and Killing spinor equations. The general
formulae can be found in [ 6 ] . In particular taking @xmath and @xmath
to be constant the Bianchi identities can be simplified as

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.4.2)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

A consequence of this is that either @xmath or @xmath . Furthermore, the
field equations of the form fluxes can be written as

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.4.3)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

respectively. As @xmath is compact without boundary observe that @xmath
implies that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.4.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

To see this, first observe that homogeneity implies that @xmath is
constant. On the other hand, the integral of @xmath over @xmath is the
constant @xmath times the volume of @xmath . As the integral of @xmath
is zero, this constant must vanish giving ( 3.4.4 ).

The dilaton field equation is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.4.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The Einstein equation along @xmath and @xmath implies

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.4.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath denote the Levi-Civita connection and the Ricci
tensor of @xmath , respectively. The former condition is the warp factor
field equation.

#### 3.4.2 The Killing spinor equations

The solutions to the KSEs of (massive) IIA along @xmath may be written
as in ( 3.3.9 ), although now @xmath and @xmath are @xmath Majorana
spinors which satisfy the lightcone projections @xmath and only depend
on the coordinates of @xmath . These are subject to the gravitino KSEs

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.4.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

the dilatino KSEs

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.4.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and the algebraic KSEs

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.4.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.4.10)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

If @xmath is compact without boundary, one can demonstrate that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

As in eleven dimensions, the last condition is essential to establish
that the warp factor @xmath is constant for IIA AdS @xmath backgrounds
preserving @xmath supersymmetries with compact without boundary internal
space @xmath .

#### 3.4.3 @xmath solutions with left only supersymmetry

AdS @xmath backgrounds admit the same Killing superalgebras in
11-dimensional, IIA and IIB supergravities. As a result the Lie algebras
@xmath that must act transitively and effectively on the internal spaces
of IIA and IIB AdS @xmath backgrounds can be read off those found in the
11-dimensional analysis. So for @xmath , these are given in ( 3.3.30 ).
An inspection of the 7-dimensional homogeneous spaces in table 3.9
reveals that there are no @xmath supersymmetric AdS @xmath backgrounds
with @xmath .

#### 3.4.4 @xmath solutions with @xmath

The 7-dimensional homogeneous spaces ⁷ ⁷ 7 There are several embeddings
of @xmath in @xmath however only one of them admits a modification such
that the internal space is associated to a background that can preserve
@xmath supersymmetries. that admit an effective and transitive action of
the Lie algebras in ( 3.3.34 ) are

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.12)
     @xmath      (3.4.13)
     @xmath      (3.4.14)
     @xmath      (3.4.15)
     @xmath      (3.4.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Solutions with internal space @xmath can immediately be excluded. This
is a symmetric space and so all fluxes are parallel. On the other hand,
the only parallel forms on @xmath are the constant functions and the
volume form. Therefore all k-form fluxes for @xmath must vanish. In such
a case the dilaton field equation in ( 3.4.5 ) implies that @xmath . In
turn, the warp factor field equation in ( 3.4.1 ) becomes inconsistent.
The remaining cases are investigated below.

##### @xmath

The geometry of @xmath has been summarised in the beginning of section
3.3.7 . The metric is given in ( 3.3.57 ). The invariant forms are
generated by the 1-form @xmath and 2-form @xmath as in ( 3.3.58 ),
@xmath . Given these data, the most general invariant fluxes can be
chosen as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

As the Bianchi identities require that @xmath , we have @xmath .
Furthermore, the remaining Bianchi identities imply

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and the field equations for the fluxes give

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.19)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Suppose first that @xmath . Then @xmath which in turn gives @xmath . As
both @xmath , the dilaton field equation in ( 3.4.5 ) implies that the
rest of the fluxes vanish which in turn leads to a contradiction, since
the warp factor field equation in ( 3.4.1 ) cannot be satisfied.

Next suppose that @xmath . Then @xmath . Take that @xmath otherwise
there will be a contradiction as described for @xmath above. If @xmath ,
this will imply that @xmath and so again the dilaton field equation in (
3.4.5 ) will imply that the rest of the fluxes must vanish.

It remains to investigate the case @xmath . The dilatino KSE ( 3.4.8 )
and algebraic KSE ( 3.4.9 ) become

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.20)
     @xmath      (3.4.21)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Eliminating the flux @xmath , one finds

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.22)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The integrability condition gives

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.23)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Comparing this with the field equation for the warp factor ( 3.4.1 )
leads to a contradiction. There are no supersymmetric solutions.

##### @xmath

The geometry of @xmath has been described in section 3.3.7 . As we have
pointed out, there are no invariant 1- and 2-forms, and no invariant
closed 3-forms on this homogeneous space. As a result @xmath . Then, the
dilaton field equation in ( 3.4.5 ) implies that @xmath and therefore
the warp factor field equation in ( 3.4.1 ) cannot be satisfied. There
are no AdS @xmath solutions with internal space @xmath .

##### @xmath

The metric on the internal space can be chosen as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.24)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath , @xmath , is a left-invariant frame on @xmath and @xmath ,
@xmath is a left-invariant frame on @xmath , @xmath is a constant and
@xmath a positive definite @xmath symmetric matrix. Note that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.25)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Before we proceed, observe that without loss of generality @xmath can be
chosen to be diagonal. This is because any transformation @xmath of the
left-invariant frame with @xmath leaves the structure constants of
@xmath invariant and acts on @xmath as @xmath . So, there is a choice of
frame such that @xmath with @xmath constants. From here on, we shall
take @xmath to be diagonal.

The most general invariant fluxes are

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.26)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , @xmath , are constants.

First observe that @xmath implies that @xmath . Next suppose that @xmath
. It follows from the Bianchi identities ( 3.4.2 ) that @xmath , as
@xmath . In addition, the Bianchi identities ( 3.4.2 ) give

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.27)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Next, the dilaton field equation in ( 3.4.5 ) implies that @xmath which
is a contradiction to the assumption that @xmath .

So, let us now consider @xmath . Again @xmath and so either @xmath or
@xmath . Let us first take @xmath and @xmath . In such a case the field
equation for @xmath in ( 3.4.1 ) gives @xmath . If @xmath , the Bianchi
identities ( 3.4.2 ) will imply that @xmath . This in turn leads to a
contradiction as the field equation for the dilaton in ( 3.4.5 ) implies
that @xmath .

Suppose now that both @xmath . As @xmath as well, the dilatino and
algebraic KSEs can be re-written as in ( 3.4.21 ). This in turn gives (
3.4.22 ) which leads to the integrability condition ( 3.4.23 ).
Substituting this into the field equation for the warp factor in ( 3.4.1
) and after eliminating @xmath , one finds a contradiction.

It remains to investigate the case that @xmath and @xmath . First the
Bianchi identity for @xmath ( 3.4.2 ) implies that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.28)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Then field equation for @xmath , @xmath , together with ( 3.4.28 ) imply
that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.29)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Next turn to the Einstein equation along @xmath . As @xmath and the
fields @xmath , @xmath and @xmath have non-vanishing components only
along @xmath , we find that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.30)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Using ( 3.4.29 ), one can show that @xmath . This is a contradiction as
@xmath is the Ricci tensor of the @xmath subspace which is required to
be strictly positive. Therefore, we conclude that there are no
supersymmetric IIA AdS @xmath solutions with internal space @xmath .

##### @xmath

This homogeneous space admits invariant 3- and 4-forms which are the
fundamental @xmath forms @xmath and @xmath . However the 3-form @xmath
is not closed and so @xmath . As there are no invariant 1-forms and
2-forms @xmath . In such a case the dilaton field equation in ( 3.4.5 )
implies that @xmath . In turn, the warp factor field equation in ( 3.4.1
) becomes inconsistent.

#### 3.4.5 @xmath solutions with @xmath

The Lie algebras that must act both effectively and transitively on the
internal space @xmath are the same as those found in @xmath supergravity
and given in ( 3.3.47 ). With regard to the 7-dimensional homogeneous
spaces, those admitting an effective and transitive action by these Lie
algebras are the following

  -- -- -------- -- ----------
        @xmath      
        @xmath      (3.4.31)
  -- -- -------- -- ----------

Both are products of 6-dimensional homogeneous spaces with @xmath .

##### @xmath

The only non-vanishing k-form flux, @xmath , allowed is @xmath , where
@xmath is a left-invariant frame along @xmath and @xmath a constant. The
dilatino KSE ( 3.4.8 ) can be re-written as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.32)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which leads to the integrability condition

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.33)
  -- -------- -- ----------

As a result @xmath . This leads to an inconsistency, since the warp
field equation ( 3.4.1 ) cannot be satisfied. There are no
supersymmetric IIA AdS @xmath backgrounds with @xmath internal space.

##### @xmath

The differential algebra of a left-invariant frame on @xmath modulo
terms in @xmath which involve the canonical connection is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.34)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is a complex frame, @xmath , on @xmath and @xmath is a
left-invariant frame on @xmath . The invariant forms on @xmath are the
2-form

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.35)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and the holomorphic 3-form

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.36)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Clearly,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.37)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The most general invariant metric on @xmath is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.38)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath are constants. Moreover, the most general invariant fluxes
are

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.4.39)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

where the @xmath ’s, @xmath and @xmath are constants and we have used
that @xmath . As @xmath , we have that @xmath . Furthermore, @xmath
yields

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.40)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Let us first consider the case that @xmath . This implies that @xmath .
As either @xmath or @xmath , let us first investigate @xmath . In such a
case the Bianchi identities ( 3.4.2 ) and the field equations ( 3.4.1 )
imply that @xmath is harmonic and since @xmath , we have @xmath . Using
this, we also find that @xmath is harmonic and so because @xmath ,
@xmath . Next the dilatino KSE ( 3.4.8 ) becomes @xmath , which in turn
implies that @xmath . This is a contradiction, as that would mean @xmath
. Thus, there are no such supersymmetric AdS @xmath backgrounds.

Next suppose that @xmath . The field equation @xmath gives

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.41)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and so @xmath does not have a component along @xmath . Then the Einstein
equation along @xmath gives

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.42)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Thus, again @xmath which is a contradiction.

So to find solutions, we have to set @xmath . The Bianchi identity
@xmath gives @xmath . Furthermore, the field equation @xmath implies
@xmath . We also have from the field equations ( 3.4.1 ) that @xmath .
If we choose @xmath and since @xmath vanishes as well, @xmath , the
dilaton field equation in ( 3.4.5 ) implies that the rest of the fields
vanish which contradicts the warp factor field equation. So, let us take
@xmath . In that case @xmath is harmonic and hence @xmath . This is also
the case for @xmath and so @xmath . The dilatino KSE in turn implies
that @xmath , which gives @xmath . Thus, all the fields vanish, leading
to a contradiction with the warp factor field equation. There are no
supersymmetric AdS @xmath solutions with internal space @xmath .

#### 3.4.6 @xmath solutions with @xmath

The 7-dimensional homogeneous spaces that admit an effective and
transitive action of one of the Lie algebras in ( 3.3.78 ) are

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.4.43)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The @xmath case can be easily ruled out, as @xmath . Then, the dilaton
field equation implies that @xmath , which in turn leads to a
contradiction, since the warp factor field equation cannot be satisfied.
Moreover, the @xmath internal space has been investigated already, as it
is a special case of @xmath .

##### @xmath

The geometry of the homogeneous space @xmath has been described in
section 3.3.8 . Using this, the most general invariant metric on @xmath
can be written as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.44)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath are constants @xmath , @xmath , is a left-invariant frame
on @xmath and @xmath is a left-invariant frame on @xmath . The invariant
forms on the homogeneous space are generated by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.45)
  -- -------- -- ----------

with

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.46)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The most general invariant fluxes are

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.47)
     @xmath      (3.4.48)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The Bianchi identity @xmath implies that @xmath . So @xmath . The
remaining Bianchi identities imply that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.49)
  -- -------- -- ----------

To continue first take @xmath . In such a case @xmath and so @xmath . As
both @xmath , the dilaton field equation implies that @xmath . This is a
contradiction to the assumption that @xmath .

Therefore we have to set @xmath . Furthermore @xmath as otherwise @xmath
and the dilaton field equation will imply that all other fluxes must
vanish. This in turn leads to a contradiction as the warp factor field
equation cannot be satisfied. As @xmath , we have @xmath . Then, the
field equation for the fluxes ( 3.4.1 ) give @xmath , which implies that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.50)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Notice that @xmath as otherwise @xmath and so @xmath leading again to a
contradiction. Thus, we find @xmath and so @xmath .

As we have established that @xmath , we can follow the analysis of the
KSEs in section 3.4.4 that leads to the conclusion that there are no
supersymmetric AdS @xmath solutions with internal space @xmath .

#### 3.4.7 @xmath solutions with @xmath

The 7-dimensional homogeneous spaces that admit an effective and
transitive action of one of the Lie algebras in ( 3.3.108 ) are

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.4.51)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The only new cases that arise and have not already been investigated are
those with internal space @xmath and @xmath . All the remaining ones do
not give supersymmetric solutions with @xmath and @xmath .

##### @xmath

The most general invariant metric on this homogeneous space can be
written as

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.4.52)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath are constants and @xmath , @xmath , is a left-invariant
frame on @xmath , @xmath is a left-invariant frame on @xmath and @xmath
is a left-invariant frame on @xmath . The most general invariant form
fluxes can be chosen as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.53)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath are constants.

From the Bianchi identities ( 3.4.2 ) and the field equation ( 3.4.4 ),
we find that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.54)
  -- -------- -- ----------

First, suppose that @xmath . It follows that @xmath . Moreover, from the
field equation of @xmath ( 3.4.1 ) follows that @xmath . Next, consider
the Einstein field equation to find that

  -- -------- -------- -- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath         (3.4.55)
  -- -------- -------- -- -- ----------

However, this is the Ricci tensor of @xmath and hence vanishes. This in
turn gives @xmath which is a contradiction to our assumption that @xmath
.

Thus, we have to set @xmath . The Bianchi identities ( 3.4.2 ) and the
field equation ( 3.4.4 ) give that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.56)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and the field equations ( 3.4.1 ) of the form field strengths imply that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.57)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Therefore, if @xmath , we will have @xmath . Furthermore as @xmath , the
Einstein equation reveals that @xmath . Then the dilaton field equation
implies that @xmath which is a contradiction to our assumption that
@xmath .

It remains to investigate solutions with @xmath . Notice that we should
take @xmath , or equivalently @xmath , as otherwise the Einstein
equation @xmath will imply that @xmath and so the warp factor field
equation cannot be satisfied leading to a contradiction. Thus @xmath and
since @xmath , we have that @xmath . Inserting @xmath into the dilatino
and algebraic KSEs we find that they can be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.58)
     @xmath      (3.4.59)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath and @xmath . As each common eigenspace of @xmath and @xmath
has dimension 4 to find solutions with @xmath supersymmetries we have to
choose at least two of these eigenspaces. One can verify after some
calculation that for all possible pairs of eigenspaces the resulting
system of equations arising from ( 3.4.59 ) does not have solutions.
Therefore, there are no AdS @xmath solutions that have internal space
@xmath and preserve @xmath supersymmetries.

##### @xmath

As @xmath is a modification of @xmath , see [ 125 , 16 ] , we can use
the local description of the geometry of the latter in appendix F to
describe this space. In particular, the metric can be written as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.60)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is a left-invariant frame and @xmath constants. From the
results of appendix F , one can deduce that there are no closed 3-forms
and so @xmath . The remaining invariant form field strengths are

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.61)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath are constants. The Bianchi identities ( 3.4.2 ) imply that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.62)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Furthermore, the field equation for @xmath in ( 3.4.1 ) gives

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.4.63)
     @xmath      (3.4.64)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Clearly, from ( 3.4.62 ) either @xmath or @xmath . Suppose that @xmath .
Then @xmath and from the rest of the conditions arising in the Bianchi
identities, @xmath . As both @xmath , the dilaton field equation implies
that @xmath which is a contradiction to our assumption that @xmath .

Therefore, we set @xmath . We also take @xmath as otherwise the same
argument presented above leads to a contradiction again. As @xmath , the
last condition in ( 3.4.64 ) implies that @xmath . However, @xmath
cannot vanish. Indeed, if @xmath , then ( 3.4.62 ) will lead to @xmath .
Since @xmath , the dilaton field equation in ( 3.4.5 ) will imply that
the rest of the fields vanish. In turn the warp factor field equation (
3.4.1 ) cannot be satisfied. Thus we have to set @xmath . In that case
@xmath and the first equation in ( 3.4.64 ) gives @xmath . As both
@xmath , @xmath .

We have shown that the remaining non-vanishing fields are @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath . To continue, consider the dilatino and algebraic
KSEs. These can be written as in ( 3.4.21 ). Then a similar argument as
that presented in section 3.4.4 leads to a contradiction. There are no
supersymmetric AdS @xmath solutions with internal space @xmath .

### 3.5 @xmath solutions in IIB

#### 3.5.1 Field equations and Bianchi identities for @xmath

The bosonic fields of IIB supergravity are a metric @xmath , a complex
1-form field strength @xmath , a complex 3-form field strength @xmath
and a real self-dual 5-form field strength @xmath . For the
investigation of IIB @xmath backgrounds that follows, we shall employ
the analysis presented in [ 8 ] , where all the necessary formulae can
be found. Since we are focusing on backgrounds that preserve @xmath
supersymmetries, the homogeneity theorem implies that the scalars are
constant and so @xmath . We shall use this from the beginning to
simplify the relevant field equations, Bianchi identities and KSEs.
Imposing the symmetries of the AdS @xmath subspace on the fields, one
finds that the non-vanishing fields are

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.5.1)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where a null orthonormal frame @xmath , @xmath , is defined as ( 3.3.3 )
and @xmath . @xmath is a real 2-form, @xmath is a complex function and
@xmath a complex 3-form on @xmath . The dependence of the fields on AdS
@xmath coordinates is hidden in the definition of the frame @xmath . All
the components of the fields in this frame depend on the coordinates of
@xmath .

The Bianchi identities of the k-form field strengths can be written as

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.5.2)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

while their field equations are

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.5.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Note that the Bianchi identities imply that @xmath is constant. We have
also used that the warp factor @xmath is constant. This is proved as in
eleven dimensions upon making use of the compactness of @xmath and the
homogeneity theorem.

The Einstein equation along AdS @xmath and @xmath becomes

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
              @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.5.4)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

respectively. Here, @xmath denotes the Levi-Civita connection on @xmath
and @xmath is the Ricci tensor on the transverse space. The first
condition above is the field equation for the warp factor.

#### 3.5.2 The Killing spinor equations

The solution of the KSEs of IIB supergravity along the @xmath -subspace
can be expressed as in ( 3.3.9 ), only that now @xmath and @xmath are
@xmath Weyl spinors which depend only on the coordinates of @xmath and
satisfy the lightcone projections @xmath . The remaining independent
KSEs are the gravitino

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.5.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

dilatino

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.5.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and algebraic

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.5.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

KSEs, where

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.5.8)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

and @xmath is the charge conjugation matrix followed by complex
conjugation. In the expressions above we have used that @xmath and that
@xmath is constant. As in the 11-dimensional and IIA supergravities, the
IIB AdS @xmath backgrounds preserve an even number of supersymmetries.

#### 3.5.3 @xmath solutions with @xmath and @xmath

The existence of solutions that preserve strictly 28 and 30
supersymmetries has already been excluded in [ 53 ] . As in the IIA
case, IIB @xmath supersymmetric AdS @xmath solutions with @xmath can
also be ruled out because there are no 7-dimensional homogeneous
manifolds that admit a transitive and effective action of the @xmath
subalgebra of the expected symmetry superalgebra of such backgrounds. So
we shall begin with backgrounds with @xmath . The homogeneous spaces are
as those in IIA and are given in ( 3.4.16 ).

The homogeneous space @xmath can be ruled out immediately. This
symmetric space does not admit invariant 2- and 3-forms. Therefore
@xmath . Then, a field equation in ( 3.5.3 ) implies that @xmath as well
and so the warp factor field equation in ( 3.5.1 ) cannot be satisfied.

Similarly, @xmath can also be ruled out, as it does not admit an
invariant closed 3-form and so @xmath . Also, it does not admit an
invariant 2-form either, i.e. @xmath . Then because of the field
equations in ( 3.5.3 ), one deduces that @xmath and so the warp factor
field equation in ( 3.5.1 ) becomes inconsistent.

##### @xmath

Following the description of the geometry of the homogeneous space
@xmath as in section 3.3.7 , the most general allowed fluxes are

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.5.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The Bianchi identity @xmath requires that @xmath . In turn a field
equation in ( 3.5.3 ) implies that @xmath . Substituting this back into
the Bianchi identities ( 3.5.2 ), one finds that @xmath is harmonic and
so it must vanish. As all fluxes vanish, the warp factor field equation
in ( 3.5.1 ) becomes inconsistent. There are no AdS @xmath solutions
with internal space @xmath .

##### @xmath

The geometry of this homogeneous space described in section 3.3.7
reveals that there are no invariant 2-forms and closed 3-forms. As a
result @xmath . The field equations ( 3.5.3 ) imply that @xmath as well.
Therefore, there are no solutions as the warp factor field equation
cannot be satisfied.

##### @xmath

The geometry of this homogeneous space space has been described in
section 3.4.4 . The most general fluxes can be chosen as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.5.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath . As @xmath is both closed and co-closed and @xmath , we
deduce that @xmath and so a Bianchi identity in ( 3.5.2 ) implies that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.5.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This together with a field equation in ( 3.5.3 ) imply @xmath and so
@xmath . Then the warp factor field equation in ( 3.5.1 ) cannot be
satisfied. There are no AdS @xmath solutions with internal space @xmath
.

#### 3.5.4 @xmath solutions with @xmath

The homogeneous internal spaces are given in ( 3.4.31 ). It is
straightforward to show that @xmath is not a solution as @xmath which
contradicts the warp factor field equation.

##### @xmath

In the notation of section 3.4.5 the metric can be chosen as @xmath and
the most general invariant @xmath and @xmath forms are

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.5.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The Bianchi identity @xmath implies that @xmath . Set @xmath . It
follows from the Bianchi identity for @xmath in ( 3.5.2 ) that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.5.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Furthermore the field equation for @xmath in ( 3.5.3 ) gives

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.5.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Next turn to the dilatino KSE. Setting @xmath , it can be written as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.5.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . These are commuting Hermitian
Clifford algebra operators with eigenvalues @xmath . For all choices of
eigenspaces either @xmath or @xmath . Substituting this into the first
field equation in ( 3.5.3 ), we find that @xmath . Therefore, @xmath as
well. Then ( 3.5.13 ) and ( 3.5.14 ) imply that @xmath . Thus the warp
factor field equation in ( 3.5.1 ) cannot be satisfied. Hence, there are
no supersymmetric AdS @xmath solutions with internal space @xmath .

#### 3.5.5 @xmath solutions with @xmath

The allowed homogeneous internal spaces are given in ( 3.4.43 ). We have
already investigated the AdS @xmath backgrounds with internal space
@xmath as they are a special case of those explored in section 3.5.3 and
we have found that there are no solutions. Next, we shall examine the
remaining two cases.

##### @xmath

The metric can be chosen as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.5.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath are constants, @xmath , @xmath is a left-invariant frame on
@xmath and @xmath is a left-invariant frame on @xmath . As this
symmetric space does not admit invariant 3-forms, we have @xmath . Then
a field equation in ( 3.5.3 ) implies that @xmath . Setting @xmath , the
Einstein equation along @xmath gives

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.5.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

However the Ricci tensor of @xmath is strictly positive. Thus there are
no AdS @xmath solutions with internal space @xmath .

##### @xmath

The geometry of this homogeneous space has already been described in
section 3.4.6 and the metric is given in ( 3.4.44 ). The most general
fluxes can be chosen as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.5.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The Bianchi identity @xmath implies that @xmath and so @xmath .
Furthermore, a field equation in ( 3.5.3 ) yields @xmath , and @xmath
implies @xmath .

Next, consider the Einstein equation ( 3.5.1 ) along @xmath . A direct
calculation reveals that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.5.19)
  -- -------- -- ----------

However, the Ricci tensor of @xmath is strictly positive. There are no
AdS @xmath solutions with internal space @xmath .

#### 3.5.6 @xmath solutions with @xmath

The allowed homogeneous internal spaces are given in ( 3.4.51 ). All
these cases have already been investigated apart from those with
internal space @xmath and @xmath which we shall examine next.

##### @xmath

The geometry of this symmetric space has been described in section 3.4.7
. The metric can be chosen as in ( 3.4.52 ) and the most general
invariant fluxes are

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.5.20)
  -- -------- -- ----------

As @xmath , the Bianchi identities ( 3.5.2 ) give that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.5.21)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which, together with a field equations in ( 3.5.3 ), imply that @xmath .
The only non-vanishing field is @xmath . However as in the previous case
after evaluating the Einstein equation along @xmath , one finds a
similar relation to ( 3.5.19 ). This is a contradiction as the Ricci
tensor of @xmath is strictly positive, i.e. there are no AdS @xmath
solutions with internal space @xmath .

##### @xmath

The metric can be chosen as in ( 3.4.60 ). From the results of appendix
F , one can deduce that there are no closed invariant 3-forms and so
@xmath . The field equations ( 3.5.3 ) imply that @xmath as well. The
most general 2-form @xmath is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.5.22)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The Bianchi identities imply that @xmath must be harmonic. Observe that
@xmath . The co-closure condition implies that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.5.23)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath .

Next the algebraic KSE ( 3.5.7 ) can be written as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.5.24)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . The relations amongst the fluxes for
each of the eigenspaces can be found in table 3.10 . The warp factor
field equation in ( 3.5.1 ) also gives

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.5.25)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Since the common eigenspaces of @xmath have dimension 2 to find
solutions preserving @xmath supersymmetries, one needs to choose at
least three such eigenspaces.

The eigenspaces that lead to the relation @xmath for the fluxes can be
ruled out because of the warp factor field equation. Therefore, we have
to choose three eigenspaces from the remaining cases in table 3.10 . For
every choice of a pair of relations either @xmath or @xmath vanishes.
Then, the co-closure condition ( 3.5.23 ) implies that @xmath . There
are no AdS @xmath supersymmetric solutions preserving @xmath
supersymmetries.

## Chapter 4 A Uniqueness Theorem for warped @xmath Minkowski
Backgrounds with Fluxes

In this chapter, we demonstrate that warped Minkowski space backgrounds,
@xmath , @xmath , preserving strictly more than 16 supersymmetries in
11-dimensional and type II supergravities, and with fields, which may
not be smooth everywhere, are locally isometric to the @xmath Minkowski
vacuum. In particular, all such flux compactification vacua of these
theories have the same local geometry as the maximally supersymmetric
vacuum @xmath . The following work was conducted in collaboration with
George Papadopoulos and published in [ 87 ] .

### 4.1 Proof of the main statement

Recently, all warped anti-de-Sitter (AdS) backgrounds with fluxes that
preserve @xmath supersymmetries in @xmath and @xmath supergravities have
been classified up to a local isometry in [ 9 , 76 , 75 ] . In this
chapter, we extend this result to include all warped @xmath backgrounds
of these theories. In particular, we demonstrate that all warped @xmath
, @xmath , solutions with fluxes of @xmath , IIA @xmath and IIB @xmath
supergravities that preserve @xmath supersymmetries are locally
isometric to the @xmath maximally supersymmetric vacuum of these
theories. Massive IIA supergravity does not admit such solutions. A
consequence of this is that all @xmath flux compactification vacua,
@xmath , of these theories are locally isometric to the maximally
supersymmetric toroidal vacuum @xmath . To prove these results we have
made an assumption that the translation isometries along the @xmath
subspace of these backgrounds commute with all the odd generators of
their Killing superalgebra. The necessity and justification of this
assumption will be made clear below.

To begin, we shall first describe the steps of the proof common to all
@xmath and @xmath theories and then at the end specialise to present the
theory-specific features in each case. Schematically, the fields of
@xmath backgrounds are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.1)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the warp factor that depends only on the coordinates of
the internal space @xmath , @xmath denotes the volume form of @xmath
evaluated in the warped metric and @xmath denotes collectively all the
k-form fluxes of the supergravity theories. We take @xmath , where we
have singled out a spatial coordinate @xmath which will be useful later.
@xmath and @xmath are @xmath - and @xmath -forms on @xmath which depend
only on the coordinates of @xmath . Clearly if @xmath , @xmath .
Therefore, these backgrounds are invariant under the Poincaré isometries
of the @xmath subspace. It is known that there are no smooth
compactifications with non-trivial fluxes of @xmath and @xmath
supergravities [ 44 , 89 ] , i.e. solutions for which all fields are
smooth including the warp factor and @xmath is compact without boundary.
However, here we do not make these assumptions. @xmath is allowed to be
non-compact and the fields may not be smooth.

To continue following the description of @xmath backgrounds in [ 68 , 8
, 6 ] , where one can also find more details about our notation, we
introduce a light-cone orthonormal frame

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.1.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

on the spacetime with @xmath . Then the Killing spinors of the @xmath
backgrounds can be written as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.1.5)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

where @xmath , all the gamma matrices are in the frame basis ( 4.1.3 )
and the spinors @xmath , @xmath , only depend on the coordinates of
@xmath . The remaining independent KSEs are a restriction of the
gravitino and algebraic KSEs of the supergravity theories on @xmath
which schematically can be written as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.1.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

respectively, and, in addition, an integrability condition

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.1.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a Clifford algebra element that depends on the fields.
@xmath will not be given here and can be found in the references above.
The latter arises as a consequence of integrating the gravitino KSE of
the theories along the @xmath subspace.

Notice that the (spacetime) Killing spinors ( 4.1.5 ) may depend on the
coordinates of the @xmath subspace. Such a dependence arises, whenever
@xmath is not in the kernel of @xmath . Of course @xmath is required to
lie in the kernel of of @xmath . To see why this dependence can arise
for @xmath backgrounds, notice that @xmath in Poincaré coordinates can
be written as a warped product of @xmath . Therefore all AdS
backgrounds, warped or otherwise, can be interpreted as warped Minkowski
space backgrounds. It is also known that the former admit Killing
spinors that depend on all AdS coordinates including those of the
Minkowski subspace. Therefore @xmath may also admit Killing spinors that
depend on the coordinates of @xmath , see also [ 50 ] for a more
detailed explanation.

The assumption we have made that the commutator of the translations
@xmath along @xmath and the odd generators @xmath of the Killing
superalgebra [ 40 , 34 ] must vanish, @xmath , is required for Killing
spinors @xmath not to exhibit a dependence on the coordinates of @xmath
. Indeed, if the Killing spinors have a dependence on the Minkowski
subspace coordinates, then the commutator @xmath of the Killing
superalgebra will not vanish. This can be verified with an explicit
computation of the spinorial Lie derivative of @xmath in ( 4.1.5 ) along
the translations of @xmath . Although this may seem to be a technical
assumption, it also has a physical significance in the context of flux
compactifications. Typically, the reduced theory is invariant under the
Killing superalgebra of the compactification vacuum. So, for the reduced
theory to exhibit at most super-Poincaré invariance, one must set @xmath
for all @xmath and @xmath generators. This physical justification
applies only to compactification vacua, but we shall take it to be valid
for all backgrounds that we are investigating below. Of course such an
assumption excludes all AdS solutions of supergravity theories
re-interpreted as warped Minkowski backgrounds. Therefore from now on we
shall take @xmath and so all Killing spinors @xmath will not depend on
the coordinates of the @xmath subspace.

Before we proceed further, let us describe the Killing spinors of @xmath
backgrounds in more detail. It turns out that if @xmath is a Killing
spinor, then @xmath is also a Killing spinor. Similarly, if @xmath is a
Killing spinor, then @xmath is also a Killing spinor. Furthermore, if
@xmath is a Killing spinor, then @xmath are also Killing spinors for
every @xmath . Therefore, the Killing spinors form multiplets under
these Clifford algebra operations. The counting of Killing spinors of a
background proceeds by identifying the linearly independent Killing
spinors in each multiplet and then counting the number of different
multiplets that can occur [ 68 , 8 , 6 ] . As all Killing spinors are
generated from @xmath Killing spinors, we shall express all key formulae
in terms of the latter.

The 1-form bilinears of the Killing spinors @xmath , @xmath , that are
associated with spacetime Killing vectors, and also leave all other
fields invariant are

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.1.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where in @xmath and IIA supergravity theories @xmath is the Dirac inner
product restricted on the Majorana representation of @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively, while in IIB it is the real part of the Dirac inner
product. Note that @xmath . In particular, one finds that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.9)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.10)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.11)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

Clearly, the last 1-form bilinear is @xmath . The requirement that
@xmath is Killing, implies that @xmath are constants. In particular, one
can choose, without loss of generality, that @xmath . Then, the first
1-form bilinear in ( 4.1.11 ) is @xmath .

Next, consider the middle 1-form bilinear in ( 4.1.11 ). If @xmath is in
the same multiplet as @xmath , i.e. @xmath , then @xmath . On the other
hand, if @xmath , then @xmath . Thus all these bilinears generate the
translations in @xmath . However, if @xmath and @xmath are not in the
same multiplet, then the bilinear

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

will generate the isometries of the internal space. The Killing
condition of @xmath implies that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

As the @xmath isometries commute with the translations, the even part,
@xmath , of the Killing superalgebra decomposes as @xmath , where @xmath
is the Lie algebra of translations in @xmath and @xmath is the Lie
algebra of isometries in the internal space @xmath .

So far we have not used the assumption that the backgrounds preserve
@xmath supersymmetries. If this is the case, the Killing vectors
generated by @xmath span the tangent space of the spacetime at each
point. This is a consequence of the homogeneity theorem proven for
@xmath and @xmath supergravity backgrounds in [ 29 , 30 ] . This states
that all solutions of these theories that preserve more than 16
supersymmetries must be locally homogeneous. In this particular case,
because of the decomposition of @xmath , the Killing vector fields
generated by @xmath span the tangent space of @xmath at every point. As
a result, the condition ( 4.1.13 ) implies that @xmath is constant. The
main result of this chapter then follows as a consequence of the field
equation of the warp factor and those of the rest of the scalar fields
of these theories. So to complete the proof we shall state the relevant
equations on a case by case basis.

In 11-dimensional supergravity, the 4-form field strength of the theory
for @xmath , @xmath , backgrounds can be expressed as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

with @xmath for @xmath , and the warp factor field equation is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the Levi-Civita connection on @xmath . The superscripts
on the forms denote their degree whenever it is required for clarity.
Clearly if @xmath is constant, as it has been demonstrated above for
@xmath backgrounds, then @xmath . So @xmath and thus all the fluxes
vanish. In fact, this is also the case for @xmath provided that @xmath
is taken to be constant. As @xmath and @xmath is constant, the gravitino
KSE in ( 4.1.6 ) implies that all the Killing spinors @xmath are
parallel with respect to the Levi-Civita connection, @xmath , on @xmath
. This in turn means that all the Killing vector fields @xmath in (
4.1.12 ), which span the tangent space of @xmath , are also parallel
with respect to @xmath . Thus @xmath is locally isometric to @xmath .
Therefore, the backgrounds @xmath are locally isometric to the maximally
supersymmetric vacuum @xmath . Notice that the last step of the proof
requires the use of the homogeneity theorem.

In (massive) IIA supergravity, the 4-form @xmath , 3-form @xmath and
2-form @xmath field strengths of the theory for @xmath , @xmath ,
backgrounds can be written as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.16)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.17)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.18)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath vanishes for @xmath and similarly @xmath vanishes for
@xmath . The field equations for the warp factor @xmath and dilaton
field @xmath , @xmath , are

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.1.19)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath and @xmath is the cosmological constant of (massive) IIA
supergravity. Clearly, if both @xmath and @xmath are constant, which is
the case for all @xmath backgrounds, then the above two field equations
imply that all the form fluxes will vanish. Significantly, the
cosmological constant must vanish as well. There are no @xmath solutions
in massive IIA supergravity that preserve @xmath supersymmetries. In IIA
supergravity, an argument similar to the one presented above in @xmath
supergravity reveals that @xmath is locally isometric to @xmath and so
all @xmath @xmath backgrounds are locally isometric to the maximally
supersymmetric vacuum @xmath . It is not apparent that the theorem holds
for @xmath even if @xmath and @xmath are taken to be constant.

In IIB supergravity the self-dual real 5-form @xmath and complex 3-form
@xmath field strengths of the theory for @xmath , @xmath , backgrounds
can be expressed as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.20)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.21)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath vanishes for @xmath and @xmath vanishes for @xmath . The
field equation of the warp factor is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.22)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Clearly if @xmath is constant, which we have demonstrated is the case
for @xmath backgrounds, then @xmath . Moreover the homogeneity theorem
implies that the two scalar fields of IIB supergravity, the axion and
the dilaton, are also constant. A similar argument to that used in
@xmath supergravity implies that @xmath is locally isometric to @xmath .
Thus the @xmath are locally isometric to the @xmath maximally
supersymmetric vacuum of the theory. The same conclusion holds for
@xmath as well, provided that @xmath is taken to be constant.

## Chapter 5 Conclusions

In this thesis, we investigated all warped AdS @xmath and AdS @xmath
backgrounds preserving more than 16 real supercharges in 10- dimensional
type II and 11-dimensional supergravities. We made the assumption that
either the internal manifold is compact without boundary or equivalently
that the isometry algebra of the background decomposes into that of AdS
and that of the transverse space. As we pointed out in section 1.2.2 and
1.4 , this is crucial for performing any sort of meaningful and
unambiguous classification. Otherwise, we could, for example, rewrite
the maximally supersymmetric @xmath solution as a warped product of some
lower dimensional AdS @xmath space ( @xmath ) with a non-compact
manifold. Assuming a closed internal space or, alternatively, the
aforementioned decomposition of the bosonic KSA, culls such “fake”
vacua.

The key developments that enabled us to obtain the results in chapters 2
, 3 and 4 are the proof of the homogeneity theorem [ 29 ] , the
integration of the Killing spinor and field equations along the AdS
subspace [ 68 , 8 , 6 ] , as well as the classification of the Killing
superalgebras [ 5 , 58 ] . With these tools at our disposal, we proved
in chapter 2 that there are no @xmath AdS @xmath backgrounds in type IIB
supergravity. Similarly, we showed that all 11-dimensional @xmath AdS
@xmath backgrounds are locally isometric to the maximally supersymmetric
@xmath solution. In type IIA the unique such background is its reduction
on the circle fibre, namely @xmath , which preserves @xmath
supersymmetries. Furthermore in chapter 3 , we proved a non-existence
theorem for AdS @xmath solutions preserving strictly more than 16
supersymmetries. Finally in chapter 4 , we showed that all warped 10-
and 11-dimensional @xmath Minkowski backgrounds @xmath ( @xmath ) with
fields which may not be smooth everywhere and possibly non-compact
internal spaces are locally isometric to the Minkowski vacuum @xmath .
Particularly in the context of flux compactifications, this means that
all vacua of this type have the same local geometry as the maximally
supersymmetric toroidal vacuum @xmath .

It is quite remarkable how sparse the landscape of @xmath AdS solutions
turns out to be(cf. table 5.1 ). In fact, all the maximally
supersymmetric solutions arise as near-horizon limits of stacks of
coincident D3-, M2- or M5-branes, respectively. Incidentally, these are
also the only configurations of coincident branes giving rise to an AdS
factor in the near-horizon limit, therefore it seems as though the
existence of more than half BPS AdS backgrounds is linked to
supersymmetry enhancement in near-horizon geometries. As for @xmath ,
this background can be obtained from M2-branes probing a @xmath
singularity [ 1 ] which corresponds to dividing by @xmath in the
near-horizon geometry, i.e. @xmath . The @xmath action makes the @xmath
in the Hopf fibration @xmath @xmath times smaller, so as @xmath becomes
large, we end up with @xmath in IIA. This actually illustrates another
natural extension of our work. We classified AdS backgrounds up to local
isometry, i.e. we determined the local geometries of the internal spaces
@xmath . It might be possible to find further solutions by dividing out
discrete subgroups, as was also pointed out in section 2.5 , however
this requires a classification of all possible subgroups of @xmath and
@xmath which is not available at the time of writing. Lastly, in the
spirit of the classification of AdS backgrounds with symmetric spaces as
internal manifold in [ 35 , 30 , 130 , 129 ] , one could try and
classify all @xmath homogeneous AdS backgrounds, however the reduced
amount of supersymmetry and hence reduced control over the geometry will
greatly complicate the analysis. Nevertheless, this would be a fruitful
avenue to explore.

## Appendix A Notation and conventions

Throughout this thesis, we use the mostly positive metric

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (A.1.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Our conventions for forms are as follows. Let @xmath be a k-form, then

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.1.2)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

We also define

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (A.1.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the @xmath are the Dirac gamma matrices. The gamma matrices are
always taken in an orthonormal frame and we use the notation

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (A.1.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

for anti-symmetrised products with total weight 1. To simplify
expressions, we use the shorthand notation

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (A.1.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a left-invariant frame, and similarly for an orthonormal
frame @xmath .

Our Hodge duality convention is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (A.1.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The inner product @xmath we use on the space of spinors is that for
which space-like gamma matrices are Hermitian while time-like gamma
matrices are anti-Hermitian, i.e. the Dirac spin-invariant inner product
is @xmath . The norm @xmath is taken with respect to @xmath , which is
positive definite. For more details on our conventions see [ 68 , 6 , 8
] .

## Appendix B @xmath

Here, we shall collect some formulae that are useful in understanding
the homogeneous spaces admitting a transitive action of a group with Lie
algebra @xmath . A basis over the reals of anti-Hermitian @xmath
traceless complex matrices is

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.0.1)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a normalization factor and @xmath . The trace of these
matrices yields an invariant inner product on @xmath . In particular,
the non-vanishing traces are

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.0.2)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

It is customary to choose the normalization factors @xmath such that all
generators have the same length. In such a case, they will depend on
@xmath . However in what follows, it is more convenient to choose @xmath
. The Lie brackets of @xmath are

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (B.0.3)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

We shall proceed to describe the homogeneous spaces in ( 2.1.2 ) and (
2.1.5 ) that admit a transitive @xmath action.

### b.1 @xmath

To describe the @xmath homogeneous space, we set

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (B.1.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath . The brackets of the Lie subalgebra @xmath can be read off
from those in ( B.0.3 ) while those involving elements of @xmath are

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (B.1.2)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

and

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (B.1.3)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

The left-invariant frame is @xmath . The most general left-invariant
metric can be expressed as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (B.1.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a constant. The left-invariant forms of @xmath are
generated by the (Kähler) 2-form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (B.1.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The non-vanishing components of the curvature of the metric in the
orthonormal frame are

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.1.6)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

This expression of the curvature matches that in ( 2.3.35 ) for @xmath
up to an overall scale.

### b.2 @xmath

Next, let us turn to the @xmath homogeneous space. The embedding of
@xmath , where @xmath , into @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (B.2.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

As @xmath , the (non-vanishing) commutators involving elements of @xmath
are

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (B.2.2)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

and

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (B.2.3)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

Setting @xmath for the left-invariant frame, a direct computation
reveals that the most general invariant metric is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (B.2.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath are constants. Moreover the left-invariant 2- and 3-forms
for @xmath are generated by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (B.2.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and their duals, where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (B.2.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

is the holomorphic (3,0)-form.

However for convenience, we re-label the indices of the left-invariant
frame as @xmath , @xmath in which case the left-invariant metric can be
rewritten as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (B.2.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where we have introduced an orthonormal frame @xmath , and @xmath . Note
also that, up to an overall scale, the left-invariant 2- and 3-forms can
be re-written in terms of the orthonormal frame. In particular, we have

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.2.8)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (B.2.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We shall use this orthonormal basis to solve the KSEs for this internal
space.

## Appendix C The Berger space @xmath

To describe the geometry of the Berger space @xmath , one identifies the
vector representation @xmath of @xmath with the symmetric traceless
representation of @xmath and then decomposes the adjoint representation
of @xmath in @xmath representations as @xmath , where @xmath is the
symmetric traceless representation of @xmath constructed with three
copies of the vector representation. As a result @xmath , where @xmath
and @xmath are identified with the 3-dimensional and 7-dimensional
representations, respectively.

This decomposition can be implemented as follows. Consider the basis
@xmath , @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (C.0.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

in @xmath leading to the commutators

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (C.0.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Then re-write each basis element using the @xmath representation of
@xmath as @xmath , where @xmath . Decomposing this into @xmath
representations, one finds that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (C.0.4)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath . Using this one can proceed to describe the
homogeneous space @xmath . However, this decomposition does not
automatically reveal the @xmath structure which is necessary in the
analysis of the supersymmetric solutions. Instead, we shall follow an
adaptation [ 48 ] of the description in [ 17 ] and [ 77 , Appendix A.1]
. For this, use the inner product

  -- -- -- ---------
           (C.0.5)
  -- -- -- ---------

which is @xmath invariant and the basis @xmath , @xmath , is
orthonormal. In this basis, the structure constants of @xmath are
skew-symmetric. Then, we identify the @xmath subalgebra of @xmath with
the span of the orthonormal vectors

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.0.6)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.0.7)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

We choose the subspace @xmath to be orthogonal to @xmath and introduce
an ortho-normal basis in @xmath as

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.0.8)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

Then it is straightforward to show that

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (C.0.9)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is given in ( 2.4.13 ), the indices are raised and lowered
with the flat metric and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.0.10)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.0.11)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ----------

So @xmath , and the Jacobi identities imply that @xmath is invariant
under the representation of @xmath on @xmath . Therefore the embedding
of @xmath in @xmath defined by @xmath factors through @xmath . This is
useful in the analysis of the gravitino KSE.

## Appendix D @xmath

In order to describe the various homogeneous spaces we are using which
admit a transitive action of a group with Lie algebra @xmath , choose a
basis in @xmath as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (D.0.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath . The commutators are

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (D.0.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In what follows, we shall give various decompositions @xmath for
different choices of a subalgebra @xmath and summarise some of their
algebraic and geometric properties that we require in this thesis.

### d.1 @xmath

The subalgebra @xmath and @xmath are spanned as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (D.1.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (D.1.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

respectively, where @xmath and @xmath . In this basis, the non-vanishing
commutators are

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (D.1.3)
     @xmath      (D.1.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In fact, this is a symmetric coset space admitting an invariant metric

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (D.1.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a constant, and @xmath and @xmath are the left-invariant
and orthonormal frames, respectively. The curvature of the symmetric
space in the ortho-normal frame is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (D.1.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which is instrumental in the investigation of the gravitino KSE in
section 3.5.1.

### d.2 @xmath

Viewing the elements of @xmath as quaternionic @xmath matrices, @xmath
is embedded in @xmath along the diagonal. To describe this embedding
choose a basis in @xmath as in ( D.0.1 ) and set

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (D.2.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and now @xmath . In terms of this basis, the non-vanishing
commutators of @xmath are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (D.2.2)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (D.2.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (D.2.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Observe that @xmath are bases in the spaces of (anti-)self-dual forms in
@xmath and that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (D.2.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The subalgebra @xmath and @xmath are spanned by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (D.2.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (D.2.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

respectively. Introducing the left-invariant frame @xmath , where @xmath
, the left-invariant metric can be written as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (D.2.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath and we have introduced the orthonormal frame @xmath , @xmath
.

The curvature of this metric in the orthonormal frame is

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (D.2.9)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

We shall use these expressions in the investigation of the gravitino KSE
in section 3.5.2.

### d.3 @xmath

The decomposition of the Lie algebra @xmath suitable for the description
of this homogeneous space is as in ( D.1.1 ), but now @xmath and @xmath
are spanned by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (D.3.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

respectively, where @xmath and @xmath . Introducing the left-invariant
frame as @xmath , the left-invariant metric is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (D.3.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a symmetric constant positive definite @xmath matrix and
@xmath is a constant. The curvature of this metric in the left-invariant
frame is

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (D.3.3)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

and

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (D.3.4)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (D.3.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

@xmath is the inverse matrix of @xmath and the indices of @xmath are
raised and lowered with @xmath .

The Ricci tensor, again in the left-invariant frame, is

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (D.3.6)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (D.3.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

It is straightforward to compute the Ricci tensor for @xmath diagonal.

### d.4 @xmath

The decomposition of the Lie algebra @xmath suitable for the description
of this homogeneous space is as in ( D.2.3 ), where in this case

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (D.4.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath and @xmath . Introducing the left-invariant frame as @xmath
, the most general left-invariant metric is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (D.4.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a constant and @xmath is any constant @xmath positive
definite symmetric matrix. The non-vanishing components of the curvature
tensor of this metric in the left-invariant frame is

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (D.4.3)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (D.4.4)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (D.4.5)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (D.4.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (D.4.8)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- ---------

and the matrix @xmath is the inverse of @xmath . The Ricci tensor in the
left-invariant frame is

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (D.4.9)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

It is straightforward to find the Ricci tensor for @xmath diagonal. This
homogeneous space admits two Einstein metrics one of which is the round
sphere metric on @xmath . This will be explored further in the
investigation of the gravitino KSE in section 2.4.6 .

## Appendix E Coset spaces with non-semisimple transitive groups

We have already argued that if @xmath is simple then the internal spaces
@xmath , with @xmath can be identified from the classification results
of [ 17 , 111 , 102 , 101 , 12 ] . This is also the case for @xmath
semisimple, provided that in addition one considers modifications to the
homogeneous spaces as described in section 3.2.3 .

Here, we shall describe the structure of homogeneous @xmath spaces for
@xmath a compact but not semisimple Lie group. As we consider
homogeneous spaces up to discrete identifications, we shall perform the
calculation in terms of Lie algebras. The Lie algebra of @xmath can be
written as @xmath , where @xmath is semisimple and @xmath is Abelian.
Suppose now that we have a @xmath coset space, where @xmath is a compact
subgroup of @xmath . Then @xmath , where @xmath is a semisimple
subalgebra and @xmath is Abelian. Let us now focus on the inclusion
@xmath . Consider the projections @xmath and @xmath . Then, we have that
@xmath , as there are no non-trivial Lie algebra homomorphisms from a
semisimple Lie algebra into an Abelian one. Thus @xmath is an inclusion.
Furthermore, @xmath is also an inclusion. Therefore, @xmath is a
subalgebra of @xmath . As @xmath is semisimple and for applications here
@xmath , there is a classification of all coset spaces @xmath with
@xmath and @xmath .

Next, consider @xmath . Suppose first that @xmath is contained in both
@xmath and @xmath , then, up to a discrete identification, a coset space
@xmath with @xmath and @xmath is a modification of @xmath with an
Abelian group which has Lie algebra @xmath . Furthermore the generators
of @xmath commute with @xmath and are of course not in the image of
@xmath . As a result, @xmath , up to a discrete identification, can be
written as @xmath , where @xmath , i.e. up to a discrete identification
@xmath is the product of an Abelian modification of a coset space with
semisimple transitive group and of an Abelian group. On the other hand,
if @xmath is all contained in @xmath , then @xmath up to a discrete
identification is a product @xmath , where @xmath . In the
classification of AdS @xmath backgrounds in chapter 3 , we use the above
results to describe the geometry of the internal spaces, whenever @xmath
is not a semisimple Lie algebra.

## Appendix F @xmath

The inclusion of @xmath in @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Consequently in the notation of [ 76 ] , the Lie subalgebra @xmath of
the isotropy group is identified as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (F.0.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The generators of the tangent space at the origin @xmath of the
homogeneous space must be linearly independent from those of @xmath and
so one can choose

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (F.0.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , @xmath .

A left-invariant frame on @xmath is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (F.0.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath .

The exterior differential algebra of the left-invariant frame, modulo
the terms that contain the canonical connection and so lie in @xmath ,
is

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (F.0.4)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

Note that upon taking the exterior derivative of invariant forms the
terms in the exterior derivative of a left-invariant frame that lie in
@xmath do not contribute.

The invariant forms on @xmath are generated by a 1-form @xmath and the
2-forms

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (F.0.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Observe that @xmath . On the other hand @xmath . So @xmath has one
generator as expected. The invariant 3- and 4-forms are @xmath , @xmath
, and @xmath , @xmath , respectively. Both 4-forms are exact as they are
the exterior derivatives of invariant 3-forms. As a result @xmath as
expected. Note though that @xmath .