### Introduction

The Standard Model (SM) of particle physics [ 3 ] , based on Quantum
Field Theory (QFT) [ 4 , 5 , 6 ] , is well established nowadays, thanks
to an undeniable experimental success. All its elementary particle
content is discovered, and their properties are in good accordance with
the theoretical predictions [ 7 ] .

In particular, the ElectroWeak (EW) sector is described by the
Glashow-Salam-Weinberg (GSW) model [ 8 , 9 , 10 ] , based on the
spontaneous symmetry breaking of a gauge theory. For that propose, one
uses the Brout-Englert-Guralnik-Hagen-Higgs-Kibble mechanism [ 11 , 12 ,
13 , 14 , 15 , 16 ] where a weakly coupled scalar field acquires a
Vacuum Expectation Value (VEV). The fluctuations of the field around its
VEV describe a spin 0 particle, the Higgs boson. It is an elementary
scalar field which is not protected by a symmetry: its mass squared is
quadratically sensitive to every new mass scale above @xmath GeV [ 17 ,
18 , 19 ] , so such a light scalar is not technically natural. In the
modern Effective Field Theory (EFT) point of view, when an UltraViolet
(UV) theory contains an unprotected elementary scalar of mass @xmath in
addition to particles at a mass scale @xmath , once one integrates out
the particles of mass @xmath , one needs to fine tune the parameters
@xmath and @xmath of the UV theory to have a light scalar in the
spectrum of the EFT (see Ref. [ 20 ] for more details). In the case of
the Higgs boson of mass @xmath GeV, if a new mass scale exists above
@xmath TeV, then there is a fine tuning in the UV theory. There are
several motivations to believe that new scales exist well above @xmath :

First of all, the SM does not give a description of gravity which
includes a backreaction of matter and energy on the spacetime geometry
in general relativity [ 21 ] . Einstein’s theory is classical and is not
able to describe the quantum fluctuations of spacetime. When one
considers small fluctuations around a background metric, one gets a
field of spin 2 particles, the gravitons, propagating on a 4D classical
background. One can quantize the gravitons coupled to the SM as a
non-perturbatively renormalizable QFT. Nevertheless, near the 4D Planck
scale @xmath GeV, one cannot consider small quantum fluctuations around
a classical metric any more: one needs a new theory of quantum spacetime
geometry. It is expected that new degrees of freedom appear in the UV
completion near @xmath which contribute via loop corrections to @xmath
and induce an incredible fine tuning to have this Higgs boson light.

Besides, in particle physics, one observes oscillations of neutrinos
which implies that at least two of them are massive. In the SM,
neutrinos are massless so one needs to add new physics to give them a
mass. In the fermion sector of the SM, one observes a large mass
hierarchy between the neutrino mass scale and the top mass (see Fig. 1.1
). Many high energy theoreticians suspect that this hierarchy could be
the result of an unknown mechanism at high scale, which could also
explain the particular textures of the mixing matrices in the quark and
neutrino sectors and the origin of the three fermion generations.
Moreover, the absence of CP violation in strong interactions, described
by Quantum ChromoDynamics (QCD) [ 22 , 23 , 24 , 25 , 26 ] , is also a
natural question since a CP violating topological term is authorized by
the symmetries of the SM. Besides, the SM of cosmology ( @xmath CDM)
needs additional ingredients which are not present in the SM of particle
physics: a Cold Dark Matter (CDM) sector ¹ ¹ 1 Notice that warm dark
matter is also possible. , an inflaton sector, and a new CP violating
sector for the baryogenesis. Beyond @xmath CDM, if the role of dark
energy is not entirely played by the cosmological constant @xmath , one
needs to introduce a new exotic ingredient to explain the observed
accelerated expansion of the Universe. In the abundant literature
concerning Beyond Standard Model (BSM) physics, many models whose goal
is to solve one of these questions require a new mass scale above @xmath
. The naturalness of the EW scale, also called gauge hierarchy problem,
is thus a serious problem which needs to be explained by some BSM
scenario.

In QFT, spacetime is a classical background where fields propagate. In
general relativity, spacetime is dynamic and the theory describes how
classical sources backreact on the geometry. In both theories, the
number of spacetime dimensions is not determined by first principles.
Possibly, in a complete theory of gravity which describes Planckian
physics, the dimensionality of spacetime can be determined by the
dynamics or the consistency of the theory as in string theory [ 27 ] .
In absence of a particular UV completion of gravity, one is free to
build models adding an arbitrary number of spacetime dimensions
compactified on some geometries with a given topology. The criteria are
that one should be consistent with all the observations indicating that
our Universe appears four-dimensional in current experiments. A
higher-dimensional field theory with compactified extra dimensions can
be rewritten as a 4D theory by a procedure which is called Kaluza-Klein
(KK) dimensional reduction. A higher-dimensional field gives a tower of
4D fields: the KK modes. On the one hand, compactified timelike extra
dimensions seem to lead to physically inconsistent theories because the
KK excitations of the fields propagating in the extra dimensions are
tachyons, which imply violation of physically reasonable conditions like
causality and unitarity [ 28 , 29 ] . On the other hand, spacelike extra
dimensions have a long history in fundamental physics, since the pioneer
works by G. Nordström [ 30 ] , T. Kaluza [ 31 ] and O. Klein [ 32 , 33 ]
, because they allow to build consistent EFTs. They are the subject of
the present PhD thesis where we will consider only one timelike
dimension. The beginning of the new millenium was marked by an explosion
of the number of scientific publications on the subject of spacelike
extra dimension after the appearance of some key articles with the goal
of solving the gauge hierarchy problem for some of them.

The scenario proposed by Arkani-Hamed, Dimopoulos and Dvali (ADD) [ 34 ,
35 , 36 ] , with compactified Large Extra Dimensions (LEDs) and the SM
fields localized on a 3D wall (3-brane), allows to have a
higher-dimensional Planck scale at a few TeV. The 4D Planck scale @xmath
is just an effective scale which is not related to masses of new degrees
of freedom. This model allows also to generate small Dirac masses for
the neutrinos where the right-handed neutrinos are KK modes of a gauge
singlet field propagating into the whole spacetime (the bulk) [ 37 , 38
, 39 ] . In the simplest version with toroidal compactification, and
with less than seven LEDs motivated by superstring/M theory, the
compactification radii are large compared to the higher-dimensional
Planck length: the gauge hierarchy disappears at the price of
introducing a geometrical hierarchy to stabilize. The ADD proposition is
thus just a reformulation of the gauge hierarchy problem instead of a
solution of it.

The most popular way to overcome the ADD geometrical hierarchy problem
is to use a single warped extra dimension as proposed by Randall and
Sundrum [ 40 ] : the RS1 model. The SM fields are localized at the
boundary of a slice of an AdS @xmath spacetime where the warp factor
redshifts the scale at which gravity becomes strongly coupled from
@xmath GeV to the TeV scale. Quickly, it was realized that only the
Higgs field needs to be localized at the boundary and that gauge bosons
and fermions can propagate into the bulk [ 41 , 42 , 43 , 44 , 45 , 46 ]
. The zero modes of the 5D fields are identified with the SM particles.
The fermion zero modes can be quasi-localized near one of the two
boundaries thanks to 5D Dirac masses. The wave function of a heavy
(light) SM fermion has then a big (small) overlap with the boundary
localized Higgs field. Without hierarchies in the 5D masses and Yukawa
couplings, one can generate the flavor mass hierarchy observed in Nature
[ 45 , 47 ] . In order to study the phenomenology of this model, it is
then crucial to have a field theoretical treatment of 5D fermions in an
extra dimension with spacetime boundaries which can accommodate
couplings to a brane localized Higgs field.

Most of the authors use a perturbative approach [ 48 , 49 ] , which we
call 4D approach, where the KK spectrum and wave functions of the 5D
fermion fields are worked out without the brane localized interactions.
They use ad hoc Dirichlet boundary conditions on the wave functions of
one of the two chiralities of the KK modes in order to have a chiral
theory at the zero mode level. After that, they treat the Yukawa
interactions with the brane localized Higgs field VEV as a perturbation
by truncating the KK tower and bi-diagonalize the mass matrix. An
alternative method is to treat directly the brane localized mass terms
when one solves the equations for the wave functions: the 5D method.
Many authors were puzzled by an apparent discontinuity in the KK wave
functions at the Higgs field position, and they introduce a
regularization method by smoothing or shifting away from the boundary
the brane localized Higgs boson [ 50 , 51 , 52 , 53 , 54 , 55 , 56 , 57
, 58 , 59 , 60 , 61 , 49 ] . It seems puzzling that one cannot treat the
Higgs boson at the boundary without this regularization procedure.

In this thesis, we begin by developping a consistent field theoretical
method to treat 5D fermions coupled to a brane localized Higgs field
without regularization [ 1 ] . For that purpose, we have to introduce
Henningson-Sfetsos boundary terms [ 62 , 63 , 64 , 65 , 66 , 67 , 68 , 1
] at both sides of a brane. One can then solve the problem treating
fields as functions or distributions. After that, we apply different
methods (function/distribution fields, 4D/5D calculations, etc) to
various brane localized terms (kinetic terms, Majorana masses, etc), as
well as generalizing to several classified models (flat/warped
dimensions, intervalle/orbifold, etc).

The end of the PhD is dedicated to revisit the LED possibility by
compactifying an extra dimension on a star/rose graph with @xmath
identical leaves/petals of length/circumference @xmath [ 69 ] . The SM
fields are localized on a 3-brane at the central vertex of the graph.
One can then have a 5D Planck scale at a few TeV and choose for example
@xmath . The large hierarchy between the 4D Planck scale @xmath and
@xmath is then reformulated as a large @xmath . As @xmath is a
radiatively stable quantity fixed by the spacetime geometry, which is
just a classical brackground for the EFT, this solves the technical
naturalness problem of the Higgs boson mass @xmath . The question of why
@xmath is very large is postponed until a Planckian theory of gravity.
Subsequently, we use our previous results on 5D fermions to build a
model of small neutrino masses, where the right-handed neutrinos are the
KK modes of a gauge singlet fermion propagating into the LED and coupled
to the 4D left-handed neutrino through the 4D Higgs field, both
localized at the central vertex.

The manuscript of this PhD thesis entitled “Compactified Spacelike Extra
Dimension & Brane-Higgs Field” is organized as follows:

-   Part I is written in French and gives the state of the art of the
    most popular models with spacelike extra dimensions whose purpose is
    to tackle the gauge and/or flavor hierarchies problems:

    -   Chapter 1 is a short review of the SM of particle physics and of
        the motivations for BSM model buildings, insisting on the gauge
        hierarchy problem.

    -   Chapter 2 is a review of the historical models with spacelike
        extra dimensions and in particular the ones which solve or
        reformulate the gauge hierarchy problem.

    -   Chapter 3 is an introduction to the models with the SM Higgs
        field localized at the boundary of a slice of an AdS @xmath
        spacetime with bulk fermion and gauge fields.

-   Part II contains the main research work made during this PhD thesis:

    -   Chapter 4 describes the method to treat 5D fermions coupled to a
        boundary localized Higgs field with a compactification on an
        interval.

    -   Chapter 5 contains a generalization of the method of Chapter 4
        towards a compactification on 5D orbifolds, to a Higgs field
        localized on a brane away from a boundary, and to other brane
        localized terms.

    -   Chapter 6 describes our model of LED compactified on a star/rose
        graph with a large number of weak scale leaves.

-   Our conventions are given in Appendix A .

-   A summary in French of the chapters in English is given in Appendix
    D .

-   The acronyms used in this manuscript are listed in a Glossary p.
    Glossary .

## Part I State of the Art

### Chapitre 1 Du champ de Higgs électrofaible à la hiérarchie de jauge

#### 1.1 Modèle standard de la physique des particules

Le SM de la physique des particules décrit les particules élémentaires
de la matière et leurs interactions. Il est construit dans le cadre de
la QFT ¹ ¹ 1 Pour une revue sur le SM de la physique des particules et
la QFT, voir par exemple les Réfs. [ 71 , 72 , 73 , 74 , 75 , 76 , 77 ,
78 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 79 , 80 , 81 , 82 , 83 , 84 , 85 ] . sur une théorie de
jauge renormalisable [ 86 , 87 , 88 ] et unitaire [ 89 , 90 , 91 , 92 ]
décrivant les interactions EW et fortes.

La théorie GSW des interactions EWs [ 8 , 9 , 10 ] décrit les
interactions électromagnétiques [ 93 , 94 , 95 , 96 , 97 ] et faibles [
98 , 99 , 100 ] entre les quarks et les leptons. C’est une théorie de
Yang-Mills [ 101 ] basée sur les groupes de symétrie d’isospin @xmath et
d’hypercharge @xmath faibles. Ajoutée à la QCD [ 22 , 23 , 24 , 25 , 26
] , la théorie de l’interaction forte entre les quarks colorés fondée
sur le groupe de jauge @xmath , on obtient une description unifiée des
interactions subatomiques. Le SM contient trois types de champs : les
fermions, les bosons de jauge et le boson de Higgs ( c.f. la Fig. 1.1 ).

##### 1.1.1 Zoologie des fermions

Les champs de matière sont des fermions de spin @xmath dans la
représentation fondamentale du groupe de jauge @xmath . Il y a trois
générations séquentielles, i.e. trois répliques ayant les mêmes nombres
quantiques mais de masses différentes. Les fermions de chiralité gauche
sont des isodoublets faibles ² ² 2 On note d’ailleurs plus communément
le groupe de jauge d’isospin faible @xmath plutôt que @xmath .
Cependant, dans le cadre de modèles avec des fermions se propageant dans
des dimensions spatiales supplémentaires, des quarks vectoriels
apparaissent, dont la chiralité droite est un isodoublet de @xmath , ce
qui peut prêter à confusion. : @xmath (la troisième composante d’isospin
faible). On distingue les leptons:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

et les quarks:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

où on a utilisé les notations de la Fig. 1.1 . Les fermions de chiralité
droite sont des isosingulets faibles : @xmath . Il y en a un pour chaque
élément des isodoublets, sauf pour les neutrinos ³ ³ 3 On sait
aujourd’hui que les neutrinos sont des particules massives via le
phénomène d’oscillation. Pour générer cette masse, il est souvent
nécessaire d’ajouter des neutrinos de chiralité droite ( c.f. les Réfs.
[ 102 , 103 ] , par exemple, pour une revue). Dans le SM, les neutrinos
sont considérés sans masse. :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

L’hypercharge faible est définie à partir de @xmath et de la charge
électrique @xmath (en unité de charge électrique élémentaire @xmath ):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

La théorie GSW assigne donc les fermions de chiralité gauche et droite à
des représentations différentes de @xmath : on parle de théorie chirale,
par opposition à une théorie vectorielle comme la QCD. En effet, les
deux chiralités de quarks (leptons) sont des triplets (singulets) de
couleur sous @xmath . On notera la relation :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

où on somme sur tous les champs d’une génération de fermions (chaque
couleur étant comptée comme un champ différent). Ceci assure
l’annulation des anomalies chirales [ 104 , 105 ] pour chaque
génération, préservant ainsi les symétries de jauge au niveau quantique
(dans les diagrammes à boucle).

##### 1.1.2 Zoologie des bosons de jauge

Les champs de jauge décrivent des bosons de spin-1, médiateurs des
interactions. Le nombre de bosons par interaction est égal au nombre de
générateurs des groupes de symétrie associés.

Dans le secteur EW, on a les champs @xmath et @xmath , correspondants
respectivement aux générateurs @xmath et @xmath ( @xmath des groupes
@xmath et @xmath . Les générateurs @xmath sont reliés aux matrices de
Pauli tels que

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

vérifiant

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Les relations de commutation entre générateurs sont :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

où @xmath est le tenseur de Levi-Civita totalement antisymétrique.

Dans le secteur de l’interaction nucléaire forte, on a un octet de
gluons @xmath associés aux huit générateurs du groupe @xmath , dont les
relations de commutation sont :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

avec les matrices de Gell-Mann ( @xmath ):

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.8)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

vérifiant

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Les constantes de structure non-nulles de @xmath sont :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Les tenseurs des champs pour chaque interaction s’écrivent :

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.11)
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

où @xmath , @xmath et @xmath sont respectivement les constantes de
couplage des groupes @xmath , @xmath et @xmath . On remarquera la
présence des constantes de structures dans l’expression des tenseurs de
champs associés aux groupes de jauge non-abéliens. Cela se traduit
physiquement par une auto-interaction des gluons et bosons @xmath , i.e.
des couplages triples et quartiques dans les lagrangiens.

Un champ fermionique @xmath est couplé de manière minimale aux champs de
jauge par la dérivée covariante :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Dans une théorie de Yang-Mills, imposer l’invariance d’un lagrangien de
Dirac sous une symétrie de jauge entraine de manière automatique le
couplage du fermion au(x) boson(s) de jauge.

Le lagrangien du SM, invariant sous @xmath , que l’on peut écrire à ce
stade, est :

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

où toutes les particules sont de masses nulles, ce qui est correct pour
les gluons. En revanche, on mesure une masse non-nulle pour les fermions
et les bosons de l’interaction faible. De tels termes de masse
correspondent à :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

pour les bosons de jauge EWs, et

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

pour un fermion @xmath . Or, si on écrit les transformations des champs
sont le groupe @xmath , on obtient

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

On en conclut que les termes de masses dans les Éqs. ( 1.14 ) et ( 1.15
) sont manifestement non-invariants sous ces transformations : de tels
termes sont interdits dans une théorie de jauge. Il faut donc rajouter
un ingrédient au modèle.

##### 1.1.3 Champ de Higgs

Afin de donner une masse aux fermions et bosons de l’interaction faible,
le SM a recourt au mécanisme de
Brout-Englert-Guralnik-Hagen-Higgs-Kibble (plus communément appelé
mécanisme de Higgs) de brisure spontanée de symétrie [ 11 , 12 , 13 , 14
, 15 , 16 ] . Le but est de générer une masse pour les bosons @xmath et
@xmath , tout en préservant une masse nulle pour le photon. Pour cela,
on introduit un isodoublet faible de champs scalaires complexes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

tel que sa composante électriquement neutre @xmath développe une VEV
non-nulle. Le potentiel scalaire @xmath dans le lagrangien

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

doit alors avoir une instabilité tachyonique @xmath et être stabilisé
par un terme quartique @xmath avec @xmath . Ainsi, le minimum du
potentiel est obtenu pour ( c.f. la Fig. 1.2 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Si on prend à la place @xmath , @xmath alors @xmath ( c.f. la Fig. 1.2 )
et on a simplement le lagrangien de Klein-Gordon ordinaire d’une
particule de spin-0 avec un terme d’interaction quartique. Notons au
passage que le cas @xmath , @xmath correspond à un potentiel
tachyonique, et donc non-physique, et que si @xmath , @xmath alors
@xmath est un minimum métastable qui peut se désintégrer en un vide
tachyonique.

En revenant au premier cas qui nous intéresse, la composante chargée
@xmath ne doit pas acquérir de VEV afin de préserver la symétrie de
jauge @xmath à l’origine de l’interaction électromagnétique. Le champ
@xmath peut alors s’écrire, au premier ordre, en fonction de quatre
champs réels @xmath et @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

On peut alors effectuer une transformation de jauge sous @xmath , afin
de se placer dans la jauge dite unitaire, telle que

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

En écrivant cette expression de @xmath dans le lagrangien ( 1.18 ), on
obtient :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Définissons les champs @xmath , @xmath , @xmath des bosons @xmath ,
@xmath et du photon :

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.23)
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

que l’on peut écrire sous forme matricielle :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

en introduisant l’angle de mélange faible @xmath , tel que

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Les termes de masse dans Éq. ( 1.22 ) deviennent

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

avec

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

À la fin, on obtient bien que les trois bosons de l’interaction faible
sont massifs et que le photon reste sans masse : c’est la brisure
spontanée de symétrie @xmath . En fait, trois des quatre degrés de
liberté de l’isodoublet @xmath (les bosons de Nambu-Goldstone [ 107 ,
108 , 109 , 110 , 111 ] ) sont «  mangés   » par les bosons @xmath et
@xmath qui acquièrent, de ce fait, une polarisation longitudinale, et
donc une masse. Le degré de liberté restant, @xmath , décrit une
particule massive de spin-0 : le boson de Higgs, qui constitue ainsi la
signature du mécanisme éponyme. En faisant la correspondance entre la
théorie GSW et celle de Fermi, on peut relier la masse des bosons @xmath
à la constante de Fermi @xmath , ce qui permet de dériver la valeur de
la VEV dans le SM :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

qui définit l’échelle EW.

Après brisure de symétrie EW (EWSB – ElectroWeak Symmetry Breaking ), on
peut écrire la dérivée covariante en fonction des états propres de
masse. Introduisons les matrices :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

Pour un fermion @xmath , on a :

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (1.30)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

où on a défini la charge électrique :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

Le mécanisme de Higgs permet aussi de générer les masses des fermions du
SM. Pour une génération, on introduit le lagrangien

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

invariant sous @xmath , où @xmath avec @xmath . Dans le cas de
l’électron, on a par exemple :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

Le couplage à la VEV constitue un terme de masse, on obtient :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

Dans le cas de trois générations, on peut écrire des couplages de Yukawa
impliquant deux fermions de générations différentes. Ceci induit des
mélanges de saveur dans le secteur des quarks. La matrice, permettant de
passer des états propres de l’interaction faible (avec «  ’   ») aux
états propres de masse (sans «  ’   »), est celle de
Cabibbo-Kobayashi-Maskawa (CKM) [ 112 , 113 ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

dont les éléments sont en général complexes. On peut absorber certaines
phases en redéfinissant les champs de quarks. Au final, il en reste une
: la phase de violation de @xmath , qui vient s’ajouter aux trois angles
de mélange.

Venons en maintenant au boson de Higgs lui-même. En développant @xmath
autour de sa VEV dans l’Éq. ( 1.18 ), et en ne gardant que les termes
impliquant @xmath seul, on a :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

d’où on lit la masse du boson de Higgs :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

en rappelant que @xmath est imaginaire pur dans nos conventions. On
notera la présence des couplages triple et quartique de @xmath . Quant
aux termes couplant ce dernier aux bosons de jauge de l’interaction
faible ( @xmath ) et aux fermions, ils donnent

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

Les règles de Feynman, pour le boson de Higgs, sont répertoriées sur la
Fig. 1.3 .

#### 1.2 Au-delà du modèle standard de la physique des particules

Dans cette section, nous allons rapidement passer en revue les
principales motivations pour élargir le SM et construire une théorie
plus fondamentale des interactions entre les particules élémentaires.

##### 1.2.1 Lacunes du modèle standard

###### Masses des neutrinos

L’observation des oscillations des trois saveurs de neutrinos connues
implique qu’au moins deux d’entre eux aient une masse [ 115 ] . Or, de
tels termes de masse n’existent pas dans le SM. De nombreux mécanismes
ont été proposés, impliquant souvent de nouvelles échelles physiques à
haute énergie. La solution la plus naturelle, du point de vue du SM,
serait d’ajouter deux ou trois champs de neutrinos de chiralité droite,
singulets sous le groupe de jauge du SM, pour pouvoir écrire des termes
de Yukawa (impliquant les neutrinos de chiralité droite, le champ de
Higgs et les isodoublets faibles contenant les neutrinos de chiralité
gauche) qui seraient à l’origine des termes de masse pour les neutrinos
après EWSB. Il est alors possible d’ajouter des termes de masse de
Majorana pour les neutrinos droits, puisqu’ils sont invariants sous le
groupe de jauge du SM et renormalisables. Dans ce cas, les neutrinos
seraient des particules de Majorana. Le fait que les neutrinos soient
des fermions de Majorana ou de Dirac reste aujourd’hui une question
ouverte en physique des particules.

###### Interaction gravitationnelle

La relativité générale ⁴ ⁴ 4 Voir les Réfs. [ 116 , 117 , 118 , 119 ,
120 , 121 , 21 ] , par exemple, pour une revue. d’Einstein [ 122 , 123 ,
124 , 125 , 126 , 127 , 128 , 129 , 130 ] est la théorie de l’espace, du
temps et de la gravitation. C’est l’outil central pour comprendre les
phénomènes astrophysiques extrêmes comme les trous noirs, les pulsars,
les quasars, la fin de vie d’une étoile, la naissance et l’évolution de
l’Univers. La relativité générale est une théorie classique, qui n’est
pas miscible avec le SM : la gravité est la seule interaction
fondamentale connue qui n’a pas encore de formulation quantique achevée,
principalement parce qu’une quantification naïve aboutit à une théorie
qui n’est pas perturbativement renormalisable. La relativité générale
est donc une EFT ⁵ ⁵ 5 Pour une revue introduisant le concept d’EFT,
c.f. les Réfs. [ 131 , 132 , 133 , 134 , 135 , 136 , 137 ] qui cesse
d’être valide à une certaine échelle d’énergie de coupure ⁶ ⁶ 6 Les
revues [ 138 , 139 , 140 ] donnent une introduction à l’étude de la
gravité basée sur les EFTs. @xmath , correspondant à l’échelle de masse
des degrés de liberté UVs les plus légers de la gravité.

La relativité générale a une formulation lagrangienne : l’action
d’Einstein-Hilbert, invariante sous les difféomorphismes et les
transformations locales de Lorentz, s’écrit :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

où @xmath est le déterminant de la métrique @xmath , @xmath est la
courbure scalaire de Ricci, @xmath est la constante cosmologique, @xmath
est le lagrangien du SM, et @xmath est la masse de Planck ⁷ ⁷ 7 La
définition de @xmath adoptée ici est généralement celle de la masse de
Planck réduite. Il y a de nombreuses définitions de la masse de Planck
dans la littérature, la plus commune diffère de la notre par un facteur
@xmath . ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

où @xmath est la constante de Newton. On définit aussi la longueur de
Planck,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

En l’absence d’un achèvement UV explicite, on peut a priori ajouter à la
relativité générale une infinité d’opérateurs non-renormalisables
invariants sous les difféomorphismes et les transformations locales de
Lorentz. Dans le régime où la relativité générale est applicable, il est
possible d’étudier les fluctuations quantiques linéaires @xmath autour
d’une métrique de fond classique @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

où @xmath est obtenue en résolvant les équations d’Einstein. Les
fluctuations @xmath se comportent comme une particule de spin-2 de masse
nulle, le graviton, se propageant sur un espace-temps classique. Il est
alors possible de quantifier la relativité générale linéarisée, mais la
théorie reste non-renormalisable.

Une théorie non-renormalisable devient fortement couplée à une certaine
échelle d’énergie, où :

-   tous les opérateurs, quelque soit leur dimension, contribuent de
    manière égale à l’arbre,

-   les contributions quantiques (à boucle), associées à une
    interaction, donnent toutes une contribution égale à celle à
    l’arbre, ce qui signifie que l’expansion perturbative est perdue.

Le procédé d’analyse dimensionnelle naïve [ 141 , 142 , 143 ] permet
d’estimer l’échelle d’énergie @xmath à partir de laquelle une théorie
effective devient non-perturbative, du fait de son caractère
non-renormalisable, et en l’absence des nouveaux degrés de liberté de
l’achèvement UV. Si ce dernier est une théorie fortement couplée, alors
les nouveaux degrés de liberté les plus légers ont leur masse de l’ordre
de @xmath . Au contraire, si c’est une théorie faiblement couplée, alors
les nouveaux degrés de liberté les plus légers ont, en général, leur
masse bien inférieure à @xmath [ 144 ] . Il est donc impossible de
déterminer l’échelle d’énergie de coupure d’une théorie effective sans
en connaître l’achèvement UV. Au mieux, on peut estimer l’échelle de
coupure maximale @xmath , grâce à l’analyse dimensionnelle naïve. En
relativité générale linéarisée, le couplage du graviton est

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

où @xmath est l’échelle d’énergie typique du processus étudié. Chaque
boucle apporte un facteur @xmath , où @xmath est le facteur de boucle à
4D, donc la relativité générale linéarisée devient fortement couplée
quand @xmath . Ceci correspond à l’échelle d’énergie [ 145 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

Cependant, si la gravité est décrite dans l’UV par une théorie
faiblement couplée, i.e. si l’un de ses couplages @xmath , on s’attend à
avoir @xmath puisqu’une analyse dimensionnelle donne, pour une théorie à
4D,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

On vient de voir que la relativité générale linéarisée peut être
quantifiée en tant que théorie effective. Qu’en est-il des effets
non-linéaires ? À ce jour, il n’y a pas de cadre théorique clair pour
quantifier la relativité générale en incluant les effets non-linéaires.
La physique des trous noirs permet d’intuiter [ 146 ] qu’ils doivent
apparaître à une énergie de l’ordre de @xmath , où Éq. ( 1.42 ) n’est
plus applicable. On s’attend à ce qu’à une échelle d’énergie de l’ordre
de @xmath ou, de manière équivalente, à une échelle de distance de
l’ordre de @xmath , les effets de gravité non-linéaires et
non-perturbatifs deviennent dominants. En s’inspirant de l’étude de la
théorie de la gravité quantique euclidienne [ 147 ] , on peut imaginer,
de manière très spéculative, que l’espace-temps quantique est une
«  mousse   » [ 148 , 149 ] de trous noirs, trous de ver, bébés univers,
instantons gravitationnels, et autres objets exotiques ( c.f. la Fig.
1.4 ), dont le cadre théorique cohérent, notamment l’achèvement UV,
reste largement à construire ( c.f. la Réf. [ 150 ] pour une revue
récente). Comme @xmath , @xmath . Si @xmath , les degrés de liberté UV
de la gravité, même faiblement couplés, peuvent altérer
significativement le comportement UV de la gravité, notamment l’échelle
à laquelle les effets non-linéaires deviennent importants, qui peut être
très différente de celle spéculée à partir de la relativité générale.

Encore aujourd’hui, beaucoup de physiciens admettent le «  paradigme
standard   », qui repose sur deux hypothèses fortes [ 152 ] :

-   @xmath , la théorie UV de la gravité est alors fortement couplée.
    Dans ce cas, rien ne se passe concernant la gravité entre l’échelle
    du TeV, actuellement scrutée au LHC, et @xmath ( c.f. la Fig. 1.5 ).

-   @xmath est supposée être aussi l’énergie de coupure des modèles de
    physique des particules décrivant les interactions fondamentales
    dans le cadre de la QFT (le SM et ses extensions).

Le «  désert   » physique entre l’échelle EW et @xmath , qui en résulte,
est appelé la hiérarchie de jauge. Souvent, on inclut dans le paradigme
standard la solution la plus populaire à ce que l’on appelle le problème
de hiérarchie de jauge ( c.f. Section 1.2.2 ) : la SUperSymétrie (SUSY)
[ 153 ] . Celle-ci est une éventuelle symétrie de l’espace-temps reliant
bosons et fermions. Elle permet aux couplages de jauge du SM de
s’unifier à une énergie autour de @xmath . On parle de théories de
grande unification (GUTs – Grand Unified Theories ). La hiérarchie de
jauge désigne alors l’écart en énergie entre l’échelle de brisure de la
SUSY, @xmath , et @xmath . Dans ce manuscrit, on s’intéressera à des
modèles où la SUSY n’est pas forcément nécessaire, et on n’inclura donc
pas la SUSY et les GUTs dans notre définition du paradigme standard.

Les hypothèses du paradigme standard sont très discutables. La première
a été remise en cause par les Réfs. [ 34 , 35 , 36 ] . Les auteurs
supposent la présence de dimensions spatiales supplémentaires compactes,
dont le rayon de compactification @xmath est supérieure à @xmath . Ceci
implique que @xmath n’est qu’une échelle effective, différente de
l’échelle de Planck réelle @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

Le même résultat peut être obtenu si on rajoute, au SM, un secteur caché
(champs neutres sous les interactions du SM) avec un grand nombre de
degrés de liberté [ 154 , 155 ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

où @xmath est le nombre d’espèce de particules du modèle. Les Réfs. [
156 , 157 , 152 , 158 ] abandonnèrent la deuxième hypothèse pour
justifier la petitesse de la constante cosmologique mesurée par rapport
aux échelles de la physique des particules testées aux collisionneurs.
@xmath peut alors être très inférieure à l’échelle d’énergie où le SM
cesse d’être une description correcte de la Nature. Les effets de la
théorie UV de la gravité doivent alors être «  doux   », i.e. qu’ils
n’augmentent pas le couplage effectif du SM à la gravité, celle-ci peut
alors continuer à être négligée dans l’étude des processus en
collisionneur.

###### Modèle standard de la cosmologie

Le SM de la cosmologie, le @xmath CDM, suppose l’existence d’autres
champs de particules pour reproduire les observations. Ainsi, environ
@xmath du contenu en énergie de l’Univers est constitué d’énergie noire
pour expliquer l’accélération de son expansion. Dans le @xmath CDM, ce
rôle est tenu par la constante cosmologique @xmath . Environ @xmath est
constitué de matière noire froide (CDM), et seulement environ @xmath est
constitué de matière du SM de la physique des particules. Le contenu en
énergie de l’Univers est résumé par la Fig. 1.6

L’hypothèse de nouvelles particules constituant la CDM est aujourd’hui
la meilleure pour expliquer toutes les évidences observationnelles de
masse manquante dans l’Univers : les courbes de rotation des galaxies [
160 , 161 , 162 , 163 , 164 ] , la collision d’amas [ 165 ] , la
formation des structures [ 166 ] , le fond diffus cosmologique (CMB –
Cosmic Microwave Background ) [ 167 ] , et la nucléosynthèse primordiale
(BBN – Big Bang Nucleosynthesis ) [ 168 ] . Les propriétés de la matière
noire et les évidences observationnelles pour celles-ci sont résumées
par la Fig. 1.7 .

Le @xmath CDM fait également l’hypothèse d’une époque de l’Univers
primordial où celui-ci est en expansion rapide : l’inflation [ 169 ] .
Cette phase est provoquée par la rétroaction sur la métrique d’au moins
un champ scalaire : l’inflaton.

##### 1.2.2 Naturalité de l’échelle électrofaible

On vient de voir que le SM n’est pas la théorie ultime de la physique.
C’est donc une EFT, certes renormalisable et unitaire, mais qui cesse
d’être valide à une échelle de coupure @xmath . Intéressons nous aux
corrections radiatives à une boucle à la masse du boson de Higgs,
générées principalement par le quark top, le boson de Higgs lui-même,
les bosons @xmath et @xmath ( c.f. la Fig. 1.8 ). En coupant les moments
dans l’intégrale de boucle à l’échelle de coupure @xmath , on obtient :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

où on a gardé que les contributions dominantes. @xmath est la masse
physique du boson de Higgs, @xmath est sa masse «  nue   » et @xmath est
la contribution radiative. Si @xmath , alors les corrections radiatives
sont plus grandes que la masse elle-même : la masse du boson de Higgs
est quadratiquement sensible à toute échelle de nouvelle physique
au-dessus de l’échelle EW. S’il n’y a pas de physique BSM à une échelle
d’énergie inférieure à @xmath , alors @xmath et @xmath doit être
finement ajustée pour compenser la contribution radiative sur une
trentaine d’ordre de grandeur ! C’est le problème de hiérarchie de
jauge, inhérent au caractère d’EFT du SM, et caractéristique des champs
scalaires élémentaires, comme le boson de Higgs. En effet, les
corrections radiatives aux masses des fermions et bosons de jauge
croissent logarithmiquement avec @xmath , et sont proportionnelles aux
masses des particules elles-mêmes :

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Les corrections de boucles sont donc supprimées par le petit paramètre à
l’arbre. Ce phénomène est relié au critère de naturalité technique de
t’Hooft [ 19 , 172 ] : un paramètre est naturellement petit si,
lorsqu’il est mis à zéro, la théorie a une symétrie supplémentaire. Pour
les fermions et les bosons de jauge, ce sont respectivement les
symétries chirale et de jauge.

Il est important de rappeler que le problème de hiérarchie est
indépendant du schéma de renormalisation. On trouve parfois dans la
littérature que la régularisation dimensionnelle fait disparaître la
divergence quadratique en @xmath , remplacée par un pôle en @xmath
correspondant à une divergence logarithmique. Ce n’est pas le bon
argument : le problème de hiérarchie n’est pas relié à la divergence
quadratique mais à le sensibilité quadratique aux nouvelles échelles
d’énergie. Par exemple, supposons l’existence d’un nouveau scalaire
lourd @xmath de masse @xmath couplant au boson de Higgs par un terme
@xmath . La contribution à une boucle de la particule @xmath est

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

Si @xmath n’est pas, cette fois, une échelle BSM mais juste un
régulateur (que l’on peut faire disparaître par une régularisation
dimensionnelle), la seule échelle de nouvelle physique est @xmath . On
voit que la masse du boson de Higgs est quadratiquement sensible à
@xmath , et ce peu importe le schéma de régularisation choisi pour le
calcul de la boucle. Ceci reste vrai même si les états BSM ne couplent
pas directement au boson de Higgs mais interagissent seulement avec les
autres champs du SM. Prenons par exemple une paire de fermions lourds
@xmath , chargés sous le groupe de jauge du SM mais ne couplant pas
directement à @xmath . Ils contribuent aux corrections radiatives à
@xmath via des diagrammes à deux boucles ( c.f. la Fig. 1.9 ) :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

où l’on retrouve une dépendance en @xmath .

La valeur de @xmath est donc naturellement à l’échelle de la théorie
fondamentale. Du point de vue du groupe de renormalisation Wilsonien,
@xmath est le seul paramètre relevant du SM, donc son importance
augmente au cours du flot vers l’infrarouge (IR – InfraRed ). Il est
donc difficile (ajustement fin) de trouver une trajectoire du groupe de
renormalisation qui donne la valeur de @xmath mesurée dans l’IR. Si le
boson de Higgs est réellement une particule élémentaire qui n’est pas
protégée par une symétrie, comme c’est le cas dans le SM, alors toute
échelle de nouvelle physique doit être inférieure à 10 TeV, afin que la
valeur mesurée de @xmath soit techniquement naturelle. Le boson de
Higgs, comme toute autre particule, couple à la gravité. Si les effets
de la théorie UV de la gravité ne sont pas doux, on s’attend à ce que
@xmath soit dominée par @xmath . @xmath est alors techniquement
naturelle si @xmath TeV et donc, d’après Éq.  ( 1.45 ), si @xmath pour
une théorie à 4D et en l’absence d’un secteur caché comprenant un grand
nombre de degrés de liberté. On peut ainsi se demander pourquoi la
théorie UV de la gravité serait si faiblement couplée mais, sans théorie
explicite, il n’est pas possible de dire si c’est une reformulation du
problème de hiérarchie de jauge ou non.

Si l’échelle de gravité est très grande devant l’échelle EW, la manière
conservative (du point de vue de la structure du SM) la plus simple pour
résoudre le problème de hiérarchie de jauge est de supposer l’existence
de la SUSY. Dans les modèles les plus simples, toutes les particules du
SM ont un partenaire de même masse et couplages dont le spin diffère
d’une demie unité. Comme les boucles de fermions et de bosons ont un
signe opposé, les corrections radiatives s’annulent. Ces particules
n’ayant pas été découvertes, la SUSY doit être spontanément brisée à une
échelle @xmath . Les particules supersymétriques sont alors plus lourdes
que leurs partenaires du SM. L’échelle @xmath doit être autour du TeV
pour stabiliser la masse du boson de Higgs contre les corrections
radiatives.

### Chapitre 2 La voie des Univers branaires

#### 2.1 Préambule historique

##### 2.1.1 Modèles à la Kaluza-Klein

La première apparition d’une dimension spatiale supplémentaire, dans la
littérature scientifique, est due à Nordström [ 30 ] . En 1914 (un an
avant la publication de la relativité générale par Einstein), il étend
la théorie de l’électromagnétisme à 5D, en utilisant un 5-vecteur,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

le 4-vecteur @xmath et le scalaire @xmath décrivant respectivement les
interactions électromagnétiques et gravitationnelles. Ainsi, il proposa
une théorie unifiée de ces deux interactions fondamentales.

En 1921, s’appuyant sur la relativité générale, Kaluza [ 31 ] repris
cette idée avec cette fois une théorie tensorielle de la gravité. La
métrique à 5D se décompose comme

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

où le scalaire @xmath , quelque peu embarrassant alors pour Kaluza,
ajouté à la métrique @xmath est compris aujourd’hui comme constituant
une théorie tenseur-scalaire de la gravité à la Brans-Dicke. Ainsi, dans
le modèle de Nordström, la gravité n’est qu’un effet électromagnétique
dans une dimension spatiale supplémentaire alors que, chez Kaluza, c’est
l’interaction électromagnétique qui est un effet gravitationnel dans
celle-ci. Nordström, comme Kaluza, firent l’hypothèse drastique que les
champs ne dépendent pas de la coordonnée de la dimension spatiale
supplémentaire, afin d’expliquer la non-observabilité de cette dernière.

Pour remédier à ce problème, Klein [ 32 ] proposa en 1926, après
l’avènement de la mécanique quantique, de compactifier la dimension
spatiale supplémentaire sur un cercle @xmath dont le rayon @xmath serait
très petit ( c.f. la Fig. 2.1 ). Les champs sur le cercle admettent
alors une décomposition en modes de Fourier, étiquetés par l’entier
@xmath , dont le moment est quantifié en @xmath ; on parle aujourd’hui
de décomposition de KK. Par exemple, pour un champ scalaire @xmath ,
dépendant des coordonnées @xmath de l’espace-temps de Minkowski à 4D et
de la coordonnée @xmath d’une dimension spatiale supplémentaire, on a

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

où @xmath et @xmath sont respectivement les champs et les fonctions
d’onde des modes de KK dans la dimension spatiale supplémentaire,
étiquetés par l’entier @xmath . En prenant un rayon suffisamment petit,
les modes @xmath sont hors de portée des expériences. @xmath étant le
groupe d’isométries de @xmath , on comprend bien le lien intime entre la
géométrie de la dimension spatiale supplémentaire et la nature de
l’interaction induite. Dans les années 30, Pauli [ 174 ] et Klein [ 33 ]
généralisèrent l’idée au cas de deux dimensions spatiales
supplémentaires compactifiées sur une sphère @xmath , dont le groupe
d’isométries est @xmath ( c.f. la Fig. 2.1 ). Cette fois-ci, le modèle
unifie la gravité avec une interaction basée sur un groupe de jauge
non-abélien : ils découvrirent alors la première théorie de Yang-Mills.

Le principe des théories de KK est simple et attrayant : compactifier
des dimensions spatiales supplémentaires sur une variété dont le groupe
d’isométries générées par les vecteurs de Killing se manifeste comme une
théorie de jauge à 4D. En 1975, Cho et Freund [ 176 ] présentèrent la
dérivation complète des théories gravitationnelles et de Yang-Mills à
partir d’une théorie de dimension supérieure. Néanmoins, cette voie a un
problème de taille : l’espace-temps à 4D usuel est nécessairement
courbe, rejetant la solution de type Minkowski. Pour y remédier, les
tentatives qui suivirent se focalisèrent sur la réalisation d’une
compactification spontanée des dimensions spatiales supplémentaires,
proposée par Cremmer et Scherk [ 177 ] , en incluant des scalaires et
champs de jauge additionnels, mais abandonnant ainsi l’idée fondatrice
de KK d’une «  théorie du tout   » purement gravitationnelle.

Motivé par le développement de la SUSY et de son application à la
gravité, la supergravité ¹ ¹ 1 Pour une revue sur la SUGRA, c.f. la Réf.
[ 178 ] . (SUGRA – SUperGRAvity ), Witten [ 179 ] démontra en 1981 que
le nombre minimal de dimensions spatiales supplémentaires pour réaliser
une théorie de KK, incluant le SM, est sept, ce qui correspond également
au nombre maximal de dimensions spatiales supplémentaires qu’une théorie
SUGRA cohérente peut avoir, laissant entrevoir le rêve que la théorie du
tout pourrait être la SUGRA à 11D. Cependant, une telle théorie n’est
pas renormalisable, et Witten [ 179 ] montra qu’aucune compactification
de la variété à 7D ne peut aboutir à une théorie chirale comme le
secteur EW du SM. Ceci enterra définitivement la voie des scenarii de KK
pour construire une théorie ultime de la physique.

##### 2.1.2 Théories des supercordes

En 1974, Scherk et Schwarz [ 181 ] proposèrent que les particules
élémentaires de la matière ne seraient pas des objets ponctuels, mais de
petites cordes vibrantes de taille @xmath , où l’échelle de masse @xmath
des premières excitations des cordes est souvent prise proche de @xmath
(paradigme standard). Le spectre de la théorie des cordes prévoyant une
particule sans masse de spin-2, la gravité est donc naturellement
incluse dans le modèle. En outre, il a été démontré que la gravité à
grande distance se comporte comme le prévoit la relativité générale, et
que c’est à petites distances que les effets cordistes apparaissent.
Dans une théorie des cordes ² ² 2 Pour une revue sur les théories des
cordes, voir par exemple les Réfs. [ 182 , 183 , 184 , 185 , 186 , 187 ,
27 , 188 ] . , les grands moments euclidiens @xmath dans les intégrales
de boucle sont coupés par des facteurs @xmath , impliquant l’absence de
divergences UV dans la théorie : cette dernière n’a donc pas besoin
d’être renormalisée. Une telle théorie est donc une bonne prétendante au
titre de théorie quantique de la gravitation dans l’UV. Pour introduire
des fermions en théorie des cordes, et s’assurer de l’absence de
tachyons dans le spectre, il faut avoir recours à la SUSY. De plus, la
quantification de la supercorde requiert un espace temps à 10D. On
connaît aujourd’hui cinq théories des supercordes consistantes, reliées
par des relations de dualité, dont on pense qu’elles ne sont que des cas
limites d’une théorie plus fondamentale à 11D : la théorie M ( c.f. la
Fig. 2.2 ). C’est aujourd’hui, dans ce cadre théorique, qu’est reformulé
le fantasme d’unification des interactions fondamentales et de la
matière : un unique objet fondamental, la supercorde, est à l’origine de
toutes les particules élémentaires connues.

##### 2.1.3 Branes

Les @xmath -branes sont des membranes de dimension @xmath apparaissant
souvent dans les modèles extra-dimensionnels. Elles ont une densité
d’énergie appelée tension, et sont capables de piéger certains champs à
leur surface, les empêchant ainsi de se propager dans tout l’espace
compactifié. Cela ouvre la porte à une myriade de nouvelles possibilités
de construction de modèles. Par essence, ce sont des objets effectifs
dont la formation et la description microscopique peut avoir deux
origines connues à ce jour : les D @xmath -branes en théorie des
supercordes ou les défauts topologiques en théorie des champs.

###### D-branes

En 1995, Polchinski [ 189 ] découvrit que dans les théories des
supercordes de type I et II apparaissent des membranes solitoniques de
dimension @xmath appelées @xmath -branes de Dirichlet, ou D @xmath
-branes. Les cordes ouvertes sont attachées par leurs extrémités à des
piles de D @xmath -branes, et y développent des charges de Chan-Paton [
190 ] : elles y sont chargées sous un groupe de jauge dont le rang est
déterminé par le nombres de D @xmath -branes de la pile. On se retrouve
alors avec une membrane sur laquelle sont piégés des champs de jauge et
des fermions ( c.f. la Fig. 2.3 ). Quant aux cordes fermées, comme le
graviton, elles n’ont pas d’extrémités où s’attacher aux D @xmath
-branes et sont donc libres de se propager dans tout l’espace-temps,
appelé le bulk. Dans la vision de la relativité générale, la gravité est
une propriété géométrique de l’espace-temps, qui se propage donc dans
toutes les dimensions, ce qui rejoint la description cordiste.

###### Défauts topologiques

Dans les années 80, Akama [ 191 ] , Rubakov et Shaposhnikov [ 192 ] ,
ainsi que Visser [ 193 ] , proposèrent l’idée selon laquelle les champs
du SM seraient piégés au sein d’un défaut topologique dans le bulk, avec
une ou plusieurs dimensions spatiales supplémentaires non nécessairement
compactifiées. Supposons, par exemple, l’existence d’une dimension
spatiale supplémentaire de coordonnée @xmath , et que la théorie a
plusieurs vides discrets dégénérés, correspondant à des valeurs
différentes d’un paramètre d’ordre. Appelons deux de ces vides I et II.
Il existe une configuration statique des champs, un mur de domaine, qui
divise le bulk en deux compartiments : dans l’un, le système est dans le
vide I, alors que, dans l’autre, il est dans le vide II ( c.f. la Fig.
2.4 ). Le mur de domaine représente une région transitoire
topologiquement stable. Son épaisseur @xmath dépend des détails
microscopiques de la théorie. À des distances très grandes devant @xmath
, il peut être vu comme une membrane 3D.

Les excitations de la configuration en champs du mur de domaine peuvent
être classées en deux catégories. Certaines sont localisées sur le mur,
leur extension spatiale le long de la direction perpendiculaire au mur
étant du même ordre que @xmath . Elles sont souvent associées aux modes
zéro de la décomposition en modes 4D : ce sont des particules sans masse
se propageant uniquement le long de la surface du mur. Les autres
excitations, dont les masses les plus légères sont de l’ordre de @xmath
, sont délocalisées et peuvent s’échapper dans le bulk. En supposant que
toute la matière de notre Univers est composée de modes zéro, ces
derniers sont donc confinés à la surface du mur et sont perçus comme
constituant un monde à 4D. Afin de découvrir la dimension spatiale
supplémentaire, un observateur devra avoir accès à des énergies
supérieures à @xmath .

La principale distinction, entre les scénarii de KK et la localisation
sur un défaut topologique, est l’échelle de masse des modes excités
@xmath . Dans les théories de KK, cette dernière est reliée au rayon de
compactification @xmath alors que, dans le cas des murs de domaine, elle
est reliée à l’épaisseur du mur @xmath , et la dimension spatiale
supplémentaire est possiblement infinie.

L’existence d’au moins un mode zéro peut être démontrée. La théorie avec
une dimension spatiale supplémentaire infinie est invariante sous les
translations 4D. La présence du mur de domaine brise spontanément
l’invariance par translation selon la direction @xmath : la physique
devient dépendante de la distance au mur le long de la dimension
spatiale supplémentaire. On a donc l’existence d’un boson de
Nambu-Goldstone de spin-0 confiné à la surface du mur. La fonction
d’onde du mode zéro dans la dimension spatiale supplémentaire est donnée
par la dérivée par rapport à @xmath de celui du paramètre d’ordre @xmath
( c.f. la Fig. 2.4 ). Ainsi, la localisation d’un boson de spin-0 est
possible. Supposons que la théorie ait une symétrie globale sous le
groupe @xmath , qui reste non-brisée dans les vides I et II. Supposons
ensuite que @xmath soit brisé spontanément en @xmath sur le mur. Alors
les bosons de Nambu-Goldstone, correspondant aux générateurs brisés,
sont localisés sur celui-ci.

Qu’en est-il de la localisation des fermions de spin-1/2 ? Ces derniers
peuvent être couplés au champ scalaire @xmath modélisant le mur. Le
nombre de modes zéro est donné par le théorème de l’index de
Jackiw-Rebbi [ 194 ] . L’épaisseur de la fonction d’onde du mode zéro
est de l’ordre de l’inverse de la masse du fermion dans le bulk. Si le
bulk est à 6D et le défaut topologique une hypercorde cosmique
abélienne, Frère, Libanov et Troitsky proposèrent en 2000 [ 195 , 196 ]
de générer les trois générations de fermions du SM à partir d’une seule
génération à 6D grace au nombre quantique de vorticité de l’hypercorde.

Quant aux champs de jauge, il est notoirement difficile de les localiser
sur un mur de domaine tout en préservant l’universalité des couplages
aux fermions. En effet, dans le SM par exemple, les différentes saveurs
de quarks couplent de la même manière aux gluons. En 1996, Dvali et
Shifman [ 198 ] proposèrent un mécanisme réalisant cette tâche. L’idée
est d’avoir une théorie de jauge dans une phase de confinement dans le
bulk, et une phase déconfinée sur le mur. De cette manière, le champ
chromo-électrique d’une charge résidant sur le mur ne peut pas pénétrer
dans le bulk. Un modèle dual est le suivant : un supraconducteur
inhomogène avec une phase non-supraconductrice sur un plan. Des
monopoles magnétiques placés loin du plan vont ressentir le confinement,
alors que ceux sur le plan interagissent via la loi de Coulomb 2D.
L’universalité de la charge est préservée dans ce modèle. Si celle-ci
est déplacée du mur vers le bulk, un vortex la connectant au mur va se
former ( c.f. la Fig. 2.5 ). Le champ de jauge induit par cette charge
sur le mur à grande distance est alors indépendant de sa position dans
la dimension spatiale supplémentaire, et est identique à l’interaction
générée par une charge placée sur le mur. Une reformulation plus économe
de ce mécanisme a été proposée en 2010 par Ohta et Sakai [ 199 ] , en
introduisant une perméabilité diélectrique dépendante de @xmath pour les
champs de jauge, i.e. un couplage de jauge dépendant de la position dans
la dimension spatiale supplémentaire. Cette difficulté de localisation
des bosons de jauge disparaît avec deux dimensions spatiales
supplémentaires : Oda [ 200 , 201 ] montra en 2000 que les modes zéro
sont localisés grâce à la gravité près d’une hypercorde (3D), dans un
bulk à 6D, en préservant un couplage universel aux fermions.

##### 2.1.4 Modèles phénoménologiques

À la fin des années 90 et au début du nouveau millénaire, de nouveaux
paradigmes provoquèrent un gigantesque engouement pour les dimensions
spatiales supplémentaires en physique des particules et en cosmologie,
ouvrant la voie à une approche «  du bas vers le haut   » pour
construire des modèles extra-dimensionnels.

La première est due à Arkani-Hamed, Dimopoulos et Dvali [ 34 , 35 , 36 ]
(ADD) en 1998. Ils proposèrent de confiner le SM à une 3-brane, avec des
dimensions spatiales supplémentaires compactifiées. L’idée phare de leur
modèle est de supposer le rayon de compactification @xmath , i.e. entre
le millimètre et le femtomètre, en fonction du nombre de dimensions
spatiales supplémentaires. Ainsi, l’échelle de gravité peut être
abaissée à l’échelle du TeV ³ ³ 3 L’idée d’abaisser l’échelle de la
gravité était apparue quelques années auparavant en théorie des
supercordes [ 202 , 203 , 204 , 205 , 206 , 207 ] . , faisant
disparaître la hiérarchie de jauge et le problème qui y est inhérent.
Cependant, cette dernière y est remplacée par une hiérarchie géométrique
: la taille des dimensions spatiales supplémentaires considérées est
très grande devant la distance caractéristique de la gravité.

Pour remédier à ce problème, Randall et Sundrum [ 40 ] (RS) publièrent,
en 1999, un modèle avec une dimension spatiale supplémentaire courbe, de
taille naturelle, compactifiée sur un intervalle. Le SM est toujours sur
une 3-brane à une extrémité, mais l’échelle de gravité dépend de la
position dans la dimension spatiale supplémentaire, évoluant d’un bout à
l’autre de l’intervalle de @xmath jusqu’à l’échelle du TeV (là où est
positionnée la 3-brane du SM). Cette fois, la hiérarchie de jauge
apparente à 4D est expliquée par un effet de courbure dans la dimension
spatiale supplémentaire, et l’échelle EW est stabilisée par une échelle
de coupure au TeV sur la 3-brane : c’est le modèle de RS1.

Dans la foulée, la même année, Randall et Sundrum [ 208 ] montrèrent
qu’une 3-brane, où est localisé le SM, avec une dimension spatiale
supplémentaire infinie, courbe l’espace dans celle-ci de manière à
localiser le mode zéro du graviton près de la 3-brane. Il n’y a donc pas
toujours besoin de compactifier les dimensions spatiales supplémentaires
pour retrouver la gravité newtonienne à 4D dans le régime accessible
actuellement par l’expérience : c’est le modèle de RS2.

En 2000, Dvali, Gabadadze et Porrati (DGP) [ 157 ] proposèrent un modèle
où le SM est localisé sur une 3-brane plongée dans un espace-temps de
Minkowski infini à 5D. Un terme de courbure scalaire à 4D localisé sur
la 3-brane implique que la gravité apparaît 4D à courte distance. À
grandes distances, par contre, elle devient 5D, donnant lieu à de
nouvelles solutions pour la cosmologie, notamment une réinterprétation
de l’origine de l’accélération de l’expansion de l’Univers.

Toujours la même année, Appelquist, Cheng et Dobrescu [ 209 ] étudièrent
un modèle avec une dimension spatiale supplémentaire plate, compactifiée
sur un intervalle dont la longueur est de l’ordre d’un dixième
d’attomètre, dans laquelle tous les champs du SM se propagent : on parle
de dimension spatiale supplémentaire universelle (UED – Universal Extra
Dimension ). Si les 3-branes situées à chaque bord de l’UED sont
identiques (mêmes couplages localisés) alors le modèle possède une
symétrie sous la réflexion par rapport au milieu de l’intervalle. Ceci
implique que la parité de KK @xmath , où @xmath étiquette les niveaux de
KK, est conservée. La KK-particule @xmath la plus légère est stable, on
parle de LKP ( Lightest Kaluza-Klein Particle ). Celle-ci est alors une
bonne candidate pour la matière noire.

En 2004, Cremades, Ibánez et Marchesano [ 210 ] étudièrent des modèles
avec 2, 4 ou 6 dimensions spatiales supplémentaires plates,
compactifiées sur des tores magnétisés. Si des fermions se propagent
dans les dimensions supplémentaires, le champ magnétique génère @xmath
modes zéro chiraux dégénérés pour les tours de KK. On peut ainsi générer
à la fois la chiralité et la structure en trois générations du SM. Ces
modèles effectifs sont censés capturer l’essentiel de la physique à
basse énergie de modèles UVs semi-réalistes en théorie des supercordes.

On a pris ici le parti de citer les modèles historiques dont l’impact
est si important qu’ils ont chacun ouvert leur axe de recherche en
physique des particules et/ou en cosmologie. La plupart des modèles qui
suivirent en sont des variantes et des raffinements. L’explosion du
nombre d’articles dans la littérature sur les dimensions spatiales
supplémentaires ne permet pas d’en faire une liste exhaustive, et de
nombreux mécanismes très intéressants ne sont pas cités ici.

#### 2.2 Mode d’emploi pour construire un modèle extra-dimensionnel

##### 2.2.1 Compactification de dimensions spatiales supplémentaires

Comme nous l’avons vu dans la section précédente, il est possible que
des dimensions spatiales supplémentaires soient indétectables pour des
expériences de basse énergie, si elles sont enroulées en un espace
compact de petit volume. Nous allons revenir ici plus en détail sur
cette idée.

###### Compactification sur une variété lisse

Considérons un monde unidimensionnel, la droite réelle @xmath ,
paramétrisé par la coordonnée @xmath . Pour chaque point @xmath le long
de cette droite, il y a un unique nombre réel @xmath appelé la
coordonnée @xmath du point @xmath . Un bon système de coordonnée, pour
cette droite infinie, satisfait deux conditions :

-   Deux points distincts @xmath ont des coordonnées différentes @xmath
    .

-   L’affectation des coordonnées aux points est continue : deux points
    voisins ont des coordonnées presque égales.

Choisissons une origine à cette droite, et utilisons la distance depuis
cette origine comme bonne coordonnée. Imaginons maintenant un
observateur se déplaçant dans cette ligne-monde et remarquant l’étrange
caractéristique suivante : la même scène se répète à chaque fois qu’il
se déplace d’une distance @xmath . S’il rencontre une autre personne en
@xmath , il voit des clones de celle-ci en @xmath , avec @xmath ( c.f.
la Fig. 2.6 ). Il n’y a pas moyen de distinguer une droite avec cette
étrange propriété d’un cercle @xmath de rayon @xmath . Dans ce dernier
cas, il n’y a pas de clones mais seulement la même personne que
l’observateur rencontre à chaque tour du cercle. Pour exprimer cela
mathématiquement, il suffit de penser le cercle comme une droite où tous
les points, dont les coordonnées diffèrent de @xmath , correspondent au
même point physique. Cela revient à définir la classe d’équivalence
suivante :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

L’intervalle @xmath est appelé le domaine fondamental de
l’identification ( 2.4 ). C’est un sous-espace qui doit satisfaire deux
conditions :

-   Deux points dans le domaine fondamental ne sont pas identifiés.

-   Tout point de l’espace entier est dans le domaine fondamental ou est
    relié par une identification à un point de ce dernier.

Pour construire l’espace généré par cette identification, on prend
l’adhérence du domaine fondamental, ici @xmath , et on effectue
l’identification de ses bords, ici @xmath et @xmath , ce qui donne le
cercle @xmath de rayon @xmath ( c.f. la Fig. 2.7 ). On dit que
l’identification ( 2.4 ) a compactifié la dimension. Cela peut sembler
un moyen bien compliqué de décrire un cercle. Cependant, pour @xmath ,
une coordonnée est soit discontinue, soit multivaluée. Définir la
théorie des champs sur @xmath , avec la classe d’équivalence ( 2.4 ),
permet d’utiliser un bon système de coordonnée, lequel est multivalué
sur @xmath . De plus, en théorie des champs, une telle identification
revient à imposer une symétrie pour l’action, ce qui rend le problème
plus simple en pratique.

Voyons maintenant comment construire de manière générale une théorie des
champs avec des dimensions spatiales supplémentaires compactifiées sur
une variété lisse. Considérons une théorie à @xmath D, avec @xmath
dimensions spatiales supplémentaires et une action définie comme

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

où on a le lagrangien @xmath du champ @xmath . On dit que la théorie est
compactifiée sur @xmath , où @xmath est l’espace-temps de Minkowski à
4D, et @xmath est un espace compact à @xmath D, si les coordonnées de
l’espace à @xmath D peuvent être séparées comme @xmath ( @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath ). Le lagrangien à 4D est obtenu après intégration sur les
coordonnées @xmath de @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

En général, on peut écrire @xmath , où @xmath est une variété
non-compacte, et @xmath est un groupe discret agissant librement sur
@xmath par les opérateurs @xmath , pour @xmath . @xmath est appelé
l’espace de recouvrement de @xmath . On dit que @xmath agit librement
sur @xmath si seulement @xmath a des points fixes dans @xmath , où
@xmath est l’identité dans @xmath . Les opérateurs @xmath constituent
une représentation de @xmath . @xmath est donc construit par
identification des points @xmath et @xmath qui appartiennent à la même
orbite ; on définit alors la relation d’équivalence :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Après identification, la physique ne dépend pas des points individuels
de @xmath mais seulement des orbites (chaque point de @xmath correspond
à une unique orbite), ainsi

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

dont une condition nécessaire et suffisante pour le champ est

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

puisque

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

où @xmath est un élément de la représentation du groupe @xmath agissant
dans l’espace des champs. Si @xmath , où @xmath est l’identité, on parle
de compactification ordinaire. Si @xmath , on parle de compactification
de Scherk-Schwarz [ 211 , 212 , 213 ] , et @xmath est appelé un twist de
Scherk-Schwarz. Pour les compactifications ordinaires et de
Scherk-Schwarz, les champs sont mono-valués sur l’espace de recouvrement
@xmath . Pour la compactification ordinaire, les champs sont mono-valués
sur l’espace compact @xmath . Par contre, pour la compactification de
Scherk-Schwarz, les champs sont multi-valués sur @xmath .

Dans l’exemple de la compactification de @xmath sur @xmath : @xmath (
@xmath ), @xmath , @xmath et @xmath . Le @xmath -ième élément du groupe
@xmath est représenté par @xmath , tel que

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

L’identification ( 2.4 ) revient donc à faire l’identification @xmath .
Le groupe @xmath a une infinité d’éléments mais ils peuvent tous être
obtenus à partir d’un seul générateur : la translation de @xmath
représentée par @xmath . Le twist @xmath correspondant est défini par :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

et les twists des autres éléments de @xmath sont donnés par @xmath .

###### Compactification sur un orbifold

On peut également construire des identifications qui ont des points
fixes [ 214 , 215 , 216 , 217 ] , i.e. des points reliés à eux-mêmes par
celles-ci. Prenons l’exemple de la droite réelle, paramétrisée par la
coordonnée @xmath , sur laquelle on effectue l’identification @xmath .
Un domaine fondamental est la demi-droite @xmath . Notons que le point
au bord @xmath doit être inclus dans le domaine fondamental, lequel est
identifié avec lui-même : c’est l’exemple le plus simple d’un orbifold,
un espace obtenu par des identifications qui ont des points fixes. Ces
derniers sont des points singuliers : la demi-droite @xmath est une
variété unidimensionnelle conventionnelle pour @xmath , alors que le
point @xmath est un point d’arrêt. Cet orbifold est noté @xmath , où
@xmath est la transformation : @xmath ( c.f. la Fig. 2.8 ).

On peut définir la compactification sur un orbifold de la manière
suivante. Soit @xmath une variété compacte et @xmath un groupe discret
représenté par les opérateurs @xmath , pour @xmath , agissant
non-librement sur @xmath . On définit alors la classe d’équivalence
suivante :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

La condition nécessaire et suffisante est que les champs définis en deux
points identifiés diffèrent par une transformation @xmath , élément de
la représentation de @xmath dans l’espace des champs :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Le fait que @xmath agisse non-librement sur @xmath signifie que
certaines transformations @xmath ont des points fixes dans @xmath .
L’espace quotient @xmath n’est pas une variété lisse mais a des
singularités aux points fixes : c’est un orbifold.

L’exemple le plus simple d’orbifold compact est l’intervalle. Dans ce
cas, @xmath , @xmath de rayon @xmath et @xmath . L’action du seul
élément non-trivial de @xmath (l’inversion) est représentée par @xmath ,
telle que

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

ce qui satisfait @xmath . La condition sur les champs est

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

où @xmath , et @xmath est la matrice identité @xmath . Dans l’espace des
champs, @xmath est une matrice diagonalisable, de valeurs propres @xmath
. L’orbifold @xmath est une variété avec des bords en @xmath et @xmath ,
les points fixes ( c.f. la Fig. 2.9 ). La compactification sur @xmath
permet aussi de définir un twist de Scherk-Schwarz @xmath avec l’Éq. (
2.12 ). @xmath et @xmath doivent satisfaire une condition de
consistance. Considérons un point de coordonnée @xmath dans le domaine
fondamental de @xmath . Appliquons d’abord une réflexion par rapport à
@xmath et ensuite une translation de @xmath , ce qui correspond à @xmath
. C’est équivalent à considérer d’abord une translation de @xmath et une
réflexion par rapport à @xmath . Ceci implique la condition :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

ce qui équivaut dans l’espace des champs à :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Pour un twist non-trivial @xmath , on peut toujours trouver une
combinaison de @xmath et @xmath qui agit comme une autre réflexion :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

C’est en fait une réflexion par rapport à @xmath : si @xmath , @xmath
effectue la transformation @xmath , donc @xmath . La condition de
consistance ( 2.18 ) appliquée à @xmath donne

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

La description de l’orbifold @xmath , avec des twists de Scherk-Schwarz
non-triviaux, est donnée par deux parités @xmath et @xmath par rapport
aux points fixes respectifs @xmath et @xmath , qui ne commutent pas
nécessairement. On parle d’orbifold @xmath .

Il n’est cependant pas obligatoire de décrire l’intervalle avec un
orbifold. On peut très bien construire une théorie des champs
consistante directement sur l’intervalle @xmath où @xmath [ 218 , 219 ,
50 ] . Les Réfs. [ 220 , 51 ] comparent les descriptions orbifold et
intervalle.

##### 2.2.2 Réduction dimensionnelle et décomposition de Kaluza-Klein

Pour construire une théorie avec des dimensions spatiales
supplémentaires, on commence par choisir : la géométrie de l’espace
compactifié, la position des éventuelles @xmath -branes, le contenu en
champs (localisés sur une @xmath -brane ou libres de se propager dans le
bulk), c.f. la Fig. 2.10 .

On écrit l’action du bulk à @xmath D en termes des champs dans les
différentes représentations du groupe de Lorentz à @xmath D @xmath . On
effectue la même démarche avec l’action des @xmath -branes. On
compactifie ensuite les dimensions spatiales supplémentaires sur la
géométrie choisie, et on résout les équations d’Einstein (si on désire
tenir compte de la rétroaction de la tension des @xmath -branes sur la
métrique) avec un ansatz assurant un espace-temps de Minkowski pour les
quatre dimensions usuelles (ou de de Sitter si on fait de la
cosmologie).

L’étape suivante est la réduction dimensionnelle à 4D. @xmath est plus
grand que @xmath , pour @xmath , chaque représentation de @xmath étant
plus grande que celle correspondante de @xmath . Ceci implique qu’une
seule représentation de @xmath se décompose en plusieurs représentations
différentes de @xmath . Cependant, différentes représentations de @xmath
correspondent à des particules de spins différents. Ainsi, on voit que
certaines particules de spins différents en 4D peuvent être vues comme
différentes composantes d’une seule particule dans un espace-temps de
plus haute dimensionalité, avec un seul spin associé à @xmath . C’est
l’idée à la base de la théorie de KK : l’Éq. ( 2.2 ) montre que le
graviton à 5D se décompose en graviton, graviphoton et graviscalaire à
4D. Lors de la construction du modèle, on décompose donc les champs à
@xmath D en représentations irréductibles de @xmath . Ensuite, on
effectue une décomposition de KK des champs, qui dépendent toujours des
coordonnées des dimensions spatiales supplémentaires, en une somme
infinie de produits de champs à 4D et de leurs fonctions d’onde de KK,
fonctions propres de l’opérateur de Laplace dans l’espace compactifié.
L’action effective à 4D est alors obtenue en intégrant sur les
coordonnées de l’espace compactifié, l’orthonormalisation des fonctions
d’onde de KK étant imposée afin d’avoir des termes cinétiques canoniques
à 4D.

Il y a ainsi deux signatures expérimentales de l’existence de dimensions
spatiales supplémentaires :

-   L’apparition d’une multitudes d’états de KK, appelée tour de KK,
    pour le graviton et certaines ou toutes les particules connues du
    SM.

-   L’apparition de nouveaux champs de spins différents se combinant
    avec les champs connus pour former des représentations irréductibles
    de @xmath .

La première implication signifie qu’il y aurait une tour de KK-gravitons
(qui ont toujours accès à toutes les dimensions spatiales
supplémentaires), et possiblement des tours pour les leptons, les quarks
et les bosons de jauge (à part s’ils sont piégés sur une 3-brane), dont
le mode zéro correspond à la particule du SM. Tous les modes d’une tour
de KK ont les mêmes nombres quantiques (spins, charges de jauge, …).
Pour la deuxième implication, les champs de spins différents issus d’une
même représentation de @xmath ont les mêmes charges de jauge, et ont
possiblement une tour de KK associée (parfois, les degrés de liberté
d’une tour de KK peuvent être «  mangés   » par une autre tour : les
modes de celle-ci acquièrent ainsi leur masse, d’une manière analogue au
mécanisme de Higgs).

#### 2.3 Univers branaires et hiérarchie de jauge

Dans cette section, nous allons passer en revue les différents modèles
extra-dimensionnels historiques, résolvant le problème de hiérarchie de
jauge, où le SM est localisé sur une 3-brane. Pour des revues sur le
sujet, voir les Réfs. [ 197 , 159 , 222 , 223 , 224 , 225 , 226 , 227 ,
228 , 175 , 229 , 230 ] .

##### 2.3.1 Théorie effective pour une 3-brane

Commençons par poser les bases de la description effective d’un Univers
confiné à une 3-brane [ 231 , 232 ] . Considérons une 3-brane dans un
espace temps à @xmath D. Les coordonnées dans le bulk, @xmath , sont
étiquetées par @xmath et celles sur la @xmath -brane, @xmath , par
@xmath . Les coordonnées du point @xmath sur la 3-brane sont @xmath ,
dont la dépendance en @xmath rappelle que les @xmath sont des champs (
c.f. la Fig. 2.11 ). La métrique dans le bulk est @xmath , associée au
vielbein à @xmath D @xmath , où @xmath est l’indice de Lorentz de
l’espace tangent au point @xmath . L’EFT que l’on veut construire doit
décrire de petites fluctuations des champs autour d’un état du vide. On
peut supposer que la 3-brane est plate, plongée dans un bulk lui-aussi
plat. Le vide est alors :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Si on considère la distance entre deux points de la 3-brane, séparés par
une distance infinitésimale, un observateur sur celle-ci ou dans le bulk
mesure la même distance, i.e.

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

ce qui donne la métrique induite sur la 3-brane :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

On peut alors écrire l’action générale pour des champs localisés sur la
3-brane. Les symétries qui nous guident sont celles des transformations
générales de coordonnées dans l’espace des @xmath et des @xmath . Pour
décrire des fermions, on doit définir le vielbein induit sur la 3-brane
:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

où @xmath est une représentation de @xmath .

Sur la 3-brane, sont localisés des champs typiques du contenu du SM : un
scalaire @xmath , deux spineurs de Weyl @xmath qui se couplent à @xmath
via un couplage de Yukawa @xmath , un boson de jauge @xmath qui se
couple à @xmath et @xmath avec la constante de couplage @xmath .
L’action effective, décrivant ces champs sur la 3-brane et leurs
interactions, est donnée par

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

où @xmath , @xmath , et l’ellipse désigne des termes de dimensions
supérieures. Le terme @xmath est la tension de la 3-brane, i.e. sa
densité d’énergie, qui est déterminée par la théorie UV donnant une
description microscopique de la 3-brane. Elle doit être exactement
compensée par un ajustement fin, et ainsi pouvoir travailler avec le
vide minkowskien de l’Éq. ( 2.21 ). L’action ( 2.25 ) s’ajoute à celle
d’Einstein-Hilbert décrivant la gravité dans le bulk :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

où @xmath et @xmath sont respectivement la masse de Planck et la
constante cosmologique dans le bulk.

À cause de l’invariance sous la reparamétrisation à 4D de la 3-brane, on
doit choisir des conditions de fixation de jauge, afin d’éliminer les
composantes non-physiques de @xmath . Il y a quatre coordonnées sur la
brane, donc on a besoin des quatre conditions :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

qui fixent complètement la jauge. Seules les composantes le long de la
dimension spatiale supplémentaire, @xmath , demeurent, correspondant aux
degrés de liberté des fluctuations de la 3-brane autour de son état du
vide. Après réduction dimensionnelle, ils se manifestent comme des
particules de spin-0 : les branons. Pour obtenir les champs @xmath ,
avec une normalisation canonique des termes cinétiques, on effectue
l’expansion du terme dominant dans l’action de la 3-brane, ce qui se
réduit à simplement la tension de cette dernière :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

où la dépendance à l’ordre dominant en @xmath de la métrique induite est

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

et

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

Ainsi, le terme dominant de l’action est

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

On peut alors définir le champ avec une normalisation canonique :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

Dans le cas d’une brane de tension @xmath , le terme cinétique est
négatif et les branons sont des fantômes d’Ostrogradsky. La brane est
donc instable et se désagrège. La solution est d’éliminer les degrés de
liberté des branons, i.e. empêcher la brane de bouger en la
positionnant, par exemple, à un point fixe d’un orbifold.

##### 2.3.2 Modèles d’ADD

###### Compactification sur une variété toroïdale

La nouvelle classe de modèles BSM, proposée par Arkani-Hamed, Dimopoulos
et Dvali (ADD) [ 34 , 35 , 36 ] , constitue la renaissance des
dimensions spatiales supplémentaires en physique fondamentale. L’idée de
base est de ramener l’échelle de la gravité au TeV, afin de faire
disparaître la hiérarchie de jauge et le désert du paradigme standard.
Les champs du SM sont confinés à une 3-brane, et l’espace compactifié
doit avoir un volume suffisamment grand pour diluer la gravité, qui
apparaît de faible intensité pour un observateur sur la 3-brane ( c.f.
la Fig. 2.12 ).

Dans sa version la plus simple, le modèle d’ADD repose sur les
hypothèses suivantes :

-   Il existe @xmath dimensions spatiales supplémentaires de rayon de
    compactification commun @xmath , l’espace compactifié étant un tore
    à @xmath D de volume @xmath , où @xmath .

-   Les champs fermioniques, de jauge et de Higgs, sont piégés sur une
    3-brane dans le bulk.

-   La constante cosmologique est nulle dans le bulk, et la tension la
    3-brane compense exactement l’énergie du vide créée par les champs
    qui y sont localisés : l’espace-temps est minkowskien dans le bulk
    et sur la 3-brane.

-   La 3-brane est rigide, i.e. la brane brise explicitement
    l’invariance par translation dans le bulk et les branons sont
    massifs et découplent de l’EFT: on peut donc négliger les
    fluctuations de la position de la brane dans le bulk : @xmath .

L’action @xmath de ce modèle est constituée de deux parties :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

où @xmath est l’action du SM localisé sur la 3-brane (les indices de
Lorentz étant contractés avec la métrique induite sur la 3-brane) et
l’action dans le bulk @xmath est l’action d’Einstein-Hilbert à @xmath D
:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

où @xmath est l’échelle la masse de Planck à @xmath D, et @xmath ,
@xmath sont respectivement le déterminant de la métrique et le scalaire
de courbure de Ricci à @xmath D, avec

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

Sous nos hypothèses, en développant la métrique autour de son état du
vide, on a :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

où on a utilisé un système de coordonnées cylindriques. On a écrit
seulement les fluctuations @xmath de la partie à 4D car on veut
déterminer comment l’action à 4D est incluse dans celle à @xmath D. On
peut alors calculer les quantités :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

et ainsi, l’action de l’Éq. ( 2.34 ) donne :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

Si on définit l’échelle de Planck du paradigme standard comme

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

on retrouve l’action d’Einstein-Hilbert habituelle à 4D ( 1.39 ) avec
une constante cosmologique nulle. Si @xmath , alors @xmath . Dans ce
cas, la masse de Planck de la théorie extra-dimensionnelle est la même
que celle de la relativité générale à 4D, ce qui a été longtemps supposé
en théorie des supercordes. En revanche, si @xmath , @xmath . @xmath
n’est alors plus une échelle fondamentale, mais une échelle effective
dérivée de la géométrie du système.

On peut linéariser la relativité générale :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

Dans les scénarii d’ADD, l’échelle d’énergie, à partir de laquelle la
relativité générale linéarisée devient fortement couplée, est alors

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

où @xmath est le facteur de boucle à @xmath D,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

Les effets gravitationnels non-linéaires apparaissent à l’échelle @xmath
. Il est important de rappeler que l’échelle, à laquelle apparaissent
les nouveaux degrés de liberté de la théorie UV de la gravité, peut tout
de même être très inférieure à @xmath , si l’achèvement UV est une
théorie faiblement couplée :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

comme discuté dans le troisième article d’ADD [ 36 ] . Cependant, on
suppose généralement dans la littérature que @xmath est l’échelle de
coupure du SM (ou de l’une de ses extensions). On choisit alors le
volume de l’espace compactifié suffisamment grand pour ramener la masse
de Planck près de l’échelle EW (Éq. ( 2.39 )). La théorie UV de la
gravité n’a donc plus forcément besoin d’être très faiblement couplée
pour résoudre le problème de hiérarchie avec un secteur de Higgs
non-protégé par une symétrie.

La réduction dimensionnelle du graviton à @xmath D et la décomposition
de KK donnent, pour les modes zéro, le graviton à 4D, des graviphotons
et graviscalaires, dont le radion : un scalaire décrivant les
fluctuations de la taille de l’espace compact. Dans le modèle d’ADD,
l’espace-temps est plat, donc la décomposition de KK pour le graviton
est une simple décomposition de Fourier, et la masse du @xmath -ième
niveau de KK est @xmath . La présence d’une tour de KK-gravitons modifie
la loi Newton de la gravité à 4D. Le potentiel gravitationnel, entre
deux corps de masse @xmath et @xmath distants de @xmath , est alors

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

où @xmath est la constante gravitationnelle de Newton usuelle à 4D. Pour
@xmath , on peut ne retenir que le premier mode, pour lequel @xmath [
233 ] . La déviation à la loi de Newton dépend donc de @xmath , qui se
calcule à partir de l’échelle de Planck dans le bulk @xmath avec l’Éq. (
2.39 ) :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

On peut prendre, par exemple, @xmath , pour résoudre le problème de
hiérarchie de jauge. La longueur de Planck associée est @xmath . On
obtient le tableau suivant :

  @xmath   @xmath            @xmath   @xmath
  -------- ----------------- -------- ------------
  1        @xmath Gm         @xmath   @xmath feV
  2        @xmath @xmath m   @xmath   @xmath eV
  3        @xmath pm         @xmath   @xmath keV
  4        @xmath pm         @xmath   @xmath MeV
  5        @xmath fm         @xmath   @xmath GeV
  6        @xmath fm         @xmath   @xmath GeV
  7        @xmath fm         @xmath   @xmath GeV

La plupart des études du modèle d’ADD considèrent @xmath , motivé par un
achèvement UV en théorie des supercordes [ 35 ] ou en théorie M. On
remarque que l’on a @xmath . On a donc fait disparaître la hiérarchie de
jauge au prix d’en faire apparaître une autre, cette fois géométrique.
Il faut alors chercher un mécanisme de stabilisation de la taille des
dimensions spatiales supplémentaires, ce qui est très difficile dans le
modèle d’ADD ⁴ ⁴ 4 Néanmoins, certaines compactifications en théorie des
supercordes peuvent autoriser de grands volumes [ 234 , 235 , 236 ] .
Cependant, pour une échelle de corde au TeV, certains modules sont si
légers qu’ils médient de nouvelles forces à très longue portée, exclues
par les limites expérimentales actuelles. [ 237 , 238 , 239 , 240 , 241
, 242 , 243 ] . Le cas @xmath est clairement exclu par le succès de la
gravité newtonienne dans l’étude du système solaire. Pour @xmath , il
faut tester la gravité à des échelles submillimétriques avec des
expériences de Cavendish. La limite actuelle pour @xmath est @xmath [
244 ] et donc @xmath .

On peut définir le tenseur énergie-impulsion à partir de l’action du SM
localisé sur la 3-brane:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

où on a utilisé la métrique induite sur la 3-brane @xmath . Le champ de
graviton est alors défini comme une fluctuation linéaire de la métrique
de fond minkowskienne :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

L’interaction entre le graviton et le SM s’écrit alors

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

où @xmath est la superposition des états propres de KK. En effet, la
décomposition de KK du graviton s’écrit

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

où les coordonnées des dimensions spatiales supplémentaires sont notées
@xmath . Après insertion dans l’action d’interaction graviton/SM, on
obtient

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

où on a utilisé la relation ( 2.39 ) entre l’échelle de Planck à 4D et
celle à @xmath D. Chaque KK-graviton couple individuellement aux champs
du SM avec un couplage en @xmath . Néanmoins, la taille des dimensions
spatiales supplémentaires étant grande, ils forment un quasi-continuum,
et les processus inclusifs, où l’on somme sur tous les états, ont leurs
sections efficaces supprimées seulement par une puissance de @xmath .

Dans les collisionneurs de particules, on peut produire des gravitons
qui s’échappent dans le bulk ( c.f. la Fig. 2.13 ). Après réduction de
KK, l’émission de gravitons dans le bulk correspond à la production de
KK-gravitons. Leur largeur de désintégration est de l’ordre de @xmath .
Ils ont donc un temps de vie extrêmement long et, une fois produits, ils
ne se désintègreront pas dans le détecteur. Ce sont donc des particules
quasi-stables interagissant très faiblement. Leur signature est donc de
l’énergie transverse manquante ( @xmath ). On peut citer les processus
typiques :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

ou encore

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

où @xmath désigne un jet. On définit souvent l’échelle @xmath , telle
que @xmath , considérée comme l’échelle de coupure du modèle dans la
littérature expérimentale. Dans un collisionneur hadronique comme le
LHC, les canaux les plus prometteurs sont ceux dont les états finaux
sont @xmath ou @xmath . Les bornes les plus sévères proviennent de
l’analyse du canal @xmath [ 245 ] : @xmath pour @xmath . D’autres
contraintes provenant d’échanges de gravitons virtuels existent, mais
dépendent de la manière de traiter la coupure UV de l’EFT, et sont donc
plus discutables.

Les KK-gravitons légers peuvent être produits en grande quantité dans
les étoiles, emportant ainsi de l’énergie. Il faut alors que la
luminosité des gravitons émis soit suffisamment faible pour assurer un
bon accord entre les modèles stellaires et les observations, donnant une
borne inférieure sur @xmath . La plus sévère provient de la supernova SN
1987a [ 247 ] : @xmath pour @xmath . Après une explosion de supernova,
la plupart des gravitons restent piégés par la gravité dans l’étoile à
neutron résultante. Il faut que celle-ci ne soit pas excessivement
chauffée par les désintégrations des KK-gravitons en photons, on obtient
ainsi [ 248 ] @xmath pour @xmath . On a aussi des bornes venant de la
cosmologie [ 249 ] . Pour éviter l’effondrement gravitationnel de
l’Univers par les KK-gravitons reliques, il faut @xmath pour @xmath . La
désintégration des KK-gravitons reliques en photons donne également une
contribution au fond diffus cosmologique, on a alors la borne @xmath
pour @xmath . Les bornes, provenant des processus de désintégration des
KK-gravitons en photons, peuvent être réduites si ceux-ci se
désintègrent principalement en particules d’un secteur caché, par
exemple des champs localisés sur une autre brane [ 36 ] .

Notons que l’on a supposé les dimensions spatiales supplémentaires
compactifiées sur un tore carré. De manière générale, une variété
compactifiée est décrite par des modules de volume et des modules de
forme. Par exemple, pour @xmath , le module de forme est l’angle @xmath
entre les deux directions de compactification. Dans la discussion
précédente, le tore carré correspond à @xmath . La Réf. [ 250 ] a mis en
évidence que le spectre des KK-gravitons dépend fortement de @xmath .
Dans certains cas, il est possible de maintenir le rapport entre @xmath
et @xmath tout en augmentant l’écart entre les masses de deux
KK-gravitons. En faisant varier @xmath , on peut aussi induire des
croisements entre niveaux de KK ou interpoler entre des modèles avec
différents @xmath .

###### Compactification sur une variété hyperbolique

Une variété hyperbolique à @xmath dimension @xmath est une variété avec
une courbure constante négative. On définit la variété compacte
hyperbolique @xmath où @xmath est un sous-groupe discret des isométries
de @xmath . On obtient ainsi un espace de genre (nombre de «  trou   »)
@xmath , caractérisé par deux longueurs @xmath et @xmath . @xmath est le
rayon de courbure, c’est une propriété locale, alors que @xmath est
reliée au volume et est une propriété globale. On peut alors considérer
un modèle d’ADD en remplaçant le tore @xmath par @xmath [ 251 ] . Les
variétés compactes hyperboliques ont une propriété importante donnée par
le théorème de rigidité de Mostow-Prasad : pour @xmath , une fois que
l’on a fixé @xmath et le volume, il n’y a pas d’autre module. De plus,
le volume de la variété, en unité de @xmath , ne peut pas être changé
tout en maintenant l’homogénéité de la géométrie. Ainsi, la
stabilisation d’un tel espace compactifié se réduit au problème de
stabilisation du seul module @xmath , i.e. le radion. La topologie des
variétés compactes hyperboliques est en général compliquée, on peut
néanmoins estimer leur volume pour @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

avec toujours @xmath . Pour @xmath , @xmath et @xmath , on a @xmath et
donc @xmath , on parle alors d’ «  Univers gruyère   » [ 252 ] . En
conséquence, l’une des caractéristiques intéressantes de la
compactification sur une variété compacte hyperbolique est de générer
une hiérarchie exponentielle entre @xmath et @xmath , mais sans
réintroduire une nouvelle hiérarchie géométrique trop grande entre
@xmath et @xmath .

Après réduction dimensionnelle, on peut montrer que le spectre
gravitationnel contient un mode zéro pour le graviton, le radion (pas
d’autres graviscalaires sans masse pour @xmath ), mais pas de
graviphoton (pas d’isométries pour @xmath ). Concernant les
KK-gravitons, KK-graviphotons et KK-graviscalaires, l’échelle de KK
@xmath et l’écart d’énergie entre les modes dépendent de la topologie
précise de la variété compacte hyperbolique. On peut cependant estimer
que @xmath , ce qui relâche la plupart des contraintes expérimentales
existantes pour le modèle d’ADD compactifié sur un tore [ 251 ] .

##### 2.3.3 Modèle de RS1

###### Principe

Randall et Sundrum proposèrent une autre classe de modèles résolvant le
problème de hiérarchie de jauge avec des dimensions spatiales
supplémentaires de petite taille. Cette fois, le mécanisme utilise une
propriété étonnante des espaces courbes : l’échelle de coupure d’une EFT
dépend de la position de l’observateur dans l’espace compactifié. Dans
les modèles d’ADD, on néglige la rétroaction gravitationnelle de la
tension des branes sur la métrique, contrairement aux modèles de RS1.
Dans le modèle originel [ 40 ] , on a une dimension spatiale
supplémentaire compactifiée sur l’orbifold @xmath de rayon @xmath ,
topologiquement équivalent à un intervalle de longueur @xmath . Deux
3-branes sont localisés aux points fixes de l’orbifold, i.e. aux bords
de l’intervalle en @xmath , de tensions respectives @xmath et @xmath .
On peut contre-balancer l’effet des tensions branaires par une constante
cosmologique @xmath dans le bulk. Après intégration sur la dimension
spatiale supplémentaire, la théorie effective à 4D a alors une constante
cosmologique nulle. En chaque point de la dimension spatiale
supplémentaire, on impose que la métrique induite à 4D soit
minkowskienne, et que les composantes de la métrique à 5D dépendent
seulement de la coordonnée @xmath de la dimension spatiale
supplémentaire. L’ansatz général pour cette métrique est alors

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

où @xmath est appelé le facteur de déformation.

Dans la description dite de «  l’intervalle   » [ 254 , 220 , 255 ] ,
l’action du système s’écrit

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

avec l’action d’Einstein-Hilbert du bulk à 5D,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

l’action de la brane UV,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

l’action de la brane IR,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

et le terme de Gibbons-Hawking [ 256 , 254 , 220 , 255 ] sur les bords
de l’intervalle,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

où @xmath est la courbure extrinsèque, et @xmath est le déterminant de
la métrique induite sur la brane UV/IR. En résolvant les équations
d’Einstein, on trouve alors que

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

où @xmath est la courbure de l’espace. L’espace à 5D est donc une
tranche Anti-de Sitter à 5D (AdS @xmath ) reposant sur deux conditions
d’ajustement fin : l’une pour la valeur de la constante cosmologique à
4D et l’autre imposant que les tensions des 3-branes doivent être
exactement opposées. On remarquera que @xmath , mais cela ne pose pas de
problème d’instabilité ici, car la 3-brane est positionnée à un point
fixe d’un orbifold ( c.f. la Fig. 2.14 ), donc il n’y a pas de
branons-fantômes associés.

Dans la littérature, on suppose aussi généralement, de manière
implicite, que l’achèvement UV de la gravité est une théorie fortement
couplée. La relativité générale linéarisée devient non-perturbative à
l’échelle

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

où @xmath et @xmath sont respectivement l’échelle de Planck réduite et
le facteur de boucle à 5D. Quant aux effets gravitationnels
non-linéaires, on estime qu’ils devraient apparaître à l’échelle @xmath
, donc @xmath est supposée être l’échelle fondamentale du modèle.

Dans le modèle de RS1 originel, les champs du SM sont localisés sur la
brane IR, son action est :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

où on a écrit les termes impliquant seulement le champ de Higgs @xmath
dont @xmath est la VEV, naturellement à l’échelle de gravité
fondamentale @xmath , mais suffisamment inférieure à celle-ci pour être
encore dans le régime de validité de la théorie des champs : @xmath . En
insérant l’expression de la métrique (Éqs. ( 2.54 ) et ( 2.60 )),
l’action du SM devient

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

où les champs ont été canoniquement renormalisés :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

Après avoir intégré sur la dimension spatiale supplémentaire, la VEV du
Higgs dans la théorie effective à 4D @xmath est alors naturellement à
une échelle d’énergie plus basse que le paramètre de la théorie
extra-dimensionnelle @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

Comme on ne veut pas réintroduire de hiérarchie géométrique, on s’attend
à ce que @xmath et donc pour @xmath , on a

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

On retrouve ainsi l’échelle d’énergie de la VEV du Higgs dans le SM !
Cependant, pour résoudre le problème de hiérarchie de jauge, la valeur
de la VEV doit être stabilisée par rapport aux corrections radiatives.
Le moyen le plus simple de le vérifier est de régulariser la théorie à
la Pauli-Villars en introduisant des particules fantômes de masse @xmath
, l’échelle de coupure de la théorie sur la brane UV. Lors de la
renormalisation des champs, la masse de ces particules, i.e. l’échelle
de coupure, est naturellement abaissée comme la VEV du Higgs, assurant
ainsi la stabilité de cette dernière, d’après l’Éq. ( 1.48 ). Ainsi,
l’échelle de coupure @xmath dans une tranche AdS @xmath dépend de la
position dans la dimension spatiale supplémentaire [ 257 ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

où on suppose @xmath .

Pour relier la masse de Planck réduite à 4D @xmath à celle dans le bulk
@xmath , on va procéder comme pour le modèle d’ADD. Considérons la
fluctuation @xmath de la métrique associée au graviton à 4D :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

Le terme donnant l’action d’Einstein-Hilbert à 4D est alors

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

où on identifie la masse de Planck réduite

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

Pour @xmath et @xmath , on a bien @xmath . Plus précisément, la métrique
du modèle de RS1 est obtenue par résolution des équations d’Einstein, on
a donc la contrainte @xmath . On peut alors estimer une borne supérieure
sur @xmath .

###### Secteur gravitationnel

Le graviton à 5D donne, en principe, après réduction dimensionnelle à
4D, une tour de gravitons, de graviphotons et de graviscalaires. La
fluctuation de la métrique du modèle de RS1 s’écrit

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

où @xmath paramétrise les fluctuations du graviton, @xmath celles du
graviphoton et @xmath celles du graviscalaire. La compactification
intervalle/orbifold ⁵ ⁵ 5 À cause de la symétrie @xmath inhérente à
l’orbifold, @xmath doit être invariant sous celle-ci : @xmath est donc
impair sous @xmath et ne peut avoir de mode zéro. implique que la tour
de graviphotons n’a pas de mode zéro. Les états excités des tours de
graviphotons et de graviscalaires sont absorbés par ceux de la tour de
gravitons, donnant ainsi leur masse aux KK-gravitons, de manière
similaire au mécanisme de Higgs. Finalement, dans une jauge physique, il
reste le graviton sans masse, sa tour de KK-gravitons massifs et un
graviscalaire sans masse.

La décomposition de KK, pour le champ @xmath du graviton dans le modèle
de RS1, est donnée par

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

où les champs @xmath décrivent les KK-gravitons, et les @xmath sont
leurs fonctions d’onde de KK normalisées telles que

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

La résolution des équations d’Euler-Lagrange, obtenues à partir de la
variation de l’action, permet d’obtenir une forme analytique pour ces
fonctions d’onde de KK. Le mode zéro est ainsi quasi-localisé près de la
3-brane en @xmath avec une fonction d’onde de KK

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

On a alors un modèle où la gravité est quasi-localisée dans la dimension
spatiale supplémentaire, ce qui permet de reformuler la résolution du
problème de hiérarchie de jauge dans le modèle de RS1 : le graviton est
quasi-localisé sur la 3-brane, dite UV, où la gravité est forte, et un
observateur positionné sur l’autre 3-brane, dite IR, ressent seulement
la queue de la fonction d’onde de KK du graviton ; l’intensité de la
gravité y est exponentiellement supprimée. Pour les modes de KK, leurs
fonctions d’onde sont des fonctions de Bessel quasi-localisées près de
la brane IR, et leurs masses sont données par

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

avec l’échelle de KK @xmath , et

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

Une prédiction importante du modèle de RS1 est donc l’apparition d’une
tour de KK-gravitons à une échelle @xmath , accessible au LHC, et non à
l’échelle de l’inverse de la longueur propre de la dimension spatiale
supplémentaire (proche de l’échelle de Planck avec une dimension
spatiale supplémentaire de petite taille). De plus, la
quasi-localisation des KK-gravitons près de la brane IR, où est confinée
la matière, induit un couplage avec celle-ci exponentiellement augmenté
par rapport à celui du mode zéro, localisé près de la brane UV ; le
lagrangien d’interaction est de la forme :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

On peut alors rechercher ces KK-gravitons sous la forme de résonances
individuelles au LHC. En supposant un rapport @xmath , les bornes
inférieures les plus sévères, sur la masse du premier mode de KK,
proviennent des canaux en dilepton [ 258 ] ( @xmath ) et diphoton [ 259
] ( @xmath ). Dans le scénario du chapitre suivant, où les bosons de
jauge et les fermions se propagent dans la dimension spatiale
supplémentaire, les limites précédentes ne s’appliquent plus : les
couplages des KK-gravitons au @xmath sont supprimés. Le premier mode de
KK du champ de graviton est alors plus lourd que les premiers modes de
KK des autres champs se propageant dans la dimension spatiale
supplémentaire.

Intéressons nous maintenant au graviscalaire. C’est en fait le champ qui
décrit les fluctuations de la longueur @xmath de la dimension spatiale
supplémentaire, d’où son nom de radion. Dans le modèle de RS1 que l’on a
présenté jusqu’alors, @xmath n’est pas fixée dynamiquement : on a juste
choisi la valeur qui nous arrangeait pour résoudre le problème de
hiérarchie de jauge. L’absence d’un potentiel jouant ce rôle entraîne
que le radion est sans masse. Il génère ainsi une nouvelle interaction
gravitationnelle scalaire de portée infinie qui modifie la loi de
Newton, ce qui est expérimentalement exclu. Le mécanisme de
Goldberger-Wise [ 260 ] permet de stabiliser dynamiquement la dimension
spatiale supplémentaire, et ainsi de donner une masse au radion. Il faut
alors ajouter un champ scalaire dans le bulk avec un terme de masse,
cela engendre un potentiel non-trivial pour @xmath : la masse dans le
bulk tend à réduire @xmath . En ajoutant des potentiels scalaires,
chacun localisé sur une des deux 3-branes, et ayant des minima
différents, le scalaire acquiert un profil non-trivial le long de la
dimension spatiale supplémentaire. Le terme cinétique tend alors à avoir
ses dérivées petites et donc à augmenter @xmath , pour minimiser
l’énergie cinétique dans la direction de la dimension spatiale
supplémentaire. Il y a ainsi apparition d’un minimum qui stabilise
@xmath avec des valeurs naturelles pour les paramètres du lagrangien :
le radion acquiert une masse inférieure à celle des KK-gravitons [ 261 ,
262 ] . On peut approximer le facteur de déformation de la métrique (
2.54 ) par sa valeur sans la rétroaction du scalaire : @xmath . Des deux
conditions d’ajustement fin ( 2.60 ), il ne reste que celle associée à
la constante cosmologique : le modèle de RS1 fait disparaître
l’ajustement fin de la masse du boson de Higgs, sans en introduire un
autre que celui de la constante cosmologique, déjà présent dans le SM
couplé à la gravité. Du fait de l’ajout d’un champ scalaire dans le
bulk, le radion acquiert une tour de KK dont les masses des modes sont
du même ordre de grandeur que celles des KK-gravitons. Le radion peut se
mélanger avec le boson de Higgs [ 263 ] , altérant potentiellement la
phénoménologie standarde de ce dernier [ 261 , 264 , 265 ] . Des
recherches expérimentales du radion au LHC ont été effectuées [ 266 ,
267 ] , via sa production en fusion de gluons et sa désintégration en
dihiggs, excluant sa masse entre 300 et 1100 GeV, et entre 1150 et 1550
GeV, pour une constante de désintégration de 1 TeV.

##### 2.3.4 Problèmes liés à une échelle de gravité au TeV

Les modèles qui résolvent le problème de hiérarchie de jauge, avec des
dimensions spatiales supplémentaires et les champs du SM sur une
3-brane, ramènent l’échelle de coupure, et donc de gravité, à l’échelle
du TeV. Or, des phénomènes gravitationnels non-perturbatifs, comme les
trous noirs, les instantons gravitationnels, les trous de ver, et la
nucléation de bébés univers ou de bébés branes sont connus pour ne pas
conserver les charges associées à des symétries globales. Il est donc
couramment admis qu’une théorie UV de la gravité, reproduisant la
relativité générale à basse énergie, ne peut pas avoir de symétrie
globale : c’est l’un des critères des «  Marécages ⁶ ⁶ 6 On appelle
«  Marécages   » l’ensemble des EFTs qui ne sont pas consistantes avec
un achèvement UV décrivant la gravité. » [ 268 , 269 ] . Par contre, la
gravité conserve les symétries de jauge. Prenons l’exemple de la
conservation du nombre baryonique @xmath (charge globale associée à la
symétrie accidentelle @xmath ) et de la charge électrique @xmath (charge
locale) dans le SM.

-   Un trou noir n’a pas de charge globale, c’est le théorème de
    calvitie [ 270 , 271 , 272 , 273 , 274 , 275 , 276 , 277 ] . À
    l’inverse, il peut avoir une charge de jauge [ 278 , 279 ] . Comme
    l’illustre la Fig. 2.15 , un trou noir virtuel peut absorber un
    proton et s’évaporer par radiation de Hawking [ 280 , 281 , 282 ] .
    Cependant, les modèles microscopiques de trous noirs, où ces
    derniers sont décrits comme des condensats de Bose-Einstein de
    gravitons [ 283 , 284 ] , prédisent que les trous noirs peuvent
    avoir des charges globales [ 285 , 286 ] . Dans ces modèles, les
    arguments impliquant le théorème de calvitie, basés sur la
    relativité générale, sont alors valables dans la limite
    semi-classique idéale, que ne vérifie jamais un trou noir dans la
    Nature.

-   Un trou de ver est constitué d’une gorge terminée par une bouche à
    chaque extrémité. Il forme ainsi un pont entre deux régions du même
    Univers ou entre deux Univers différents ( c.f. la Fig. 2.16 ). Un
    trou de ver virtuel peut transporter une charge globale d’une région
    de l’espace à une autre beaucoup plus éloignée, ou dans un autre
    Univers [ 148 , 287 , 288 , 289 , 290 , 291 , 292 , 150 ] , comme le
    montre la Fig. 2.16 .

-   Un bébé Univers correspond à un trou de ver coupé au niveau de la
    gorge ( c.f. Fig. 2.17 ). Autrement dit, il n’y a pas encore
    d’Univers où ressortir. La gorge en formation correspond à la
    nucléation du bébé Univers. Une charge globale peut être emmenée par
    le bébé Univers en formation [ 289 , 150 ] .

-   Comme on l’a vu à la Section 2.3.1 , si la 3-brane sur laquelle est
    localisé le SM n’est pas un point singulier de l’espace compactifié,
    elle peut fluctuer. On appelle branons les degrés de liberté de
    fluctuation. La Réf. [ 293 ] a mis en évidence, qu’à une énergie
    comparable à la tension de la 3-brane, appelée brane mère, celle-ci
    peut se contorsionner jusqu’à créer une bébé brane indépendante (
    c.f. Fig. 2.18 ). Lors de sa formation, la bébé brane peut capturer
    des particules de la brane mère, et les emmener avec elle
    lorsqu’elle s’éloigne dans le bulk. Si ces particules ont des
    charges globales, comme @xmath , un observateur sur la brane mère
    verra une disparition de ces charges, donc une non-conservation de
    @xmath . On pourrait craindre qu’il en soit de même pour les charges
    locales, comme @xmath . Cependant, une particule de charge Q,
    emportée par la bébé brane, va créer un tube de champ qui la relie à
    sa position initiale sur la brane mère ( c.f. Fig. 2.19 ). Si
    l’énergie est suffisante, ce tube va se briser, en générant une
    paire particule-antiparticule, telle que l’antiparticule ait une
    charge @xmath . La bébé brane va alors emporter la paire
    électriquement neutre, formée de la particule initiale et de
    l’antiparticule créée. Quant à la particule créée de charge @xmath ,
    elle va rester sur la brane mère, assurant la conservation de la
    charge électrique. On peut généraliser ce raisonnement au cas de
    charges locales associées à des symétries non-abéliennes.

Tous ces phénomènes seraient interprétés dans une expérience comme une
désintégration du proton. On doit alors inclure, dans l’EFT
extra-dimensionnelle, des opérateurs de contact à quatre fermions sur la
3-brane du SM de type @xmath , où @xmath est le coefficient adimensionné
de l’opérateur, et @xmath est l’échelle de coupure sur la 3-brane
ramenée au TeV (échelle fondamentale dans les modèles à la ADD, ou
échelle de la gravité sur la brane IR due à l’effet du facteur de
déformation dans le modèle de RS1). Le même constat peut être fait avec
les opérateurs violant le nombre leptonique @xmath , ou induisant des
courants neutres de changement de saveur (FCNCs – Flavor Changing
Neutral Currents ). Par ailleurs, on sait expérimentalement que :

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.80)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Pour un modèle où l’échelle de gravité est au TeV, on a alors deux cas
possibles :

-   Ces processus sont rares dans la théorie UV de la gravité, et donc
    le coefficient, devant les opérateurs effectifs, est supprimé :
    @xmath , il n’y a alors pas de problème.

-   Dans le cas contraire, @xmath et il faut donc trouver des mécanismes
    supplémentaires pour supprimer ces opérateurs dangereux.

Pour les symétries @xmath et @xmath , on peut, par exemple, les jauger
(la gravité conserve les charges de jauge). On obtient une théorie avec
des anomalies de jauge qui peuvent être annulées par le mécanisme de
Green-Schwarz [ 294 , 295 , 296 , 297 , 298 ] , motivé par les
constructions de la théorie de jauge du SM avec des D-branes [ 299 , 300
, 301 ] : les bosons de jauge acquièrent une masse à l’échelle des
supercordes tout en préservant les symétries globales @xmath et @xmath .
Dans d’autres modèles, on jauge les symétries de saveur approximatives
du SM, @xmath , pour supprimer les opérateurs de FCNCs [ 302 , 303 , 304
, 305 , 306 , 307 ] . Ces nouvelles symétries de jauge sont alors
brisées sur des branes distantes de celle du SM, et la brisure est
communiquée à cette dernière par des champs scalaires dans le bulk : les
flavons. Alternativement, si la 3-brane du SM est épaisse (un mur de
domaine, par exemple), on peut construire un modèle où les fonctions
d’onde des modes 4D des fermions sont des gaussiennes localisées en des
points différents de la dimension spatiale supplémentaire pour les
leptons et les quarks ( c.f. la Fig. 2.20 ). Le faible recouvrement,
entre les gaussiennes des quarks et des leptons, supprime ainsi les
opérateurs de contact de désintégration du proton [ 308 ] .

### Chapitre 3 Bosons de jauge et fermions dans une tranche AdS@xmath

Afin de résoudre les éventuels problèmes liés à une échelle de gravité
au TeV sur la brane IR du modèle de RS1, on a vu au chapitre précédent
que l’on peut construire des modèles en jaugeant @xmath et les symétries
de saveur approximatives du SM, @xmath . Cependant, jauger toutes les
symétries de saveur peut paraître très artificiel. Il a très vite été
réalisé que, pour résoudre le problème de hiérarchie de jauge, seul le
champ de Higgs nécessite d’être localisé sur la brane IR, alors que les
bosons de jauge et les fermions peuvent se propager dans le bulk [ 41 ,
42 , 43 , 44 , 45 , 46 ] ( c.f. la Fig. 3.1 ). La brane UV assure alors
une échelle de coupure suffisamment élevée pour supprimer les opérateurs
de contact générant des FCNCs. On peut aussi utiliser la liberté sur la
quasi-localisation des modes zéro des fermions pour générer la
hiérarchie de masse du SM [ 45 , 47 ] . Pour une introduction à cette
thématique, voir les Réfs. [ 51 , 309 , 310 , 311 ] .

#### 3.1 Bosons de jauge et fermions dans le bulk

Nous allons ici décrire, en théorie des champs, des bosons de jauge et
des fermions se propageant dans le bulk du modèle de RS1. On utilisera
la description de la dimension spatiale supplémentaire sur un intervalle
@xmath [ 219 , 50 ] , équivalente à celle sur l’orbifold @xmath . On
suppose que ces champs ont une rétroaction gravitationnelle négligeable
sur la géométrie. La métrique est alors :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

##### 3.1.1 Champs de jauge

Considérons un champ de jauge @xmath dans le bulk du modèle de RS1 [ 41
, 42 , 219 ] . Il a une dimension de masse @xmath . On va chercher à
décrire le champ libre, et les interactions sont traitées en théorie des
perturbations comme usuellement en QFT. On peut alors se concentrer sur
une théorie de jauge abélienne, puisque le caractère non-abélien se
traduit par une auto-interaction des bosons de jauge. L’action s’écrit

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

où @xmath est le couplage de jauge à 5D et @xmath . On travaille dans la
jauge où @xmath et @xmath . L’application du principe de Hamilton
requiert l’annulation séparée des variations de l’action dans le bulk et
sur chaque 3-brane. On obtient ainsi les équations d’Euler-Lagrange dans
le bulk :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

et les conditions aux bords :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Ces dernières sont satisfaites si l’on suppose les champs arbitraires
sur les 3-branes et si on les y laisse varier : @xmath . On parle de
conditions aux bords naturelles, qui imposent ainsi des conditions aux
bords de Neumann (N) pour le champ : @xmath .

Pour construire l’EFT à 4D, on effectue une décomposition de KK :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

où les @xmath sont les modes de KK de masse @xmath satisfaisant
l’équation de Proca :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Les fonctions d’onde @xmath des modes de KK sont orthonormalisées de
manière à avoir des termes cinétiques canoniques dans le lagrangien à 4D
:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

En insérant la décomposition ( 3.5 ) et l’Éq. ( 3.6 ) dans l’Éq. ( 3.3
), on obtient des équations de Sturm-Liouville pour les fonctions d’onde
de KK :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Pour le mode zéro, @xmath , la solution générale est donnée par

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

où @xmath et @xmath sont des constantes à déterminer. Pour des
conditions aux bords de Neumann sur chaque 3-branes (NN), @xmath et
@xmath , la solution est donc

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Le mode zéro d’un boson de jauge sans masse a une fonction d’onde de KK
constante le long de la dimension spatiale supplémentaire, il n’est donc
pas localisé dans le bulk. En insérant la décomposition de KK ( 3.5 ) et
la fonction d’onde de KK du mode zéro ( 3.10 ) dans l’action ( 3.2 ), on
peut identifier le couplage de jauge à 4D :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Pour les modes de KK avec @xmath , la solution générale pour les
fonctions d’onde de KK est donnée par

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

où @xmath , @xmath et @xmath sont des constantes que l’on peut
déterminer en imposant les conditions aux bords (NN) et en utilisant les
conditions d’orthonormalisation ( 3.7 ). On peut alors aussi dériver le
spectre de masse :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

avec l’échelle de KK, @xmath , et

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

On peut approximer le spectre de masse avec ( @xmath )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

L’étude des fonctions d’onde des modes de KK montre que ces derniers
sont quasi-localisés près de la brane IR.

##### 3.1.2 Fermions de Dirac

Intéressons nous maintenant au cas d’un fermion libre de spin 1/2,
@xmath , dans le bulk du modèle de RS1 [ 43 , 45 ] . Il a une dimension
de masse @xmath . L’action s’écrit :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

où @xmath et @xmath . @xmath sont les matrices de Dirac à 5D. @xmath
paramétrise la masse du champ fermionique dans le bulk, il est
naturellement d’ordre @xmath . Pour l’espace AdS @xmath , on a le
fünfbein @xmath , et la connexion de spin :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

La dérivée covariante est définie par @xmath . On notera que la
contribution de la connexion de spin s’annule dans l’action ( 3.16 ), on
peut alors faire la substitution @xmath . En prévision de la réduction
dimensionnelle à 4D, on décompose le champ @xmath en spineurs de Weyl:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

On peut appliquer le principe de Hamilton, où on annule toujours
séparément les variations de l’action dans le bulk et sur les bords. On
obtient ainsi les équations d’Euler-Lagrange pour les champs @xmath et
@xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

et les conditions aux bords :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

La méthode habituelle, pour satisfaire ces conditions aux bords sur
l’une des 3-branes, est d’y imposer une condition de Dirichlet (D) pour
l’un des champs @xmath , avec @xmath , ce qui implique @xmath .

L’étape suivante de la réduction dimensionnelle est d’effectuer la
décomposition de KK:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

où les @xmath sont les modes de KK de masse @xmath satisfaisant les
équations de Dirac-Weyl :

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Les fonctions d’onde @xmath des modes de KK sont orthonormalisées, tel
que :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

Le facteur @xmath dans la décomposition de KK ( 3.21 ) permet d’avoir
une normalisation canonique des termes cinétiques pour les modes de KK,
ainsi qu’une interprétation physique des fonctions d’onde @xmath en
terme de localisation des KK-fermions dans la dimension spatiale
supplémentaire. En utilisant les Éqs. ( 3.22 ) et ( 3.21 ) dans l’Éq. (
3.20 ), on trouve les équations pour les fonctions d’onde de KK :

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Pour le mode zéro, @xmath , les équations pour les fonctions d’onde de
KK @xmath et @xmath sont découplées. La solution générale est donnée par

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

où @xmath et @xmath sont des constantes à déterminer. Imposer une
condition de Dirichlet sur @xmath ou @xmath , à l’une des deux
extrémités de l’intervalle, se transpose sur les fonctions d’onde après
décomposition de KK ( 3.21 ). Avec la forme des fonctions d’onde de KK (
3.25 ), une condition (D) pour @xmath ( @xmath ) revient à avoir @xmath
( @xmath ) et donc à éliminer le mode zéro correspondant. Un champ 5D
@xmath auquel on impose des conditions aux bords de Dirichlet à chaque
bord (DD) sur @xmath ( @xmath ) aura donc un seul mode zéro @xmath (
@xmath ) : la théorie est chirale au niveau des modes zéro. Le
coefficient de normalisation de sa fonction d’onde de KK est donné par
les Éqs. ( 3.23 ) et ( 3.25 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

D’après les Éqs. ( 3.25 ), un mode zéro de chiralité gauche (droite) est
quasi-localisé près de la brane UV si @xmath ( @xmath ) ou près de la
brane IR si @xmath ( @xmath ). Il n’est pas localisé dans le bulk dans
le cas particulier où @xmath ( @xmath ). La quasi-localisation du mode
zéro est illustrée sur la Fig. 3.2 .

Pour les modes de KK avec @xmath , les équations des fonctions d’onde (
3.24 ) peuvent être découplées en les dérivant. On obtient alors des
équations de Sturm-Liouville dont les solutions ont la forme :

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

où @xmath , @xmath et @xmath sont des constantes à déterminer en faisant
un choix de conditions aux bords et en utilisant les conditions
d’orthonormalisation ( 3.23 ). En se focalisant sur les conditions aux
bords induisant l’existence d’un mode zéro identifiable avec l’une des
deux chiralités d’un fermion du SM, le spectre de masse peut être
approximé par ( @xmath ) :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

où @xmath @xmath pour @xmath ( @xmath ) ayant des conditions aux bords
(DD). Comme pour les bosons de jauge, les modes de KK sont
quasi-localisés près de la brane IR.

#### 3.2 Le Modèle Standard dans le bulk

Dans la suite de ce chapitre, on va considérer une tranche AdS @xmath ,
où le champ de Higgs est localisé sur la brane IR, et où les champs
fermioniques et de jauge du SM sont promus à des champs 5D. Les bosons
de jauge observés sont alors identifiés avec les modes zéro de champs de
jauge 5D avec des conditions aux bords (NN). Le secteur EW du SM est une
théorie chirale : les fermions de chiralité gauche et droite se
transforment différemment sous le groupe de jauge. Or, on a vu que le
mode zéro d’un spineur de Dirac 5D est de chiralité gauche ou droite.
Ainsi, pour chaque spineur de Weyl @xmath du SM, on introduit un spineur
de Dirac 5D @xmath dans la même représentation du groupe de jauge (où
@xmath est l’index de saveur). Les conditions aux bords sont alors
choisies pour que le spineur de Weyl de chiralité gauche @xmath (droite
@xmath ) soit identifié avec le mode zéro du spineur dans le bulk @xmath
( @xmath ), c.f. la Fig. 3.3 .

##### 3.2.1 Hiérarchie des couplages de Yukawa

L’action des couplages de Yukawa, entre les fermions dans le bulk et le
champ de Higgs localisé sur la brane IR, s’écrit :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

où @xmath est le couplage de Yukawa à 5D adimensionné car on a introduit
l’échelle naturelle du modèle @xmath , et @xmath est le couplage de
Yukawa effectif 4D. Pour passer de la première à la deuxième ligne, on a
effectué une décomposition de KK ( 3.21 ) dans l’action et on a
renormalisé le Higgs ( c.f. l’Éq. ( 2.64 )), @xmath est alors défini par
:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

Avec des couplages à 5D et des paramètres de masse dans le bulk
naturels, @xmath et @xmath , on va voir que l’on peut générer une
hiérarchie dans les couplages à 4D [ 45 , 47 ] sans invoquer de
symétries de saveur. Prenons un modèle simplifié où @xmath , sans
mélange de saveur. Les Éqs. ( 3.25 ), ( 3.26 ) et ( 3.30 ) donnent :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

Quand @xmath , le couplage de Yukawa à 4D dépend exponentiellement du
paramètre de masse dans le bulk @xmath , on a approximativement ( @xmath
) :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

consistant avec des fermions quasi-localisés près de la brane UV, dont
les fonctions d’onde de KK ont un faible recouvrement avec la brane IR
où est localisé le champ de Higgs. On peut alors reproduire, par
exemple, le couplage de Yukawa de l’électron dans le SM, @xmath , avec
@xmath . À l’inverse, quand @xmath , les fermions sont quasi-localisés
près de la brane IR sans suppression exponentielle :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

Dans ce cas, le couplage de Yukawa du quark top dans le SM, @xmath , est
obtenu pour @xmath . Les couplages des autres fermions sont générés pour
@xmath . On donne une illustration de la quasi-localisation des modes
zéro des champs fermioniques à la Fig. 3.1 .

Il est important de noter que les couplages de Yukawa, entre les
fermions dans le bulk et le champ de Higgs, induisent un mélange des
modes zéro avec les modes excités : la base de KK dans la décomposition
( 3.5 ) n’est pas celle des états propres de masse après EWSB.
N’utiliser que les modes zéro, pour obtenir les masses des fermions du
SM, reste néanmoins une bonne approximation à l’ordre @xmath . Les Réfs.
[ 312 , 53 ] donnent une analyse détaillée des paramètres @xmath où la
hiérarchie de masse des fermions et la matrice CKM peuvent être
naturellement expliquées par le recouvrement des fonctions d’onde de KK.

##### 3.2.2 Suppression des opérateurs de contact induisant des FCNCs

Dans le modèle de RS1 originel, que l’on a décrit à la Section 2.3.3 ,
les fermions sont localisés, comme le champ de Higgs, sur la brane IR.
Comme expliqué à la Section 2.3.4 , des opérateurs de contact,
potentiellement générés par des effets gravitationnels, sont affectés
par le facteur de courbure sur la brane IR lors de la renormalisation
des champs des Éqs. ( 2.64 ), ( 2.65 ) et ( 2.66 ). Ainsi, les
opérateurs, induisant la désintégration du proton et des FCNCs, ne sont
supprimés que par l’échelle de coupure sur la brane :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

où @xmath est l’échelle à laquelle la gravité devient fortement couplée
sur la brane UV. De la même manière, pour l’opérateur générant des
masses pour les neutrinos, on a

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

Les contraintes expérimentales de l’Éq. ( 2.80 ) sur les échelles de
suppression de ces opérateurs excluent le modèle de RS1 comme solution
au problème de hiérarchie de jauge, si les coefficients de ces
opérateurs ne sont pas naturellement très supprimés dans la théorie UV
de la gravité.

Pour éviter de jauger les symétries de saveur dans le bulk, comme évoqué
à la Section 2.3.4 , on autorise les fermions et les bosons de jauge à
se propager dans la dimension spatiale supplémentaire [ 45 , 47 ] .
Cette fois, les opérateurs de contact, générant les FCNCs et la
désintégration du proton, sont de la forme :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

où on a utilisé la décomposition de KK ( 3.21 ). En utilisant les Eqs. (
3.25 ) et ( 3.26 ), l’échelle effective de suppression à 4D est donnée
par :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

Pour des valeurs @xmath , @xmath . On peut vérifier que les opérateurs
générant des FCNCs sont suffisamment supprimés pour être en accord avec
les contraintes expérimentales de l’Éq. ( 2.80 ), tout en générant la
hiérarchie de masse des fermions. Pour la troisième génération de
quarks, on s’attend, par contre, à observer des déviations par rapport
aux prédictions du SM, car les processus de FCNCs sont moins supprimés.
Quant à l’opérateur générant la désintégration du proton, il nécessite
@xmath . Les masses des fermions sont alors trop faibles pour être
compatibles avec le SM. Pour finir, intéressons nous à l’opérateur de
contact générant des masses de Majorana pour les neutrinos :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

où

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

Ceci, combiné à l’Éq. ( 3.32 ) donnant les couplages de Yukawa pour les
doublets d’isospin gauche des leptons, donne une masse trop grande aux
neutrinos (Éq. ( 2.80 )). La symétrie @xmath doit donc quand même être
jaugée afin d’interdire ces opérateurs de contact.

##### 3.2.3 Couplages de jauge

Les modes zéro des fermions étant quasi-localisés différemment le long
de la dimension spatiale supplémentaire, on pourrait penser que
l’universalité des couplages des fermions aux bosons de jauge est
perdue, excluant ainsi le modèle extra-dimensionnel. Considérons
l’action du couplage entre un boson de jauge (associé à une symétrie
@xmath pour simplifier) et un champ fermionique se propageant dans le
bulk :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

où on a inséré les décompositions de KK ( 3.5 ) et ( 3.21 ). Le couplage
de jauge à 4D est alors défini par :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

La fonction d’onde de KK du boson de jauge étant constante le long de la
dimension spatiale supplémentaire, on peut utiliser la relation
d’orthonormalisation des fonctions d’onde de KK fermioniques ( 3.23 )
pour trouver que :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

en accord avec l’Éq. ( 3.11 ). En conclusion, le couplage des
KK-fermions aux bosons de jauge est universel, et le modèle est sauf.

Cependant, il est important de remarquer que ce résultat n’est valable
que pour les couplages aux bosons de jauge non affectés par la VEV du
Higgs sur la brane IR. Pour les bosons @xmath et @xmath , les conditions
aux bords ne sont pas de simples conditions de Neumann, mais impliquent
la VEV du Higgs. Les fonctions d’onde de KK des modes zéro sont
déformées (par rapport au cas sans VEV) près de la brane IR, affectant
les couplages aux fermions lourds (localisés près de la brane du Higgs)
comme les quarks @xmath et @xmath . On s’attend donc à avoir des
déviations par rapport aux couplages du SM, induisant ainsi des
contraintes sur le modèle (voir, par exemple, la Réf. [ 53 ] pour une
discussion détaillée).

##### 3.2.4 Échelle de coupure du modèle

Il est important d’insister sur le fait qu’un modèle extra-dimensionnel
doit être traité dans le cadre d’une EFT car, comme on l’a vu dans les
paragraphes précédents, la plupart des couplages renormalisables du SM
ont, lorsque les champs sont promus à se propager dans le bulk, une
dimension de masse négative et sont donc non-renormalisables. On peut
estimer l’échelle d’énergie à partir de laquelle un couplage
non-renormalisable devient non-perturbatif par analyse dimensionnelle
naïve [ 313 , 311 ] . À 5D, un couplage de jauge @xmath et un couplage
de Yukawa @xmath (entre un scalaire localisé sur une 3-brane et un
fermion dans le bulk) ont une dimension de masse @xmath . Ils deviennent
non-perturbatifs quand [ 311 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

où @xmath et @xmath sont respectivement les facteurs de boucle à 4D et
5D, et @xmath est le facteur de multiplicité d’états du vertex
considéré.

#### 3.3 Principales contraintes sur l’échelle de Kaluza-Klein

Comme nous venons de le voir, autoriser les fermions et les bosons de
jauge à avoir accès à la dimension spatiale supplémentaire permet de
construire un modèle de saveur robuste. Néanmoins, la présence d’une
tour de KK, pour chaque fermion et boson de jauge, implique de nouvelles
contraintes expérimentales sur l’échelle de Kaluza-Klein @xmath , et
donc sur l’échelle de coupure sur la brane-IR puisque @xmath .

##### 3.3.1 FCNCs

Étant donné que les modes zéro des fermions sont localisés à différents
endroits dans la dimension spatiale supplémentaire, leurs couplages aux
KK-bosons de jauge dépend de la saveur. Ces couplages sont de la forme :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

Bien qu’ils soient diagonaux dans la base fermionique des états propres
de jauge, le fait qu’ils dépendent du paramètre @xmath implique que des
éléments non-diagonaux sont induits dans la base des états propres de
masse. Des FCNCs, possiblement associés à une violation de @xmath ,
pourront alors être générés à l’arbre. Par exemple, un KK-gluon @xmath
peut participer aux oscillations @xmath via le diagramme de Feynman [
311 ] :

Sur la Fig. 3.4 , on a le graphique du rapport @xmath , où @xmath est le
couplage d’un fermion au n-ième KK-boson de jauge, et @xmath est le
couplage du même fermion au mode zéro du boson de jauge. Quand @xmath
est grand et négatif, les fermions sont quasi-localisés près de la brane
IR et le rapport @xmath approche une valeur asymptotique @xmath
correspondant à un fermion localisé sur la brane IR. Pour @xmath , les
fermions sont quasi-localisés près de la brane UV, et le couplage
devient rapidement universel pour toutes les saveurs de fermions. Ceci
est dû au fait que la fonction d’onde des KK-bosons de jauge est presque
plate, sauf près de la brane IR. Ainsi dans l’Éq. ( 3.44 ), on a :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

en utilisant la condition de normalisation ( 3.23 ). Pour un fermion
quasi-localisé près de la brane UV, la dépendance en @xmath est donc
très faible : les vertex de changement de saveur, impliquant un KK-boson
de jauge, sont donc supprimés. Ce résultat est typique des modèles dont
la métrique est proche de AdS @xmath [ 45 , 314 , 315 ] . Pour une
métrique AdS @xmath , les Réfs. [ 316 , 317 ] donnent une borne
inférieure autour de @xmath . On peut abaisser ces contraintes en
ajoutant de nouvelles symétries de saveur [ 318 , 319 ] .

##### 3.3.2 Contraintes électrofaibles

###### Principe

La présence d’une tour de KK, pour chaque fermion et boson de jauge,
impacte aussi le calcul des observables dans le secteur EW, impliquant
de nouvelles contraintes sur le modèle. Notamment, la relation @xmath ,
en très bon accord avec les mesures expérimentales, suggère l’existence
d’une symétrie carcérale.

Dans le SM, si l’on met les couplages d’hypercharge @xmath et de Yukawa
à zéro, on peut montrer l’existence d’une symétrie globale :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

En pratique, on peut réécrire le lagrangien du SM avec un champ de Higgs
sous la forme d’un bidoublet de @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

Sa VEV, @xmath , préserve le sous-groupe diagonal de @xmath . Comme les
trois bosons @xmath se transforment comme un triplet (singulet) sous
@xmath
( @xmath ), donc comme un triplet sous @xmath , les composantes chargées
et neutres ont la même masse après EWSB. L’ajout de @xmath induit un
mélange entre @xmath et @xmath , et ainsi une séparation en masse des
bosons @xmath et @xmath : @xmath . Les effets de brisure de la symétrie
carcérale par les couplages de Yukawa (dominés par celui du quark top)
sont plus petits, puisqu’ils interviennent à l’ordre des boucles.

Dans notre modèle extra-dimensionnel, le lagrangien a la même forme que
celui du SM, il y a donc aussi une symétrie carcérale pour @xmath et les
couplages de Yukawa nuls. Elle est toujours brisée à l’arbre par @xmath
, et par les couplages de Yukawa à l’ordre des boucles. Cependant, les
couplages des KK-bosons du champ de jauge @xmath au champ de Higgs sont
augmentés d’un facteur approximatif @xmath par rapport aux modes zéro.
Même constat pour les couplages des KK-quarks top au champ de Higgs. La
violation de la symétrie carcérale par les KK-particules va donc être
plus importante que par les modes zéro, via les diagrammes de Feynman
suivants, où les lignes internes correspondent aux propagateurs des
KK-particules [ 311 ] :

La borne inférieure actuelle sur l’échelle de KK, provenant des mesures
de précision EW, est [ 320 ] : @xmath . Pour adoucir ces contraintes,
une solution populaire est de jauger la symétrie carcérale dans le bulk
et sur la brane IR, et de la briser sur la brane UV [ 321 ] . Cependant,
cela nécessite d’ajouter plusieurs champs au modèle, et de fortes
contraintes ont été mises en évidence, provenant des mesures
expérimentales des couplages du boson de Higgs [ 59 , 61 ] . Nous allons
présenter ci-dessous une autre solution plus économique.

###### Termes cinétiques branaires

On peut, en toute généralité, ajouter au modèle des termes cinétiques
localisés sur les 3-branes (BLKTs – Brane Localised Kinetic Terms ),
pour les champs de jauge et les fermions dans le bulk, qui n’ont pas de
conditions aux bords de Dirichlet sur la brane considérée :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (3.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

où @xmath et @xmath sont les coefficients des BLKTs. Ces termes,
autorisés par les symétries du modèle, sont générés par les corrections
radiatives [ 322 ] mais peuvent être aussi présents à l’arbre dans
l’EFT. En utilisant les décompositions de KK ( 3.5 ) et ( 3.21 ), ils
vont modifier les conditions aux bords pour les fonctions d’onde de KK
et les conditions d’orthonormalisations ( 3.7 ) et ( 3.23 ) :

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.49)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.50)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

La relation ( 3.11 ), reliant le couplage de jauge effectif à 4D au
couplage de jauge à 5D, est également modifiée :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

Le principal effet des BLKTs est de repousser les fonctions d’onde des
KK-particules de la 3-brane où ils sont quasi-localisés. Si on ajoute
des BLKTs sur la brane IR où est localisé le champ de Higgs, on va alors
diminuer le recouvrement des fonctions d’onde de KK avec le champ de
Higgs, et donc diminuer les couplages correspondants. Les contraintes,
provenant des mesures de précision EW, sont alors adoucies [ 323 , 324 ,
325 , 326 , 320 ] . La Réf. [ 320 ] montre qu’une valeur de @xmath reste
autorisée pour des coefficients de BLKTs naturels, i.e. d’ordre @xmath .

##### 3.3.3 Couplages à une boucle du boson de Higgs

Les couplages du boson de Higgs aux gluons et aux photons se font par
l’intermédiaire d’une boucle où contribuent les KK-particules [ 327 ,
328 , 329 , 330 , 331 , 55 , 58 , 59 , 60 , 61 , 332 ] . Ainsi, on a le
diagramme de Feynman du couplage @xmath , avec la boucle dans laquelle
circulent les quarks du SM et les KK-quarks :

et les diagrammes du couplages @xmath , avec les boucles de fermions,
KK-fermions, bosons de jauge et KK-bosons de jauge :

Les contraintes les plus sévères proviennent de la mesure du couplage
@xmath [ 59 ] , et la borne inférieure sur @xmath augmente avec le
couplage de Yukawa @xmath à 5D, puisque les KK-quarks vont alors coupler
plus fortement au champ de Higgs. La Fig. 3.5 présente un graphique des
régions d’exclusion du modèle en fonction de l’amplitude des @xmath et
de l’échelle de KK.

#### 3.4 Vers un achèvement ultraviolet

##### 3.4.1 Interprétation holographique

La dualité jauge/gravité, aussi nommée principe holographique, est un
cadre pour interpréter une théorie avec une dimension spatiale
supplémentaire courbe comme une théorie des champs à 4D fortement
couplée. Le point de départ est la correspondance AdS/CFT, proposée en
1997 par Maldacena [ 333 ] dans le cadre de la théorie des supercordes
de type IIB. Cette conjecture établit une dualité entre la théorie des
supercordes de type IIB formulée sur l’espace-temps AdS @xmath , et une
théorie de jauge @xmath supersymétrique @xmath sur l’espace-temps de
Minkowski à 4D. Cette théorie de jauge est une théorie des champs
conforme (CFT – Conformal Field Theory ) : sa constante de couplage
@xmath ne reçoit pas de correction radiative, et ne varie donc pas avec
l’énergie.

Les symétries des deux théories sont reliées :

-   Les isométries de @xmath sont les rotations décrites par le groupe
    @xmath , dont le groupe de recouvrement universel est @xmath , qui
    est justement le groupe de R-symétrie de la CFT supersymétrique.

-   Le groupe des isométries de AdS @xmath est précisément celui des
    transformations conformes de la CFT.

La correspondance établit une relation entre les paramètres des deux
théories :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

où @xmath est la longueur de courbure de l’espace-temps AdS @xmath , et
@xmath est la longueur d’une corde. On se place dans le régime où la
théorie des supercordes se réduit à la SUGRA. On a donc @xmath , ce qui
implique la condition @xmath : la CFT est fortement couplée. On ajoute
la condition supplémentaire de perturbativité de la théorie des
supercordes, i.e. que sa constante de couplage @xmath , de telle manière
que les états d’excitation non-perturbatifs de la corde de masse @xmath
restent lourds. Puisque @xmath , on a la limite de ’t Hooft [ 334 ]
@xmath . Si on étudie la CFT fortement couplée, on peut alors utiliser
la correspondance AdS/CFT et calculer les observables physiques à partir
de la théorie gravitationnelle classique faiblement couplée.

Dans les modèles à 5D qui nous intéressent, on a simplement une théorie
des champs définie sur l’espace-temps AdS @xmath . On conjecture la
dualité jauge/gravité qui nous permet d’établir une correspondance entre
une théorie gravitationnelle classique définie sur l’espace-temps AdS
@xmath et une CFT fortement couplée. On peut utiliser l’explication
heuristique suivante. Considérons la métrique de l’espace-temps AdS
@xmath (Éq. ( 3.1 )) et effectuons le changement de variable suivant :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

On obtient la métrique :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

La transformation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

d’une tranche à 4D de AdS @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

se traduit par un changement d’échelle de la métrique effective à 4D :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

Se déplacer vers les @xmath croissants équivaut donc à augmenter les
échelles de longueur à 4D, et donc à diminuer les échelles d’énergie,
@xmath ( c.f. la Fig. 3.6 ). Ces considérations mènent à
l’interprétation holographique de la dimension spatiale supplémentaire,
où la coordonnée @xmath correspond au flot du groupe de renormalisation
dans la CFT à 4D. L’évolution d’une fonction d’onde de KK quand @xmath
croît correspond à l’évolution du coefficient d’un opérateur de la CFT
quand @xmath décroît. Pour une description détaillée de la
correspondance AdS/CFT dans le cadre de la théorie des champs, voir les
Réfs. [ 335 , 305 , 336 , 337 , 309 , 310 , 338 ] . Dans la suite, on va
donner les éléments principaux du dictionnaire AdS/CFT.

Les modèles type RS1 ne sont pas formulés sur un espace-temps AdS @xmath
entier mais sur une tranche de celui-ci ( c.f. la Fig. 3.7 ). Quelle est
l’interprétation des deux 3-branes ?

-   La brane UV correspond à une échelle de coupure de la CFT à haute
    énergie, @xmath . Elle introduit une échelle de masse dans les CFT,
    et est donc une source de brisure de la symétrie conforme. En
    s’éloignant de la brane UV, on diminue l’énergie dans la CFT, et le
    bulk devient immédiatement AdS : la CFT devient alors rapidement
    conforme sous l’échelle de coupure UV. Toute source de brisure de la
    symétrie conforme, introduite par la coupure UV, doit donc être une
    déformation irrelevante de la CFT.

-   La brane IR est une coupure brusque de l’espace-temps AdS @xmath en
    @xmath , et correspond à une déformation relevante de la CFT,
    impliquant une brisure spontanée de la symétrie conforme, et un
    phénomène de confinement à l’échelle @xmath . On peut montrer que la
    présence de la brane IR est responsable de la quantification du
    spectre de KK des différents champs dans le bulk, dont les états les
    plus légers apparaissent près de l’échelle @xmath . Pour chaque état
    de KK de la théorie extra-dimensionnelle, il existe un opérateur
    composite dans la CFT. La brane IR doit être interprétée comme un
    modèle simplifié du confinement.

Les états liés existent lorsque l’on considère la CFT à des énergies
proches de l’échelle de confinement @xmath , ce qui implique que les
KK-particules, qui ont leur fonction d’onde localisée près de la brane
IR dans la tranche AdS @xmath , sont duaux des états composites. À
l’inverse, un état localisé près de la brane UV interagit faiblement
avec les états de KK (états composites de la CFT). On en conclut que (
c.f. la Fig. 3.8 ) :

-   Pour chaque état localisé sur la brane IR, il existe un état
    composite dans la CFT.

-   Pour chaque état localisé sur la brane UV, il existe un état
    élémentaire dans la CFT.

-   Pour chaque mode qui se propage dans le bulk, il existe une
    particule partiellement composite dans la CFT. C’est un mélange
    d’états élémentaires et composites, à l’instar du mélange entre le
    méson @xmath et le photon en QCD. Pour une particule, dont la
    fonction d’onde de KK est piquée près de la brane UV (IR), il existe
    une particule principalement élémentaire (composite) dans la CFT.
    Pour une particule, dont la fonction d’onde de KK est plate, il
    existe une particule dans la CFT qui est un mélange équilibré entre
    états élémentaires et composites.

Dans le modèle de RS1 originel, tous les champs du SM sont localisés sur
la brane IR, il existe donc pour chacun d’entre eux des états composites
dans la CFT. Dans les modèles de ce chapitre :

-   Le champ de Higgs est localisé sur la brane IR : il est donc
    composite dans la CFT. Le problème de hiérarchie de jauge est résolu
    parce qu’au-dessus de l’échelle de confinement, le boson de Higgs
    disparaît et les préons ¹ ¹ 1 Si les particules du SM ont une
    substructure, on appelle parfois préons les particules les
    constituant. (non-scalaires), qui le constituent, apparaissent.

-   Les modes zéro du graviton et des fermions légers du SM ont leur
    fonction d’onde de KK piquée près de la brane UV : ils sont donc
    partiellement composites dans la CFT, et principalement
    élémentaires.

-   L’isodoublet et l’isosingulet faibles du quark top, ainsi que les
    KK-particules, ont leur fonction d’onde de KK piquée près de la
    brane IR : ils sont donc partiellement composites dans la CFT, et
    principalement composites.

-   Les modes zéro des bosons de jauge du SM ont leur fonction d’onde de
    KK plate : ils sont donc partiellement composites dans la CFT,
    mélanges équilibrés entre états élémentaires et composites. On
    notera que les bosons de jauge massifs du SM ont une fonction d’onde
    de KK qui n’est pas tout à fait plate près de la brane IR, ils sont
    donc légèrement plus composites qu’élémentaires dans la CFT.

En conclusion, les modèles de théorie des champs dans une tranche AdS
@xmath peuvent être considérés comme un outil de calcul pour étudier des
modèles composites. Dans cette vision, la dimension spatiale
supplémentaire n’est pas physique, on peut parler de dimension spatiale
supplémentaire auxiliaire : la Nature est décrite par une CFT fortement
couplée, et on utilise la dualité jauge/gravité pour calculer les
observables dans un modèle extra-dimensionnel. Comme la CFT est une
théorie de jauge à 4D, elle est renormalisable. Il est néanmoins très
important d’avoir à l’esprit que la correspondance AdS/CFT, dans un
modèle phénoménologique à 5D, permet de faire davantage des discussions
qualitatives que quantitatives sur la CFT. Contrairement à la conjecture
initiale en théorie des supercordes, le modèle à 5D ne permet pas
d’avoir accès à la dynamique préoniques de la CFT. Il n’est d’ailleurs
pas garanti qu’il existe une théorie avec confinement dont la dynamique
reproduit exactement les valeurs des observables calculés à 5D [ 66 ] .
Autrement dit, de la même manière qu’un achèvement dans l’UV n’est pas
garanti pour le modèle phénoménologique à 5D, il en va de même pour la
CFT. Le principe holographique doit donc être utilisé avec prudence. Les
contraintes sur les modèles à 5D ne peuvent pas être, en général,
directement appliquées aux modèles composites. Par contre,
qualitativement, la découverte des premiers états excités des particules
du SM ne permettrait pas de trancher entre un scenario
extra-dimensionnel et un scenario composite. Seule la découverte de
plusieurs niveaux d’excitation différents, dont on pourrait extraire
l’expression du spectre de masse, permettrait de déterminer qui d’une
dimension supplémentaire ou d’une théorie de jauge avec confinement
décrit correctement ces résonances.

##### 3.4.2 Gorges déformées en théorie des supercordes de type IIB

###### Construction

Si la dimension spatiale supplémentaire est physique, il est nécessaire
de trouver un achèvement UV qui soit une théorie extra-dimensionnelle.
Celle-ci doit résoudre le problème de non-renormalisabilité des
interactions de jauge et de Yukawa dans un espace-temps à plus de 4D.
Une candidate naturelle est l’une des théories des supercordes ( c.f. la
Réf. [ 340 ] pour une revue). Il y a notamment des tentatives
intéressantes dans le type IIB. Typiquement, les six dimensions
spatiales supplémentaires sont compactifiées, dont la taille est de
l’ordre de @xmath . Cependant, en ajoutant des configurations
non-triviales de champs de @xmath -formes dans l’espace compactifié, on
obtient des quanta de flux, lesquels peuvent générer une dimension
spatiale supplémentaire plus grande que les autres où la courbure est
importante. On obtient une géométrie dite de gorge déformée, jouant un
rôle similaire au bulk entre les 3-branes UV et IR du modèle de RS1. La
taille de la gorge est stabilisée par les flux, ce que l’on peut
modéliser dans l’EFT par le mécanisme de Goldberger-Wise [ 341 ] .

Dans ces constructions, l’espace est de la forme AdS @xmath , où @xmath
est une variété compacte à 5D. AdS @xmath est la géométrie proche de
l’horizon d’une pile de @xmath D3-branes. Il y a alors @xmath unités de
flux dans @xmath . Le point de départ est la construction de
Klebanov-Witten [ 342 ] , où @xmath . La théorie n’est pas régulée dans
l’IR, i.e. la géométrie présente une singularité nue. Pour la résoudre,
on utilise la construction de Klebanov-Strassler [ 343 , 337 ] , où
@xmath , avec @xmath se réduisant à un point au bout de la pointe de la
gorge. La géométrie, près de la pointe IR, n’est alors plus AdS @xmath .
Les constructions de Klebanov-Witten et de Klebanov-Strassler ont des
géométries non-compactes, s’étendant à l’infini dans la direction
associée au rayon AdS @xmath . Il faut alors compléter la géométrie dans
l’UV par une variété compacte de Calabi-Yau. Dans la construction de
Klebanov-Strassler, le spectre est alors normalisable et discret [ 344 ]
. Dans le modèle effectif de RS1, la pointe de la gorge et l’espace de
Calabi-Yau sont respectivement modélisés par les branes IR et UV. La
Fig. 3.9 présente une illustration de la géométrie d’une gorge déformée.

Pour introduire les champs du SM dans le bulk [ 345 , 346 ] , on ajoute
une pile de D7-branes s’enroulant autour d’un 3-cycle de @xmath . Les
bosons de jauge et les fermions ne se propagent pas alors dans une, mais
quatre dimensions spatiales supplémentaires. De plus, la déformation de
la géométrie AdS @xmath , près de la pointe IR dans la solution de
Klebanov-Strassler, a des conséquences importantes pour la
phénoménologie des KK-particules. En effet, les fonctions d’onde de KK
de celles-ci sont quasi-localisées près de la brane IR, et leurs
couplages sont donc très sensibles à la géométrie de la pointe de
Klebanov-Strassler, qui n’est pas AdS @xmath . Dans la littérature, il y
a peu d’études des contraintes sur @xmath dans ces modèles. Des
constructions simplifiées [ 347 , 348 , 349 ] montrent que les
KK-particules sont fortement couplées près de la pointe IR. On s’attend
donc à avoir une borne inférieure sur @xmath dramatiquement plus élevée
que dans une tranche AdS @xmath , ce qui remet sérieusement en question
le potentiel du modèle pour résoudre le problème de hiérarchie de jauge
avec les bosons de jauge et les fermions dans le bulk. Construire un
achèvement UV préservant, ou même améliorant, les contraintes
expérimentales sur @xmath dans un modèle aussi simple que celui de RS1
reste donc un défi important.

###### Gorges multiples

En théorie des supercordes de type IIB, les compactifications avec flux
peuvent donner naissance, non pas à une, mais à une multitude de gorges
déformées, collées au même espace de Calabi-Yau. On obtient ainsi un
Univers «  pieuvre   » où la «  tête   » serait l’espace de Calabi-Yau
et les «  tentacules   » les gorges ( c.f. la Fig. 3.10 ). On peut alors
considérer une EFT où les dimensions transverses des gorges sont
négligeables, et où l’espace de Calabi-Yau est réduit à une 3-brane UV.
Chaque gorge est alors modélisée par un intervalle, et toutes partagent
la même brane UV, comme illustré sur la Fig. 3.10 . Autrement dit, on
colle plusieurs tranches AdS @xmath ensemble, et la physique UV de
l’espace de Calabi-Yau est décrite par des opérateurs localisés sur la
brane UV. Les champs peuvent alors se propager dans une ou plusieurs
gorges, ouvrant la porte vers une large variété de modèles, possibilités
pourtant peu exploitées dans la littérature. Les Réfs. [ 69 , 350 ]
donnent les bases de construction d’une théorie des champs dans cette
géométrie, et la Réf. [ 351 ] montre que l’on peut stabiliser la
longueur de chaque gorge avec une généralisation du mécanisme de
Goldberger-Wise. En ayant des gorges de différentes longueurs, chaque
brane IR reçoit un facteur de déformation différent ; on génère ainsi
naturellement différentes échelles d’énergie dans le modèle. Quelques
applications phénoménologiques ont été proposées [ 352 , 353 , 354 ]
pour construire notamment des modèles de saveur [ 355 ] , de neutrinos [
356 ] , de leptogénèse [ 357 ] , de secteurs cachés [ 358 , 359 ] , de
matière noire [ 360 ] et d’axions [ 361 , 362 ] .

## Part II Original Research Work

### Chapter 4 Beyond Brane-Higgs Regularization

This chapter is a personal adaptation of Ref. [ 1 ] written in
collaboration with Andrei Angelescu, Ruifeng Leng and Grégory Moreau.

#### 4.1 Introduction

The paradigm of scenarii with spacelike extra dimensions (and the
composite Higgs models dual via the AdS/CFT correspondance) represents
an alternative to SUSY for addressing the gauge hierarchy problem of the
SM. Moreover, the warped extra dimension scenarii with SM fields in the
bulk allow to generate the SM fermion mass hierarchy from a simple
geometrical picture of fermion KK wave functions along the extra
dimension. To realize those two hierarchical features, the Higgs field,
providing masses to fermions and weak gauge bosons of the SM via EWSB,
is often stuck exactly on the IR-brane.

In supersymmetric models with a warped geometry (see Ref. [ 363 ] for a
review), the two Higgs doublets are localized at the boundary of the
extra dimension and SUSY is broken on the opposite side. On the one
hand, if the Higgs doublets are on the IR-brane [ 364 , 365 ] , then the
big gauge hierarchy problem is still solved by the warp factor, and SUSY
protects the masses of the Higgs bosons from radiative corrections
between the EW scale and the quantum gravity scale on the IR-brane
(indeed the current LHC constraints push the quantum gravity scale on
the IR-brane up to @xmath TeV, implying a little hierarchy problem for
the mass of the Higgs boson). On the other hand, if the Higgs doublets
are on the UV-brane [ 366 , 367 , 368 , 369 ] , SUSY solves the entire
gauge hierarchy problem. In both cases, the fermion mass hierarchy is
generated by allowing the gauge and matter fields to propagate in the
bulk. The same mechanism gives a sfermion spectrum compatible with the
experimental bounds in the flavor sector.

In the present chapter, we discuss a rigorous 5D treatment of a brane
localized Higgs scalar field, interacting with bulk quarks/leptons,
which presents subtleties that deserve to be looked at more deeply. Let
us recall these subtle aspects. The brane localized interactions between
the 5D fields and the Higgs boson on the IR-brane involves a Dirac
distribution, which may induce an unusual discontinuity in the KK wave
function along the extra dimension for some of the bulk fermions: the
so-called “jump problem” [ 370 , 50 ] . This motivated the introduction
[ 50 , 51 , 52 , 53 , 54 , 55 , 49 ] of a regularization of the Dirac
distribution (smoothing the Dirac distribution or shifting it from the
boundary) in the calculation of the KK fermion mass spectra and
effective four-dimensional (4D) Yukawa couplings. Although there is no
profound theoretical reason to apply such a regularization procedure
(implying interaction-free boundary conditions for fermions), nowadays
most of the theoretical and phenomenological studies of the warped
models with a brane localized SM Higgs field (see e.g. Refs. [ 54 , 55 ,
56 , 57 , 58 , 59 , 60 , 61 , 49 ] ) are relying on this Dirac
distribution regularization.

We first present the mathematical inconsistencies of this regularization
procedure used in the literature. Then, instead of regularizing, we
develop the rigorous determination of the KK wave functions – taking
into account the nature of the Dirac distribution in the Higgs couplings
– which leads to bulk fermion KK wave functions without discontinuities
on the considered internal space. Alternatively, we suggest to introduce
the appropriate formalism of distributions in order to treat properly
the Dirac distribution as well as all the Lagrangian terms. We conclude
from this whole approach that neither a jump of KK wave functions nor a
particular problem arises when a proper mathematical framework is used,
so that there is in fact no motivation to introduce a brane-Higgs
regularization. These methods without regularization are illustrated
here in the derivation of the KK fermion mass spectrum – the same ideas
apply to the calculation of effective 4D Yukawa couplings. This
calculation of the mass spectrum is performed in a simplified model with
a flat extra dimension, the minimal field content and without gauge
symmetry. Nevertheless this toy model already possesses all the key
ingredients to study the delicate brane-Higgs aspects. Hence our
conclusions can be directly extended to the realistic warped models with
bulk SM matter addressing the fermion flavor and gauge hierarchy.

Several new methods for the calculation of the spectrum are proposed
which further allow for confirmations of the analytical results. Those
methods apply to alternative uses of the 5D or the 4D approaches,
employing distributions or functions. Note that from a historical point
of view, the method established here arises naturally in the theory of
variational calculus, as the Lagrangian boundary terms (brane-Higgs
couplings to fermions) are included in a new boundary condition [ 371 ]
. Furthermore, the present method follows the prescription of
considering the Dirac function to be a distribution. By the way, the
distributions were defined with mathematical rigor during the 1940’s by
L. Schwartz [ 372 , 373 ] precisely for the purpose of consistently
solving physical problems.

Besides, the performed exhaustive exploration of the solutions for the
KK wave function, in the context of two fermion fields propagating along
a flat extra dimension with neither bulk mass nor BLKTs, allows to show
that while in the free case either Neumann or Dirichlet conditions are
possible at both interval boundaries (with possibly different conditions
at the two boundaries), once their brane-Higgs couplings are introduced,
only the new type of boundary conditions involving the Yukawa coupling
constants exists at the boundary where the Higgs field is localized.

The rigorous result obtained here for the KK mass spectrum is different
from the one derived through the regularization of Dirac distributions,
as it is detailed in the present work. This difference is physical and
analytical which is also important because determining the fermion mass
formula is part of the precise theoretical understanding of the
higher-dimensional setup with a brane localized Higgs boson, since the
Higgs properties are tested at the LHC with an increasing accuracy.
Phenomenological studies of the brane localized Higgs interaction within
warped models can be found in Refs. [ 327 , 328 , 331 , 330 , 329 , 55 ,
56 , 57 , 58 , 374 , 59 , 60 , 61 , 332 ] .

At the level of calculating Higgs production/decay rates, a theoretical
debate appeared in the literature [ 58 ] on models with brane-Higgs
coupling to bulk matter. Indeed, a paradoxal non-commutativity arose in
the calculation: different physical results were obtained for Higgs
processes when taking @xmath and then @xmath [ 55 , 57 ] or the opposite
order [ 56 ] ¹ ¹ 1 Here @xmath is the number of exchanged KK states at
the level of the loop amplitude and @xmath is the infinitesimal
parameter introduced to regularize the Dirac distribution. . A
consequence of our present work is that the ambiguity is solved since
our conclusion is that the regularization must not be applied (in turn
no @xmath has to be introduced).

Furthermore, the mass spectrum obtained here allows to point out the
necessity for bulk fermions (with or without coupling to a brane
localized scalar field) to have certain Bilinear Boundary Terms (BBTs)
(studied in a different context in Refs. [ 62 , 63 , 64 , 65 , 66 ] )
which are mass terms from the point of view of the spinorial structure
but do not introduce new contributions to physical masses. Indeed, such
terms guarantee the existence of physical solutions (with correct
profile normalizations, Hermitian conjugate boundary conditions and
satisfying the decoupling limit argument) and the (non-trivial) exact
matching between the 5D and 4D analytical calculations. These boundary
terms are part of the definition of the self-consistent 5D model with
bulk fermions coupled to a brane localized scalar field, although they
are newly introduced in this context.

At a brane without Yukawa coupling, instead of including the BBTs, we
find that one can alternatively impose an essential boundary condition
(in contrast to natural boundary conditions coming from the Lagrangian
variations), consistent with the condition that a fermion current along
the extra dimension must vanish at the boundaries (exclusively within
the 4D approach in case of brane localized Yukawa interactions). Indeed,
the generic reason for the presence of the BBTs is the consistent and
complete geometrical definition of models with an extra dimension
compactified on an interval to which fermionic matter is confined. With
the BBTs, the chiral nature of the SM at the level of the zero modes
(left-handed for the weak isodoublets and right-handed for the weak
isosinglets) is entirely induced by the signs in front of BBTs. This new
relation shows how the particular chiral properties of the SM could be
explained by an underlying theory, through the signs of the BBTs.

The plan of the chapter is the following. We begin by defining our toy
model in Section 4.2 and explain how to generalize it to a realistic
warped model reproducing the SM at low energy. In Section 4.3 , we
discuss in detail the natural versus essential boundary conditions for
bulk fermions – at the boundaries of the extra dimension – and also to
derive the free fermion mass spectrum (in the absence of Yukawa
interactions), which is useful in particular for the 4D approach or more
generically for a solid comprehension of the mass spectrum. In
particular the boundary conditions arising from considerations on the
probability currents are discussed. We expose the so-called 4D method,
where the coupling of the bulk fermions to the Higgs field VEV is
introduced with an infinite matrix to bi-diagonalize. In Section 4.5 ,
we discuss the main drawbacks of the 5D method with regularization of
the Dirac distribution which one can find in the literature. In Section
4.6 , we present our 5D method. In Section 4.7 , we apply our results,
together with a discussion of the phenomenological impacts. We summarize
and conclude in Section 4.8 .

#### 4.2 Minimal Consistent Model

##### 4.2.1 Spacetime Structure

We consider a 5D toy model with a space-time @xmath .

-   @xmath is the usual 4D Minkowski spacetime. An event in @xmath is
    characterized by its 4-vector coordinates @xmath where @xmath is the
    Lorentz index.

-   @xmath is the interval @xmath , guaranteeing chiral fermions at low
    energies (below the first KK mass scale). @xmath is parametrized by
    the extra coordinate @xmath and bounded by two flat 3-branes at
    @xmath and @xmath .

-   A point of the whole 5D spacetime @xmath is labeled by its
    coordinates @xmath with an index @xmath . @xmath can be split into
    @xmath .

##### 4.2.2 Bulk Fermions

We consider the minimal spin-1/2 fermion field content allowing to write
down a 4D renormalizable SM Yukawa-like coupling between zero mode
fermions (of different chiralities) and a scalar field (see Subsection
4.2.4 ): a pair of fermions @xmath and @xmath . Both are also
propagating along the extra dimension, as we have in mind an extension
of the model to a realistic scenario with bulk matter ( c.f. Subsection
4.2.6 ) where @xmath will be left and right handed down type quark
fields. According to the discussion in Appendix B.2 , there are branes
only at the boundaries so we take the 5D fields continuous up to the
boundaries. Using the notation, @xmath , the 5D fields @xmath and @xmath
of mass dimension 2 have thus the following kinetic terms:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath denote the 5D Dirac matrices. In our notations a 5D Dirac
spinor, being in the irreducible representation of the Lorentz group,
reads

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

in terms of the two two-component Weyl spinors. @xmath stands for the
left/right-handed chirality. Let us rewrite the bulk action of Eq. ( 4.1
) in a convenient form:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

##### 4.2.3 Brane Localized Scalar Field

The subtle aspects arise when the fermions couple to a single 4D real
scalar field @xmath (mass dimension 1), confined on a boundary taken
here to be at @xmath (as inspired by warped scenarii addressing the
gauge hierarchy problem). The action of this scalar field has the
generic form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the action of a Dirac distribution centered at @xmath on a
testfunction @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

The potential @xmath possesses a minimum which generates a non-vanishing
VEV for the field @xmath , which can be expanded as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

in analogy to the SM Higgs field.

##### 4.2.4 Yukawa Interactions

We focus on the following basic interactions in order to study the
subtleties induced by the coupling of the brane scalar field to bulk
fermions,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Considering operators involving @xmath , @xmath and @xmath up to
dimension 5 allows to include this Yukawa coupling of interest ² ² 2
Notice that for instance a dimension-6 operator of type @xmath , @xmath
being a mass scale, would be treated in a similar way as the couplings
in Eq. ( 4.7 ) (and can contribute to the Yukawa couplings ( 4.7 )
through the scalar field VEV). . The complex coupling constants @xmath
and @xmath of Yukawa type (with a mass dimension -1), entering these two
distinct terms, are independent (i.e. parameters with possibly different
values) as the fermion fields on the 3-brane at @xmath are strictly
chiral (see for instance Ref. [ 54 ] ).

When calculating the KK fermion mass spectrum, we restrict our
considerations to the VEV of @xmath . Indeed, we have in mind that the
interactions of the fluctuation of the Higgs boson with the fermions are
treated in perturbation theory, as usual in QFT. Hence, we can decompose
the action ( 4.7 ) into @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the compact notations @xmath and @xmath , and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

##### 4.2.5 Bilinear Boundary Terms

Interestingly, the presence of certain BBTs for the bulk fermions
coupled to the brane Higgs field will turn out to be required to recover
the SM in the decoupling limit as will be demonstrated in detail in
Subsection 4.6.3 . The necessity and exact form (including numerical
coefficients) of these terms will be confirmed in Subsection 4.6.3 by
the exact analytical matching between the 4D and 5D calculations of the
KK mass spectrum. These boundary terms read ³ ³ 3 Similar terms, leading
in particular to @xmath , would be present in a model version extended
to the EW symmetry of the SM, with the @xmath field promoted to an
@xmath doublet @xmath . In contrast, terms of the kind @xmath (or @xmath
) or @xmath would obviously not belong to a gauge invariant form.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

They do not involve new parameters (multiplying the operators).

Note that this kind of boundary terms ( 4.10 ) is a specific case of
boundary mass terms that one can add to the model:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

when @xmath and @xmath . In Ref. [ 62 ] , Henningson and Sfetsos
introduced by hand such kind of terms only at the UV-brane ( @xmath ) of
a warped 5D model with an arbitrary coefficient @xmath , in order to
derive the AdS/CFT correspondance in the calculation of correlation
functions for spinors (see also Ref. [ 63 ] ). Then, Arutyunov and
Frolov justified them in Ref. [ 64 ] with a fixed coefficient @xmath in
the Lagrangian formulation, to obtain a consistent Hamiltonian
formulation when one performs the Legendre transformation in the case of
a full AdS spacetime. Refs. [ 65 , 66 ] showed that they are necessary
to apply Hamilton’s principle – see Annexe B.1 . Note that one is free
to add also such kind of terms at the IR-brane ( @xmath ). The AdS/CFT
duality can be used to give a holographic interpretation of warped
models (from which the present simplified scenario is inspired) in terms
of composite Higgs models. Refs. [ 67 , 68 ] make use of boundary terms
to select boundary conditions with Hamilton’s principle for 5D
symplectic-Majorana fermions.

The necessity of boundary localized terms, in a field theory defined on
a manifold with boundaries, is not a surprise as it is known for a long
time in the context of gravity. Indeed, Gibbons-Hawking boundary terms [
256 , 254 , 220 , 255 ] are needed in order to cancel the variation of
the Ricci tensor at the boundary of the manifold.

##### 4.2.6 Model Extension

The toy model considered is thus characterized by the action

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Nevertheless, the conclusions of the present work can be directly
generalized to realistic warped models with bulk SM matter solving the
fermion mass and gauge hierarchies. Indeed, working with a warped extra
dimension instead of a flat one would not affect the conceptual
subtleties concerning the coupling of bulk fermions to a brane scalar
field. The boundaries at @xmath and @xmath would then become the UV and
IR-branes, respectively. Similarly, the scalar potential @xmath can be
extended to any potential (like the SM Higgs potential breaking the EW
symmetry) as long as it still generates a VEV for the scalar field as
here. In this context the @xmath singlet can be promoted to the Higgs
doublet under the SM @xmath gauge group, simply by inserting doublets in
the kinetic term of Eq. ( 4.4 ). The whole structure of the coupling of
Eq. ( 4.8 ) between bulk fermions and the brane localized VEV would
remain the same in case of fermions promoted to SM @xmath weak
isodoublets: after index contraction of the doublet @xmath with
down/up-quark singlets @xmath , one would obtain two replicas of the
structure ( 4.8 ) with the forms @xmath and @xmath where @xmath denotes
the chirality. Hence the procedure described in this work should be
applied to both terms separately ⁴ ⁴ 4 The action in Eq. ( 4.12 ) would
be trivially generalized as well to a scenario with a gauge symmetry. .
The same comment holds for the SM color triplet contraction and the
extension of the field content to three generations of quarks and
leptons of the SM. Notice that the flavor mixings would be combined with
the mixings among fermion modes of the KK towers, without any impact on
the present considerations concerning brane localized couplings.

#### 4.3 5D Free Fermions on an Interval

In this part, we calculate the fermionic mass spectrum in the basic case
where @xmath in Eq. ( 4.7 ) (Refs [ 50 , 310 ] ), pointing out the
correct treatment. We consider the system with a compactification on an
interval with only the free bulk action @xmath in Eq. ( 4.3 ). The main
interest of this section is to develop a rigorous procedure for applying
the boundary conditions.

##### 4.3.1 Natural Boundary Conditions Only

In order to extract the Euler-Lagrange equations and the boundary
conditions for the bulk fermions, we apply Hamilton’s principle with the
action ( 4.3 ) for each fermion @xmath ⁵ ⁵ 5 The Euler-Lagrange
equations for the conjugate fields are trivially related. . According to
the discussion in Appendix B.2 , we take the variations of the fields
continuous in the bulk and at the boundaries since there are no branes
away from the boundaries. Assuming the values of the fields at the
boundaries @xmath @xmath to be initially unknown (unfixed by ad hoc
boundary conditions), their values should be deduced from the
minimization of the action with respect to them, considering thus
generic field variations @xmath . In other words, @xmath should be
obtained from the so-called natural boundary conditions ⁶ ⁶ 6 The notion
of natural boundary conditions has already been introduced in the
treatment of scalars and gauge fields with brane localized mass terms [
219 ] . [ 371 ] . The stationary action condition can be split into
conditions associated to each field without loss of generality. After an
integration by part of each term, we get

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where we drop the boundary term at infinity of the four usual
dimensions. The bulk and brane variations of Eqs. ( 4.13 )-( 4.14 ) must
vanish separately (respectively the volume and the surface terms) to
ensure @xmath for generic field variations ⁷ ⁷ 7 A functional variation
reads @xmath with a generic function @xmath and an infinitesimal
parameter @xmath . . We get the bulk Euler-Lagrange equations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the boundary conditions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us now deduce from these equations involving the 5D fields the
relations among the KK wave functions along the extra dimension.

To develop a 4D effective picture, let us replace the 5D fields in the
relations obtained just above by their standard KK decomposition,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath or @xmath are the dimensionless KK wave functions along the
extra dimension, associated respectively to the 4D fields @xmath or
@xmath ( @xmath is the KK level integer index). If they are not
vanishing for all @xmath , the KK wave functions are orthonormalized
such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

from the requirement of canonically normalized and diagonal kinetic
terms for the 4D fields after inserting the KK decomposition ( 4.17 )
into the 5D field kinetic terms ( 4.3 ). Each KK-fermion is described by
4D Dirac-Weyl equations,

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.19)
  -- -- -- --------

where @xmath are the mass eigenvalues of the KK excitation tower for the
fermions such that, for each KK mode, one has the action

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath if @xmath , and @xmath if @xmath . Inserting the KK
decomposition ( 4.17 ) and the Dirac equations ( 4.19 ) into the 5D
Euler-Lagrange equations ( 4.15 ), one can directly extract the
differential equations for the KK wave functions,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

whose solutions for the zero modes ( @xmath ) are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the @xmath ’s are complex coefficients. For the massive modes (
@xmath ), the first order differential equations ( 4.21 ) can be
combined into second order equations,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

which are the equations for independent harmonic oscillators whose
solutions have the general form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath are complex coefficients. Eq. ( 4.21 ) is a system
of first order coupled equations which imposes the relations @xmath and
@xmath for @xmath .

Now, inserting Eq. ( 4.17 ) into the boundary conditions ( 4.16 ), we
obtain the following Dirichlet boundary conditions for any KK wave
function

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

For massive modes, a Dirichlet boundary condition for a KK wave function
associated to one chirality, @xmath , combined with Eq. ( 4.21 ), gives
a Neumann boundary condition for the KK wave function of the other
chirality, @xmath . Hence, the KK wave functions have both Dirichlet and
Neumann boundary conditions at each boundary. When applied to the
expression of the KK wave functions in Eqs. ( 4.24 )-( 4.24 ), the
boundary conditions lead to @xmath , hence

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

which means that there are no KK modes. This problem comes from the fact
that the system is overconstrained at the boundaries. Indeed, the KK
wave function equations ( 4.21 ) relate @xmath and @xmath on-shell for
the massive modes: a boundary condition on @xmath is also a constraint
on @xmath and vice versa. Therefore, the KK wave functions @xmath and
@xmath for @xmath depend on the same three parameters: the mass @xmath
and the two complex coefficients @xmath . For the zero modes, @xmath and
@xmath depend each on one complex coefficient @xmath . The variation of
the action at the boundaries in Eqs. ( 4.13 )-( 4.14 ) involves the
variations of both @xmath and @xmath so there are two natural boundary
conditions for each boundary. The system is thus overconstrained, that
is why the KK wave functions vanish everywhere for all modes.

In order to have a non-trivial 5D fermion model interesting for physics,
we have to choose another kind of boundary conditions (see the next
Subsection 4.3.2 ). In Subsection 4.3.3 , we show that if we modify our
model by introducing the BBTs ( 4.10 ), we avoid the above problems.

##### 4.3.2 Essential Boundary Conditions from Conserved Currents

Regarding the geometrical field configuration within the present model,
each fermion is defined only along the interval @xmath . This model
building hypothesis, that fermions do not propagate outside the
interval, translates into the condition of a vanishing conserved current
transversal to the branes at both boundaries for each fermion species
separately (without possible compensations) – as was discussed in Ref. [
230 ] for a scalar field case.

Formally speaking, there are two conserved currents defined
independently for the two bulk fermions, involving the 5D fields @xmath
:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

as predicted by Noether’s theorem applied to the global fermionic
symmetry @xmath of the free action in Eq. ( 4.1 ). The symmetries are
based on the distinct transformations,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath ( @xmath ) are the continuous parameters of the
transformations. Infinitesimal field variations give @xmath , @xmath .
The condition that the component of the conserved currents transverse to
the branes vanishes at the boundaries is thus,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

It implies the following possible Dirichlet boundary conditions,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

which translate into boundary conditions for the KK wave functions after
the KK decomposition ( 4.17 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

One can impose ad hoc conditions on the fields at the boundaries from
the beginning, instead of using natural boundary conditions derived from
the variational calculus [ 371 ] . Such boundary conditions will be
called essential boundary conditions. Having fixed fields at boundaries
is equivalent to have vanishing functional variations, @xmath or @xmath
. The conditions ( 4.30 ) of vanishing fields at the boundaries can be
imposed as essential boundary conditions: they correspond to some fields
initially fixed at the boundaries [geometrical field configuration].
This is in contrast to our first treatment [above], where all the
boundary fields @xmath were assumed to be initially arbitrary, and then
we obtained the natural boundary conditions through Hamilton’s
principle. In the literature, Dirichlet boundary conditions are imposed
by hand as essential boundary conditions [ 50 , 310 ] . Here, we justify
these essential boundary conditions by the requirement of vanishing
probability currents at the boundaries.

Keeping these new essential boundary conditions ( 4.30 )-( 4.31 ) in
mind, let us apply Hamilton’s principle to the action ( 4.3 ) as in
Eqs. ( 4.13 )-( 4.14 ). The vanishing of the bulk variations is
identical to the previous treatment and leads to the same equations (
4.15 ). However, the boundary variations – in the two-component
notations –

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

are vanishing this time by the choice of one of the four possible
essential boundary conditions ( 4.30 ) which read

  -- -------- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath         
     @xmath   @xmath         (4.33)
  -- -------- -------- -- -- --------

recalling that @xmath implies @xmath . In other words, for instance, if
@xmath then there is no need to minimize the action with respect to this
known field at the boundary so that the corresponding variation term
[involving @xmath ] in Eq. ( 4.32 ) should be absent. Hence to obtain
complete boundary conditions, we have to combine only the essential
boundary conditions ( 4.33 ) with the KK wave functions equations ( 4.21
) [and their solutions ( 4.24 )]. For the fields which are not fixed at
the boundaries by essential boundary conditions, their variation must be
generic. We obtain the following four possible sets of wave functions
and KK mass spectrum equations ( @xmath ),

  -- -------- -------- -- --
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --

In Eq. ( LABEL:1_completeEBC ), we have used the standard boundary
condition notations, i.e. @xmath or @xmath for example at @xmath stands
respectively for the Dirichlet or Neumann KK wave function boundary
condition: @xmath or @xmath . For instance @xmath denotes Dirichlet
(Neumann) boundary condition at @xmath ( @xmath ). For the boundary
conditions 1) and 2), we would like to know if the phase of @xmath is
physical. For that purpose, we perform the transformations:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

which let the KK wave functions equations ( 4.21 ) and the
orthonormalization conditions ( 4.18 ) invariant, thus the phase of
@xmath is not physical and one can take @xmath . For the boundary
conditions 3) and 4), the same method is applied to conclude that the
phase of @xmath is not physical. We take @xmath . The boundary
conditions 1) and 4) have the following solutions for the KK mass
spectrum:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

As @xmath is also solution of the mass spectrum equation ( 4.36 ), we
will show that the sign of @xmath is not physical. One can perform the
transformations

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.37)
  -- -- -- --------

Then, the 4D actions of each KK modes ( 4.20 ) (and thus the Dirac
equations ( 4.19 )), the KK wave functions equations ( 4.21 ) and the
orthonormalization conditions ( 4.18 ) (using the parity of the
solutions ( LABEL:1_completeEBC )) are invariant. One can conlude that
the sign of @xmath is not physical and take @xmath . The boundary
conditions 2) and 3) have the solutions:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath is also solution of the mass spectrum equation ( 4.38 ). By using
the same method as above, one can show that the sign of @xmath is not
physical and take @xmath . Therefore, in the case of the first complete
boundary conditions above, the 5D field @xmath possesses a zero mode (
@xmath ) with a KK wave function @xmath associated to a right-handed
chirality 4D field @xmath [ c.f. Eq. ( 4.17 )], since @xmath – in
contrast to the second complete boundary conditions without zero mode (
@xmath ). The constants @xmath and @xmath are fixed by the
orthonormalization conditions ( 4.18 ).

Now let us impose on the 5D fields @xmath the realistic complete
boundary conditions in Eq. ( LABEL:1_completeEBC ) to fix the model.
@xmath are associated respectively to the first and fourth complete
boundary conditions of Eq. ( LABEL:1_completeEBC ), implying the
existence of zero mode 4D fields, which is realistic as, in standard
warped scenarios including Yukawa interactions, the various measured
quark masses are expected to originate mainly from the EWSB mechanism.
Furthermore, within an extended realistic warped model (as described in
Subsection 4.2.6 ) the @xmath field is promoted to a SM @xmath gauge
doublet, which is consistent with the left-handed chirality of the zero
mode 4D field @xmath imposed by the fourth complete boundary conditions,
while @xmath is the @xmath singlet down-quark, compatible with the
right-handed chirality of @xmath driven by the first complete boundary
conditions. The KK wave functions associated to these realistic boundary
conditions are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

for the massless zero modes, and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

for the excited modes with @xmath , @xmath . The second and third
complete boundary conditions of Eq. ( LABEL:1_completeEBC ) are not
realistic for a describtion of SM fermions, since they predict neither
zero mode 4D fields nor chiral states (only vector-like modes). A chiral
model can thus be recovered at low-energy for a specific choice of
complete boundary conditions on the boundaries of the interval.

One can notice that the action @xmath ( 4.1 ) has an accidental global
@xmath symmetry whose fundamental representation acts on the doublet
@xmath . However, we do not want this symmetry in our model: our choice
of boundary conditions @xmath and @xmath in Eq. ( LABEL:1_completeEBC )
break this @xmath symmetry explicitely. Indeed, one can check that the
component of the associated Noether’s current transverse to the 3-branes
is not vanishing for these boundary conditions. This is not a problem
since the @xmath symmetry is not in our list of symmetries which define
our model.

##### 4.3.3 Natural Boundary Conditions with Bilinear Boundary Terms

We propose an alternative solution to the problem of 5D free fermions
with the extra dimension compactified on an interval. Instead of
imposing essential boundary conditions when performing Hamilton’s
principle with the action @xmath in Eq. ( 4.3 ), we add the boundary
terms ( 4.11 ) allowing for natural boundary conditions. This is the
point of view adopted in Ref. [ 220 ] for a 5D scalar field and 5D
gravity, and in Refs. [ 67 , 68 ] for a 5D symplectic-Majorana fermion.
We will see that the two methods give the same physical mass spectrum as
in the previous subsection if the boundary terms have fixed
coefficients. Essential boundary conditions and natural boundary
conditions with BBTs correspond to two ways to describe the same model.

Let us apply Hamilton’s principle by considering the sum of the
actions ( 4.3 ) and ( 4.11 ) involving the two-component spinor fields:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.41)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.42)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

For generic field variations @xmath , the bulk and brane variations in
Eqs. ( 4.41 ) and ( 4.42 ) have to vanish separately, leading to the
same equations as in Eq. ( 4.15 ) and in turn, via Eqs. ( 4.19 ) and (
4.17 ), to the Euler-Lagrange equations ( 4.21 ) with solutions ( 4.22
)-( 4.24 ). We are thus left with the natural boundary conditions
(generic field variations at the boundaries):

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.43)
  -- -- -- --------

For @xmath and @xmath , we get the same boundary conditions as in Eq. (
4.16 ) which, after a KK decomposition ( 4.17 ) and solving the KK wave
functions equations ( 4.21 ), leads to vanishing KK wave functions
everywhere ( 4.25 ) in the bulk as in Subsection 4.3.1 . Indeed, the
system is still overconstrained by the natural boundary conditions (see
discussion below Eq. ( 4.26 )). In order to obtain interesting natural
boundary conditions for physics, one should take @xmath and @xmath . In
these cases, the variation of the action at the boundaries (Eq. ( 4.42
)) involves only one of the two chiralities: @xmath or @xmath . This
implies that there is only one natural boundary condition for each
boundary instead of two:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

Performing a KK decomposition ( 4.17 ) and using Eq. ( 4.21 ), one
obtains the following boundary conditions for the KK wave functions:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we used the same numbering as in Eq. ( LABEL:1_completeEBC ). The
associated KK wave function solutions and mass spectrum are the same
(the system is not overconstraines anymore). As in Subsection 4.3.2 , we
take the boundary conditions 1) and 4) respectively for the fields
@xmath and @xmath , so the boundary terms are the ones of Eq. ( 4.10 ).

The kinetic terms ( 4.1 ) and the BBTs ( 4.11 ) are invariant under the
global symmetries @xmath and @xmath so there are conserved currents
@xmath and @xmath (see Appendix B.3 for a discussion on Noether’s
theorem with boundary terms). From Eq. ( B.15 ), the conserved currents
are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath defined as in Eq. ( 4.27 ) and where @xmath is the Heaviside
distribution. @xmath is given by Eq. ( 4.29 ). The 5-divergence of this
conserved current vanishes:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

From the conservation of @xmath in the bulk, we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

The fields are differentiable with continuous derivatives on @xmath ,
thus Eq. ( 4.48 ) can be extended to the 3-branes. Using this last
result in ( 4.47 ), we have

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.49)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

We get Eq. ( 4.29 ), which is guaranteed by the boundary conditions (
4.45 ). Therefore, using this method, the boundary conditions on the
currents are a consequence of Hamilton’s principle instead of a
requirement imposed by essential boundary conditions.

The global @xmath symmetry of the action ( 4.1 ) is not a symmetry of
the boundary terms ( 4.10 ) and thus of the natural boundary conditions
through Hamilton’s principle. Here, the symmetry is broken explicitely
in the action. In Subsection 4.3.2 , the action was invariant under the
@xmath symmetry but it was broken by the choice of essential boundary
conditions.

##### 4.3.4 Summary

In Fig. 4.1 , we give a plot of the free profiles along the extra
dimension.

We summarize and provide an overview of the method followed in this
section to obtain the fermion mass spectrum and KK wave functions along
the spacelike extra dimension(s) – allowing to calculate the 4D
effective Yukawa couplings which had not been considered here. For this
purpose, we present in Fig. 4.2 a general schematic description of this
method for a well-defined extra-dimensional model. The figure must be
understood as follows. A given extra-dimensional model is defined by its
geometrical set-up (spacetime structure and geometrical field
configuration), its field content and its internal (gauge groups,…) as
well as other kinds of symmetries (restricted to the Poincaré group
here) of symmetries. These ingredients determine entirely the action
from which Noether’s theorem predicts the conserved currents. The basic
assumptions on the boundaries of the internal space where the fields
propagate translate into conditions on these currents ⁸ ⁸ 8 The
geometrical condition imposed along the three usual spatial dimensions
being that the fields and their derivatives must decrease quickly at
large distance and vanish at infinity. . In turn those geometrical field
configurations fix some fields at the boundaries. One can use essential
boundary conditions (and hence impose vanishing field variations) or
natural boundary conditions with well chosen boundary terms in the
action. The KK decomposition allows to separate the Euler-Lagrange
equations into the ones for the 4D fields and for the KK wave functions
along the extra dimension(s). The last step is to solve the KK wave
function equation, together with the previously obtained complete
boundary conditions, to find the mass spectrum.

#### 4.4 4D Fermion Mass Matrix including Yukawa couplings

In this subsection, we describe the two steps of a first method [ 48 ,
49 ] to include the effects of the Yukawa terms ( 4.8 ) on the final
fermion mass spectrum. First, the free KK wave functions and free
spectrum are calculated within a 5D approach whose treatment was exposed
in detail in Section 4.3 . Secondly, one can write a mass matrix for the
4D fermion fields involving the pure KK masses (the free spectrum of the
first step) as well as the masses induced by the Higgs VEV in the Yukawa
terms ( 4.8 ) (with free KK wave functions of first step) which mix the
KK modes. The bi-diagonalization of this matrix gives rise to an
infinite set of eigenvalues constituting the physical masses, as will be
presented here.

We focus on the interval compactification with the fermion terms of the
5D action ( 4.12 ), with or without @xmath , in order to work out the
mass spectrum. This action leads – after insertion of the free KK
decomposition ( 4.17 ), the use of the orthonormalization condition (
4.18 ) when one integrates over the fifth dimension – to the canonical
kinetic terms for the 4D fermion fields as well as to the following
fermionic 4D effective mass terms in the Lagrangian density (and to
independent 4D effective Higgs-fermion couplings not discussed here),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the free KK bases (Eq. ( 4.17 )) for the
left and right-handed 4D fields ⁹ ⁹ 9 Notice that there exists only one
chirality for the zero modes as explained above with the free
solutions ( LABEL:1_completeEBC ).

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

and where the infinite mass matrix @xmath reads (see Ref. [ 49 ] )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath is the free spectrum of the first and fourth solutions of Eq. (
LABEL:1_completeEBC ), and the off-diagonal terms @xmath and @xmath
describe the mixings between the KK modes (obtained in Section 4.3 )
induced by the Yukawa couplings. They are given by the overlap of the
free KK wave function with the Higgs-brane:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

From the first and fourth solutions of Eq. ( LABEL:1_completeEBC )
respectively for @xmath and @xmath in the studied model, @xmath .

The physical fermion mass spectrum is obtained by bi-diagonalizing the
mass matrix ( 4.52 ). The eigenstate basis is then

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.54)
  -- -- -- --------

This method is called the perturbative method in the sense that
truncating the mass matrix at a given KK level corresponds to keeping
only the dominant contributions to the lightest mass eigenvalue being
the measured fermion mass (higher KK modes tend to mix less with the
zero mode due to larger mass differences).

Extracting the mass spectrum equation from the characteristic equation
for the Hermitian-squared mass matrix ( 4.52 ), in the case of infinite
KK towers, is not trivial. This useful calculation was addressed
analytically in Ref. [ 49 ] for the present toy model with real Yukawa
couplings @xmath and @xmath in Eq. ( 4.7 ). The resulting exact
equation, without any approximation is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

so the mass spectrum @xmath is given by the two equations:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.56)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

One can verify that in the limit of vanishing Yukawa couplings ( @xmath
), the two KK spectra @xmath and @xmath converge to the two free spectra
( 4.36 ) (one for each 5D field @xmath , @xmath ). Truncating the
spectra at a given KK level @xmath , one can see that there is a
one-to-one correspondance between the KK modes. Rewriting the spectra
with the unique label @xmath , one gets:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us notice that if one includes @xmath in Eq. ( 4.12 ), the boundary
terms are included in the mass matrix ( 4.52 ). Then the would-be
induced 4D mass matrix elements vanish since @xmath involves @xmath KK
wave functions at @xmath , like the @xmath coefficients in Eq. ( 4.53 ).
Hence the mass eigenvalues are unchanged.

#### 4.5 Usual 5D Treatment: the Regularization Doom

In the previous Section 4.3 , the fermion wave functions did not satisfy
equations of motion including interactions with the Higgs field
localized on the boundaries. In this part, we work out the fermion mass
spectrum in the model defined by the 5D action ( 4.12 ), using the
alternative 5D approach based on the brane-Higgs regularizations [ 53 ,
54 , 58 , 59 , 49 ] and we point out non-rigorous features of these
methods.

##### 4.5.1 Mixed Kaluza-Klein Decomposition

As we have seen in Eqs. ( 4.51 ) and ( 4.52 ), after EWSB, the infinite
towers of @xmath and @xmath fields of the free KK basis ( 4.51 ) mix (as
well as the @xmath and @xmath ) to form 4D fields @xmath (and @xmath )
of the mass eigenstate basis ( 4.54 ). In order to take into account
this mixing within the 5D approach, we expand the 5D fields in the mass
eigenstate basis ( 4.54 ) instead of the free KK basis ( 4.51 ). It is
called a mixed KK decomposition [instead of the free one in Eq. ( 4.17
)] [ 53 , 54 ] , defined as follows,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

The 4D fields @xmath ( @xmath ) must satisfy the Dirac-Weyl equations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the spectrum @xmath includes contributions to masses from the
Yukawa couplings ( 4.8 ). Note that in contrast to the free case, there
is a unique mass spectrum @xmath for a unique 4D field tower @xmath . Fo
each KK mode, one has the action:

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.60)
  -- -- -- --------

In order to guarantee the existence of diagonal and canonical kinetic
terms for the 4D fields @xmath , the associated new KK wave functions
must now obey the two following orthonormalization conditions,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

for a chirality index @xmath or @xmath . These two conditions are
different from the four ones of Eq. ( 4.18 ) due to the new mixed KK
decomposition.

##### 4.5.2 Shift of the Bounday Localized Higgs Field

Here we highlight the formal problems of the 5D process by shifting the
brane-Higgs field away from the boundary [ 50 , 51 , 52 , 49 ] to get
the fermion mass tower. The considered fermion terms of the 5D action (
4.12 ) are @xmath and @xmath (without @xmath which was missed in the
relevant literature and which will be taken into account in Subsection
4.6 ). The variations of the studied action lead to the same free
boundary conditions, @xmath , and to the following bulk Euler-Lagrange
equations including the Yukawa coupling constants present in the mass
terms with @xmath and @xmath [instead of the free ones in Eq. ( 4.15 )],

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are taken real. Indeed, in view of regularizing
the brane-Higgs field, the Yukawa interactions must be included in the
bulk Euler-Lagrange equations [ 49 ] as done in the literature.
Inserting the mixed KK decomposition ( 4.58 ) into the 5D field
Euler-Lagrange equations ( 4.62 ) allows to factorize out the 4D fields,
obeying the 4D Dirac equations ( 4.59 ), and to obtain the KK wave
function equations for each mode (instead of the free ones in Eq. ( 4.21
)):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here we underline a first mathematical issue of this usual approach:
introducing @xmath Dirac distributions ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 Strictly speaking, a
Dirac distribution is a distribution although its historical name is
“Dirac delta function” [ 375 ] . in these KK wave function equations
requires to treat the KK wave functions as distributions ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 Also
called “generalized functions” in mathematical analysis. . The
right-hand sides of the equations ( 4.63 ) involve products of the four
KK wave functions and @xmath which are well defined if the KK wave
functions are continuous at @xmath . As we will see, some of the KK wave
functions are instead discontinuous at @xmath .

The apparent “ambiguity” noticed in the literature (in the context of a
warped extra dimension) was that the Yukawa terms in Eq. ( 4.63 ) are
present only at the @xmath boundary and might thus affect the fermion
boundary conditions. In order to avoid this question, a regularization
of the brane-Higgs coupling was suggested allowing to maintain the free
fermion boundary conditions in the presence of Yukawa interactions. Here
is the main drawback of all the regularization methods: when applying
Hamilton’s principle, the boundary term from the integration by parts of
the variation of the bulk action ( 4.3 ) has to vanish without the
variation of the localized Lagrangian including the Yukawa couplings (
4.8 ), leading to free boundary conditions. One should instead impose
the variation of the complete boundary term at @xmath to vanish, as we
did in Subsection 4.6 .

###### Regularization I Drawbacks

For the type of regularization first applied in the literature [ 50 , 51
, 52 ] , called Regularization I [ 49 ] , one begins by using the free
boundary conditions @xmath (see respectively the first and fourth
solutions in Eq. ( LABEL:1_completeEBC )) in the system of equations (
4.63 ) which becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the next step of this method, the usual trick is to shift the
brane-Higgs coupling from the brane at @xmath (TeV-brane in a warped
framework) by an amount @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then the integration of the four equations ( 4.65 ) over an
infinitesimal range, tending to zero and centered at @xmath , leads to
¹² ¹² 12 The integration of Eq. ( 4.65 ) could also be performed over
the interval @xmath ; this variant of the calculation, suggested in
Refs. [ 50 , 51 , 52 ] , represents in fact an equivalent regularization
process leading to the same physical results but with identical
mathematical inconsistencies.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

We see an inconsistency arising here in the regularization process: the
first and fourth relations in Eq. ( 4.66 ) show that the KK wave
functions @xmath and @xmath possess a discontinuity at @xmath , and thus
at @xmath in the limit @xmath , using the free boundary conditions ¹³ ¹³
13 The KK wave functions @xmath , @xmath are usually assumed to be
continuous at @xmath while @xmath , @xmath remain unknown exactly at
this point. . Hence their product with the Dirac distribution centered
at @xmath is not defined in the original equations ( 4.63 ). As a
consequence, the action ( 4.8 ) is ill-defined since the Dirac
distribution @xmath multiplies the KK wave functions @xmath and @xmath
not being continuous at @xmath .

In the following steps of this regularization I, one solves Eq. ( 4.65 )
first in the interval @xmath (bulk Euler-Lagrange equations without
Yukawa couplings) and applies the free boundary conditions @xmath . Then
one solves Eq. ( 4.65 ) on @xmath before applying the jump and
continuity conditions ( 4.66 ) at @xmath on the resulting KK wave
functions. The last step is to apply the free boundary conditions at
@xmath on these KK wave functions and take the limit @xmath (to recover
the studied brane-Higgs model) of the boundary conditions. The obtained
boundary conditions give rise to the equation whose solutions constitute
the fermion mass spectrum with real Yukawa couplings [ 49 ] ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

exactly as the 4D approach result of Eq. ( 4.57 ).

###### Regularization II Drawbacks

Within the regularization II [ 49 ] , the Higgs coupling is first
shifted along @xmath in the bulk equations ( 4.63 ), which become

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

Integrating these four relations over an infinitesimal range centered at
@xmath gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

This set of conditions shows that the four KK wave functions undergo a
jump at @xmath , in conflict with the continuity required by the
products of the shifted Dirac distributions and the KK wave functions on
the right-hand side of the equations ( 4.68 ). In other terms, the
continuity conditions ( 4.69 ) depend on the right-hand sides of the
equations so that one must choose a value for each KK wave function
exactly at @xmath . Taking a mean value weighted by a real number @xmath
¹⁴ ¹⁴ 14 Different values of @xmath correspond to physically equivalent
regularizations based on different input values of the Yukawa coupling
constants (different coupling definitions). , Eq. ( 4.69 ) takes the
form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

Looking at the left-hand sides of those four equations, one observes
that jumps may arise at @xmath (in the limit @xmath ) for the four KK
wave functions [for each @xmath mode]. Determining which KK wave
functions are discontinuous requires to consider the free boundary
conditions at @xmath (before applying the limit @xmath ), the various
@xmath values (including infinity) and the four KK wave functions
simultaneously [as they are related through Eq. ( 4.70 )]. The
hypothesis that all of the four KK wave functions are continuous at
@xmath (in the limit @xmath ) corresponds to the same field
configuration as in the absence of Yukawa interactions and leads thus to
a free fermion mass spectrum. This kind of solution was not considered
in the literature since it does not reproduce the SM at low-energies and
is thus not realistic. Therefore, there exists at least one KK wave
function discontinuous at @xmath which in turn involves ill-defined
products with @xmath in the original KK wave function equations ( 4.63
). Furthermore, the obtained discontinuous KK wave function [at @xmath ]
multiplies @xmath in Eq. ( 4.8 ), spoiling the mathematical validity of
this action.

In the next steps of regularization II, Eq. ( 4.68 ) is first solved
over the domain @xmath (free bulk Euler-Lagrange equations) and the free
boundary conditions at @xmath are applied to the resulting KK wave
functions. Eq. ( 4.68 ) is then solved over @xmath before the
jump/continuity conditions ( 4.70 ) at @xmath are applied to the
obtained KK wave functions. Finally the free boundary conditions at
@xmath are implemented on those KK wave functions and one applies the
limit @xmath to the boundary conditions. These boundary conditions lead
to the equation giving the fermion mass spectrum with real Yukawa
couplings [ 49 ] ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

which can still be shown [ 49 ] to be physically equivalent to the
result of regularization I ( 4.67 ) as the definition of the Yukawa
couplings are also different in the two regularizations.

##### 4.5.3 Softening of the Boundary Localized Higgs Field

Another type of regularization used in the literature (for warped
models) [ 54 , 56 , 55 , 49 ] consists in replacing the Dirac
distribution @xmath of Eq. ( 4.8 ) by a normalized square function:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . The limit when @xmath is formaly the Dirac “function”:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

as in Dirac’s original article [ 375 ] . Of course, this is not a true
function in the mathematical sense. This object has a meaning only in
the framework of distribution theory built by L. Schwartz [ 373 , 372 ]
. The Dirac distribution @xmath is defined from its action on a function
@xmath continuous at @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

What is allowed is to say that @xmath converges weakly on @xmath when
@xmath , which means that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

We insist on the fact that this is allowed because @xmath is continuous
at @xmath .

In Refs. [ 54 , 56 , 55 ] , they found that by naively integrating the
equations in the system ( 4.63 ) around @xmath , the KK wave functions
are discontinuous and they propose to regularize @xmath with @xmath
precisely in a case where it is not allowed. Then, they solve the system
of equations ( 4.63 ) in the two regions @xmath and @xmath . The KK wave
functions solutions are connected at @xmath by continuity. They get a
mass spectrum which depends both of @xmath and @xmath . For giving a
meaning to this regularization procedure, @xmath in Eq. ( 4.63 ) should
multiply only continuous wave functions. This happens when @xmath and/or
@xmath vanish. We need @xmath to give their masses to the zero modes of
@xmath and @xmath as in the SM. In order to be allowed to soften the
brane-Higgs, we have to take @xmath in a regularization procedure which
is well defined in distribution theory.

##### 4.5.4 Two non-commutativities of calculation limits

The analytical differences of the mass spectra found in the
Regularizations I and II, as well as via the softened and shifted
brane-Higgs, could be compensated by different input values for the
Yukawa coupling constants ( @xmath and @xmath ) to get identical
physical mass values [ 49 ] . Nevertheless, the Regularizations I and II
are in fact physically different with respect to the existence of
measurable flavor violating effective 4D Yukawa couplings at leading
order in @xmath (with @xmath the KK scale) which are generated by the
@xmath couplings [ 54 ] being present exclusively within
Regularization II (as appears clearly in the 4D approach). This physical
difference between the two schemes of regularization raises the
paradoxal question of which one is the correct analytical scheme to use,
and represents thus a confirmation of the inconsistency of regularizing
the Higgs peak. These two schemes of regularization are obtained [ 49 ]
by commuting in the 4D calculation (of masses and couplings) the order
of implementation of the two limits @xmath [the regularization parameter
@xmath defined in Eq. ( 4.65 )] and @xmath [the upper value @xmath of
the KK level @xmath in Eq. ( 4.17 )]. Therefore, this physical
non-commutativity of calculation limits reflects the inconsistency of
the Higgs peak regularization. Another paradoxal non-commutativity of
calculation limits arising in the context of regularization of a
brane-Higgs coupled to bulk fermions was discussed in Ref. [ 58 , 59 ] :
different results for Higgs production/decay rates when taking @xmath
and then @xmath ¹⁵ ¹⁵ 15 Here @xmath stands for the number of excited
fermion eigenstates exchanged at the loop-level. [ 55 ] or the inverse
order [ 56 ] in their calculation. We can thus interpret now this second
non-commutativity of calculation limits as another hint for the
problematic brane-Higgs regularization (also expected with a warped
extra dimension). The origin of the two non-commutativities is the
mathematically ill-defined (see above) and unnecessary (see below) Higgs
regularization (introducing @xmath ).

#### 4.6 New 5D Treatment

In this part, we present a method to calculate the fermionic mass
spectrum which does not require any kind of regularization. We follow
the main lines of the methodology developed for the free case in Section
4.3 and summarized in Fig. 4.2 .

##### 4.6.1 Fermionic Currents & Essential Boundary Conditions

We begin with considerations of the fermion currents, as justified in
Section 4.3 , to define the geometrical field configuration of the
considered scenario (see the schematic illustration of Fig. 4.2 ). In
this scenario, the two 5D fields @xmath propagate only in the interval
@xmath . This set-up translates into a condition of a vanishing current
perpendicular to both boundaries (see Appendix B.3 for a discussion on
Noether’s theorem with boundary terms); this current is now the sum of
the individual currents of type ( 4.29 ) for the two fermion species
@xmath since those fermions are mixed at @xmath through the terms ( 4.8
). More precisely, there exists a current involving the two 5D fields:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

as obtained by Noether’s theorem applied to the global fermionic @xmath
symmetry of the action made of Eqs. ( 4.3 ), ( 4.10 ) and Eq. ( 4.8 ).
The associated transformations,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath ( @xmath ) a continuous parameter [now forced by the
invariant terms ( 4.8 ) to be common to the two fields @xmath ].
Finally, the conditions for a vanishing current perpendicular to the two
boundaries are,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

Those relations constitute boundary conditions for the currents.

However, the brane localized Yukawa terms ( 4.8 ) are not invariant
under the individual @xmath and @xmath symmetries so the individual
currents @xmath and @xmath defined in Eq. ( 4.27 ) are separately
conserved locally only outside the boundary at @xmath , which leads to
the conditions of vanishing currents at @xmath in Eq. ( 4.30 ). These
are satisfied if one imposes the same essential boundary conditions at
@xmath on the fermion wave functions, as in the free case, and the 4D
mass matrix method in Subsection 4 ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### 4.6.2 Failed Treatment without Bilinear Boundary Terms

We study the mass spectrum considering the action @xmath ( 4.3 ) for the
kinetic terms and the Yukawa couplings action @xmath ( 4.8 ), but
without the BBTs @xmath ( 4.10 ) for the moment. The boundary fields at
@xmath are fixed by the essential boundary conditions ( 4.79 ), whereas
they are initially free at @xmath so that their functional variations
will be taken generic and continuous including the boundaries (see
Appendix B.2 ). Without loss of generality, the stationary action
condition can be split into the following conditions for each field,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
                          (4.80)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.81)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
                          (4.82)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.83)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where the field variations at @xmath are zero because of the essential
boundary conditions. For generic field variations, the bulk and brane
variations of Eqs. ( 4.80 ), ( 4.81 ), ( 4.82 ) and ( 4.83 ), must
vanish separately. The bulk part of Eqs. ( 4.80 ), ( 4.81 ), ( 4.82 )
and ( 4.83 ) leads to identical bulk Euler-Lagrange equations as in
Eq. ( 4.15 ). The brane parts give the natural boundary conditions:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

satisfying the boundary current conditions ( 4.30 ) and ( 4.78 ), and
leading to consistency relations,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

which imply @xmath and @xmath . Eq. ( 4.85 ) gives conditions which
relate different parameters of the model. They appear because our model
is overconstrained at the boundaries (similar to the discussion below
Eq. ( 4.26 )). The variation of the action at the boundaries (Eq. ( 4.80
)-( 4.83 )) involves the variations of both @xmath and @xmath . There is
thus one natural boundary condition for each field at each boundary,
while @xmath and @xmath are related on-shell by the Euler-Lagrange
equations ( 4.15 ): the system is thus overconstrained.

The Euler-Lagrange equations ( 4.15 ) lead, via the relevant mixed KK
decomposition ( 4.58 ) and 4D Dirac-Weyl equations ( 4.59 ), to the
equations for the KK wave functions along the whole interval @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

The KK decomposition ( 4.58 ) in Eq. ( 4.84 ), together with Eq. ( 4.86
), gives the complete boundary conditions,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

The boundary conditions are not of type @xmath or @xmath anymore. One
can call them @xmath and @xmath , where a boundary condition @xmath
refers to the dependence on @xmath , @xmath at @xmath .

We can now solve the bulk equations ( 4.86 ) with the boundary
conditions ( 4.87 ). This system of coupled first order equations can be
decoupled into second order ones so that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.88)
  -- -------- -- --------

whose solutions are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.89)
  -- -------- -- --------

with real constant parameters @xmath , @xmath . The coupled equations (
4.86 ) impose the relations @xmath and @xmath . The solutions ( 4.89 )
of Eq. ( 4.86 ) inserted into the complete boundary conditions at @xmath
( 4.87 ) give rise to the following profiles,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.90)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath and @xmath . The normalization conditions ( 4.61 ) give
@xmath . When these four solutions are injected into the boundary
conditions at @xmath ( 4.84 ), one obtains the equations for the mass
spectrum,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.91)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.92)
  -- -------- -- --------

These two mass spectra are equivalent thanks to the relation ( 4.85 )
but they do not match the mass spectrum ( 4.57 ) of the 4D method.

Moreover, the Yukawa coupling @xmath between two zero modes is obtained
by injecting the KK decomposition ( 4.58 ) in Eq. ( 4.9 ) and then by
using the BCs at @xmath ( 4.87 ) and the relation ( 4.85 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.93)
  -- -------- -- --------

thus

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.94)
  -- -------- -- --------

A vanishing Yukawa coupling for the zero modes is not compatible with
the SM at low energy. All these problems show that this approach is not
consistent.

Another failure of the present treatment can be seen when one takes the
limit of vanishing Yukawa couplings ( @xmath ). One expects that the 5D
and 4D mass matrix methods match, i.e. the complete boundary conditions
( 4.87 ) should be the same as the free ones in Subsection 4.4 : @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . Instead, we have @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , where @xmath means that there is a Neumann and a Dirichlet
boundary conditions on the same KK wave function at the same boundary.
This implies vanishing KK wave function everywhere along the extra
dimension.

##### 4.6.3 Treatment with Bilinear Boundary Terms

In order to overcome the drawbacks discussed in Subsection 4.6.2 , we
add to the model the BBTs ( 4.10 ). The boundary fields are free to vary
on the branes. Hamilton’s principle applied to @xmath (Eqs. ( 4.3 ), (
4.8 ), ( 4.10 )), insisting on continuous field variations (see Appendix
B.2 ) field variations, gives

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.95)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
                          (4.96)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
                          (4.97)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.98)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Variations of the action in the bulk and on the branes must vanish
separately. The Euler-Lagrange equations ( 4.15 ) are still valid and
give, after the KK decomposition, the equations for the KK wave
functions ( 4.86 ). This time, the natural boundary conditions from the
vanishing variations of the action on the branes are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.99)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is straightforward to check that the boundary current conditions (
4.30 ) and ( 4.78 ) are satisfied by the natural boundary conditions (
4.99 ) which can be further rewritten without loss of generality as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.100)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which leads to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath               
              @xmath               
     @xmath   @xmath               (4.101)
                       @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

As shown in Subsection 4.6.2 in Eq. ( 4.94 ), the Yukawa coupling @xmath
must be present to allow this scenario to reproduce the SM at EW
energies. Hence one has @xmath so that the BCs 1 reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath               (4.102)
                       @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Then, combining these BCs 1 with the bulk Euler-Lagrange equations (
4.15 ) would lead to vanishing 5D fields: the presence of the mass term
with @xmath leads to an additional natural boundary condition which
overconstrains the system. Let us move to the BCs 2 by taking @xmath
(thus @xmath and we recover the condition guessed in Subsection 4.5.3 ,
which can be expressed in terms of the KK wave functions thanks to the
relevant mixed KK decomposition ( 4.58 ), and then combined with the
equations for the KK wave functions ( 4.86 ). We get the complete
boundary conditions,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.103)
  -- -------- -- ---------

One can check that in the limit @xmath , one recovers the free boundary
conditions of the 4D mass matrix approach in Subsection 4 : @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

Eq. ( 4.86 ) and the boundary conditions at @xmath in Eq. ( 4.103 ) lead
to the same KK wave functions ( 4.90 ) as in Subsection 4.6.2 . When
these four solutions are injected into the boundary conditions ( 4.103 )
at @xmath , one obtains

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.104)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The mass spectrum is thus

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.105)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The normalization conditions of Eq. ( 4.61 ) ( @xmath ) give, with the
KK wave functions of Eq. ( 4.90 ), @xmath and @xmath with @xmath ,
@xmath . Moreover, Eq. ( 4.104 ), together with the mass spectrum
equation in Eq. ( 4.105 ), leads to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.106)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.107)
  -- -------- -- ---------

When one changes the sign of @xmath , one goes from the spectrum ( 4.106
) to the spectrum ( 4.107 ). When one performs the transformation

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.108)
  -- -------- -- ---------

the 4D actions of each KK modes ( 4.60 ) (and thus the Dirac equations (
4.59 )), the KK wave functions equations ( 4.86 ) and the
orthonormalization conditions ( 4.61 ) (using the parity of the
solutions ( 4.90 )) are invariant. One can conlude that the sign of
@xmath is not physical and consider only the spectrum ( 4.106 ) which is
physically equivalent to ( 4.107 ). The phase @xmath is not fixed yet.
To see if it is physical, we perform the shift @xmath , and check that
the KK wave function equations ( 4.86 ) and the orthonormalization
conditions ( 4.61 ) are invariant, so one can take @xmath since it is
not physical. What about @xmath ? By performing the shift @xmath , we
check also that ( 4.86 ) and ( 4.61 ) are invariant so we fix @xmath .
At the end, we obtain the KK wave functions ( 4.90 ) with @xmath and the
mass spectrum:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.109)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This time, the mass spectrum matches the one obtained in the 4D mass
matrix approach (Eq. ( 4.57 )). We conclude that this new approach seems
consistent. In Fig. 4.3 , we give a plot of the KK wave functions along
the extra dimension.

The Yukawa couplings between the modes @xmath and @xmath follow from
inserting the KK decomposition ( 4.58 ) in Eq. ( 4.9 ) and using the
profiles expression ( 4.90 ),

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.110)
  -- -------- -- ---------

thus

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.111)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where we use the mass spectrum ( 4.105 ) and trigonometric identities ¹⁶
¹⁶ 16

@xmath (4.112)

@xmath (4.113)

to get the last equality.

##### 4.6.4 Brane Localized Terms & the Dirac Distribution

In this part, we reformulate the method in Subsection 4.6.3 with the
formalism of distributions [ 372 , 373 ] . As it corresponds just to
reexpress the procedure in the language of distributions, the physical
results are the same.

###### The 5D Action as a Distribution

One can treat the 5D fields as distributions in order to handle boundary
localized interactions. In this subsection, we choose a different
approach where the fields are still functions but the action is built
with rectangular and Dirac distributions.

To formulate our model using Dirac distributions for the brane localized
terms, we define the 5D fields on @xmath and use a rectangular
distribution @xmath to restrict the action to the physical compact
space. The 5D action is thus rewritten as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.114)
  -- -------- -- ---------

An important remark is that the fields in the Lagrangians @xmath ( 4.3
), @xmath ( 4.8 ) and @xmath ( 4.10 ) must be continuous at the
positions of the 3-branes in order to define the product between the
Dirac distributions and the Lagrangians @xmath , @xmath in Eq. ( 4.114
).

Hamilton’s principle applied to the action ( 4.114 ), varying each
field, with generic variations at the boundaries, leads to

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.115)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.116)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.117)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.118)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where we used the fact that @xmath since @xmath . The generic field
variations should be understood as playing the role of testfunctions.
One gets the equations including distributions,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.119)
  -- -------- -- ---------

One can notice that, in the formalism of distribution theory, the 5D
Euler-Lagrange equations contain the information leading to the natural
boundary conditions via the products with @xmath . If one applies the
distribution equations ( 4.119 ) on a testfunction @xmath , whose
support @xmath is such that @xmath , one gets simply

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.120)
  -- -------- -- ---------

For a generic testfunction @xmath , this leads to the bulk
Euler-Lagrange equations ( 4.15 ) for the 5D fields restricted to @xmath
. Assuming that the 5D fields are differentiable with respect to @xmath
with continuous derivatives, one can extend the viability of this
Euler-Lagrange equations system ( 4.120 ) to @xmath . Then, using them
in the system ( 4.119 ), we obtain

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.121)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Again, one obtains the same boundary conditions as in Eq. ( 4.100 ). At
the end, we recover the system of 5D Euler-Lagrange equations ( 4.15 )
and boundary conditions of Subsection 4.6.3 . The solution of the
equations is thus the same (see the discussion in Subsection 4.6.3 below
Eq. ( 4.100 )). Therefore, treating the Yukawa terms as distributions is
just another mathematical way to treat brane localized couplings of bulk
fields.

###### Currents and Distributions

The formalism of distributions is particulary convenient to study the
currents associated to the 5D fields. We come back to the two
transformations @xmath in Subsection 4.3.2 . It is straightforward to
generalize Noether’s theorem to the case of a Lagrangian distribution as
in Eq. ( 4.114 ). The current associated to the field @xmath is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.122)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath defined as in Eq. ( 4.27 ), and in particular @xmath is
given by the same expression as in Eq. ( 4.29 ). Moreover, Noether’s
theorem gives the expression for the divergence of these currents (
@xmath ) [ 71 ] ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.123)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the @xmath means the transformed Lagrangian under @xmath .
Therefore, even if the currents @xmath are not conserved on the 3-brane
at @xmath , Eq. ( 4.123 ) can still provide information, linking the
bulk currents to the Yukawa couplings on the 3-brane. For the left-hand
side of ( 4.123 ), using ( 4.122 ), one gets

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.124)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Restricting our study to the bulk, it is clear from Eq. ( 4.1 ) that
@xmath is a symmetry of @xmath so the associated current is conserved
outside of the branes,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.125)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Again, we know that the fields are differentiable with continuous
derivatives on @xmath , thus Eq. ( 4.125 ) can be extended to the
3-branes. Using this last result in ( 4.124 ), we have

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.126)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where we used the fact that @xmath vanishes at @xmath since there is no
mixing term between @xmath and @xmath here ¹⁷ ¹⁷ 17 but the constraint
that @xmath ( 4.78 ) has to vanish at @xmath remains. . Subsequently,
one can express the right-hand side of Eq. ( 4.123 ) with ( 4.8 ) for
the transformation @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.127)
  -- -------- -- ---------

hence ( 4.126 ) with ( 4.29 ) leads to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.128)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which is trivially satisfied by the BCs 2 in Eq. ( 4.101 ) that we
choose. One can repeat the same exercise for the transformation @xmath .
Our choice of boundary conditions is thus consistent with the
conservation laws of the currents.

#### 4.7 Implications

##### 4.7.1 Interpretation of the Analytical Results

The matching of the fermion mass spectra obtained in the distinct 4D
(Subsection 4.4 ) and 5D (Subsection 4.6.3 ) approaches constitutes a
confirmation of both the spectra and the feature that regularizing
(performed in none of the 4D and 5D approaches) is not required for the
calculation. The 5D method is obviously different from the 5D
regularizations (of type I and II) discussed in the literature and whose
inconsistencies have been pointed out in Section 4.5 .

As a corollary, note that there is no other theoretical reason other
than a would-be regularization to introduce a temporary shift along
@xmath of the Dirac distribution in the spectrum calculation. This shows
the uniqueness of the fermion mass spectrum since such a shift could
modify the spectrum (as in the regularization II). Indeed, in particular
in the 4D approach, the coefficients @xmath of Eqs. ( 4.52 )-( 4.53 )
would tend to zero as shift of the brane on which the Higgs is localized
would go to zero, implying a change of the mass spectrum if this limit
is taken after (like in the 4D regularization II) the infinite KK tower
limit of the mass matrix characteristic equation [ 49 ] .

Besides, the independence of the final fermion mass spectrum ( 4.105 )
on the parameter @xmath is an important result since most approaches
including brane-Higgs regularization lead to a @xmath dependeence. The
condition @xmath is required in order to have a system of Euler-Lagrange
equations with boundary conditions which is not overconstrained.

Let us now interpret physically the absence of the role of the @xmath
coupling (involved in @xmath ) in the final spectrum ( 4.105 ) which
depends only on @xmath . In the 4D approach, starting with the free
action @xmath , the KK wave functions @xmath and @xmath ( @xmath ),
defined in Eq. ( 4.17 ) and given respectively by the first and fourth
solutions of Eq. ( LABEL:1_completeEBC ) (see the discussion below this
equation), vanish at the boundary @xmath . Hence the term with a
coefficient @xmath in the action @xmath of Eq. ( 4.8 ), added to the
above free action @xmath , gets multiplied by a vanishing factor from
the integration over the interval due to the Dirac distribution @xmath .
More intuitively, the @xmath term localized at the boundary @xmath , and
coupling the brane localized Higgs boson to the bulk fermions @xmath ,
@xmath , should not have any effect since the associated free fermionic
KK wave functions vanish at this boundary. Moreover, if this term is
absent at tree level, it will not be perturbatively generated [ 322 ,
326 ] , and thus this situation is technically natural. This feature is
confirmed by the rigorous procedure of solving the Euler-Lagrange
equations and complete boundary conditions leading to the mass spectrum
 ( 4.105 ).

##### 4.7.2 Phenomenological impacts

In the appropriate treatment developed in the present chapter without
regularization, the obtained mass spectrum and the effective 4D Yukawa
coupling depend on @xmath but not on @xmath coupling constant.

The results for fermion masses and profiles are also correct when one
invokes the brane-Higgs Regularization I for which the @xmath dependence
cancels. Hence, the phenomenological analyses in the literature based on
such results are still valid: see for instance Ref. [ 47 , 376 , 53 , 48
, 377 , 378 , 331 ] . Those arguments apply also to the geometrical
background with warped extra dimensions where the spectrum is expected
to be independent of @xmath as well.

However, if the Regularization II or the softering of the brane-Higgs
are used, the obtained fermion masses and 4D Yukawa couplings depend on
both @xmath and @xmath so that the results differ effectively from the
correct ones. Hence, the phenomenological studies based on these
analytical results (for example Ref. [ 54 , 55 , 58 , 59 , 60 ] ) should
be reconsidered.

In addition, the effective 4D Yukawa couplings to fermions and their KK
excitations affect the main Higgs production mechanism at the Large
Hadron Collider (LHC): the gluon-gluon fusion via triangular loops of
(KK) fermions. Hence the effect of the realistic limit [ 49 ] of
vanishing @xmath on the constraints on KK masses derived in the studies
[ 55 , 58 , 59 , 60 ] , within the warped background and based on the
Regularization II, should be considered as well.

Besides, the rotation matrices diagonalizing the 4D fermion mass
matrix ( 4.52 ) do not diagonalize simultaneously the effective 4D
Yukawa coupling matrix since the latter one does not contain matrix
elements due to the pure KK masses. The induced flavor violating 4D
Yukawa couplings are generated at leading order by @xmath contributions
as can be shown diagrammatically [ 54 ] . Hence there exist FCNC effects
in measured @xmath processes such as @xmath , @xmath and @xmath mixings,
mainly produced by tree-level exchanges of the Higgs boson via @xmath
couplings. These lead to considerable lower bounds on the KK boson mass
scale found to be around @xmath TeV in the analysis [ 54 ] on warped
extra dimensions using indeed the Regularization II. Hence these bounds
should be significantly alleviated in the realistic situation where
@xmath ; this limit should be applied since the independence found in
the present paper on @xmath (extended via flavor indices) remains true
for the case of three flavors, as well as for fermion bulk masses, as it
is clear in the 4D approach where the @xmath -elements ( 4.53 ) of the
mass matrix still vanish. The predictions of Ref [ 54 ] , based on
Regularization II, that FCNC reactions involving Yukawa couplings, like
the rare top quark decay @xmath and exotic Higgs boson decay to charged
leptons @xmath , can be observable at the LHC deserve reconsiderations
as well when @xmath .

#### 4.8 Summary & Conclusion

For bulk fermions coupled to a brane-Higgs boson we have shown that the
proper calculation of the fermion masses and effective 4D Yukawa
couplings does not rely on brane-Higgs regularizations. The
justifications are the following ones: (i) There are no jumps of the
fermion wave functions at the boundary where the Higgs field is
localized so there is no motivation to introduce an arbitrary
regularization, (ii) the regularizations suffer from several
mathematical discrepancies confirmed by two known non-commutativities of
calculation limits, (iii) our method without any regularization is
validated in particular by the matching between the 4D versus 5D
treatments.

In the rigorous method developed for both free and brane-coupled bulk
fermions, we have also pointed out the necessity to either include BBTs
in the Lagrangian, or alternatively impose conditions on vanishing
conserved currents at the boundaries of the interval. The arguments go
as follows: (i) the presence of BBTs guarantees the conditions on
currents which define the field geometrical configuration of the model,
(ii) the BBTs and the conditions on currents allow to define a model
which is not overconstrained and to find physically consistent fermion
masses, bulk profiles and effective 4D Yukawa couplings (solutions
fulfilling the normalization constraints and the decoupling limit
condition), (iii) the BBTs lead to the expected matching between the 4D
and 5D calculation results. We summarize the results in Tab. 4.1 . The
BBTs indicate a possible origin of the chiral nature of the SM as well
as of its chirality distribution among quark/lepton @xmath doublets and
singlets.

The general methodology worked out reveals that the information
regarding the definition of a higher-dimensional model are not
necessarily fully contained in the action itself – through the deduced
Euler-Lagrange equations and the natural boundary conditions – but might
be partly included as well through essential boundary conditions.

We finished the analysis by the phenomenological impacts of the new
calculation method which predicts the independence of the fermion masses
and effective 4D Yukawa couplings on the @xmath parameter of the
Lagrangian. This feature, with respect to the Regularization II or to
the softening of the brane-Higgs usually applied in the literature,
should in particular alleviate significantly the previously obtained
severe bounds on KK masses induced by FCNC processes generated via
flavor violating couplings of the Higgs boson.

### Chapter 5 Generalizations

This chapter is a personal adaptation of a collection of unpublished
works in collaboration with Andrei Angelescu, Ruifeng Leng and Grégory
Moreau.

In this chapter, we continue our exploration of the treatment of brane
localized terms for 5D fermions. In Section 5.1 , we treat the model of
Chapter 4 on an AdS @xmath spacetime. In Section 5.2 , we apply our
methods to the case of other boundary terms usually studied in brane
world literature. In Sections 5.3 and 5.4 , we study the model of
Chapter 4 on an orbifold background. Finally, in Section 5.5 , we
generalize the study of Chapter 4 to the case of a Higgs field localized
on a brane away from a boundary.

#### 5.1 Boundary Localized Higgs Field: Generalization to a Slice of
AdS@xmath

##### 5.1.1 Randall-Sundrum 1 Setup

In this section, we want to generalize the model of Chapter 4 to the
case of a warped extra dimension. We consider the 5D spacetime of the
RS1 model. The extra dimension is still compactified on an interval
@xmath but now the two 3-branes have opposite tensions. The
gravitationnal backreaction of the brane tensions is balanced by the
introduction of a negative bulk cosmological constant. At the price of a
fine tunning between these quantities, the fifth dimension is warped in
order to get a 5D bulk as a slice of an AdS spacetime. Once integration
is performed over the compact coordinate, the effective 4D cosmological
constant vanishes. The 5D metric, solution of the Einstein equations, is
given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the AdS curvature. The fünfbein @xmath is defined by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

and its inverse by @xmath , with @xmath and @xmath . We define also
@xmath . It is often more convenient to work in the conformally flat
frame by making the coordinate transformation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

such that the conformally flat fünfbein is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

so

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

In this frame, the UV-brane at @xmath and the IR-brane at @xmath , where
the electroweak symmetry breaking occurs, are respectively at @xmath and
@xmath , where @xmath . If @xmath is the 5D gravity scale, one should
have @xmath such that we are in the classical regime where one can use
the Einstein equations: the AdS @xmath background metric is well
defined. The cut-off ¹ ¹ 1 i.e. the scale at which gravity becomes
strong. on the UV-brane is usually taken @xmath and the one on the
IR-brane is @xmath , because of the gravitational redshift induced by
the warp factor. If one takes @xmath and a IR-brane localized Higgs
field, one can solve the naturalness problem of the Higgs sector in the
SM.

In the following, we focus on a toy model containing only bulk fermions
and a brane localized Higgs field, and study their resulting Yukawa
interactions.

##### 5.1.2 Field Content

###### Brane Localized Higgs field

The Higgs field is still confined to the IR-brane. For simplicity, we
take just a real scalar without gauge quantum numbers. Its Lagrangian
has the generic form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

As for the SM, the minimum of the Higgs potential @xmath determines a
non-vanishing VEV @xmath for @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

The factor @xmath comes from the induced metric (Eq. ( 5.5 )) on the
IR-brane and the usual rescaling of the brane localized Higgs field, in
order to define @xmath as the electroweak VEV.

###### Fermion Content and Yukawa Interactions

Our goal is to study a chiral 4D effective field theory with
renormalizable Yukawa couplings to the Higgs field, in order to generate
Dirac masses for the fermions as, for example, in the quark sector of
the SM. For that purpose, the minimal spin- @xmath fermion field content
is a couple of fermions, @xmath and @xmath . In the spirit of RS1 models
with bulk matter, the fields @xmath and @xmath propagate in the extra
dimension. We split the fermion Lagrangian into a free part @xmath , the
BBTs @xmath , and a Yukawa interaction with the Higgs field @xmath ,
such that the 5D action is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The passage to the conformally flat frame requires the following
substitution: @xmath and @xmath .

The free Lagrangian for a fermion @xmath is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath and @xmath . The covariant derivative @xmath contains the
spin connection @xmath . It is known that in the case of the RS metric,
Eq. ( 5.1 ), the contribution of @xmath cancels in the action and one
can safely replace @xmath in Eq. ( 5.9 ). We define the bulk mass @xmath
in units of the fundamental scale @xmath such that @xmath . The 5D spin-
@xmath fermions are decomposed as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

in terms of two Weyl spinors ² ² 2 From now on, we use calligraphic
letters to denote 5D (Dirac) spinors and typed letters to denote Weyl
spinors. @xmath and @xmath with @xmath . We use the conventions of Ref.
[ 379 ] which are summarized in Appendix A . We point out that the bar
on @xmath is part of the name of the field, and does not denote the
operation of Hermitian conjugation. After some algebra, Eq. ( 5.9 )
becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have dropped a 4-divergence term from an integration by parts.
Below the KK scale (in the decoupling limit), we would like to recover
the SM so we would like zero modes for @xmath and @xmath only. For that
purpose, one needs the BBTs,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

which allow the matching between the 4D and 5D methods.

The Yukawa interactions with the Higgs field are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

We focus on the VEV of the Higgs field and include the @xmath boson
fluctuation only in a later subsection which deals with the Yukawa
couplings. @xmath therefore becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the compact notation @xmath and @xmath .

##### 5.1.3 5D Method

###### Euler-Lagrange Equations and Boundary Conditions

One can generalize Hamilton’s principle in Appendix B.4 to the case of a
metric with a warp factor. With the Lagrangian @xmath ( 5.11 ), the 5D
Euler-Lagrange equations ( B.19 ) give

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

At @xmath , we obtain the natural boundary conditions ( B.22 ): @xmath
and @xmath . At @xmath , the Hamilton’s principle with the Lagrangians
@xmath ( 5.11 ), @xmath ( 5.12 ) and @xmath ( 5.13 ) give the natural
boundary condition ( B.23 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order to obtain a mass spectrum which depends on @xmath (we want to
recover the SM in the decoupling limit), we choose @xmath so @xmath .
The only warp factor which affects the boundary conditions at @xmath is
the redshift of the Higgs field VEV in @xmath . One can check whether
the phase of the 5D Yukawa coupling @xmath has a physical impact. If one
performs the following simultaneous transformations: @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath , the Lagrangians ( 5.11 ), ( 5.12 ) and ( 5.13 ) are invariant.
Since the phase of @xmath can be redefine by a transformation, this
phase is not physical, which is similar to the SM with only one
generation of fermions. One can thus choose @xmath . In the limit @xmath
, one needs @xmath in order to keep @xmath and @xmath finite, so an
infinite Higgs field VEV is equivalent to a Dirichlet boundary
conditions on @xmath and @xmath .

###### Kaluza-Klein Decomposition & Equations for the KK Wave Functions

Because of the mass term @xmath localized on the IR-brane, the two KK
towers from @xmath and @xmath will mix respectively with the ones from
@xmath and @xmath . We follow the same method as in Section 4.6 , and
introduce the mixed KK decomposition:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the Weyl spinors @xmath and @xmath obey the usual Dirac-Weyl
equations,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.19)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

with @xmath the mass of the @xmath KK mode, and where @xmath and @xmath
( @xmath ) are the KK wave functions, orthonormalized so that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

in order to recover canonical kinetic terms for the KK modes when
plugging the mixed KK decomposition into the 5D action from Eq. ( 5.8 ).
This, together with the Dirac-Weyl equations, Eq. ( 5.19 ), and the 5D
Euler-Lagrange equations ( 5.15 ), gives the equations for the KK wave
functions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

One can easily decouple these first order differential equations into
second order equations:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

These are Bessel equations, whose solutions are combinations of Bessel
functions of the first and the second kind:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath . We choose the prescription @xmath for @xmath
and @xmath for @xmath and will come back later on the reason for this
choice.

###### Boundary Conditions & Mass Spectrum

The boundary conditions at @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , translate into
Dirichlet boundary conditions for the KK wave functions of @xmath and
@xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

One can combine them with the first order equations for the KK wave
function from Eq. ( 5.21 ) to get the boundary conditions:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

These boundary conditions are consistent with Eq. ( 5.21 ) and the KK
wave functions in Eq. ( 5.23 ) if

  -- -- -- --------
           (5.26)
  -- -- -- --------

Using the mixed KK decomposition (Eq. ( 5.18 )) in the boundary
conditions at @xmath from Eq. ( 5.17 ), one gets

  -- -- -- --------
           (5.27)
  -- -- -- --------

where the factorized warp factors in the KK decompositions ( 5.18 )
simplifies in these boundary conditions. This represents a system of two
linear equations for the inverse of the normalization coefficients
@xmath . This system has non-trivial solutions (i.e. non-zero) only when
the associated determinant vanishes. This gives us the relation from
which we can extract the mass spectrum @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is independent of the normalization coefficients @xmath .

In the case of equal bulk masses, the left-handed zero mode of @xmath
and the right-handed zero mode of @xmath have the same KK wave
functions. In our sign convention for @xmath and @xmath , this is simply
the condition @xmath , from which it follows that the common
localization parameter is @xmath . This also implies that @xmath and
@xmath . Using the KK wave functions from Eq. ( 5.23 ), the mass
spectrum from Eq. ( 5.28 ) is determined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Normalization Conditions

In the same way as in Section 4.6 , it is easy to show that one can take
the normalization constants @xmath and @xmath real. The KK wave
functions are thus real. Let us have a closer look at the normalization
conditions in Eq. ( 5.20 ) for the exact KK wave functions. These
conditions read for @xmath .

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.30)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.31)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

and in the following we focus on showing that these two conditions are
equivalent.

We start by simplifying Eqs. ( 5.30 ) and ( 5.31 ). To achieve this, we
first consider the coupled equations for the KK wave functions @xmath
and @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.32)
     @xmath      (5.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

We now perform two operations on the coupled equations: we multiply (i)
Eq. ( 5.32 ) by @xmath and Eq. ( 5.33 ) by @xmath and (ii) Eq. ( 5.32 )
by @xmath and Eq. ( 5.33 ) by @xmath , and in both cases we take the sum
of the resulting equations. After a few lines of algebra, it is possible
to express the two KK wave functions, @xmath and @xmath , in terms of
their derivatives

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.34)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.35)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

If one repeats the exercise for the @xmath KK wave functions, the
following relations are derived:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.36)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.37)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Inserting Eqs. ( 5.34 )-( 5.37 ) into the normalization conditions from
Eqs. ( 5.30 ) and ( 5.31 ), we find that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.38)
     @xmath      (5.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that the only difference between the two previous equations is the
third terms in Eqs. ( 5.38 ) and ( 5.39 ). Since the KK wave functions
are continuous and differentiable on the closed interval @xmath , we can
write the difference between Eqs. ( 5.38 ) and ( 5.39 ) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

We now use the boundary conditions for the KK wave functions to show
that the above expression vanishes. Indeed, as @xmath and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

one immediately realizes that the expression in Eq. ( 5.40 ) vanishes.
As a consequence, Eqs. ( 5.38 ) and ( 5.39 ) are identical, which means
that the two normalization conditions in Eqs. ( 5.30 ) and ( 5.31 ) are
equivalent. In other words, Eqs. ( 5.30 ) and ( 5.31 ) cannot determine
both normalization constants @xmath and @xmath , but only provide a
relationship between the two.

###### 4D Yukawa Couplings

The 4D Yukawa couplings between the KK modes and the Higgs boson can be
obtained by developping the Higgs field around its VEV in Eq. ( 5.13 )
and performing the KK decompositions of the 5D fields. One simply
obtains

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### 5.1.4 4D Method

The 4D method to compute the mass spectrum and Yukawa couplings was done
in an unpublished work by our collaborator Andrei Angelescu. We give it
in Appendix C for completeness. As expected, the results of the 5D and
4D methods match.

##### 5.1.5 Conclusion

In this section, we have generalized the treatment of 5D fermions
coupled to a boundary localized Higgs field of Chapter 4 to a warped
extra dimension. The lightest mode can be identified with a fermion of
the SM which obtain his mass from the boundary localized Higgs field.
The method to treat the boundary localized mass terms and Yukawa
interactions is still the same: one has to add BBTs in order to have a
well defined 5D method and also to get the matching between the 4D and
5D methods.

#### 5.2 Various Boundary Localized Terms

We are going to study various boundary localized terms without the
regularization procedure. We will see the necessity of introducing BBTs
for each case.

##### 5.2.1 Toy Model: One Fermion in the Bulk

We consider a 5D flat spacetime. The extra dimension is compactified on
an interval @xmath of length @xmath , with two 3-branes set at the
boundaries. Our goal is to study various brane localized kinetic and
mass terms for a bulk fermion field @xmath , using a rigorous
mathematical treatment. The corresponding fermionic Lagrangian splits
into a free part (without interaction) @xmath containing the kinetic
term, and a brane localized part @xmath at @xmath , such that the 5D
action is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

The bulk part of the Lagrangian reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the 5D spin- @xmath fermions are decomposed as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

in terms of two Weyl spinors @xmath and @xmath with @xmath (see Appendix
A ). After some algebra and an integration by parts (we drop the
4-divergence), Eq. ( 5.44 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

In Appendix B.4 , we explain how to apply Hamilton’s principle for a
field theory with an extra dimension compactified on @xmath . The 5D
Euler-Lagrange equations for @xmath and @xmath (Eq. ( B.19 )) originate
only from the bulk Lagrangian @xmath ( 5.46 ) (Eq. ( B.19 )), and we get

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.47)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

In absence of a brane localized Lagrangian and a Higgs field, we would
like that the 5D fermion field reduces to a massless 4D chiral fermion
(SM-like before EWSB) in the limit @xmath (decoupling limit). For that
purpose, it is convenient to decompose the 5D theory into a 4D theory by
performing a KK decomposition: each 5D field becomes an infinite tower
of 4D KK modes, each of them has a KK wave function along the extra
dimension. In order to conserve only the left-handed or the right-handed
zero mode, we impose the so-called chiral boundary conditions. Here, we
choose to have a left-handed zero mode so the chiral boundary conditions
consist of Dirichlet boundary conditions at @xmath for @xmath . In
Chapter 4 , it is shown that the chiral boundary conditions can be
essential boundary conditions induced by conditions on the conserved
current at the boundaries. Then, one can include the brane localized
Lagrangians as an infinite matrix in the KK basis to diagonalize. Here
we use the alternative method, where the brane localized operators
generate boundary conditions for the 5D fields.

##### 5.2.2 Boundary Localized Kinetic Terms

We begin by studying Brane Localized Kinetic Terms (BLKTs) at @xmath
such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are real parameters with mass dimension @xmath :
the magnitude of the BLKTs. They only involve the partial dervatives
@xmath since terms with @xmath involve subtleties that we will not
consider here [ 380 , 381 , 382 ] . In an extra-dimensional model with
branes, the BLKTs are allowed by the symmetries in the EFT. The UV
completion can imply large BLKTs at tree level leading to important
phenomenological consequences [ 323 , 324 , 325 , 326 , 320 ] . Even if
absent at tree level, the BLKTs are still generated radiatively [ 322 ]
. In this case, their magnitude is not large, as they originate from
loop corrections.

In order to rewrite the 5D theory as a 4D one, we perform a KK
decomposition of the fields,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.49)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

With this KK decomposition, the 5D Euler-Lagrange equations ( 5.47 )
reduce to the first order differential equations for the KK wave
functions @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.50)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

and the two 4D Weyl spinors @xmath and @xmath combine into a Dirac
spinor of mass @xmath , which represents the @xmath -th fermionic KK
level, described by the Dirac-Weyl equations ( 5.19 ). In order to get
canonical kinetic terms for the 4D KK modes, the wave functions @xmath
and @xmath are orthonormalized as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.51)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The first order equations can be decoupled into second order ones as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.52)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The general solutions are

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.53)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are complex coefficients. The
first order equations ( 5.50 ) impose the relations @xmath and @xmath .
We keep the same boundary conditions at @xmath as in the absence of
BLKTs, @xmath , so after the KK decomposition ( 5.49 ) and with Eq. (
5.50 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

When imposed on the KK wave functions ( 5.53 ), the boundary conditions
( 5.54 ) give

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.55)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

###### Failed treatment without bilinear boundary terms

Using Appendix B.4 , Hamilton’s principle applied to the action ( 5.43 )
with the Lagrangians ( 5.46 ) and ( 5.48 ) gives the natural boundary
conditions at @xmath (Eq. ( B.23 )),

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.56)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

With the KK decomposition ( 5.49 ) and the 4D Dirac-Weyl equations (
5.19 ), the natural boundary conditions at @xmath ( 5.56 ) become
boundary conditions for the KK wave functions,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.57)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

which lead to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

or else to the relation:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

With the KK wave functions of Eq. ( 5.55 ), the boundary conditions (
5.58 ) lead to wave functions (and a 5D field) which vanish everywhere
in the extra dimension (not physical), c.f. Chapter 4 . Eqs. ( 5.55 )
and ( 5.59 ) give the mass spectrum

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

With Eq. ( 5.59 ), there is thus only one massive KK mode (no KK tower)
whose mass fix the parameter @xmath which is not a free parameter. In
fact, Eq. ( 5.59 ) results from the fact that the system is
overconstrained (see discussion below Eq. ( 4.85 ) where we have a
similar problem). Moreover, in the 4D method, @xmath should not play a
role since the matrix element involving @xmath are proportional to the
overlap of wave functions with Dirichlet boundary conditions so they
vanish (no 4D/5D matching).

###### Treatment with bilinear boundary terms

To overcome the previous difficulty, we add to the action ( 5.43 ) BBTs:

  -- -- -- --------
           (5.61)
  -- -- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

and we will take also @xmath . The choice @xmath corresponds to a
non-vanishing BLKT leading to a variation of the action at @xmath
involving @xmath , while we have also the variation of the BLKT
depending on @xmath whose variation implies also @xmath : there are two
natural boundary conditions at the boundary. As the 5D Euler-Lagrange
equations ( 5.47 ) relate @xmath and @xmath on-shell, a non-vanishing
@xmath overconstrains the system. The absence of BLKT for a 5D field
with a Dirichlet boundary condition ³ ³ 3 It is a perturbative argument
based on the fact that one solves the Euler-Lagrange equations first
without the BLKTs and then includes them perturbatively through a 4D
matrix to diagonalize. was already noted in the literature. In Ref [ 326
] , it was noticed that the BLKT for a field with a Dirichlet boundary
condition vanishes at tree level. In the context of holography, Ref. [
66 ] showed that the absence of brane localized terms for fields with
Dirichlet boundary conditions is required by Hamilton’s principle.
Moreover, if a brane localized operator is absent at tree level for
fields with Dirichlet boundary conditions, it is not radiatively
generated [ 322 ] .

Hamilton’s principle applied to the action ( 5.43 ), with the
Lagrangians ( 5.46 ), ( 5.48 ) and ( 5.62 ), gives the natural boundary
conditions at @xmath (Eq. ( B.23 )),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the natural boundary conditions at @xmath , @xmath .

As above, we use a KK decomposition ( 5.49 ). The KK modes satisfy Eq. (
5.19 ) and their wave functions are normalized with ( 5.51 ). The
boundary conditions ( 5.63 ) and ( 5.64 ) give

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

The effect of the BLKTs is due to the boundary conditions. For @xmath in
the boundary condition ( 5.65 ) with BBTs, the limit @xmath implies
@xmath to keep @xmath finite, since the KK wave functions are bounded as
they must be normalized. One can thus impose Dirichlet boundary
condition by a BLKT of infinite magnitude.

The KK wave functions satisfy Eq. ( 5.50 ). This is in contrast to what
appeared in the literature. In [ 50 ] , the BLKT is present in the
equations for the KK wave functions multiplied by a Dirac distribution.
The mass spectrum is obtained by integrating these equations over a
small interval around the boundary. In Chapter 4 , it was shown that
such a treatment leads to mathematical inconsistencies and that a Dirac
distribution must be treated more carefully within the theory of
distributions. The simplest way is to put the boundary terms in the
boundary conditions, as we do here.

The KK wave functions are still given by Eq. ( 5.55 ). With the boundary
condition at @xmath ( 5.65 ) and the KK wave functions expressions (
5.55 ), we get the transcendental equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

whose solutions give the mass spectrum depending on @xmath . We see that
the BLKT affect the mass spectrum and the shape of the KK wave functions
only for @xmath . On the other hand, when @xmath , the mode is massless
and @xmath will only play a role via the normalization condition.
Indeed, combining Eqs. ( 5.51 ), ( 5.55 ) and ( 5.67 ), we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### 5.2.3 Boundary Localized Majorana Mass Terms

In this subsection, we study the case of a Majorana mass term localized
on the 3-brane [ 50 ] at @xmath , which is described by the following
Lagrangian:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath , dimensionless real parameters. Such terms are possible
because physics on the 3-brane is 4D and therefore Majorana spinors
exist, contrary to the 5D bulk where only Dirac spinors can be defined.
These terms could play an important role in brane world model building
with neutrinos or with 5D SUSY.

We define a KK decomposition,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.70)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where the KK states are Majorana fermions @xmath of mass @xmath ,
obeying the homonymous equations,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.71)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The KK wave functions are orthonormlized to recover canonical 4D kinetic
terms for the KK modes, so

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

The 5D Euler-Lagrange equations ( B.19 ) lead, after the KK
decomposition ( 5.70 ) and using the Majorana equations ( 5.71 ), to the
coupled first order differential equations ( 5.50 ) for the KK wave
functions. Their solution is similar to the one below Eq. ( 5.50 ) with
the same boundary condition at @xmath ( 5.54 ), and we get the KK wave
functions in Eq. ( 5.55 ).

###### Failed treatment without bilinear boundary terms

We apply Hamilton’s principle to the action ( 5.43 ) with the
Lagrangians ( 5.46 ) and ( 5.69 ) and get the natural boundary
conditions (Appendix B.4 , Eq. ( B.23 )),

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.73)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

so

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

or else

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

The case of Eq. ( 5.74 ) with the KK wave functions ( 5.55 ) gives
vanishing wave functions (and 5D field) everywhere in the extra
dimension, which is not physical. Now we examine the case of the
relation ( 5.75 ). The KK decomposition ( 5.70 ) in Eq. ( 5.73 ) gives
the boundary conditions at @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.76)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

which are applied to the wave functions ( 5.55 ) to get the equation for
the mass spectrum:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath is not an independent parameter, which means that the system is
overconstrained. Moreover, in the 4D method, @xmath should not play a
role since the matrix element involve the overlap with wave functions
which have Dirichlet boundary conditions so they vanish: we do not have
the 5D/4D matching. Besides, in the limit @xmath , @xmath . One would
expect to recover the free case in this limit, where only @xmath has a
Dirichlet boundary condition at @xmath . Indeed, when the brane
localized Majorana mass terms ( 5.69 ) are included with an infinite
matrix in the free KK basis to diagonalize, the limit @xmath reduces to
the boundary condition of the free case. Instead, we have Dirichlet
boundary conditions for both @xmath and @xmath at @xmath , and this is
known to imply vanishing 5D fields at each point in the bulk.

###### Treatment with bilinear boundary terms

In the same way as in the case of the BLKTs, we modify the model by
adding the boundary term @xmath (Eqs. ( 5.61 ) and ( 5.62 )). The effect
of the brane localized Majorana term enters via the boundary conditions
at @xmath . In order to give a mass to the zero mode, we would like
non-vanishing @xmath . The presence of the term with @xmath
overconstrained the system in the same way as in the discussion with the
BLKT involving @xmath so we will take also @xmath . Again, the
brane-localized term, involving fields with Dirichlet boundary
conditions in the free case, is vanishing and is not radiatively
generated (Ref. [ 322 ] ).

Hamilton’s principle with the Lagrangians ( 5.46 ), ( 5.69 ) and ( 5.62
) gives the natural boundary conditions at @xmath (Appendix B.4 , Eq. (
B.23 )),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the natural boundary condition at @xmath , @xmath .

The natural boundary conditions ( 5.78 ) and ( 5.79 ) translate into
boundary conditions for the KK wave functions as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

We chose @xmath . One can notice that, in the case @xmath , one needs
@xmath in order to maintain @xmath finite, since the KK wave functions
are bounded. One can thus impose Dirichlet boundary conditions by an
infinite brane localized Majorana mass.

The boundary condition at @xmath ( 5.80 ) gives, with the KK wave
functions ( 5.55 ), the equation for the mass spectrum,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

whose solutions are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.83)
  -- -------- -- --------

The normalization conditions ( 5.72 ) applied to the profiles ( 5.55 )
give the normalization coefficients @xmath .

##### 5.2.4 Mixing Terms involving a Boundary Localized Fermion

We now turn towards the case of a bulk fermion @xmath and a brane
localized Weyl fermion @xmath . The two fermions can mix on the IR brane
via a Dirac mass term, with the relevant piece of Lagrangian being

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a real parameter of mass dimension @xmath .

We use the KK decomposition ( 5.49 ). The wave functions are
orthonormalized such that we recover canonical 4D kinetic terms for the
KK fields:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.85)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The boundary field can be decomposed in the basis spanned by @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are mixing coefficients. The KK decomposition ( 5.49 ) and
the Dirac equations ( 5.19 ) are used to obtain the system in Eq. ( 5.50
) from ( B.19 ). The boundary conditions at @xmath are still those in
Eq. ( 5.54 ). We obtain the KK wave functions of Eq. ( 5.55 ).

###### Failed treatment without bilinear boundary terms

The presence of the brane localized term ( 5.84 ) requires to use
natural boundary condition. Hamilton’s principle with the Lagrangians (
5.46 ) and ( 5.84 ) gives (Appendix B.4 , Eq. ( B.23 ))

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.87)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

By using the decompositions ( 5.49 ) and ( 5.86 ), we get

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.88)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

With the KK wave functions of Eq. ( 5.55 ), we have wave functions which
vanish everywhere in the extra dimension. Indeed, the system ( 5.88 ) is
overconstrained. Since @xmath and @xmath are related on-shell by the
Euler-Lagrange equations ( 5.47 ), there is one natural boundary
condition too much which overconstrains the system.

###### Treatment with bilinear boundary terms

In order to treat correctly the brane localized fermion, we add to the
action the BBTs (Eqs. ( 5.61 ) and ( 5.62 )). When we apply Hamilton’s
principle to the Lagrangians ( 5.46 ), ( 5.62 ) and ( 5.84 ), we obtain
the natural boundary conditions,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.89)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

and the natural boundary condition at @xmath , @xmath .

The two boundary conditions at @xmath ( 5.89 ) give, with Eqs. ( 5.49 )
and ( 5.86 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.90)
  -- -------- -- --------

from which we get the transcendental equation for @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.91)
  -- -------- -- --------

The normalization coefficients are given by Eq. ( 5.85 ), using Eqs. (
5.55 ) and ( 5.91 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.92)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### 5.2.5 Conclusion & Summary

We have studied different scenarii of 5D fermions with a boundary
localized term: BLKT, Majorana mass, Dirac mass with a boundary
localized 4D fermion. In every cases, the absence of BBTs implies
pathologies, which indicates that the model is overconstrained. By
adding a BBT and allowing a boundary localized term only for the left or
right-handed 5D field, we get models wich are not overconstrained.

#### 5.3 Brane-Higgs Field within the Orbifold @xmath

##### 5.3.1 1D Compactification Classification

When one builds a field theory with a compactified extra dimension, the
existence, the degenerescence and the mass spectrum of the KK modes
depend on the compact geometry.

Once we have chosen our 1D compact space (the circle @xmath or the
interval @xmath ), one can still impose that the action is symmetric
under some field transformations with respect to isometries of this
compactified space: physics has to be the same at points related by the
isometry. In Fig. 5.1 , we give several examples:

-   The circle @xmath of radius @xmath is invariant under a translation
    of generator @xmath or under a reflection @xmath with respect to an
    axis passing through its center. One can thus impose to the
    Lagrangian: @xmath or @xmath for the orbifold @xmath . One can also
    wind the infinite real line @xmath around @xmath and define a
    winding number. The Lagrangian on @xmath has thus to verify @xmath
    with the winding number @xmath .

-   The interval @xmath , is invariant under the reflection @xmath with
    respect to the midpoint of the interval. One can thus impose the
    Lagrangian to be invariant under this transformation. Like for
    @xmath , one can define a winding number on the interval which is
    the number of return trips.

One can then combine these different cases to define more complicated
orbifolds like @xmath (see Section 5.4 ). Moreover, the interval and the
circle are the smallest building blocks for more complicated 1D
geometries: one can glue different circles and/or intervals to obtain
metric graphs (see Chapter 6 ).

##### 5.3.2 The Model on the Orbifold @xmath

The traditional way to obtain a 4D chiral theory, at the level of the
zero modes, from a 5D theory is by compactifying the extra dimension on
an orbifold. In this part, we reformulate our 5D treatment of Section
4.6 with an orbifold background. We use the definition of an orbifold
given in Subsection 2.2.1 . Let @xmath be the circle of radius @xmath .
We assign a coordinate @xmath to the points of @xmath . The orbifold
@xmath is obtained by defining an equivalence relation between the
points of @xmath belonging to the same orbit under @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.93)
  -- -------- -- --------

We want to study the model of Chapter 4 on the geometry @xmath . The
standard procedure is to define the field theory on the covering space
@xmath . Physics has to be the same at points belonging to the same
equivalence class: the values of the fields at these points have to
match up to a symmetry transformation of the fields:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.94)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the Lagrangian is the same at these points:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.95)
  -- -------- -- --------

The orbifold @xmath has two fixed points at @xmath , which have the
properties of 3-branes. Its fundamental domain is the interval @xmath .

The model has the same field content as in Subsection 4.2 . The bulk
action of Eq. ( 4.1 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.96)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath defined as in Eq. ( 4.3 ). The transformation laws for the
fermionic fields @xmath and @xmath under @xmath are chosen as,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.97)
  -- -------- -- --------

under which the action @xmath ( 5.96 ) is invariant. The choice of the
sign in front of @xmath in Eq. ( 5.97 ) is free and determines the
chirality of the zero mode for the 5D Dirac field. Here, we require that
the zero modes for the field @xmath are left/right-handed respectively
to recover the SM at low energies.

.

##### 5.3.3 From Fields as Distributions to Fields as Functions: an
Additional Motivation for Bilinear Brane Terms

The branes at the fixed points are not boundaries of the covering space
@xmath , we have thus to discuss if the fields are continuous or
discontinuous across the branes (see Appendix B.2 ). The even (odd)
fields are even (odd) with respect to each fixed point. Even fields are
continuous across the branes since a point-like discontinuity has no
effect in distribution theory. If the odd fields are continuous at
@xmath , they have to vanish at the fixed points: when one applies
Hamilton’s principle, their variations have thus to vanish as well at
@xmath . If fields are discontinuous at @xmath , their values at the
fixed points are not prescribed by the parity of the fields since the
jumps are at the fixed points.

We use the distribution theory to define the partial derivatives @xmath
in @xmath ( 5.100 ) as weak derivatives for (discontinuous) odd fields.
We treat the fields as distributions ⁴ ⁴ 4 See Refs. [ 373 , 372 ] for
an introduction to the theory of distributions by L. Schwartz. For an
application to quantum mechanics, see Ref. [ 383 ] . , which act on test
functions whose supports are included in the compactified geometry. We
define the regular distributions @xmath . The weak partial derivatives
give

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.98)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the regular distributions associated to the partial
derivatives @xmath , @xmath .

The action for the kinetic terms in distribution theory is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.99)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath or @xmath have to be continuous at @xmath , such that the
products @xmath and @xmath in the kinetic terms are well defined. By
using ( 5.98 ), we can thus rewrite the action @xmath ( 5.96 ) in terms
of fields treated as functions:

  -- -------- -- ---------
                 
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.100)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the BBTs @xmath (identical to the ones from the compactification
on an interval at Eq. ( 4.10 )) come from the weak partial derivative of
the odd discontinuous fields at the fixed points. We notice that this
action is also valid for continuous odd fields at @xmath , where the
boundary terms vanish. It is important to see here that the BBTs are not
added by hand to the orbifold @xmath description (as in the interval
case) but originate from the weak partial derivative of the odd field
discontinuous at the fixed points. In the second integral of Eq. ( 5.100
), we have included the points @xmath to recover the starting point of
the method with the fields as functions. Indeed, we require that all the
fields have a well defined partial right-hand (left-hand) derivative
@xmath at @xmath ( @xmath ) in order to be able to include these points
in the action.

The boundary mass terms for the fermions of Eq. ( 4.8 ), using a Dirac
distribution, become

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.101)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the action of a Dirac distribution centered at @xmath on a test
function @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.102)
  -- -------- -- ---------

As they involve @xmath , the terms involving @xmath and @xmath require
that the products @xmath and @xmath are continuous at @xmath
respectively. The @xmath -terms give mass to the zero mode of @xmath and
@xmath , which are identified with the 4D fields of the SM, so we need
@xmath to recover the SM in the decoupling limit: @xmath has thus to be
continuous. As @xmath and @xmath are even fields, we choose them
continuous across the branes. The @xmath -terms are not mandatory to
recover the SM in the decoupling limit so @xmath and @xmath can be
discontinous. The fields @xmath and @xmath are odd. If they are
continuous at the fixed points, they have to vanish at @xmath and the
terms involving the coupling @xmath in the Lagrangian @xmath (Eq. (
5.101 )) vanish. If they are non-vanishing and discontinuous at @xmath
the product @xmath can still be continuous because @xmath and @xmath are
odd. We have thus to keep the @xmath -terms in general.

##### 5.3.4 Method with 5D Fields as Functions

If we want to treat the problem of a brane away from the boundary by
keeping the 5D fields as functions, we have to cut the integral of the
action in two pieces on both sides of the brane. If a 5D field is
discontinuous across a brane, the 5D kinetic term is in general not
defined at the brane position. We require that we have a well defined
left-hand or right-hand derivative at the brane position which is
equivalent to have a 5D field with a well defined left-hand or
right-hand derivative at the brane position. For a brane at @xmath in
the extra dimension, we have the action:

  -- -- -- ---------
           (5.103)
  -- -- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath are the Lagrangians in the bulk and on the brane
respectively. Then, one uses Hamilton’s principle and treats the brane
as a boundary in order to get 5D Euler-Lagrange equations in the bulk
and junction conditions on the brane.

###### 5D Free Fermions

In this part, we revisit our treatment of free fermions of Section 4.3
but with the orbifold @xmath compactification.

###### No Bilinear Brane Terms

If one does not define the fields as distributions from the start but
begins with functions, one does not have the argument to include the
BBTs. If one tries to treat the free case without BBTs, one finds
vanishing 5D fields everywhere as in the interval case in Subsection
4.3.1 , which is a motivation to include the BBTs.

###### Including the Bilinear Brane Terms

We consider @xmath ( 5.100 ) with the possibility that odd fields (and
their variations) can be discontinuous at the positions of the 3-branes.
We apply Hamilton’s principle, treating the fixed points as boundaries:

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (5.104)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.105)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.106)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (5.107)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

We vary the action with respect to fields which are eigenstate of the
@xmath symmetry so the variation of a field has the same parity as the
field. We can thus use the parity (Eq. ( 5.97 )) and the right-hand
(left-hand) continuity of the fields and their variations at @xmath (
@xmath ) to rewrite the variations of the action at @xmath as variations
at @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (5.108)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (5.109)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

The Euler-Lagrange equations are ( 4.15 ) (with @xmath ) and the natural
boundary conditions are

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.110)
  -- -------- -- ---------

so we find that the on-shell odd fields are continuous at the fixed
points. On the orbifold @xmath the KK decomposition and the
orthonormalization of the KK wave functions are defined such that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.111)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.112)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where we normalize on the entire covering space @xmath . The KK modes
satisfy the Dirac-Weyl equations ( 4.19 ) and the system of equations
for the KK wave function is the one of Eq. ( 4.21 ) (with @xmath ). One
can solve the equations as in Subsection 4.3.2 , with the complete
boundary conditions

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.113)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The solutions on @xmath and mass spectrum are still the ones in Eqs. (
4.39 )-( 4.40 ) (with @xmath ). The solutions on @xmath are obtained
from the ones on @xmath with the @xmath symmetry.

###### Essential Boundary Conditions

We apply Hamilton’s principle imposing the continuity of the fields (and
their variations) at the fixed points. The odd fieds are thus vanishing
at @xmath . This can be used as essential boundary conditions for the
Hamilton’s principle, so

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.114)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The variations at the fixed points of Eqs. ( 5.104 )-( 5.107 ) are thus
vanishing. The Euler-Lagrange equations are still ( 4.15 ). Then we
introduce the KK decomposition ( 5.111 ) and the orthonormalization
conditions ( 5.112 ). The system of equations for the KK wave function
is the one of Eq. ( 4.21 ). One can solve them as in Subsection 4.3.2 ,
with the essential boundary conditions ( 5.114 ) leading to the complete
boundary conditions ( 5.113 ). The solutions and mass spectrum are still
the ones in Eqs. ( 4.39 )-( 4.40 ) (with @xmath and @xmath ).

###### Brane Localized Yukawa Interactions with the 4D Method

As in Section ( 4.4 ), one can add the brane localized mass term as a
matrix in the free KK basis and bi-diagonalize it. In the following, we
focus on the 5D method.

###### Brane Localized Yukawa Interactions with the 5D Method

In this subsection, we use the 5D method to compute the mass spectrum of
the fermions coupled to the Higgs VEV with the orbifold @xmath
description, parallel to the treatment in Section 4.6 in the interval
picture.

The regularization procedure in the context of the orbifold @xmath was
not considered in detail in the relevant literature for the shift of the
Higgs peak [ 53 ] . We find similar inconsistencies for the
regularizations of the brane-Higgs coupling as on the interval studied
in Section 4.5.2 due to products of Dirac distributions with
discontinuous functions. The problems of the regularizations relying on
the softening of the brane-Higgs coupling discussed in Subsection 4.5.3
remain present as well within the orbifold framework.

###### Neither Bilinear Brane Terms nor Essential Boundary Conditions

If we do not include the BBTs, we find the same problems than in
Subsection 4.6.2 for the interval.

###### Bilinear Brane Terms

We consider the action @xmath (Eqs. ( 5.100 ) and ( 5.101 )). When we
perform Hamilton’s principle, we do not impose the continuity of the odd
fields through the fixed points:

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (5.115)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (5.116)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (5.117)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (5.118)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

With the parity of the fields in Eq. ( 5.97 ) and the right-hand
(left-hand) continuity at @xmath ( @xmath ), we rewrite the variations
of the action at @xmath as variations at @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (5.119)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (5.120)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

We get the Euler-Lagrange equations ( 4.15 ) extended on @xmath and the
boundary conditions:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.121)
  -- -------- -- ---------

It is clear that if the odd fields are continuous or @xmath ( @xmath )
then, for @xmath , @xmath , we get Dirichlet boundary conditions for all
fields (and thus vanishing 5D fields everywhere in the bulk). Therefore,
in order to have a physical model, one has to take a discontinuity for
the odd fields and @xmath .

We perform a mixed KK decomposition,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.122)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the KK modes satisfy the Dirac-Weyl equations ( 4.59 ) and the KK
wave functions are orthonormalized so that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.123)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The discussion is the same as in Section 4.6 , below Eq. ( 4.100 ), with
the replacements Eq. ( 4.58 ) @xmath Eq. ( 5.122 ), Eq. ( 4.61 ) @xmath
Eq. ( 5.123 ) and @xmath : we obtain the KK wave function solutions (
4.90 ) on @xmath and the mass spectrum ( 4.109 ) (with and @xmath and
@xmath ). The solutions on @xmath are obtained from the ones on @xmath
with the @xmath symmetry. The mass spectra of the compactification on
the orbifold @xmath and the interval @xmath are equivalent if the 5D
Yukawa couplings @xmath between the two models differ by a factor 2.
@xmath is an input, not an observable, and the two spectra span the same
range of values for the observables so one can say that the models are
dual ( i.e. same observables) for values of @xmath which differ by a
factor 2.

###### Essential Boundary Conditions

If we do not include the BBTs, and impose a jump to the odd fields as
essential boundary conditions, we will find the same problems than
without BBTs nor essential boundary conditions.

###### Summary

In Fig. 5.1 , we give a plot of the KK wave functions along the extra
dimension.

The summary table is the same as for the interval: Tab. 4.1 , which
illustrates the duality between the interval and the orbifold @xmath up
to a factor two in the mass spectrum and the normalization of the wave
functions.

In the orbifold description, the essential boundary conditions are
related to the continuity of the odd fields across the fixed points. In
the interval description, they come from the requirement of vanishing
transverse conserved currents at the boundaries.

The BBTs are justified by four different ways: (i) there is no physical
solutions without them; (ii) They have a geometrical role in the sense
that either they take into account the boundary of the interval
(vanishing currents) or they specify the field junction in the case of a
periodic extra dimension; (iii) they allow the 4D/5D matching; (iv) they
appear from the weak derivative of the fields treated as distributions.

As in the case of the interval, in the 4D approach, the @xmath -terms do
not affect the mass matrix. In the 5D approach, @xmath is implied by the
vanishing of the variation of the action at the fixed points. So there
is a 4D/5D matching regarding the independance of the @xmath parameter.
This result hold in both the approaches with functions/distributions and
interval/orbifold.

##### 5.3.5 Method with 5D Fields as Distributions

When a brane is away from a boundary as the fixed point of @xmath on
@xmath , 5D fields can be discontinuous across the brane. It is then
practical to associate regular distributions to the 5D fields in order
to have 5D Euler-Lagrange equations with the Yukawa couplings in factor
of a Dirac distribution. This method is interesting only for the 5D
treatment of brane localized Yukawa couplings which involves Dirac
distributions (the free case and the 4D method are trivial with
distributions since the KK wave functions are continuous).

Once the action is defined with a Lagrangian involving distributions,
one can use Hamilton’s principle within distribution theory. The
variations of the fields are test functions whose supports are included
in the compact space. A brane away from the boundaries does not give a
boundary term in the action but generates a term proportional to a Dirac
distribution in the 5D Euler-Lagrange equations. On the covering space
@xmath , there is no boundary terms since, after the integration by
parts,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.124)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the regular distribution associated to the function
@xmath discontinuous at @xmath . To solve the 5D Euler-Lagrange
equations, it is convenient to solve them first in the regions outside
the brane and then to integrate the equations over the extra dimension
in a small neighborhood of the brane to get the junction conditions on
the brane. We recover the same boundary conditions as with the method
with functions.

##### 5.3.6 An alternative Way to Recover the Interval

In this subsection, we present an alternative treatment of the model of
Subsection 5.3 with an extra dimension compactified on the orbifold
@xmath , with the 5D fields as functions (but one can do it also with
distributions). We start with the action defined on the covering space
@xmath and reduce it to an action on the interval @xmath with the @xmath
symmetry at the level of the action. Of course, this is equivalent to
the previous methods where we recover the interval solutions by applying
the @xmath symmetry at the level of the KK wave functions.

The action is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.125)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath , @xmath and @xmath defined as the actions of the kinetic
terms, the brane localized Yukawa interactions and the BBTs respectively
( @xmath ):

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.126)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath defined in Eq. ( 4.3 ) where the left-hand partial
derivatives @xmath are defined at @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.127)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath defined in Eq. ( 5.127 ), and

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.128)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

When calculating the mass spectrum of the KK fermions, we restrict our
attention to the VEV @xmath of @xmath ( 4.6 ). Hence, we decompose the
Yukawa interactions into @xmath and the action involving only the
fermions becomes:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.129)
  -- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.130)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with the compact notations @xmath , @xmath , and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.131)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We begin by cutting the integral over @xmath of the kinetic terms (
5.129 ) at the brane-Higgs position:

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (5.132)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where the right-hand (left-hand) partial derivatives @xmath of the 5D
fields are defined at @xmath ( @xmath ). We have thus the right-hand
(left-hand) continuity of the 5D fields at @xmath ( @xmath ).

We choose the transformation laws for the fermionic fields @xmath and
@xmath under @xmath as:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.133)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Considering the Lagrangian symmetry @xmath , and performing a change of
variable in the kinetic terms ( 5.132 ):

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
                          (5.134)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

Then we separate the brane localized mass terms into two identical parts
by the left-hand continuity of the 5D fields at @xmath and we use the
symmetry under @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
                          
                          (5.135)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

We can also use the transformation laws ( 5.133 ) in the BBTs ( 5.128 ):

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
                          
              @xmath      (5.136)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

We rewrite @xmath as

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.137)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

Using ( 5.134 ), ( 5.135 ), ( 5.136 ) into ( 5.137 ), we find the
identity:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.138)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Finally, we separate the action @xmath ( 5.129 ) into 2 identical parts:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.139)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We can thus treat @xmath as the basic building block and go back to the
interval scenario @xmath in Subsection 4.6.3 . If we search for the
profiles in @xmath , we just need to use the transformation laws ( 5.133
) for fermionic fields @xmath and @xmath .

#### 5.4 Higgs Field Localized at a Fixed Point of the Orbifold @xmath

As we explained in Subsection 2.2.1 (we keep the same definitions and
notations), a compactification on @xmath allows the possibility of a
Scherk-Schwarz twist. If one mods out @xmath by a @xmath symmetry with
respect to @xmath , the Scherk-Schwarz twist is constrained. One can
combine it with the @xmath symmetry in order to define a new reflection
symmetry @xmath with respect to @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.140)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The two fixed points of the orbifold @xmath are still @xmath and @xmath
, and the fundamental domain is the interval @xmath . It is convenient
to define the field theory on an extended circle of circumference @xmath
with the coordinate @xmath (see Fig. 5.2 ).

The model has the same field content as in Subsection 4.2 . Again, we
treat the fields as distributions, which act on test functions whose
supports are included into the compactified geometry. We will give only
the method with functions including the brane localized interaction, and
we will motivate the BBTs by defining the fields as distributions in the
Lagrangians.

###### Fields as Distributions

The bulk action at the level of distributions is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.141)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We choose the transformation laws for the fermionic fields @xmath and
@xmath under @xmath as in Eq. ( 5.97 ) and under @xmath as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.142)
  -- -------- -- ---------

under which the action @xmath ( 5.96 ) is invariant (the parities even
and odd are considered with respect to the point @xmath ). The choice of
the signs in front of @xmath in Eqs. ( 5.97 ) and ( 5.142 ) is free.
They determine if the 5D field has a zero mode and its chirality. Here,
we require that @xmath has a left/right-handed zero mode respectively in
order to recover the SM at low energy.

On each brane at @xmath , there is one copy of the same Higgs field. The
action for the brane localized Higgs fields @xmath (real scalar fields
in this toy model) is thus

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.143)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the action of a Dirac distribution centered at @xmath on a test
function @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.144)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The brane localized Yukawa interactions are

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.145)
  -- -------- -- ---------

By keeping only the Higgs VEV (Eq. ( 4.6 )), we have the brane localized
mass terms:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.146)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Again, we need @xmath in order to give a mass to the zero modes of
@xmath and @xmath so these 5D fields have to be continuous at @xmath .
However, the @xmath -terms are not required by the decoupling argument.
If the odd fields @xmath and @xmath are continuous, they have to vanish
on the branes so the @xmath -terms vanish. If the odd fields are
discontinuous at the fixed points, their product is continuous so we
keep the @xmath -terms.

The weak partial derivatives give

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.147)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

for the even fields,

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (5.148)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

for the odd field @xmath , and

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (5.149)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

for the odd field @xmath . After that, we can rewrite the action @xmath
( 5.141 ) as

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (5.150)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

As in the case of the orbifold @xmath in Section 5.3 , BBTs appears on
both sides of the branes.

###### Mass Spectrum

In order to obtain the KK mass spectrum and the wave functions, we use
the same method as in Subsection 5.3.4 . We apply Hamilton’s principle
to the action @xmath Eqs. ( 5.150 ) and ( 5.146 ). From the vanishing of
the variation of the action in the bulk, we get the Euler-Lagrange
equations ( 4.15 ) extended on @xmath . The variation of the action on
the branes gives the natural boundary conditions ( 5.121 ). We give the
different steps for the variations of the actions at the two equivalent
branes at @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (5.151)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where we used the @xmath symmetry (Eq. ( 5.142 )) to go from the first
line to the second one and the @xmath symmetry (Eq. ( 5.97 )) to go from
the second line to the second one. By using the same method for each
field variation, we get the same boundary conditions as for the orbifold
@xmath : Eq. ( 5.121 ). As for the orbifold @xmath , the fields @xmath
and @xmath are discontinuous across the branes where the Higgs field is
localized and @xmath . The free case is obtained by taking @xmath and we
get that every field is continuous at the fixed points.

We perform a mixed KK decomposition,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.152)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the KK modes satisfy the Dirac-Weyl equations ( 4.59 ) and the KK
wave functions are orthonormalized so that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.153)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where we normalize on the whole extended circle. The discussion is the
same as in Section 4.6 , below Eq. ( 4.100 ), with the replacements
Eq. ( 4.58 ) @xmath Eq. ( 5.152 ), Eq. ( 4.61 ) @xmath Eq. ( 5.153 ) and
@xmath : we obtain the KK wave function solutions ( 4.90 ) on @xmath and
the mass spectrum ( 4.109 ) (with @xmath and @xmath ). We obtain the
solutions on the whole extended circle by using the symmetries @xmath
and @xmath . The mass spectrum is the same as in the case of the
compactification on the orbifold @xmath . There is again this difference
of a factor 2 with the mass spectrum of the compactification on the
interval @xmath (see below Eq. ( 5.123 ) for a discussion). We conclude
that all these models are dual.

###### Summary and Conclusion

In this section, we have reformulated our model of Chapter 4 with the
orbifold @xmath . The BBTs are generated in distribution theory by the
odd fields which are in general discontinuous at the fixed points, in
contrast to the interval compactification in Chapter 4 where we need to
add the BBTs by hand. We get the mass spectrum with an orbifold geometry
from the one with an interval by the replacement @xmath .

#### 5.5 Higgs Field Localized on a Brane Away from a Boundary of an
Interval

##### 5.5.1 5D Method with Fields as Distributions

In this section, we consider the same model as in Section 4.2 but the
Higgs boson is now localized on a new 3-brane at @xmath , away from but
parallel to a boundary. The reader can follow Section 4.2 for the field
content of the model; we keep the same notations. However, one has to
substitute @xmath in Subsections 4.2.3 and 4.2.4 .

Following Appendix B.2 , it is important to allow for the possibility
that some fields are discontinuous across the brane at @xmath . We
choose to treat the fields as distributions (see Appendix B.2 ) which
act on test functions whose supports are part of the compactified
geometry. In order to define the partial derivatives @xmath and @xmath
in the kinetic term, it is useful to define the Lagrangians using
distribution theory. Indeed, one can associate regular distributions
@xmath and @xmath to the fields @xmath and @xmath respectively, and thus
put a tilde on every field @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and every
Lagrangian of Section 4.2 , which have to be considered as
distributions. The action of the system is then the action of Lagrangian
on the test function @xmath . The product of two distributions in the
Lagrangian is defined as in Appendix A of Ref. [ 383 ] . The kinetic
term of @xmath ( 4.3 ) involves the terms @xmath and @xmath with @xmath
or @xmath . They are well defined if at least @xmath or @xmath is
continuous at @xmath since the weak derivative of a discontinuous
function involves a Dirac distribution. We want that the Higgs VEV gives
a mass to the zero modes of @xmath and @xmath in order to recover the SM
in the decoupling limit, so the terms involving @xmath in @xmath ( 4.7 )
have to be well defined. As they are proportional to @xmath and involve
the fields @xmath and @xmath , these two fields have to be continuous at
@xmath . As for the terms involving @xmath , which are also proportional
to @xmath , they involve the fields @xmath and @xmath , and their
presence is not necessary for recovering the SM in the decoupling limit.
@xmath and/or @xmath can be discontinuous at @xmath . The product of two
discontinuous function can be continuous but if it is not, the terms
proportional to @xmath are not defined, thus one has to take @xmath .
With these constraints, we have the weak partial derivatives:

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.154)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where the @xmath ’s are the regular distributions associated to the
functions @xmath . One can use Eq. ( 5.154 ) to go from a distributional
to a functional treatment of the Lagrangians and fields where BBTs
appear from the weak partial derivative of the discontinuous fields. We
can thus continue to use the Lagrangians of Section 4.2 with fields as
functions if one adds to @xmath ( 4.12 ) the action

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.155)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We apply Hamilton’s principle to the action @xmath with arbitrary field
variations in the bulk and at the boundaries. For the fields continuous
(discontinuous) across the brane at @xmath , the variations are
continuous (discontinuous) and arbitrary at @xmath . We get

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
                          
              @xmath      (5.156)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (5.157)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (5.158)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
                          
              @xmath      (5.159)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

with the notation @xmath . We obtain the Euler-Lagrange equations ( 4.15
) in the bulk, and the following conditions at the branes at @xmath
respectively:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.160)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.161)
  -- -------- -- ---------

If @xmath and @xmath are continuous at @xmath , with non-vanishing
@xmath and @xmath in general (and thus @xmath and @xmath are
non-vanishing too), we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.162)
  -- -------- -- ---------

A Dirichlet condition at @xmath for both chirality implies in general
vanishing KK wave functions and 5D fields everywhere in the extra
dimension. In order to have a physically interesting scenario, we need
to relax the continuity condition for @xmath and @xmath across the brane
at @xmath : @xmath so @xmath and the third line of Eq. ( 5.161 ) is
satisfied whatever are the values of @xmath and @xmath .

As the fields @xmath and @xmath mix due to the brane localized mass term
involving @xmath , we expand the 5D fields into a mixed KK
decomposition:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.163)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The 4D fields @xmath ( @xmath ) satisfy the Dirac-Weyl equations ( 4.59
). The mass spectrum @xmath includes the contributions whose origin is
the Yukawa couplings ( 4.8 ). The wave functions @xmath ( @xmath or
@xmath ) are orthonormalized with the conditions:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.164)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The mixed KK decompositions ( 5.163 ) are inserted into the
Euler-Lagrange equations ( 4.15 ), and into the conditions at the branes
( 5.160 ) and ( 5.161 ). We get the equations for the KK wave functions
( 4.86 ), the boundary conditions:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.165)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and the junction conditions:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.166)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We solve the equations for the KK wave functions ( 4.86 ) in the two
different regions: @xmath and @xmath with the boundary conditions (
5.165 ). We obtain:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.167)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.168)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath , @xmath . The fields @xmath and @xmath are continuous at
@xmath so the wave functions @xmath and @xmath are also continuous
across this brane, and we get

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.169)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The junction conditions ( 5.166 ) with the wave functions ( 5.167 ) and
( 5.168 ) give

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.170)
  -- -------- -- ---------

thus we have the equation for the mass spectrum

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.171)
  -- -------- -- ---------

equivalent to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.172)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and we have @xmath . The KK wave functions are orthonormalized by Eq. (
5.164 ), such that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.173)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In a similar way as below Eq. ( 4.107 ), one can show that the phases of
@xmath and @xmath , and the sign of @xmath are not physical, so one can
take @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Therefore, the two mass spectra of
Eq. ( 5.172 ) are equivalent and correspond to the same KK modes since
one can go frome the first to the second by the transformation @xmath .

The Yukawa couplings between the modes @xmath and @xmath follow from
inserting the KK decompositions ( 5.163 ) in Eq. ( 4.9 ):

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.174)
  -- -------- -- ---------

##### 5.5.2 Conclusion

In this section, we have illustrated the differences between a Higgs
field localized on a brane away from a boundary and on a brane at a
boundary. If the brane is at a boundary, the BBTs are explicitely
introduced in the action from the beginning and all fermion fields are
continuous along the extra dimension. If the brane is away from a
boundary, the brane localized terms imply a jump at the brane position
for one of the two chiralities of the 5D fermion field. The distribution
theory is very convenient in this case and the BBTs are implicitely
generated on both sides of the brane by the weak partial derivative
along the extra dimension of the discontinuous fields.

### Chapter 6 Large Star/Rose Extra Dimension with Small Leaves/Petals

This chapter is an adaptation of Ref. [ 2 ] written under the
supervision of Ulrich Ellwanger.

#### 6.1 Introduction

The large gauge hierarchy between the 4D Planck scale,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the 4D gravitational Newton constant, and the measured
Higgs boson mass @xmath , is one of the internal puzzles of the Standard
Model (SM) of particle physics [ 3 ] when coupled to gravity. If the
Higgs boson is described by an elementary scalar field which is not
protected by a symmetry, the radiative corrections to @xmath are
quadratically sensitive to mass scales of new degrees of freedom. Such
degrees of freedom are expected at least at scales where gravitational
self interactions become strong, which is the 4D Planck scale @xmath in
the usual setup. Then the measured @xmath implies an incredible fine
tuning between the Higgs boson bare mass and the radiative corrections:
this is the naturalness problem of the Higgs boson mass due to the large
hierarchy between the 4D Planck scale @xmath and the ElectroWeak (EW)
scale (usually called the gauge hierarchy problem) [ 17 , 18 , 19 ] . A
possibility to solve this issue is to embed the SM into a theory where
the true Planck scale, i.e. the scale where gravitational self
interactions become strong and new degrees of freedom are expected, is
in the @xmath TeV range. However, this does not solve the question how a
UltraViolet (UV) completion of quantum gravity is achieved.

In 1998, N. Arkani-Hamed, S. Dimopoulos and G.R. Dvali (ADD) proposed in
Ref. [ 34 ] to compactify @xmath flat spacelike extra dimensions on a
@xmath -dimensional compact space @xmath of volume @xmath with a
factorizable spacetime geometry @xmath , where @xmath is the 4D
Minkowski spacetime. The 4D Planck scale @xmath is just an effective
scale given by the relation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

involving the @xmath D Planck scale

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the @xmath D gravitational Newton constant. @xmath is
the real scale at which gravity becomes strongly coupled, so it is the
true cut-off of the QFT ¹ ¹ 1 To be more precise, if the UV completion
is perturbative, the UV gravitational degrees of freedom appear at a
scale @xmath . The cut-off of the EFT is @xmath and not @xmath . For
example, in perturbative string theory, the string scale is lower than
the higher-dimensional Planck scale. To simplify the discussion, we
ignore this possibility here. , and this model solves the gauge
hierarchy problem if @xmath TeV with a large compactified volume @xmath
. In ADD models, the SM fields must be localized on a 3-brane, in
contrast to gravity which is a property of @xmath spacetime in general
relativity. At large distances between two test masses on the 3-brane,
gravity appears as a feebly coupled theory, because gravitational fluxes
spread into the large volume @xmath of the bulk. Quickly [ 36 ] , it was
realized that the Kaluza-Klein (KK) modes of fields propagating into
this large volume @xmath have couplings to the SM fields suppressed by
@xmath . One can thus build natural models of feebly interacting
particles, i.e. particles which have a tiny coupling constant with the
SM, like right-handed neutrinos [ 37 , 38 , 39 ] , axions [ 384 , 385 ]
, dark photons [ 36 ] , etc. In Ref. [ 36 ] , ADD proposed a simple
toroidal compactification @xmath , where @xmath is the circle of radius
@xmath , and @xmath . The bulk fields, like the graviton, generate a
tower of KK modes with a uniform mass gap of @xmath . For a benchmark
value @xmath TeV, the @xmath D Planck length is @xmath , and one gets
Tab. 6.1 and Fig. 6.1 from Eq. ( 6.2 ).

Motivated by UV completions in superstring/M-theory [ 35 , 188 ]
requiring 10/11 spacetime dimensions, most of the efforts concentrated
on @xmath . The compactification radius @xmath must be stabilized at a
large value compared to @xmath , which reintroduces a geometrical
hierarchy [ 36 ] with a low KK mass gap: too light KK-gravitons are
constrained by astrophysics, cosmology and collider physics ² ² 2 For a
review of the constraints on the simplest ADD model with toroidal
compactification, c.f. Ref. [ 386 ] . . When one probes gravitational
Newton’s law at large [small] distances with respect to @xmath , gravity
appears 4D [ @xmath D]. The case @xmath is excluded because it leads to
a modification of 4D gravitational Newton’s law at the scale of the
solar system. ADD’s proposal is thus often associated with the Large
Extra Dimensions (LEDs) paradigm, and is just a reformulation of the
gauge hierarchy problem.

In the literature, there are interesting propositions to stabilize such
large compactification radii [ 237 , 238 , 239 , 240 , 241 , 242 , 243 ]
. To circumvent this geometrical hierarchy problem, a solution can be to
abandon the framework of UV completions by superstring/M-theory, and to
increase the number of extra dimensions. This possibility was mentioned
first in Ref. [ 36 ] . Fig. 6.1 shows that, for sufficiently large
@xmath , the remaining hierarchy disappears: @xmath . A possible trail
to UV complete this kind of model could be via Loop Quantum Gravity
(LQG) [ 387 ] since, a priori, LQG does not fix the number of spatial
dimensions. First attempts to add spacelike extra dimensions to LQG were
made in Refs. [ 388 , 389 , 390 , 391 , 392 , 393 , 394 , 395 , 396 ,
397 ] .

The most popular way to overcome the geometrical hierarchy problem is
the warped extra dimension scenario proposed in 1999 by L. Randall and
R. Sundrum (RS) in Ref. [ 40 ] , known as the RS1 model. A less known
approach is the compactification of @xmath spacelike extra dimension on
a compact hyperbolic manifold with a large genus (number of holes)
proposed in 2000 in Ref. [ 251 ] (see also Ref. [ 252 ] ).

The goal of the present work is to discuss another compactification
geometry which may solve the geometrical hierarchy problem in ADD-like
models. In 2005, H.D. Kim proposed in Ref. [ 69 ] to realize ADD’s idea
by compactifying a LED on a 1D singular variety: a metric graph ³ ³ 3
Metric graphs have interesting applications in physics, chemistry and
mathematics (c.f. Ref. [ 398 ] for a short review). A 2D QFT on a star
graph background was developped in Refs. [ 399 , 400 , 401 , 402 ] . ,
like a star or a rose with respectively @xmath leaves/petals of equal
length/circumference @xmath . The reader can find a mathematical
introduction to the spectral analysis of differential operators defined
on metric graphs, the so-called quantum graphs, in Ref. [ 403 ] . In
Ref. [ 69 ] , it was shown that, for large @xmath , one can build a
phenomenologically viable model with only a single LED which gives
sizable submillimeter deviations from the Newtonian law of gravity in
tabletop experiments. The KK mass scale is @xmath meV. Here, we want to
push the concept further and we take @xmath close to @xmath for large
@xmath , so @xmath TeV which does not reintroduce a scale hierarchy and
evade all constrains on traditional ADD models (with a compactification
on a low dimensional torus) from submillimeter tests of Newtonian
gravity, astrophysics and cosmology. The integer @xmath is radiatively
stable so the scenario solves completely the naturalness problem of the
Higgs mass under the hypothesis of an exact global permutation symmetry
between the leaves/petals. Ref. [ 69 ] gives no information on the way
to embed the SM fields into the proposed geometry. Are they bulk or
brane-localized fields? In this work, we will see that the SM fields
must be localized on a 3-brane and we find it particulary interesting to
localize them on the junction (central vertex) of the star/rose graph.

In the context of the compactification of an extra dimension on a metric
graph, the star graph is the most popular [ 69 , 350 , 357 , 355 , 351 ,
404 ] , mainly because, with AdS @xmath leaves, these effective 5D
braneworlds capture the low energy behavior of models with warped
throats, arising in flux compactification in type IIB superstring theory
[ 405 , 343 , 344 , 352 , 353 , 406 , 350 ] , when one integrates out
the modes associated to the transverse dimensions of the throats. In
this work, we study a spacelike extra dimension compactified on a flat
star/rose graph with identical leaves/petals by adopting a bottom-up
approach: we are completely agnostic about the origin of this curious
geometry in a UV theory like string theories, LQG, etc.

The authors of Ref. [ 350 ] analyzed a Klein-Gordon field, a Dirac
field, a Maxwell field and Einsteinian gravity propagating in an extra
dimension compactified on a star with @xmath leaves of different
lengths. For that purpose, they define a copy of the same 5D field on
each leaf. The copies are connected at the junction of the star through
brane-localized interactions and the continuity of the metric. Of
course, a different 5D field on each leaf is not equivalent to only one
5D field defined on the whole star graph. In order to recover only one
zero mode propagating on the whole star, they add brane-localized mass
terms and take the limit of infinite masses such that @xmath zero modes
decouple from the Effective Field Theory (EFT). However, the meaning of
an infinite brane-localized mass term is not clear when the cut-off of
the EFT is not so far above the KK scale @xmath . That is why we choose
in this work the more straigtforward approach of Refs. [ 69 , 407 ]
where a 5D field is defined on the whole metric graph from the start.
For that purpose, one needs a distribution theory on the star/rose graph
allowing to define a Lagrangian with possible field discontinuities at
the junction. Instead of Schwartz’s distribution theory [ 373 , 372 ] ,
it is more appropriate to use a generalization of Kurasov’s one [ 408 ]
. In Section 6.2 , we give the definitions of a star/rose graph and
introduce the elements of the distribution theory we need.

The KK mass spectrum and wave functions of a 5D massless real scalar
field on a star/rose graph were studied in Ref. [ 69 ] . In Section 6.3
, we generalize it by adding a 5D mass to the scalar field. Besides, we
clarify the method and hypothesises of this previous study, especially
the hypothesis of continuity of the scalar field across the cental
vertex of the star/rose graph.

Recently, a 5D Dirac field with a compactification on a flat rose graph
was considered in Ref. [ 407 ] . They took petals of possibly different
circumferences and included a 5D Dirac mass for the fermion. In this
framework, they considered the rose graph as a master quantum graph
since one can reduce it to a star graph by a suitable choice of junction
conditions. They studied the general mathematical properties of the
junction conditions for the rose graph and classified them. Their work
was restricted to the analysis of the zero modes only: the KK mass
spectrum and wavefunctions of the excited modes were not considered.
They determined the number of zero mode solutions for each type of
boundary conditions in their classification. Their work was motivated by
the future goals of generating three fermion generations and the
features of the flavor sector of the SM fermions from the zero modes of
only one generation of 5D fermions. In Section 6.4 , we study the
particular case of a 5D massless Dirac field on a star/rose graph with
identical leaves/petals. We use a different approach compared to the one
of Ref. [ 407 ] . Instead of imposing arbitrary junction conditions, we
keep only the natural junction conditions at the vertices, i.e. the
junction conditions for which the variation of the action at the
vertices vanishes for arbitrary field variations [ 371 , 219 , 230 , 1 ,
409 ] . Indeed, we prefer junction conditions originating from the
variation of the action (and thus of the fields) at the vertices. We
will see that the natural junction conditions depend only on the
hypothesis of the continuity of the fields at the junction. In this
approach, we need the bilinear boundary terms for 5D fermions [ 62 , 63
, 64 , 65 , 66 , 67 , 68 , 1 , 409 ] whose importance was stressed in
Chapters 4 and 5 . Besides, we do not restrict ourselves to the study of
the zero modes only; we determine the KK mass spectrum and wavefunctions
of all KK modes.

In Section 6.5 , we propose a model to reduce the gravity scale to the
TeV scale with a large compactified volume, but with EW and KK scales
which coincide. The SM fields are localized on the 3-brane at the
central vertex of the star/rose, and we compute their couplings to
spinless KK-gravitons. We find that the results are very different from
standard ADD models in the literature, due to the very specific features
of the rose/star graph with identical leaves/petals. We also discuss
briefly what kind of physics is expected in the Planckian and
trans-Planckian regime of the model, the possibility of a hidden sector
made of KK-gravitons and of a dark matter candidate: a stable black hole
remnant [ 410 , 411 , 412 , 413 ] , the Planckion [ 414 , 415 ] .

In Section 6.6 , we revisit the models of Refs. [ 37 , 38 , 39 ] , which
generate small Dirac neutrino masses with right-handed neutrinos
identified with the zero modes of gauge singlet fermions propagating in
a large compactified volume, by adapting this idea to our spacetime
geometries. We consider a toy model with only one generation of
neutrinos. We use alternatively the zero mode approximation and the
exact treatment concerning the brane-localized Yukawa coupling between
the SM Higgs field with the 5D neutrino and the 4D left-handed neutrino
of the SM particle content. For this exact treatment of a
brane-localized Yukawa interaction, we use the 5D method that we
developped in Ref. [ 1 , 409 ] with other authors. We find that a large
number of KK-neutrinos are sterile and are part of the hidden sector of
the proposed models.

We conclude and propose some perspectives in Section 6.7 . In Appendix A
, we give our conventions for the 5D Minkowski metric, the Dirac
matrices and spinors.

#### 6.2 Star & Rose Graphs

##### 6.2.1 Geometries

In this subsection, we define the geometries on which we compactify. The
reader is refered to Chapter 1 of Ref. [ 403 ] for basic definitions,
vocabulary and properties of metric and quantum graphs which we will use
in what follows.

###### @xmath-star –

The @xmath -star @xmath (c.f. Fig. 6.2 ) is defined as the flat
equilateral star graph with @xmath bonds directed from 1 vertex of
degree @xmath to @xmath vertices of degree 1. It is a flat 1D space of
volume @xmath obtained by gluing @xmath intervals (the leaves) of length
@xmath at a common boundary @xmath (the junction). The @xmath leaf ends
at the opposite side of the junction @xmath : the boundary @xmath .
@xmath is symmetric under the group @xmath , which is the set of all
permutations of the @xmath leaves. For example, @xmath is the interval
of length @xmath , @xmath the interval of length @xmath symmetric under
a reflection ( @xmath ) with respect to the midpoint @xmath , and @xmath
is a claw. The couple of coordinates @xmath are assigned to every point
of the @xmath leaf with the identification:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

###### @xmath-rose –

The @xmath -rose @xmath (c.f. Fig. 6.2 ) is defined as the flat
equilateral rose graph (also called rhodonea or bouquet of circles),
with @xmath directed loops (1 vertex of degree @xmath ). It is a flat 1D
space of volume @xmath obtained by gluing the boundaries of @xmath
intervals (the petals), of radius @xmath and circumference @xmath , at a
single point @xmath (the vertex/junction). @xmath is symmetric under the
group @xmath , which is the set of all permutations of the @xmath
petals. For example, @xmath is a circle, @xmath a lemniscat, @xmath a
trifolium, and @xmath a quadrifolium. The couple of coordinates @xmath
is assigned to every point of the @xmath petal, with the
identifications:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

##### 6.2.2 Distribution Theory on a Star/Rose Graph

In order to study a field theory on @xmath or @xmath with localized
interactions at the vertices, one needs to define a distribution theory
on these metric graphs. To be general, we allow the test functions to be
discontinuous at the junction. The usual Schwartz’s distribution theory
[ 373 , 372 ] is thus not suitable and one should consider instead a
generalization on metric graphs of Kurasov’s distribution theory [ 408 ]
. Up to our knowledge, such a generalization on metric graphs was not
considered in the literature. We will thus define in this subsection the
objects we need for our study.

###### Function on @xmath –

A complex function @xmath on the metric graph @xmath is defined as:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

For each @xmath , we define a function:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

-   @xmath is continuous/differentiable at @xmath if @xmath is
    continuous/differentiable at @xmath . The derivative of @xmath at
    @xmath is @xmath .

-   @xmath is continuous across the junction if

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (6.9)
      -- -------- -- -------

    If it is not the case, @xmath is discontinuous/multivalued at the
    junction.

###### Test function on @xmath –

The set of test functions @xmath is the set of all complex functions
@xmath on @xmath such that the functions @xmath are infinitely
differentiable bounded functions on @xmath . We stress that a function
@xmath and/or its derivatives can be discontinuous at the junction.

###### Distribution –

A distribution @xmath is a linear form on @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where for every compact set @xmath , there exist constants @xmath and
@xmath such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Regular distribution –

For any integrable complex function @xmath on @xmath , one can define a
regular distribution @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

A distribution which is not regular is singular.

###### Product of distributions –

If @xmath and @xmath , one can define the product @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

If @xmath is the regular distribution associated to @xmath , the product
@xmath is defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Dirac distribution –

The Dirac distribution on @xmath centered at @xmath is the singular
distribution @xmath defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

We want to build a Dirac-like distribution @xmath centered at @xmath to
localize interactions at the junction. Consider the @xmath -star @xmath
. Let @xmath be an infinitely differentiable real function on @xmath
such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

We define @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath , and we associate the regular distribution @xmath to it.
The Dirac distribution @xmath at the junction @xmath is defined as the
weak limit:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

We have

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (6.20)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

We conclude that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the same way, one can build a Dirac distribution @xmath at the vertx
@xmath of the @xmath -rose @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is defined as in Eq. ( 6.18 ) and @xmath is an infinitely
differentiable real function on @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

and normalized as in Eq. 6.17 . Then,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

We have thus defined a Dirac distribution centered at the junction
@xmath which acts on test functions possibly discontinuous at @xmath .

###### Distributional derivative –

In Kurasov’s distribution theory, one defines a distributional
derivative in the same way as in Schwartz’s distribution theory. The
distributional derivative @xmath of a distribution @xmath is defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

The derivative of a regular distribution @xmath is thus

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the regular distribution associated to derivative @xmath
. As in original Kurasov’s distribution theory, the distributional
derivative does not coincide with the derivative defined in the
classical sense. For instance, the distributional derivative of the
regular distribution associated to a constant function is not zero. For
the unit function @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

Instead, it would be more natural to define the distributional
derivative as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

However, in this case, a distributional derivative of the Dirac
distributions @xmath and @xmath would involve Dirac distributions
squared which is not defined. Therefore, the price to pay in order to
define a usefull distributional derivative is to have extra boundary
terms at the vertices, compared to the traditional distributional
derivative for a regular distribution in Schwartz’s distribution theory.
One can thus define the @xmath derivative of the Dirac distribution
@xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Moment expansion –

We will adapt the moment expansion [ 416 ] of Schwartz’s distribution
theory to our case. Consider the @xmath -star. The Taylor series of a
test function @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then, the action of the previous regular distribution @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

We define the @xmath moment of the function @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (6.33)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

A similar result is obtained with the @xmath -rose. We define the moment
expansion of @xmath by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### 6.2.3 Star/Rose Extra Dimension

We want to study a field theory on the flat factorizable geometry @xmath
, with @xmath or @xmath . The coordinates can be split as @xmath , where
@xmath are the coordinates of @xmath . One has @xmath , and @xmath . The
junction @xmath and the boundaries @xmath break explicitely the 5D
Lorentz-Poincaré symmetries to the 4D ones, but the 5D symmetries are
still preserved locally in the bulk, in the same way as orbifold fixed
points. The junction and boundaries are thus 3-branes where one can
localize 4D fields and brane-localized kinetic and/or interaction terms
for the bulk fields. The 3-branes at the boundaries are called @xmath
-branes, and the 3-brane at the junction is called @xmath -brane for
@xmath .

One can consider 5D fields which propagate only in one petal/leaf as in
Refs. [ 350 , 357 , 355 , 351 , 404 ] , or 5D fields which propagate
into all the star/rose graph. In this latter case, it is straightforward
to generalize our discussion of functions defined on @xmath to the case
of 5D fields. The 5D fields can be discontinuous at the junction and
thus multivalued at this point. One can interpret it from an EFT point
of view (which is always the case in any realistic model with
interactions): the value of the field at the point @xmath is the one at
the neighborhood but outside the core of the @xmath -brane, since its
microscopic description is outside the range of validity of the EFT. One
should think the point @xmath of the graph as @xmath . Therefore, the
fact that the field is multivalued at the junction is not a problem. It
is convenient to define the field theory within a distributional
approach with respect to the coordinates @xmath , where the 5D fields
are functions of @xmath but linear forms which act on functions of
@xmath .

#### 6.3 5D Klein-Gordon Field on a Star/Rose Graph

##### 6.3.1 Klein-Gordon Equation & Junction/Boundary Conditions

We study a 5D real scalar field @xmath of mass dimension 3/2 and of mass
@xmath defined on @xmath . The 5D fields @xmath are supposed to be
smooth functions on the interval @xmath . We associate to @xmath a
regular distribution @xmath . The Lagrangian @xmath describing the
dynamics of @xmath is defined at the level of distributions. The action
is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the unit test function @xmath , and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . We do not include brane-localized kinetic/mass/interaction
terms, and the boundary terms are chosen to have Neumann-like conditions
at the junction and boundaries. The action reduces to the standard form
for a Klein-Gordon field:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the boundary terms coming from the distributional derivatives
cancel each other.

@xmath can be continuous or discontinuous across the @xmath -brane. This
feature depends on the microscopic structure of the @xmath -brane in the
UV completion. We apply Hamilton’s principle to the action @xmath , with
arbitrary variations @xmath of @xmath in the bulk and on the branes. The
@xmath ’s inherite the (dis)continuity properties from @xmath across the
@xmath -brane and we extract the junction and boundary conditions from
integrals over total derivatives. We get the Klein-Gordon equation:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

Neumann boundary conditions on the @xmath -branes:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the junction condition depends on the (dis)continuity of @xmath :

-   If @xmath is allowed to be discontinuous across the junction, we get
    Neumann junction conditions:

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (6.40)
      -- -------- -- --------

    We say that the @xmath -brane is airtight to the field @xmath ,
    which means that the spectrum is equivalent to the one obtained by
    disconnecting the @xmath bonds at the vertex @xmath into @xmath
    disjoined intervals. A brane which is airtight to the field behaves
    like a boundary for this field.

-   If we impose to @xmath to be continuous across the junction, we get
    a Neumann-Kirchhoff junction condition:

      -- -- -- --------
               (6.41)
      -- -- -- --------

    with @xmath . When @xmath is continuous across the junction, the
    leaves/petals communicate through the @xmath -brane which is thus
    not airtight.

##### 6.3.2 Kaluza-Klein Dimensional Reduction

We will not study here the KK dimensional reduction when @xmath is
allowed to be discontinuous across the junction since it reduces to a 5D
scalar field on @xmath disjoined intervals. The case of a 5D scalar
field on an interval is very well known in the literature [ 417 ] . In
the following, we focus on the continuous case.

###### Separation of Variables

We perform the KK dimensional reduction of the 5D field theory to an
effective 4D one in terms of KK degrees of freedom. A general 5D field
@xmath can be expanded as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

We label each KK mode solution by a triplet @xmath , where:

-   @xmath labels the different KK towers for the same 5D field which
    are defined by different mass spectra (see below);

-   @xmath labels the levels in the KK tower @xmath ;

-   @xmath labels the degenerate modes for each KK level @xmath . We
    choose the notation @xmath , instead of the more appropriate one
    @xmath , for simplifying the notations since we will see that each
    KK level for a KK tower @xmath has the same degeneracy: there is
    thus no ambiguity.

The 5D equation ( 6.38 ) splits into the Klein-Gordon equations for the
4D fields @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the differential equations for the wave functions @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the mass squared of the KK modes @xmath , and @xmath is
an eigenvalue of the operator @xmath on @xmath associated to the
eigenfunctions @xmath . The orthonormalization conditions for the wave
functions @xmath are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

The conditions on the 5D field @xmath on the 3-branes are naturally
transposed to conditions on the KK wave functions @xmath .

###### Zero Modes

We are looking for zero mode solutions ( @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ) of
Eq. ( 6.45 ). For both compactifications on @xmath and @xmath , there is
only one zero mode ( @xmath ) whose wave function is flat, such that:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Excited Modes

###### @xmath @xmath-Star

The general solutions of Eq. ( 6.45 ), satisfying the Neumann boundary
conditions ( 6.39 ), are of the form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . The continuity condition on the wave functions at the
@xmath -brane gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

which leads to two kinds of excited KK modes: the KK wave functions
@xmath can vanish or not on the @xmath -brane.

###### First case: @xmath

Eq. ( 6.49 ) gives the KK mass spectrum

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

which defines the KK tower @xmath . The Neumann-Kirchhoff junction
condition ( 6.41 ) implies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

Each KK level @xmath is thus @xmath times degenerate ( @xmath ) and the
KK wave functions are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the @xmath -vector basis:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath               
     @xmath   @xmath      (6.53)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

###### Second case: @xmath

We have @xmath so Eq. ( 6.49 ) gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Kirchhoff junction condition ( 6.41 ) leads to the KK mass spectrum

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

which defines the KK tower with @xmath whose KK levels are not
degenerate ( @xmath ). The KK wave functions are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### @xmath @xmath-Rose

Again, to satisfy the continuity condition at the @xmath -brane, the KK
wave functions @xmath can vanish or not at the vertex.

###### First case: @xmath

The general solutions of Eq. ( 6.45 ) with @xmath are of the form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . The periodicity condition for each petal at the vertex
gives @xmath . Moreover, the Neumann-Kirchhoff junction condition ( 6.41
) implies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

There are thus two possibilities:

-   First possibility:
    The KK mass spectrum is

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (6.59)
      -- -------- -- --------

    and defines the KK tower @xmath . From the conditions ( 6.58 ), we
    get Eq. ( 6.51 ) so @xmath and the KK wave functions are

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (6.60)
      -- -------- -- --------

    with the @xmath -vector basis ( 6.53 ).

-   Second possibility:
    The KK mass spectrum is

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (6.61)
      -- -------- -- --------

    which satisfies Eq. ( 6.58 ) and defines the KK tower @xmath . We
    get @xmath and the KK wave functions are

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (6.62)
      -- -------- -- --------

    with the @xmath -vector basis:

      -- -------- -------- -- --------
         @xmath   @xmath      
         @xmath   @xmath      
         @xmath               
         @xmath   @xmath      (6.63)
      -- -------- -------- -- --------

###### Second case: @xmath

The KK mass spectrum is the same as in Eq. ( 6.61 ). Each KK level
@xmath is thus degenerate with the @xmath KK modes of the level @xmath
so @xmath : we label the KK modes with non-vanishing wave functions at
the junction by the triplet @xmath . The KK wave functions are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally, we insist on the fact that all KK towers labeled by @xmath are
present in the spectrum: they do not correspond to different models. The
5D field @xmath has one zero mode of mass @xmath in both geometries (
@xmath or @xmath ) and excited modes. For a massless 5D field ( @xmath
), the mass gap between the KK modes is of the order of @xmath . Some of
the KK modes have wave functions which vanish at the junction. We will
see a physical application of these results in Subsection 6.5.3 , where
we will study a toy model of a 5D spinless graviton which is just a real
scalar field with @xmath . The zero mode is thus identified with the 4D
massless graviton (where we do not take into account the spin).

#### 6.4 5D Massless Dirac Field on a Star/Rose Graph

##### 6.4.1 Dirac-Weyl Equations & Junction/Boundary Conditions

We study a 5D massless Dirac field

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

of mass dimension 2 defined on @xmath , where the fields @xmath and
@xmath describe fermion fields of left and right-handed 4D chirality
respectively. To the function @xmath , we associate the regular
distribution @xmath . The action is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the Lagrangian

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are the 5D Dirac matrices ⁴ ⁴ 4 Our
conventions for the Dirac algebra is given in Appendix A . We include
the bilinear boundary terms at the vertices with @xmath . The relative
sign between the HS terms at @xmath and @xmath is chosen in order to
allow the existence of zero modes [ 1 , 409 ] . If we flip the sign of
@xmath , we exchange the features of the left and right-handed KK modes.
In what follows, we choose @xmath .

The action can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the boundary terms coming from the distributional derivatives
cancel each other. The conserved Noether current associated to the
symmetry @xmath , with @xmath , is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

Current conservation requires a Kirchhoff condition for the current at
the junction:

  -- -- -- --------
           (6.70)
  -- -- -- --------

For the component @xmath one gets at the junction:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

We apply Hamilton’s principle to the action @xmath , with arbitrary
variations of the fields @xmath in the bulk and on the branes. We get
the massless Dirac-Weyl equations for the 5D fields @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, when the fields are on-shell, @xmath and @xmath are not
independent so the junction/boundary conditions must not overconstrain
@xmath and @xmath at the same point [ 65 , 66 , 409 ] . The addition of
the HS terms guarantee that only @xmath is constrained on the branes by
the minimization of the action [ 65 , 66 , 1 , 409 ] . We get the
Dirichlet boundary conditions at the @xmath -branes:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

The fields @xmath and @xmath can be taken independently (dis)continuous
across the junction. @xmath is (dis)continuous as @xmath . One can
explore the different possibilities of junction conditions for @xmath ,
depending on the (dis)continuity of the fields here, summarized in Tab.
6.2 :

-   Case 1: If both @xmath and @xmath are allowed to be discontinuous,
    one gets Dirichlet junction conditions:

      -- -- -- --------
               (6.74)
      -- -- -- --------

    which correspond to a 5D field @xmath defined on @xmath disjoined
    intervals. The spectrum of a 5D fermion on an interval is well known
    in the literature [ 50 ] . The @xmath -brane is airtight, which is
    illustrated by the fact that each incoming or outcoming current at
    the @xmath -brane vanishes like at a boundary ( 6.71 ). There is a
    chiral zero mode (here right-handed) in each leaf/petal and a KK
    tower of vector-like fermions with a mass gap of @xmath . If one
    generation of the SM fermion sector propagates on a @xmath -star/
    @xmath -rose it is possible to generate three generations at the
    level of zero modes with a airtight @xmath -brane. The mechanism is
    the same as Refs. [ 418 , 419 , 420 , 421 , 422 , 423 ] with point
    interactions along an interval/circle to generate several zero modes
    from a unique discontinuous 5D fermion field.

-   Case 2: If we impose that both @xmath and @xmath are continuous, we
    obtain no additional boundary condition at the @xmath -brane, but a
    Dirichlet condition ( 6.74 ) for @xmath at the @xmath -brane.

-   Case 3: If we impose only the continuity on @xmath , there is a
    Dirichlet condition ( 6.74 ) for @xmath at the @xmath -brane.

-   Case 4: If we impose only the continuity on @xmath , Hamilton’s
    principle gives a Kirchhoff junction condition for @xmath at the
    @xmath -brane:

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (6.75)
      -- -------- -- --------

    which solves the current condition ( 6.71 ).

For the physical applications in this article, we will add
brane-localized terms at the junction for @xmath , which are in general
are incompatible with the continuity of @xmath [ 1 , 409 ] . In this
article, we will not consider airtight branes so we impose only that
@xmath is continuous at the junction in what follows.

##### 6.4.2 Kaluza-Klein Dimensional Reduction

###### Separation of Variables

In order to perform the KK dimensional reduction of the 5D field theory,
we use the same method as in Subsection 6.3.2 for the scalar field, with
the same system of labels for the KK modes. We expand the 5D fields
@xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are 4D Weyl fields and @xmath are wave functions defined on
@xmath . The 5D equations ( 6.72 ) split into Dirac-Weyl equations for
the 4D fields @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the differential equation for the wave functions @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the mass of the KK modes @xmath . The wave functions
@xmath are orthonormalized with the conditions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

The conditions on the 5D field @xmath at the vertices are naturally
transposed to conditions on the KK wave functions @xmath .

###### Zero Modes

We are looking for zero mode solutions ( @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ) of
Eq. ( 6.78 ) for which the first order differential equations are
decoupled. For both compactifications on @xmath and @xmath , there is
only one right-handed zero mode ( @xmath ). Its wave function is
continuous across the @xmath -brane and flat:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

For the left-handed zero modes, it is necessary to distinguish between
the compactification on @xmath and @xmath .

###### @xmath @xmath-Star

There is no left-handed zero mode for @xmath . The theory is thus chiral
at the level of the zero mode, which generalizes the well known result
of the particular case of a compactification on the interval @xmath .
The compactification on a star graph is thus very interesting since it
allows to build models where the SM fields propagate in the extra
dimension: the SM particles are identified with the zero modes of the 5D
fields. In Section 6.6 , we will identify the right-handed neutrinos
with the zero modes of 5D Dirac fields coupled to brane-localized 4D
left-handed neutrinos. The goal is to propose a toy model to obtain
small Dirac neutrino masses.

###### @xmath @xmath-Rose

For @xmath , we have @xmath degenerate left-handed zero modes ( @xmath
). The theory is vector-like at the level of the zero modes, which
generalizes the result of the compactification on a circle @xmath in the
literature. Therefore, with the compactification on a rose graph and
without an airtight @xmath -brane, one cannot build models with the SM
fields propagating in the extra dimension except if one is able to
propose a mechanism which generates chirality by giving a mass to the
mirror partners of the SM fermions. If this is possible, one recovers
the three SM generations by taking @xmath . The KK wave functions @xmath
are flat in each petal and discontinuous across the @xmath -brane
(except for @xmath , the circle, where they can be taken continuous):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the @xmath -vector basis ( 6.63 ).

###### Excited Modes

We are looking for massive KK modes ( @xmath ). The coupled first order
differential equations ( 6.78 ) can be decoupled into second order ones:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

The KK wave functions @xmath are continuous across the junction. In the
same way as in the case of the scalar field, it is necessary to
distinguish between the cases where the @xmath ’s vanish or not at the
junction. One can follow the same method as in Subsection 6.3.2 . We
will not give again all the details here since there is no major
technical difference. We summarize the results in what follows.

###### @xmath @xmath-Star

###### First case: @xmath

The KK mass spectrum is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.83)
  -- -------- -- --------

and defines the KK tower @xmath . Each KK level is @xmath times
degenerate ( @xmath ) and the KK wave functions are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the @xmath -vector basis ( 6.53 ). The @xmath ’s are discontinuous
across the @xmath -brane (except for @xmath , the interval, where they
are taken continuous).

###### Second case: @xmath

The KK mass spectrum is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is not degenerate ( @xmath ) and defines the KK tower @xmath . The
KK wave functions are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the @xmath ’s can be taken continuous across the @xmath -brane.

###### @xmath @xmath-Rose

###### First case: @xmath

There are two cases:

-   First case:
    The KK mass spectrum is

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (6.87)
      -- -------- -- --------

    and defines the KK tower @xmath with @xmath . The KK wave functions
    are

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (6.88)
      -- -------- -- --------

    with the @xmath -vector basis ( 6.53 ). The @xmath ’s are
    discontinuous across the @xmath -brane.

-   Second possibility:
    The KK mass spectrum is

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (6.89)
      -- -------- -- --------

    and defines the KK tower @xmath with @xmath . The KK wave functions
    are

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (6.90)
      -- -------- -- --------

    with the @xmath -vector basis ( 6.63 ). The @xmath ’s are
    discontinuous across the @xmath -brane (except for @xmath , the
    circle, where they can be taken continuous).

###### Second case: @xmath

The KK mass spectrum is the same as in Eq. ( 6.89 ). Each KK level
@xmath is thus degenerate with the @xmath KK modes of the level @xmath
so @xmath : we label the KK modes with non-vanishing wave functions at
the junction by the triplet @xmath . The KK wave functions are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.91)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the @xmath ’s can be taken continuous across the @xmath -brane.

Like for the scalar field, all KK towers labeled by @xmath are present
in the spectrum. Each excited KK level is vector-like for both
compactifications, and the mass gap between the KK modes is of the order
of @xmath .

#### 6.5 A Low 5D Planck Scale with a Star/Rose Extra Dimension

In this section, we propose an ADD model with brane-localized 4D SM
fields where gravity propagates in a large star/rose extra dimension
with large @xmath and a natural value for @xmath .

##### 6.5.1 Lowering the Gravity Scale

With a LED compactified on a metric graph @xmath or @xmath , one can
obtain a low 5D Planck scale. In this case, Eq. ( 6.2 ) gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.92)
  -- -------- -- --------

To solve the gauge hierarchy problem with the hypothesis of an exact
global @xmath symmetry (see Section 6.7 for a discussion when this
hypothesis is relaxed), we choose @xmath TeV, obtained with @xmath m. In
order to be in the EFT regime, i.e. below the 5D Planck scale, we need
@xmath , with @xmath m. In practice, @xmath with a large @xmath should
be enough, and thus a KK mass scale near the EW scale: @xmath GeV. Such
heavy KK-gravitons evade completely the constrains from submillimeter
tests of 4D gravitational Newtons’s law, stellar physics and cosmology
(c.f. footnote 2 p. 2 ). If one allows for @xmath of fine tuning for
@xmath by pushing @xmath up to 10 TeV with @xmath , one can even allow
for @xmath TeV. Moreover, if the concepts of space and volume still make
sense at the Planck scale @xmath , by taking @xmath and @xmath to get
@xmath TeV, there is no tower of KK-gravitons in the EFT, instead the
first experimental hints for a low 5D Planck scale are strongly coupled
quantum gravity phenomena near @xmath . Such a large @xmath seems
puzzling at first glance: the reader would wonder whether our
proposition is just a reformulation of the gauge hierarchy into why
@xmath is large. However, in the EFT, @xmath is a conserved integer so
it is stable under radiative corrections, it does not need to be
dynamically stabilized, and has no preferred value. When @xmath , the
models proposed in this article are formulated in the context of EFTs
defined on a classical background spacetime @xmath , where the number of
leaves/petals @xmath is fixed by the definition of the model, even in
presence of gravity. Possibly, @xmath becomes a dynamical quantity in a
theory of Planckian gravity involving a quantum spacetime. The situation
is somewhat similar to other beyond SM scenarii in the literature to
solve the hierarchy problem:

-   The model of Ref. [ 251 ] where @xmath spacelike dimension are
    compactified on a compact hyperbolic manifold of genus @xmath (the
    number of holes) and of volume @xmath . A compact hyperbolic
    manifold has two length scales: a curvature radius @xmath and a
    linear size @xmath . For @xmath , we have

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (6.93)
      -- -------- -- --------

    For @xmath , @xmath TeV, and @xmath , the formula gives @xmath so
    the number of holes is very large: @xmath .

-   The model of Refs. [ 237 , 424 ] , where @xmath spacelike extra
    dimensions are stabilized by a large number @xmath of branes with
    inter-brane forces, forming a brane crystal.

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (6.94)
      -- -------- -- --------

    for @xmath TeV, where @xmath is a parameter which controls the
    inter-brane distance. One should have @xmath in order to be in the
    regime where general relativity is valid and also to avoid a new
    fine tuning.

-   The model proposed by G.R. Dvali et al. in Refs. [ 154 , 155 , 425 ,
    426 , 427 , 428 , 429 ] involving a large number @xmath of particle
    species. This is a 4D model where the scale at which gravity becomes
    strongly coupled @xmath is given by

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (6.95)
      -- -------- -- --------

    This effect can be understood perturbatively as being the result of
    the radiative corrections of @xmath particle species to the graviton
    propagator. Then, @xmath TeV for @xmath . From Eqs. ( 6.92 ) and (
    6.95 ) it is a curious coincidence that @xmath when @xmath . One can
    make the same remarks for the number of branes in the brane crystal
    model when @xmath in Eq. ( 6.94 ), which means that the inter-brane
    distance is the fundamental Planck length.

-   The model of @xmath -naturalness proposed by N. Arkani-Hamed et al.
    in Ref. [ 430 ] . There are @xmath SM-like sectors which are
    mutually non-interacting. The Higgs mass parameter squared @xmath
    takes values between @xmath and @xmath , where @xmath is the scale
    common to the @xmath sectors that cuts the quadratic divergences to
    @xmath . Then, for a wide range of @xmath distributions, one expects
    that some sectors are accidentally tuned at the @xmath level, such
    that @xmath . The sector with the smallest non-zero Vacuum
    Expectation Value (VEV) is identified with our sector. When @xmath ,
    @xmath has thus to be large in order to have @xmath GeV. There is no
    need for new physics at the TeV scale!

The only quantity which needs to be dynamically stabilized is the leaf
(petal) length (circumference) @xmath , otherwise the radion, i.e. the
scalar field which represents the fluctuations of @xmath , remains
massless and conflicts with the null result from the search for a new
force of infinite range. Moreover, if only the graviton propagates into
the extra dimension, the bosonic quantum loops are known to make the
extra dimension unstable, which shrinks to a point [ 431 , 432 ] . On
the one hand, if @xmath , the corrections of Planckian gravity can
safely be neglected (EFT regime), and it is important to add a field
theoretical mechanism to the model to stabilize @xmath . On the other
hand, if @xmath , one expects @xmath corrections from Planckian gravity,
and one needs a complete theory of gravity to formulate the model and to
address its stabilization.

In the EFT regime, we have supposed the existence of an exact global
@xmath symmetry of the @xmath -star/rose, which is not realistic since
gravity is supposed to break global symmetries (see Section 6.7 for a
discussion on the impact on the resolution of the gauge hierarchy
problem). This is reminiscent of the 5D models with a Universal Extra
Dimension (UED) compactified on an interval symmetric under an exact
@xmath reflection with respect to its midpoint [ 209 ] . One can also
mention the model of Ref. [ 433 ] where two identical slices of AdS
@xmath are glued to a common UV-brane. The extra dimension of these
models can be stabilized by the dynamics of additonal bulk fields at the
quantum level by a balance between the contribution of bosonic and
fermionic loops [ 434 ] , or at the classical level by a potential for a
scalar field as in the Goldberger-Wise mechanism originally proposed for
the RS1 model [ 260 , 435 , 261 ] . In Ref. [ 351 ] , it is shown how to
stabilize a @xmath -star @xmath with the potential of a different scalar
field in each leaf, these @xmath scalar fields are related by the @xmath
symmetry. One can apply these mechanisms here with @xmath large. Other
stabilization mechanisms were proposed in Ref. [ 237 ] , in particular
it is possible to stabilize an extra dimension compactified on a circle
with the help of a complex scalar field with a topologically conserved
winding number. As it is possible to stabilize one petal by this
mechanism, one can repeat it with a different scalar field in each petal
of the @xmath -rose @xmath . Both for @xmath and @xmath , the @xmath
scalar fields meet only at the junction @xmath and we assume that they
interact only through gravity, like the @xmath copies of the SM in Ref.
[ 155 , 428 ] . Therefore, the picture reduces to stabilize @xmath
independent leaves/petals, which is a simplified version of the
mechanism in Ref. [ 351 ] . If the bulk fields in all leaves/petals have
an exact global @xmath symmetry, the geometrical @xmath symmetry is
preserved (see Section 6.7 for a discussion when it is not the case).

##### 6.5.2 Embedding the Standard Model Fields

Up to this subsection we did not mention how we embed the SM fields into
the proposed spacetime geometries. On the one hand, in the ADD-like
models in the literature, the SM fields must be localized on a 3-brane,
while gravity and possibly other exotic fields propagate in the bulk [
34 , 35 , 36 , 38 , 237 , 303 , 302 ] . On the other hand, in the
RS1-like models, one can allow some or all SM fields to propagate in the
extra dimension [ 41 , 42 , 43 , 44 , 45 , 46 , 436 , 437 , 438 ] . One
reason is that the KK scale in the ADD and RS1 models are respectively
below and above the TeV scale. The absence of discovery of low mass KK
excitations for the SM particles rules out an ADD model with bulk SM
fields. In the case of an ADD model with a star extra dimension, where
it is possible to embed a chiral model at the zero mode level, one can
naively think that it allows the SM fields to propagate in the bulk with
a KK mass scale @xmath TeV. However, one should also consider the
magnitude of the couplings of the zero mode gauge bosons. In the RS1
model with a 5D gauge field, the 5D gauge coupling @xmath (of mass
dimension @xmath ) is related to the zero mode gauge coupling @xmath by
the relation [ 42 ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.96)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the proper length of the warped extra dimension. @xmath
is not large compared to the 5D Planck length @xmath , so for a natural
gauge coupling

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.97)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is the good magnitude for a SM gauge coupling. However, in the ADD
model with a @xmath D gauge field, the higher dimensional gauge coupling
@xmath (of mass dimension @xmath ) is related to the zero mode gauge
coupling @xmath by the relation [ 225 ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.98)
  -- -------- -- --------

With a natural value for the gauge coupling

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.99)
  -- -------- -- --------

one obtains with Eq. ( 6.2 ):

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.100)
  -- -------- -- ---------

so @xmath is a very tiny coupling and cannot be identified with a SM
gauge coupling. This result depends only on the volume of the
compactified space, i.e. on the hierarchy between the 4D and @xmath D
Planck scales. It is still valid for the geometries considered in this
article, where @xmath . Therefore, the gauge coupling argument is much
stronger than the one of the KK mass scale to rule out bulk SM fields:
it applies to every compactified geometry one can imagine to realize an
ADD model.

After this discussion, it is clear that in the case of a star/rose extra
dimension with a large @xmath , even if @xmath TeV, the SM fields must
be localized on a 3-brane, like in the other ADD models in the
literature. Consider a 5D EFT with a brane. The cut-off in the bulk and
the 3-brane thickness are noted @xmath and @xmath respectively. There
are two cases [ 382 ] :

-   The fat brane ( @xmath ): its microscopic description is in the
    range of validity of the 5D EFT. Usually, a fat brane is a
    topological defect [ 191 , 192 ] and it is necessary to provide a
    field theoretical mechanism to trap the zero modes of 5D fields of
    various spins in the neighborhood of the brane [ 193 , 194 , 198 ,
    439 , 199 ] . The topological defects are the first prototypes of
    braneworlds in the literature and are chosen by ADD to trap the SM
    fields in their first article on LEDs [ 34 ] . It is also possible
    to localize the zero modes of 5D fields towards orbifold fixed
    points or spacetime boundaries with large 5D masses of
    brane-localized kinetic terms [ 440 , 439 , 441 ] . Irrespectively
    of the trapping mechanism of the fat brane, we speak about
    quasi-localized 5D fields.

-   The thin brane ( @xmath ): its microscopic description is outside
    the range of validity of the 5D EFT. A thin brane is described in
    the EFT by an infinitely thin hypersurface where 4D fields are
    strictly localized [ 231 , 225 , 441 ] . The trapping mechanism of
    the fields is relegated to the UV completion. This case became
    popular when it was relalized that 4D fields can live in the
    worldvolume of solitonic objects in some UV completions, like
    D-brane stacks in superstring theories where matter fields are
    described by open strings attached to them [ 442 , 443 , 186 ] . In
    EFTs, orbifold fixed points, spacetime boundaries or metric graph
    vertices are perfect candidates for thin branes. One can also obtain
    a thin brane by integrating out the width of a fat brane: one gets
    an EFT with a cut-off equal to the the inverse of the brane width,
    and 4D fields (the zero modes of the quasi-localized 5D fields of
    the UV completion) strictly localized on the thin brane (depending
    on the quasi-localization mechanism, the excited KK-modes do not
    necessarily decouple [ 441 ] ). Quickly, after the theoretical
    discovery of D-branes, physicists explored the new possibilities
    offered by thin branes [ 35 , 36 , 40 , 208 , 444 , 445 , 446 , 157
    ] .

For the models studied in this article, if one considers quasi-localized
5D SM fields on the @xmath -branes (fat branes), one has a problem.
Indeed, consider the @xmath -star @xmath , the fat brane has a thickness
@xmath extended into each leaf, so a zero mode gauge coupling @xmath is
related to the 5D gauge coupling @xmath as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.101)
  -- -------- -- ---------

similar to Eqs. ( 6.96 )-( 6.98 ). As @xmath is large, the model will
suffer from the same problem as for bulk SM fields in ADD models: the
gauge couplings of the zero modes are too suppressed to match the values
measured in experiments. The same problem arises with a fat @xmath
-brane in the case of the @xmath -rose @xmath . However, there is no
problem with quasi-localized SM fields on a fat @xmath -brane where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.102)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Therefore, we will consider only 4D SM fields localized on thin @xmath
-branes ⁵ ⁵ 5 See Ref. [ 441 ] for a recent discussion on the
consistency of a 5D EFT coupled to gravity with 4D fields strictly
localized on a 3-brane. Only the argument in Subsection 5.1 in Ref. [
441 ] applies to our model (see discussion in Appendix B.5 ). : the SM
gauge fields do not arise from the limit of quasi-localized 5D fields
which propagate into the leaves/petals, so the gauge couplings are not
suppressed by @xmath . Moreover, spacetime symmetries allow us to
localize 4D degrees of freedom exactly on the 3-branes located at the
vertices. However, there are various arguments that gravity implies the
existence of a minimal length scale in Nature of the order of the
fundamental Planck length (see Ref. [ 447 ] for a review). Therefore, in
a UV completion including gravity, the singular behavior the singular
feature of the junction should be regularized. In Ref. [ 448 ] , it is
shown that the spectrum of a quantum graph can arise in the thin limit
of a “graph-like manifold”. Therefore, the metric graph structure of our
extra dimension could emerge from a UV completion where the internal
space is a @xmath D graph-like manifold with @xmath transverse
dimensions of 5D Planck size, and where the vertex at the junction is
regularized [ 350 ] . After integrating out these transverse dimensions,
one is left with only one extra dimension compactified on a metric
graph. Concerning the UV origin of the brane-localized 4D SM fields, we
adopt a bottom-up approach where we do not assume a specific UV
completion. We stress that it is crucial that it does not rely on
quasi-localized higher-dimensional fields propagating into the
leaves/petals. In fact, one can imagine a UV-completion with a @xmath D
graph-like manifold and a fat @xmath -brane made of @xmath D
quasi-localized fields. However, the wave functions of the zero modes
must be highly peaked inside the protrusion [ 398 ] at the vertex @xmath
, i.e. they must decrease quickly inside the vertex protrusion such that
they are suppressed at least by @xmath at the entrance of a leaf/petal
to avoid the problem of Eq. ( 6.101 ). One can also imagine another
UV-completion: if it is possible to generate graph-like 6D manifolds in
superstring theories, the 4D SM fields may live in the worldvolume of a
D-brane stack at the regularized @xmath vertex.

It is interesting to notice that if one localizes the SM fields on the
@xmath -branes of a star extra dimension, one has @xmath copies of the
SM fields, if one does not want to break explicitly the @xmath symmetry
of @xmath . Then, if one softly breaks this symmetry only by the mass
term of the Higgs field, one can hope to be able to realize the @xmath
-naturalness idea proposed in Ref. [ 430 ] , with the reheaton (the
field which populates the Universe after inflation by decaying into SM
particles and possibly other fields) as a bulk field. The Higgs mass
parameter is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.103)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where a first @xmath factor comes from the effect of the @xmath SM
fields copies coupled to gravity (c.f. ( 6.95 )), and a second one comes
from the uniform distribution of the parameters @xmath discussed in Ref.
[ 430 ] . Although there are @xmath copies of the SM fields, Ref. [ 430
] gives two explicit models where the reheaton decays preferencially
into our SM sector, which allows a large number of SM sectors subject to
the constraints from cosmology. Applied to our setup, it is thus
possible to have a higher @xmath with no new physics at the TeV scale,
which could explain the null result from the search for beyond SM
particles at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC, @xmath TeV). This idea
needs to be investigated deeper in the future. Here, we will consider
only one copy of the SM fields, and localize them on the @xmath -brane.
The gauge hierarchy is generated by the volume of the compactified extra
dimension, with strongly coupled quantum gravity effects accessible to
the LHC ( @xmath TeV) or a future hadronic collider.

##### 6.5.3 Phenomenology

###### Kaluza-Klein Gravitons

In an ADD model, gravity and possibly other exotic fields propagate into
the extra dimensions. It is crucial for our proposition to have an idea
of the implication of gravitons propagating into the bulk. The KK
dimensional reduction of a 5D graviton [ 225 ] leads to a tower of
KK-gravitons with a zero mode, and one massless graviscalar (the
radion). A massless graviphoton is also present if there is no boundary
for the extra dimension (present for the @xmath -rose @xmath and absent
for the @xmath -star @xmath ). As the existence of KK-gravitons can have
important phenomenological effects, one has to extract their KK mass
spectrum and their couplings to the SM fields. By a suitable gauge
choice, the Euler-Lagrange equations for a 5D massless graviton reduce
to Klein-Gordon equations. One can thus study a 5D massless real scalar
field coupled minimaly to the energy momentum tensor of the SM to obtain
the KK mass spectrum and the couplings of spinless KK-gravitons. This 5D
spinless graviton @xmath couples to the energy momentum sources through
the effective metric:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.104)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The metric @xmath and thus @xmath have to be continuous at the junction.
We focus on the compactification on @xmath . The case of @xmath is very
similar. The coupling of the 5D spinless graviton to the energy momentum
tensor

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.105)
  -- -------- -- ---------

of the 4D SM fields (of action @xmath ) localized on the @xmath -brane
is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.106)
  -- -------- -- ---------

One can use the KK decomposition of Subsection 6.3.2 with @xmath and
treat the brane-localized interactions with the SM fields as a
perturbation. The zero mode is identified with the 4D massless graviton.
We note @xmath the number of KK-modes which couple to the SM fields
below the cut-off @xmath . Only the KK-gravitons with a wave function
which does not vanish on the @xmath -brane couple to the SM fields. The
interaction term ( 6.106 ) gives

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.107)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.108)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The KK modes whose wave functions do not vanish at @xmath couple
individually to the energy momentum tensor of the SM with a coupling
suppressed by @xmath : they are thus very feebly coupled, and the
probability @xmath to emit a single KK-graviton is proportional to its
coupling squared:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.109)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the energy of matter originating from @xmath in Eq. (
6.107 ). We compare two benchmark scenarii with @xmath TeV:

###### Benchmark scenario #1 – @xmath.

This case is the traditional situation of ADD models in the literature
with only one extra dimension. From Eq. ( 6.92 ), we have @xmath eV,
which is excluded by the success of 4D gravitational Newton’s law at the
scale of the solar system. Eqs. ( 6.92 ) and ( 6.108 ) give

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.110)
  -- -------- -- ---------

so we have a large number of KK-gravitons below the cut-off. At
colliders with a center of mass energy which reaches @xmath , the
probability to produce one out of @xmath gravitons becomes then

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.111)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where we used Eqs. ( 6.92 ) , ( 6.108 ) and ( 6.109 ). This last result
is also valid in more realistic models with more than one extra
dimension which can pass with success the submillimeter tests of 4D
gravitational Newton’s law. The KK tower can thus be probed and
constrained at the LHC ( @xmath TeV), c.f. Ref. [ 386 ] .

###### Benchmark scenario #2 – @xmath.

In this case, the large volume in Eq. ( 6.92 ) is generated by a large
@xmath and @xmath GeV. Thus there are few KK modes which couple to the
SM fields: @xmath from Eq. ( 6.108 ), and @xmath at the LHC. So the KK
tower is completely invisible in current experiments. The
compactification on @xmath can thus circumvent the current LHC
constraints on the KK-gravitons of traditionnal ADD models.

However, these results follow from the zero-thickness brane hypothesis.
How are they modified by a brane width in the UV completion? Indeed, we
have already discussed that one expects that the singular behavior of
the junction is soften in a UV-completion including gravity. After
integrating out the UV degrees of freedom, one is left with an effective
brane form factor as in Ref. [ 449 ] to modelize the brane width ⁶ ⁶ 6
We stress that this effective brane form factor has nothing to do with
the wave function of the zero mode of quasi-localized 5D fields on the
@xmath -brane but is related to the UV description of the brane. We have
already discussed that the brane-localized SM fields are 4D degrees of
freedom in the EFT. . It is a function @xmath rapidly decreasing over a
distance @xmath and normalized such that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.112)
  -- -------- -- ---------

One can perform a moment expansion of @xmath , where @xmath is an
intermediate function defined for convenience, such that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.113)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.114)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The action describing the interaction between the spinless graviton and
the SM fields is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (6.115)
  -- -------- -- ---------

One can naively think that the large number of KK-gravitons which do not
couple to the SM fields through the operator ( 6.106 ) will have
non-vanishing couplings to the SM via the higher-dimensional operators.
Then, one expects that @xmath is less suppressed than in Eq. ( 6.109 ).
However, this is not the case. Indeed, by using the equations for the
wave functions ( 6.45 ), one can show that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.116)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Therefore, for @xmath even, again only the tower @xmath contributes,
with an extra suppression factor @xmath . For @xmath odd, the
Neumann-Kirchhoff junction conditions ( 6.41 ) imply that these
operators vanish. We conclude that even when we take into account the
brane width in the UV, the KK-graviton towers are still invisible at the
LHC ( @xmath TeV). The KK-gravitons with @xmath constitute a hidden
sector.

One notices also that this important feature of the @xmath -star
compactification is valid only if the SM fields are localized on the
@xmath -brane. If one localizes them on one of the @xmath -branes
instead, they couple also to the KK-gravitons whose wave functions
vanish at the @xmath -brane. One can easily show that this crucial
difference implies that @xmath is of the same form as in Eq. ( 6.111 ),
as in the case of standard ADD models, and one will be able to constrain
this scenario at the LHC.

###### Ultraviolet Gravitational Objects

Black holes are expected to appear near the cut-off scale @xmath , when
the coupling to 5D gravitons becomes non-perturbative. However, in the
case of the benchmark scenario #2, we saw that the coupling of the
energy-momentum tensor of the SM to the linear superposition of
KK-gravitons is suppressed by @xmath instead of @xmath , so one expects
that the couplings of the brane-localized SM fields to the tower of
KK-gravitons remains perturbative well above @xmath , questioning the
possibility of producing black holes in trans-Planckian collisions of SM
particles. However, once the linear superposition of KK-gravitons with a
trans-Planckian energy leaves the @xmath -brane, where it was
perturbatively produced through SM fields in a trans-Planckian
collision, it will interact with all the KK-gravitons, including those
whose wave functions vanish on the @xmath -brane. This last process is
non-perturbative above @xmath and will produce a black hole. Near this
threshold, the black holes are dominated by quantum corrections, we
speak about Quantum Black Holes (QBHs) [ 450 , 451 , 452 , 453 , 278 ,
279 , 454 , 411 , 455 , 456 , 457 , 458 , 459 , 460 ] which need a
complete theory of quantum gravity to be described. Besides, the
lightest QBH, the Planckion [ 414 , 415 ] , is the last stage of the
evaporation of a semi-classical black hole by Hawking radiation. In some
models, this black hole remnant [ 410 , 411 , 412 , 413 ] is stable and
one can speculate that it can constitute a part of dark matter [ 461 ,
411 , 462 ] . There are also a large number of KK-gravitons below the
TeV scale whose wave functions vanish on the @xmath -brane, where the SM
fields are localized (c.f. Subsection 6.3.2 ): these KK-gravitons
interact only with gravity in the bulk, and constitute a natural hidden
sector which could be populated by black hole evaporation during the
early Universe.

#### 6.6 Toy Model of Small Dirac Neutrino Masses

##### 6.6.1 Zero Mode Approximation

It is known from Refs. [ 37 , 38 , 39 ] that if the left-handed
neutrinos, localized on the SM brane, interact with gauge singlet
neutrinos, propagating in the bulk in the form of an internal torus
@xmath of radius @xmath and large volume @xmath , one can get small
Dirac masses for the neutrinos. With one left-handed neutrino and one
gauge singlet neutrino (without BLKTs), the Dirac mass is [ 38 ] :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.117)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the SM Higgs field VEV, and @xmath is the @xmath D
Yukawa coupling of mass dimension @xmath . Eq. ( 6.117 ) is valid if one
can use the zero mode approximation, i.e. neglect the mixing between the
zero mode and the KK-excitations of the bulk gauge singlet neutrino:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.118)
  -- -------- -- ---------

For a natural value

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.119)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath , one has, with Eq. ( 6.2 ),

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.120)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which is a good order of magnitude for the neutrino masses.

We want to see if it is possible to build such a model for a LED
compactified on the metric graph @xmath . For the compactification on a
star/rose graph, one takes a 4D left-handed neutrino @xmath of mass
dimension 3/2 localized on the @xmath -brane, and a 5D gauge singlet
neutrino @xmath of mass dimension 2 propagating into the bulk. The
action of the model is

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (6.121)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

The free action @xmath is given by Eq. ( 6.68 ), and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.122)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The brane-localized mass term is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.123)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath can be taken real since a phase shift of the Yukawa
coupling can be compensated by a phase shift of the field @xmath . We
have imposed that the leptonic number @xmath is conserved, so @xmath is
a symmetry of the model: in this way, bulk and brane-localized Majorana
mass terms for the neutrino fields are not allowed. We have also assumed
the absence of a bulk Dirac mass term to simplify the discussion. By
adopting a perturbative approach, where @xmath is treated as a
perturbation, one can perform the KK dimensional reduction of Section
6.4 . In the regime where we can use the zero mode approximation, i.e.
when

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.124)
  -- -------- -- ---------

we get a mass term for the zero mode neutrino:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.125)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.126)
  -- -------- -- ---------

For a natural value

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.127)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath , one has, from Eqs. ( 6.92 ), ( 6.117 ) and ( 6.126 ),

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.128)
  -- -------- -- ---------

As @xmath for the benchmark scenario #2, the zero mode approximation is
thus justified.

However, within the perturbative approach, we find that the @xmath
left-handed zero modes in Section 6.4 for the @xmath -rose @xmath do not
get masses from the brane-localized mass term ( 6.123 ). They remain
massless and do not mix with the left-handed neutrino localized on the
@xmath -brane: they are sterile neutrinos which do not participate in
neutrino oscillations. However, they are coupled to gravity and may have
an impact on the cosmological history. As our model requires a large
@xmath , it appears to be ruled out by cosmological constraints which
are sensible to the number of light fermionic degrees of freedom. Even
with a brane-localized reheaton, which does not couple to the modes with
discontinuous wave functions like the @xmath left-handed zero modes,
mini-black hole evaporation should produce them in the early Universe. A
solution could be to add a new ingredient to the model to give a mass to
these @xmath zero modes. A priori, our toy model is thus interesting
only for the compactification on a star graph.

##### 6.6.2 Exact Treatment

###### Euler-Lagrange Equations & Junction/Boundary Conditions

In this subsection, we take the effect of the brane-localized mass term
@xmath on the KK mass spectrum exactly into account with the 5D method
of Ref. [ 1 , 409 ] . From Hamilton’s principle applied to the action
@xmath ( 6.121 ), we get the Euler-Lagrange equations: Eq. ( 6.72 ) and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.129)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.130)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We get also a Kirchhoff junction condition for the left-handed field on
the @xmath -brane:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.131)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and Dirichlet boundary conditions ( 6.73 ) for the left-handed field on
the @xmath -branes.

###### Separation of Variables

We want to solve the field equations by separation of variables and sum
over all linearly independant solutions. We thus write the KK
decomposition ( 6.76 ) and expand @xmath as a linear superposition of
the left-handed KK modes which are mass eigenstates:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.132)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with @xmath . Indeed, the brane-localized mass term induces a mixing
between the field @xmath and the KK modes of @xmath obtained in Section
6.4 . Here, we expand the fields @xmath and @xmath in the same KK basis
spanned by the @xmath ’s (the basis of the mass eigenstates). The reader
can follow the discussion between Eqs. ( 6.76 ) and ( 6.79 ), we will
use the same notations but we stress that, in Section 6.4 , @xmath is an
element of the KK basis without brane-localized mass term but here it is
an element of the KK basis including the effect of the brane-localized
mass term. Besides, the orthonormalization conditions ( 6.79 ) for the
functions @xmath are replaced by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.133)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The conditions on the 5D fields @xmath become conditions on the KK wave
functions @xmath by using Eq. ( 6.76 ). There is a new Kirchhoff
junction condition on the @xmath -brane from Eq. ( 6.131 ):

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.134)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Moreover, Eq. ( 6.129 ), with Eqs. ( 6.77 ), ( 6.76 ) and ( 6.132 ),
gives:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.135)
  -- -------- -- ---------

For @xmath , Eqs. ( 6.134 ) and ( 6.135 ) together lead to:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.136)
  -- -------- -- ---------

###### Kaluza-Klein Mode Analysis on the Star Graph

We give here only the KK mode analysis of the @xmath -star @xmath ,
since the @xmath -rose @xmath compactification should be incompatible
with cosmology without additional assumptions. For completeness, we give
the KK-mode analysis on @xmath in Appendix B.6 .

There are no zero modes ( @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ) with @xmath for
@xmath . Let us look at massive KK modes ( @xmath ). The coupled first
order differential equations ( 6.78 ) can be decoupled into second order
ones: Eq. ( 6.82 ). The KK wave functions @xmath are still continuous
across the junction. We will use the same method as in Subsections 6.3.2
and 6.4.2 . We give the results in what follows.

###### First case: @xmath

The results are identical to the ones in Subsection 6.4.2 , Paragraph
“First case: @xmath ” of a) p. 6.4.2 . This condition gives the mass
spectrum ( 6.83 ) which defines the KK tower @xmath . We have @xmath
from Eq. ( 6.135 ) so the left-handed modes do not mix with @xmath :
they are completely sterile, interact only with gravity, and are thus
part of the hidden sector of the model.

###### Second case: @xmath

The KK mass spectrum is given by the transcendental equation:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.137)
  -- -------- -- ---------

whose solutions @xmath define the KK tower @xmath and are not degenerate
( @xmath ). We have @xmath from Eq. ( 6.135 ) so the left-handed modes
mix with @xmath . The lightest mode @xmath is identified with the
neutrino we observe in Nature ⁷ ⁷ 7 Of course, we observe three
generations of neutrinos in Nature and here we consider a toy model with
only one generation. . In the decoupling limit @xmath , the mass of this
mode is given by Eq. ( 6.126 ) in the zero mode approximation. Indeed,
in this limit the excited KK modes decouple and their mixing with the
lightest massive mode @xmath goes to zero. The KK wave functions are

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.138)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the @xmath ’s are discontinuous across the @xmath -brane (except
for @xmath , the interval, where they are taken continuous). This
discontinuity is sourced by the brane-localized interaction.

In a nutshell, the massive KK modes have still a mass gap of order
@xmath . Only the KK modes, whose right-handed Weyl spinors have
non-vanishing wave functions at the junction without brane-localized
Yukawa couplings (c.f. Subsection 6.4.2 ), are affected by the addition
of the brane-localized SM left-handed neutrino @xmath and Higgs field.
The KK masses are shifted and the wave functions of the left-handed Weyl
spinors become discontinuous at the junction ⁸ ⁸ 8 In the literature, it
is known that an interaction localized on a brane away from a boundary
or at a fixed point of the orbifolds @xmath and @xmath implies a
discontinuity for a 5D fermion field [ 370 , 50 , 53 , 55 , 58 , 59 , 49
] . . This result is easy to understand when the Yukawa interaction with
the VEV of the Higgs field is treated as a perturbation: only
non-vanishing wave functions at the junction in Subsection 6.4.2 will
have non-vanishing matrix elements. These modes mix with the SM
left-handed neutrino. The other ones are completely sterile and interact
only through gravity.

#### 6.7 Conclusion & Perspectives

In this work, we have studied the possibily of compactifying a large
spacelike extra dimension on a star/rose graph with identical
leaves/petals. In Section 6.2 , we have adapted Kurasov’s distribution
theory to a star/rose graph. In this way, we have defined a rigorous
framework to build a field theory on these geometries.

In Sections 6.3 and 6.4 , we have worked out the KK decomposition of a
Klein-Gordon and Dirac field respectively. Our main contributions,
compared to the previous articles [ 69 , 407 ] , are discussions
concerning the different possibilities for the continuity of the fields
at the junction and the impact on the KK-spectrum. In particular, we
have pointed out the case of an airtight brane (when the off-shell
fields are allowed to be discontinuous), which is equivalent to @xmath
disconnected bonds. Moreover, we have studied for the first time the
KK-modes of a massless 5D Dirac fermion propagating into the whole
star/rose graph. We have also discussed the chirality of the zero modes.
For both bosonic and fermionic massless fields, the KK scale is given by
the inverse of the leaf/petal length/circumference.

One can realize a large compactified volume with a high KK scale for a
large number of small leaves/petals. This possibility has been
investigated in Section 6.5 in order to lower the gravity scale to the
TeV scale and solve the gauge hierarchy problem under the hypothesis of
an exact global @xmath symmetry. Moreover, we have shown that if the SM
fields are localized on the 3-brane at the junction of the star/rose
graph, they couple only to few modes of the whole tower of KK-gravitons,
even when a UV brane thickness is taken into account. The couplings of
the SM fields to this KK tower are suppressed by the large 4D Planck
scale instead of the 5D one at the TeV scale: the KK-gravitons are thus
completely invisible at the LHC ( @xmath TeV). This result is in sharp
contrast to standard ADD models in the literature with compactification
on a torus or its orbifolds, where the SM fields couple to the whole
tower of KK-gravitons, which implies couplings suppressed only by the 5D
Planck scale (near a TeV) which one can constrain at the LHC.

Besides KK-gravitons, our proposition can still be probed at hadronic
colliders through the search for strongly coupled phenomena induced by
gravity like QBHs at the LHC ( @xmath TeV) or semi-classical black holes
at the Future Circular Collider proton-proton (FCC pp, @xmath TeV). The
absence of a theory of Planckian gravity renders difficult to make
precise predictions concerning the production and decay of QBHs or other
exotic states near the Planck scale. It is thus delicate to translate
the LHC data ( @xmath TeV) into constraints on the 5D Planck scale of
our model and to estimate the degree of fine tuning which remains to
accomodate an EW scale at 100 GeV.

Finally, in Section 6.6 we have proposed to realize in our scenario a
toy model of small Dirac neutrino masses. For that purpose, we have
considered only one generation of neutrinos coupled to one gauge singlet
fermion in the bulk. The large compactified volume suppresses the 5D
Yukawa coupling of order unity, and we have been able to reproduce the
good order of magnitude for the mass of the neutrinos, with a model
which accomodates also a 5D Planck scale at the TeV scale. This kind of
model was discussed previously only with a toroidal/orbifold
compactification, and the adaptation to a star/rose graph is new. The
model is realistic only for the compactification on a star graph since
the rose graph predicts a large number of massless left-handed sterile
neutrinos incompatible with cosmology. Moreover, we have found that our
models have a hidden sector consisting in secluded KK-gravitons and
sterile KK-neutrinos possibly populated during the early Universe by the
decays of mini-black holes in the bulk. The Planckion could also be a
candidate to dark matter.

Our effective model (as well as the traditionnal UED models) has a
global @xmath symmetry which acts on the geometry. One of the Swampland
conjectures is the absence of global symmetries in a complete theory of
quantum gravity (see Refs. [ 268 , 269 ] for reviews on the Swampland
program). If true, there is no global @xmath symmetry and one has a
different leaf/petal size @xmath for each @xmath . One can define the
average of the leaf/petal size as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.139)
  -- -------- -- ---------

such that Eq. ( 6.92 ) is still valid but with @xmath . The mass
spectrum must be studied numerically. In general, the mass scale of the
lightest KK-mode is given by the inverse of the largest @xmath . If the
@xmath ’s are incommensurate (i.e. @xmath ), the KK-spectrum is chaotic
[ 463 , 464 , 465 , 466 , 467 , 468 , 350 ] . Moreover, there are more
KK-modes below the cut-off @xmath which couple to the @xmath -brane for
different @xmath ’s: @xmath is thus less suppressed than for identical
@xmath ’s such that one is in an intermediate situation between the
benchmark scenarii #1 and #2. If the @xmath ’s are incommensurate, there
are no KK modes whose wavefunctions vanish at the @xmath -brane and the
KK-spectrum is chaotic.

In a realistic model including gravitationnal effects, instead of an
exact global @xmath symmetry, one should consider a geometry with an
approximate one. In case of GW mechanisms within each leaf, the @xmath
’s would depend on the mass parameter for the GW scalar field within
each leaf. Identical leaf lengths (exact @xmath symmetry) corresponds to
@xmath symmetric mass parameters within all leafs. The question is then
in how far quantum gravity effects affect classically @xmath symmetric
mass parameters. If these modifications remain within @xmath for all
leafs, i.e. the effects of gravity can be considered as a perturbation
of the geometry with an exact @xmath symmetry, the hierarchy problem
could be considered as solved, with the common scale being given by
@xmath . On the other hand, if the modified leaf lengths follow a
statistical distribution (like a Gaussian) around a central value @xmath
, the hierarchy problem can be considered as solved only if this
distribution is extremely narrow such that the number of very light
KK-gravitons remains compatible with present constraints, see subsection
6.5.3 . In the absence of a concrete theory of quantum gravity it is
impossible to answer these questions. Therefore, the toy model of this
article with an exact global @xmath symmetry should not be considered as
a viable solution of the gauge hierarchy problem but as a scenario
within which (among others) a solution of the hierarchy problem may be
possible.

We also want to discuss some perspectives for future investigations. As
a follow-up of the present work, it would be important to study the
unitarity constraints on our models, since a low gravity scale is known
to need a UV completion at a scale lower than the higher-dimensional
Planck scale in standard ADD models with a toroidal compactification [
469 , 470 ] . It is also important to see how the mechanism to produce
small neutrino masses is influenced by adding bulk and brane-localized
Majorana mass terms, in the way of Ref. [ 37 ] . Moreover, strongly
coupled gravity at the TeV scale may generate dangerous brane-localized
higher-dimensional operators inducing proton decay, large Majorana
neutrino masses and Flavor Changing Neutral Currents (FCNCs) [ 35 ] .
Without knowledge of the UV completion, we cannot know if these
operators are naturally suppressed. If this is not the case, the natural
value of their Wilson coefficients are suppressed only by the TeV scale
and one has to add new ingredients to the scenarii to forbid them, like
gauging some global symmetries of the SM as the baryon and lepton
numbers [ 471 ] and other flavor symmetries [ 302 , 303 , 304 ] .

Beyond the motivations for the present work, we stress that the 5D
background geometries that we studied here can be used in general to
generate feebly coupled interactions. Indeed, the couplings of the whole
KK tower of a 5D field, coupled to SM fields localized at the junction
of the star/rose graph, are in general suppressed by the square root of
the compactified volume. One can easily imagine how it can be used to
build consistent models of axions and dark matter with order one 5D
couplings. Moreover, a 5D field has KK modes whose wave functions vanish
at the junction where the SM is localized: they are thus good candidates
for a hidden sector. The star graph compactification with a small number
of leaves can also be used to build models of 5D SM fields as the theory
is chiral at the level of zero modes for 5D fermions. Generating @xmath
fermion zero modes from only one 5D fermion propagating into a star/rose
graph with @xmath leaves/petals and an airtight brane is interesting
from the point of view of flavor physics. Moreover, it would be
interesting to see if one can implement a 5D supersymmetric field theory
or 5D supergravity on the star/rose background. In every scenario, it is
important to investigate different possibilities of field theoretical
mechanism to stabilize the leaf/petal length scale.

### Conclusion

In modern particle physics, the gauge and flavor hierarchies are one of
the main motivations for believing that new mass scales, at which new
degrees of freedom pop up, exist well above the TeV scale. This belief
motivates model building to stabilize the EW scale @xmath GeV against
radiative corrections. The paradigm of spacelike extra dimension offers
the possibility that all these new scales, including the gravity scale,
are in reality in the @xmath TeV range.

In the RS1 model, spacetime is a slice of AdS @xmath and the warp factor
redshifts the scale at which gravity becomes strongly coupled from the
4D Planck scale to the TeV scale on the IR-brane where the SM Higgs
boson is localized. If gauge bosons and fermions propagate into the
bulk, one can address the flavor hierarchy by quasi-localizing the
fermion zero modes along the warped extra dimension. In this picture, it
is important to understand the field theoretical treatment of 5D
fermions coupled to a Higgs field localized on a 3-brane, which is
treated in the literature with an unnecessary and incorrect brane
regularization procedure. This last point is at the heart of the first
part of this PhD thesis. We have shown that it is required to add BBTs
to the action for the 5D fermions in order to be able to employ natural
boundary conditions without overconstraining the system. These terms are
used for both free and interacting 5D fields. When the brane is a
boundary of the extra dimension, all 5D fields are continuous on this
brane and the BBTs must be added by hand from the start. Moreover, only
one of the two chiralities can have boundary localized kinetic and/or
interaction terms. However, when the Higgs field is localized on a brane
away from a boundary, the left or the right-handed field is
discontinuous across the brane. This jump generates BBTs at both sides
of the brane through the 5D kinetic term defined in distribution theory.
In this framework, only the field which is continuous across the brane
is allowed to have brane localized interactions with the Higgs field.
These results can be extended to any kind of brane localized kinetic or
interaction terms involving 5D fermions. They require to reexamine the
phenomenology of warped models with a brane localized Higgs field
coupled to 5D fermion and gauge fields when they were treated by the
brane-Higgs regularization as in previous studies.

In the ADD models, one adds @xmath LEDs compactified on a @xmath D torus
with a factorizable geometry. The large compactified volume dilutes
gravity which appears feebly coupled to an observer localized on a
3-brane. Nevertheless, gravity becomes strongly coupled at the TeV
scale. Within a UV completion in superstring/M-theory, one has @xmath ,
and the gauge hierarchy problem is reformulated as a geometrical
hierarchy problem: the compactification radii need to be stabilized at
large values compared to the @xmath D Planck length, which is difficult
to achieve in practice. In the second part of this PhD thesis, we have
proposed to compactify a single LED on a star/rose graph with a large
number of identical leaves/petals of length/circumference of @xmath ,
where the 5D Planck scale is of @xmath TeV (without a large geometrical
hierarchy to stabilize). The 4D SM fields are localized at the central
vertex of the star/rose graph. We predict a feebly coupled tower of
KK-gravitons invisible in current experiments with a KK scale of @xmath
. Our scenarii lead also to TeV scale strongly coupled gravitational
phenomena and to an infinite tower of trans-TeV semi-classical black
holes. If there is a stable black hole remnant after evaporation, the
Planckion, it could constitute a part of dark matter. Moreover, we
propose a toy model to generate light Dirac neutrinos, where the
right-handed neutrinos are KK modes of gauge singlet fermions
propagating in the extra dimension. In our models, a large number of
KK-gravitons and of sterile KK-neutrinos interact only with gravity and
consititute a dark sector. This part was also the opportunity to clarify
the field theory and KK decomposition of bosons and fermions propagating
into an extra dimension compactified on a metric graph. For that
purpose, we developped a distribution theory on these geometries. If the
brane is not airtight, the bosonic fields are continuous across the
vertices. For the fermions, the left and/or right-handed chirality must
be continuous across the vertices. Only the continuous field can have
brane localized kinetic and/or interaction terms at the vertices, which
generalizes the result of the first part.

Compactification of an extra dimension on metric graphs is an
interesting new area to build new 5D models. The traditional
compactifications on a circle, an interval and their orbifolds are the
smallest building blocks since one can glue them as we want in order to
get any metric graph. It would be interesting to explorate the various
possibilities that such new geometries allow in future works. Having KK
wave functions which vanish at the vertex where SM fields are localized
is a new portal for dark matter. Moreover, the compactification on a
rose graph with @xmath petals allows to have @xmath zero modes for one
chirality of the 5D field, and we have seen that a brane localized mass
term at the vertex gives a mass to the zero mode of opposite chirality.
It is thus tempting to imagine that one can generate the three
generations of SM fermions from only one 5D generation. In this
manuscript, we have sketched a model for small Dirac neutrino masses. It
is important to investigate the possibility of adding Majorana mass
terms and to take into account the mixings among the three generations
of neutrinos.

## Appendices

### Appendix A Conventions

We use the natural units where we have the reduced Planck constant
@xmath and the speed of light @xmath .

The flat metric is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

The 4D Dirac matrices (in the local Lorentz frame of each point of the
manifold) are taken in the Weyl representation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are the 3 Pauli matrices. We define @xmath in order to
symplify the notations.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

and thus a 4D Dirac spinor @xmath can be decompose in its chiral
components (see Ref. [ 379 ] ):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The spinor indices are raised and lowered with the antisymmetric symbol

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath and @xmath . Repeated indices contracted like

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

can be omitted for clarity.
We have also the 4D chirality operator

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

which defines the projectors on 4D chirality

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

such that for the 4D Dirac spinor @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

With our conventions, the 5D Dirac matrices are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

### Appendix B Supplement Material for 5D Models with Branes

#### b.1 Holography for Fermions

In this appendix, we recall the way of performing Hamilton’s principle
in a holographic context following Ref [ 66 ] , to show the effect of
the bilinear boundary terms. We want to describe a free fermion field
@xmath in a 5D bulk with the extra dimension compactified on an interval
@xmath . Usually, because of the AdS/CFT correspondence, the bulk is a
slice of AdS @xmath , but this is not essential for our discussion, so
we consider a flat extra dimension. The bulk part of the action is
similar to the one in Eq. ( 4.3 ),

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the holographic context, one has to choose a source field which has
to be fixed at one boundary, and allows the remaining degrees of freedom
to vary. One cannot fix simultaneously @xmath and @xmath on the brane at
@xmath because a 5D Lagrangian for a fermion contains only first order
derivatives. Here we choose @xmath as our source field,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

and @xmath is free to vary. Hamilton’s principle for each field leads to

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (B.3)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (B.4)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

@xmath , but @xmath is generic so the boundary variations at @xmath
vanish only if one adds a bilinear boundary term at @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

This bilinear boundary term at @xmath is thus essential to cancel the
brane variations in the holographic context. It is important to notice
that other brane terms (as brane kinetic terms for example) can be
localized at @xmath if they are functions of @xmath only ( @xmath so the
brane variations vanish). In the holographic approach, the value of the
field at @xmath is determined by the equations of motion for @xmath
after the bulk has been integrated out. The choice of @xmath as a source
field is equivalent to a Neumann boundary condition for it (and thus a
Dirichlet boundary condition for @xmath ). Brane localized terms for a
field are hence only consistent with a @xmath boundary condition. In the
same way, if @xmath is chosen as the source field ( @xmath is @xmath and
@xmath is @xmath ), the boundary variations vanish with a brane term as
in Eq. ( B.5 ) but with the opposite sign.

Since in the holographic approach the source fields are chosen at one
boundary so there is no similar motivation to introduce a bilinear
boundary term at @xmath . In the literature, the brane variations at
@xmath vanish by imposing by hand a Dirichlet boundary condition for
@xmath or @xmath at @xmath .

#### b.2 Note on the Continuity of the Fields on a Brane

A priori , a 5D field can be discontinuous across a brane. It is thus
important to investigate whether continuity is required by the
definition of the Lagrangian in order to know if one has to take
continuous or discontinuous variations of the field across the brane
when applying Hamilton’s principle. In order to deal with a
discontinuous field, it is convenient to use distribution theory. One
can associate a regular distributions @xmath to a 5D field ¹ ¹ 1 In
general, a 5D field is a sum of products of 4D fields with wave
functions along the extra dimension. @xmath . There are two cases to
distinguish for the brane position:

1) If the brane is at @xmath away from a boundary of the extra
dimension, the weak partial derivative with respect to @xmath is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the regular distribution associated to the partial
derivative @xmath . We distinguish two cases:

-   @xmath so the discontinuity implies non-vanishing brane localized
    terms proportional to @xmath from Eq. ( B.6 ). When one applies
    Hamilton’s principle, one has to take discontinuous field variations
    allowing for @xmath .

-   @xmath but @xmath so the term proportional to @xmath vanishes in
    Eq. ( B.6 ). One can define a continuous field @xmath such that
    @xmath and @xmath . According to distribution theory [ 373 , 372 ] ,
    @xmath and @xmath are associated to the same distribution @xmath
    since they are equal everywhere except on the hypersurface at @xmath
    . From the point of view of distribution theory, @xmath and @xmath
    belong to the same equivalence class so one can take a field @xmath
    continuous at @xmath from the beginning. In this case, when one
    applies Hamilton’s principle, the variations of the field @xmath are
    taken continous at @xmath too.

2) If the brane is the boundary at @xmath of the extra dimension, the
field @xmath can be discontinuous on this hypersurface: @xmath .
However, if we define the continuous field @xmath such that @xmath and
@xmath , it belongs to the same equivalence class as @xmath from the
point of vue of distribution theory, since the two fields are equal
everywhere except on the boundary at @xmath . As in the second case of
1), the weak partial derivative with respect to @xmath does not have a
singular term at @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

One can take a field @xmath continuous at @xmath as starting point. In
this case, when one applies Hamilton’s principle, the variations of the
field @xmath are taken continuous at @xmath too.

#### b.3 Hamilton’s Principle & Noether Theorem with Distributions

In this Appendix, we want to generalize Hamilton’s principle and
Noether’s theorem with the Lagrangian as a distribution. We have a 5D
field @xmath propagating into an extra dimension compactified on an
interval @xmath . We call @xmath , @xmath and @xmath the Lagrangians in
the bulk, on the boundary at @xmath and on the boundary at @xmath
respectively. The action is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

with the Lagrangian distribution

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , with the Heaviside distribution @xmath .

Hamilton’s principle gives:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (B.10)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where we have used the fact that the integral of the 4-divergence give a
surface term at the infinity which vanishes. The field variations @xmath
are test functions whose supports are included into @xmath so @xmath ,
and we get the 5D Euler-Lagrange equations with distributions:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let the field transform under an infinitesimal global continuous
symmetry:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

If the symmetry is internal, the Lagrangian is invariant:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

so

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (B.14)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

When the Euler-Lagrange equations ( B.11 ) are satisfied, the current

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (B.15)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

is conserved:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

and we recover Noether’s theorem.

#### b.4 Hamilton’s Principle for 5D Fields on an Interval

In this appendix, we formulate the Hamilton’s principle for a field
theory with an extra dimension compactified an interval @xmath . We
consider a set of complex fields @xmath . The bulk Lagrangian is @xmath
. In general, there are boundary localized terms so we add a brane
Lagrangian at @xmath , @xmath , and at @xmath , @xmath . The 5D action
is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Hamilton’s principle applied to @xmath , varying the fields @xmath ,
reads

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
                          
                          
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (B.18)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

In the third equality we use an integration by parts, dropping as usual
the 4-divergence which gives boundary terms at infinity. For generic
field variations, the action variations in the bulk and at the
boundaries vanish separately, giving the bulk Euler-Lagrange equations,

  -- -- -- --------
           (B.19)
  -- -- -- --------

and the brane variations,

  -- -- -- --------
           (B.20)
  -- -- -- --------

  -- -- -- --------
           (B.21)
  -- -- -- --------

On the one hand, if the field values at the boundaries are prescribed by
a constraint, then the brane variations are zero so Eqs. ( B.22 ) and (
B.23 ) are satisfied. On the other hand, for unconstrained fields at the
boundaries, the field variations have to be generic and Eqs. ( B.22 )
and ( B.23 ) imply the so-called natural boundary conditions,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### b.5 Ultraviolet Brane Thickness

In Ref. [ 441 ] , it is argued that a brane treated as an infinitely
thin hypersurface in an EFT coupled to gravity should have a thickness
in the UV completion. Indeed, if there is a minimal length scale in
Nature as argued in several approaches to quantize gravity, a brane
should have a thickness at least of the order of this minimal length. In
the EFT where the brane is treated as a hypersurface, the brane
thickness in the UV completion can manifest itself by the presence of
higher-dimensional operators such that the brane action is [ 441 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the coefficients @xmath vanish in the limit of an infinite Planck
scale. Ref. [ 441 ] claims that the fields localized on the brane must
be quasi-localized 5D fields (so they must have a @xmath -dependence) in
order to have non-vanishing higher-dimensional operators involving
derivatives of @xmath required by the UV completion. We find that this
argument can be easily circumvented if the Lagrangians @xmath involve
the 5D graviton field which depends on @xmath . Indeed, this is enough
to guarantee that the action of the products @xmath ( @xmath ) on the
test function @xmath are non-vanishing. In this case, the other
brane-localized fields can be 4D fields coupled to the 5D graviton
without any problem to UV complete the EFT with a theory involving a
brane thickness.

#### b.6 Kaluza-Klein Mode Analysis of a Neutrino Model on the Rose
Graph

This appendix refers to the model of Section 6.6 . We give the KK mode
analysis on the @xmath -rose @xmath of the exact treatment of Subsection
6.6.2 .

##### b.6.1 Zero Modes

We are looking for zero modes ( @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ) with @xmath
for which the first order differential equations ( 6.78 ) are decoupled.
For @xmath , there is no right-handed zero mode. However, we have @xmath
degenerate left-handed zero modes described by the wave functions of
Eq. ( 6.81 ): the theory is chiral at the level of the zero modes.
Therefore, the brane-localized mass term generates chirality in the rose
graph compactification by lifting the degeneracy between the right and
left-handed zero modes which exists in absence of brane-localized Yukawa
couplings (c.f. Subsection 6.4.2 ). Moreover, we have @xmath , which
means that the left-handed zero modes do not mix with the left-handed
neutrino localized on the @xmath -brane: they are sterile neutrinos
which do not participate in neutrino oscillations and they interact only
through gravity. As discussed previously, this scenario with large
@xmath should be ruled out by cosmological constraints on the number of
light fermion species.

##### b.6.2 Massive Modes

###### First case: @xmath

The results are identical to the ones in Subsection 6.4.2 , Paragraph
“First case: @xmath ” of b) p. 6.4.2 . By following this discussion, we
get two different mass spectra ( 6.87 ) and ( 6.89 ) which defines the
KK towers @xmath respectively. We have @xmath from Eq. ( 6.135 ) with
@xmath so the left-handed modes do not mix with @xmath : they are
completely sterile (hidden sector).

###### Second case: @xmath

The KK mass spectrum is given by the transcendental equation:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

whose solutions @xmath define the KK tower @xmath and are not degenerate
( @xmath ). We have @xmath from Eq. ( 6.135 ) so the left-handed modes
mix with @xmath . The lightest massive mode @xmath is identified with
the observed neutrino. In the decoupling limit @xmath , we recover that
the mass of this mode is given by Eq. ( 6.126 ) of the zero mode
approximation. The KK wave functions are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the @xmath ’s have a discontinuity across the @xmath -brane
sourced by the brane-localized interaction.

### Appendix C 4D Method with a Warped Extra Dimension

Unpublished work by Andrei Angelescu.

In this appendix, we calculate the fermionic mass spectrum and the
Yukawa couplings of the model in Section 5.1 by using the so-called 4D
method. The idea of this method is to treat the brane-localized Yukawa
interactions as perturbations. Thus, one solves the free Euler-Lagrange
equations to obtain the free fermionic KK wave functions, and then uses
these KK wave functions to calculate their overlaps with the brane
localized Higgs field, which in turn gives the fermionic mass and Yukawa
matrices in the interaction basis. To pass to the mass or physical
basis, the infinite mass matrix has to be diagonalized, and the Yukawa
matrix rotated to the mass basis. In the following, we describe this
calculation in detail.

The relevant part of the Lagrangian is the effective 4D mass Lagrangian,
given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

By choosing to work in the basis spanned by the 4D spinors @xmath and
@xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.2)
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.3)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

the mass matrix reads, in block matrix notation, as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The elements of the block matrices can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath ¹ ¹ 1 Throughout this section, we will not use the Einstein
summation convention. Sums over indices will always be explicit. go from
@xmath to @xmath , @xmath being the number of KK levels taken into
account (which shall be sent to infinity at the end). @xmath ( @xmath )
represent the free KK masses of the @xmath ( @xmath ) 5D fermion KK
tower. Similarly, @xmath ( @xmath ) are the @xmath free fermion KK wave
functions evaluated on the IR brane and multiplied by a Yukawa coupling.
For the moment, we do not need the explicit expressions of the masses
and KK wave functions. We will specify them later on, when needed.

In order to obtain the 0-mode and KK fermion eigenmasses, one has to
diagonalize either one of the two "squared" mass matrices,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Given the high (or infinite, when @xmath ) dimensionality, the usual
methods of finding the eigenvalues of @xmath or @xmath , such as
calculating the characteristic polynomial, would be cumbersome, if not
impossible. However, as we show in the following, there is a way of
circumventing this technical difficulty by closely inspecting the
unitary matrices that diagonalize @xmath and @xmath .

We thus consider the two unitary matrices @xmath and @xmath , which
diagonalize @xmath and @xmath respectively:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

At the same time, the two unitary matrices bi-diagonalize the
mass-matrix,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using the unitarity of @xmath and @xmath , @xmath , one derives the
following matrix equations:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

which represent the starting point for our calculation of @xmath .

We start by inspecting @xmath . Borrowing the bra-ket notation from
Quantum Mechanics (and slightly abusing it), we write @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath denoting column vectors. By construction, @xmath are the
eigenvectors of @xmath , with the physical squared masses @xmath as
eigenvalues:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Similarly to the block decomposition used in Eq. ( C.6 ), we write the
eigenvector @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, in block matrix notation, the eigenvector and eigenvalue
equation, Eq. ( C.11 ), becomes:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

The matrix equation above is equivalent to the system of equations

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.15)
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.16)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the unknowns, and @xmath . Solving for the
unknowns, one finds

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we used the notation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Although the two terms in @xmath diverge when @xmath , it turns out that
their sum, and hence @xmath , are finite, as we shall see below. Before
continuing, we define the following sums:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.19)
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.20)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

With the help of the two definitions above, and inserting Eq. ( C.17 )
in Eq. ( C.18 ), we find the following system of equations:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Clearly, this system admits a solution only if

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

which represents the equation that determines the physical mass
spectrum, i.e. the eigenvalues @xmath . Thus, the matrix elements of
@xmath become:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

Computing the elements of @xmath proceeds in a similar fashion as for
the case of @xmath described above. Writing @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

and decomposing its columns as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

we repeat the steps taken earlier for @xmath and find the same equation
for the mass spectrum, @xmath . We also find that the elements of @xmath
are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

Moreover, the relation between @xmath and @xmath can be determined by
using the matrix equation @xmath , and reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

The expression of @xmath can be found through a multitude of ways, such
as enforcing unitarity for @xmath or inserting Eqs. ( C.26 ) and ( C.23
) into Eqs. ( C.7 ) or ( C.8 ). Either way, @xmath is given by the
equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

The expression of @xmath is important for calculating the mass basis
Yukawa couplings @xmath , which are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is now clear that, in order to explicitly calculate the eigenmasses,
given by Eq. ( C.22 ), and the Yukawa couplings, given by Eq. ( C.30 ),
we need to evaluate the infinite sums @xmath and @xmath and their first
derivatives, both for @xmath . We detail this procedure in the
following.

To start with, we list the expressions of the free fermionic KK wave
functions, evaluated at @xmath , i.e. on the IR brane:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.31)
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.32)
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.33)
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.34)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . For @xmath (zero-mode KK wave functions), which
correspond to @xmath , only the @xmath fields have non-vanishing KK wave
functions, whose values on the IR brane read:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

These KK wave functions listed above are necessary for writing down the
expressions of @xmath and @xmath , which are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

for all @xmath . In the previous equations, we used several simplifying
notations:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

Because of their similarity, the derivation of both @xmath and @xmath
proceeds along the same lines. Thus, we concentrate on the evaluation of
@xmath , defined in Eq. ( C.20 ), for which we rely on several
mathematical formulas presented in Ref. [ 472 ] , which provide
closed-form expressions for infinite sums involving Bessel functions.
Also, to avoid notation clutter, we write in the following @xmath and
@xmath . Thus, @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . While @xmath is straightforward to compute and reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath are more challenging, as they involve the calculation of the
normalization constant @xmath . This constant can be obtained by
imposing the normalization condition for @xmath , namely

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

The integral above can be computed with the help of Eq. (4.5) of Ref. [
472 ] , and gives the following value for the normalization constant:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

which in turn allows us to express @xmath in closed form for @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

Inserting Eqs. ( C.39 ) and ( C.42 ) into Eq. ( C.38 ), one can write
@xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

Clearly, the challenge is to evaluate the infinite sum in the equation
above. Fortunately, the infinite sum we are interested in can be
evaluated with the help of Eq. (4.19) from Ref. [ 472 ] . We take a
short break from our computation to briefly explain this equation.

Let @xmath be defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

and let @xmath ² ² 2 Here and in the following @xmath denotes a complex
variable and not the conformal coordinate along the extra dimension. be
a complex function satisfying certain properties listed in Ref. [ 472 ]
(all the cases of @xmath we are considering satisfy these properties).
Denoting as @xmath the poles of @xmath lying complex right half-plane
(including the imaginary axis and thus the origin), Eq. (4.19) from Ref.
[ 472 ] states that:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (C.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

with Res standing for residue. In our case, @xmath are given by the
equation @xmath , which coincides with the condition in Eq. ( C.44 ).
This means that indeed we can use Eq. ( C.45 ) to evaluate the infinite
sum arising in Eq. ( C.43 ). The function @xmath needed for our purpose
is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

whose only pole in the complex right half-plane is at @xmath (for a
given @xmath ), which is a simple pole. Using the expression of @xmath
and the Bessel function identity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

the sum in Eq. ( C.45 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us denote the function in above equation, whose residues have to be
evaluated, as @xmath . In the right half of the complex plane, @xmath
has a simple pole at @xmath (inherited from @xmath ) and another simple
pole at @xmath . The residue at the origin is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the residue at @xmath being

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath and @xmath being the exact KK wave functions obtained in the
so-called 5D approach. Gluing all the pieces together, we find that the
infinite sum from Eq. ( C.43 ) evaluates to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

Inserting the above equality into the expression of @xmath from Eq. (
C.43 ), we note that the contribution from the residue in @xmath exactly
cancels the contribution from the term corresponding to @xmath , leaving
a simple final expression for @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the same techniques as above, one can compute @xmath as well,
whose expression is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

The sign difference between the two sums comes from the negative sign in
front of @xmath , cf Eq. ( C.33 ). With the expressions of the two sums,
Eq. ( C.22 ), which determines the physical mass spectrum, translates to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

which indeed coincides with the mass spectrum ( 5.28 ) obtained in the
5D approach.

Having derived the mass spectrum, we now focus on the calculation of the
4D Yukawa couplings in the so-called "4D approach". In the following, we
work only with the exact KK wave functions, which we write below in a
way that will be convenient later on:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.55)
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.56)
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.57)
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.58)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Combining Eqs. ( C.18 ) and ( C.30 ), the expression for the effective
Yukawa couplings becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have use the mass spectrum equation ( C.22 ) for the second
step. In order to obtain the expressions for the Yukawa couplings, one
needs to calculate @xmath , defined in Eq. ( C.29 ):

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (C.60)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Note that in the above equation we took advantage of the logarithmic
derivative from Eq. ( C.29 ) to substitute @xmath by @xmath .

In tackling Eq. ( C.60 ), we first evaluate the part containing the
@xmath -KK wave functions:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the following two relations between Bessel functions,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.62)
     @xmath      (C.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes either first ( @xmath ) or second order ( @xmath )
Bessel functions, we find that

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.64)
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (C.65)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Using the two equations above, the Bessel function recurrence relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

we obtain from Eq. ( C.61 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that, at an intermediate step, we replaced @xmath and @xmath by the
exact KK wave functions, using Eqs. ( C.55 ) - ( C.58 ). We have also
used the simplifying notation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

In a similar way, one can obtain the piece containing the @xmath -KK
wave functions from Eq. ( C.60 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

Taking another step towards the final expression for @xmath , we make
use of the boundary conditions in @xmath of the exact KK wave functions,
@xmath and @xmath , and insert Eqs. ( C.68 ) and ( C.70 ) in Eq. ( C.60
) to get

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (C.71)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Note that, in the equation above, the quantity which is to be evaluated
between @xmath and @xmath is exactly the same quantity appearing in the
normalization condition for the KK wave functions, as described in the
section dealing with the 5D approach:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

With this observation, we arrive at the final expression for @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have used the definition of @xmath , @xmath . Inserting Eq. (
C.73 ) into Eq. ( C.59 ), and using the expression of @xmath and @xmath
form Eqs. ( C.20 ) and ( C.19 ), together with the boundary conditions
in @xmath , we find that the effective 4D Yukawa couplings are given by
( 5.42 ) which indeed matches the relation derived using the 5D
approach.
