### Chapter 1 Introduction

Circle graphs [ 15 ] are intersection graphs of chords in a circle. In
other words, a graph is circle if there is a family of chords @xmath in
a circle such that two vertices in @xmath are adjacent if and only if
the corresponding chords cross each other. These graphs were defined by
Even and Itai [ 15 ] to solve a problem stated by Knuth, which consists
in solving an ordering problem with the minimum number of parallel
stacks without the restriction of loading before unloading is completed.
It was proven that this problem can be translated into the problem of
finding the chromatic number of a circle graph. For its part, in 1985,
Naji [ 28 ] characterized circle graphs in terms of the solvability of a
system of linear equations, yielding a @xmath -time recognition
algorithm for this class.

The local complement of a graph @xmath with respect to a vertex @xmath
is the graph @xmath that arises from @xmath by replacing the induced
subgraph @xmath by its complement. Two graphs @xmath and @xmath are
locally equivalent if and only if @xmath arises from @xmath by a finite
sequence of local complementations. Circle graphs were characterized by
Bouchet [ 5 ] in 1994 by forbidden induced subgraphs under local
complementation. Inspired by this result, Geelen and Oum [ 21 ] gave a
new characterization of circle graphs in terms of pivoting . The result
of pivoting a graph @xmath with respect to an edge @xmath is the graph
@xmath .

Circle graphs are a superclass of permutation graphs. Indeed,
permutation graphs can be defined as those circle graphs having a circle
model such that a chord can be added in such a way that this chord meets
every chord belonging to the circle model. On the other hand,
permutation graphs are those comparability graphs whose complement graph
is also a comparability graph [ 14 ] . Since comparability graphs have
been characterized by forbidden induced subgraphs [ 17 ] , such a
characterization implies a forbidden induced subgraphs characterization
for the class of permutation graphs.

In spite of all these results, there are no known characterizations for
the entire class of circle graphs by forbidden induced subgraphs. Some
partial characterizations of circle graphs have been given. In other
words, there are some characterizations of circle graphs by forbidden
minimal induced subgraphs when these graphs also belong to a certain
subclass, such as @xmath -tidy graphs, Helly circle graphs,
linear-domino graphs, among others. In Chapter 4 we give a brief
introduction to these known results.

In order to extend these results, we considered the problem of
characterizing by minimal forbidden induced subgraphs those circle
graphs that are also split graphs. The motivation to study circle graphs
restricted to this particular graph class came from chordal graphs,
which are defined as those graphs that contain no induced cycles of
length greater than @xmath . Chordal graphs –which is a subset of
perfect graphs– is a very widely studied graph class, for which there
are several interesting characterizations. They may be recognized in
polynomial time, and several problems that are hard on other classes of
graphs –such as graph coloring– may be solved in polynomial time when
the input is chordal. Another interesting property of chordal graphs, is
that the treewidth of an arbitrary graph may be characterized by the
size of the cliques in the chordal graphs that contain it. Block graphs
are a particular subclass of chordal graphs, and are also circle.
However, not every chordal graph is a circle graph. All these reasons
lead to consider chordal graphs as a natural restriction to study a
partial characterization of circle graphs by forbidden induced
subgraphs. Something similar happens with split graphs, which is an
interesting subclass of chordal graphs. More precisely, split graphs are
those chordal graphs for which its complement is also a chordal graph.
In Chapter @xmath we give an example of a chordal graph that is neither
circle nor split. Hence, studying those split graphs that are also
circle is a good first step towards a characterization of those chordal
graphs that are also circle.

We started by considering a split graph @xmath such that @xmath is
minimally non-circle. Since permutation graphs are a subclass of circle
graphs, in particular @xmath is not a permutation graph. Notice that
permutation graphs are those comparability graphs for which their
complement is also a comparability graph. It is easy to prove that
permutation graphs are precisely those circle graphs having a circle
model with an equator. Using the list of minimal forbidden subgraphs of
comparability graphs (see Figures 2.1 and 2.2 ) and the fact that @xmath
is also a split graph, we conclude that @xmath contains either a tent, a
@xmath -tent, a co- @xmath -tent or a net as an induced subgraph (See
Figure 2.3 ). In Chapter 2 , given a split graph @xmath and an induced
subgraph @xmath that can be either a tent, a @xmath -tent or a co-
@xmath -tent, we define partitions of @xmath and @xmath according to the
adjacencies and prove that these partitions are well defined.

A @xmath -matrix has the consecutive-ones roperty (C @xmath P) for the
rows if there is a permutation of its columns such that the ones in each
row appear consecutively. In order to characterize those circle graphs
that contain a tent, a @xmath -tent, a co- @xmath -tent or a net as an
induced subgraph, we first address the problem of characterizing those
matrices that can be ordered with the C @xmath P for the rows and for
which there is a particular color assignment for every row, having
exactly @xmath colors to do so. Such a color assignment is defined in
Chapter 3 , considering the fullfillment of some special properties
which are purely based on the partial ordering relationship that must
hold between the neighbourhoods of the vertices in the independent
partition of a split graph. These properties are contemplated in the
definition of admissibillity.

In Chapter 3 , we define and characterize @xmath -nested matrices by
minimal forbidden submatrices. This characterization leads to a minimal
forbidden induced subgraph characterization for the associated graph
class, which is a subclass of split and circle graphs. In order to do
this, we define the concept of enriched matrix, which are those @xmath
-matrices for which some rows are labeled with a letter L (standing for
left ) or R (standing for right ) or LR (standing for left-right ), and
some of these labeled rows may also be colored with either red or blue
each. In the first sections of Chapter 3 , we define and characterize
the notions of admissibility, LR-orderable and partially @xmath -nested.
This notions allowed to define what is a ’‘valid pre-coloring” and
characterize those enriched matrices with valid pre-colorings that admit
an LR-ordering, which is the property of having a lineal ordering @xmath
of the columns such that, when ordered according to @xmath , the
non-LR-rows and the complements of the LR-rows have the C @xmath P,
those rows labeled with L start in the first column and those rows
labeled with R end in the last column. This leads to a characterization
of @xmath -nested matrices by forbidden induced submatrices. @xmath
-nested matrices are those partially @xmath -nested matrices for which
the given @xmath -coloring of the rows can be extended to a total proper
@xmath -coloring of all the matrix, while maintaining certain
properties. Chapter 3 is crucial in order to determine which are the
forbidden induced subgraphs for those circle graphs that are also split.

In chapter 4 , we address the problem of characterizing the forbidden
induced subgraphs of a circle graph that contains either a tent, @xmath
-tent, co- @xmath -tent or a net as an induced subgraph. In each section
we see a case of the theorem, proving a characterization theorem and
finishing with the guidelines to draw a circle model for each case.

#### 1.1 Known characterizations of circle graphs

Recall that a graph is circle if it is the intersection graph of a
family of chords in a circle. The characterization of the entire class
of circle graphs by forbidden minimal induced subgraphs is still an open
problem. However, some partial characterizations are known. In this
section, we state some of the known characterizations for circle graphs,
including those that are partial, and give the necessary definitions to
understand these results.

A double occurrence word is a finite string of symbols in which each
symbol appears precisely twice. Let @xmath be a double occurrence word.
The shift operation on @xmath transforms @xmath into @xmath . The
reverse operation transforms @xmath into @xmath . With each double
occurrence word @xmath we associate a graph @xmath whose vertices are
the symbols in @xmath and in which two vertices are adjacent if and only
if the corresponding symbols appear precisely once between the two
occurrences of the other. Clearly, a graph is circle if and only if it
is isomorphic to @xmath for some double occurrence word. Those graphs
that are isomorphic to @xmath for some double occurrence @xmath are also
called alternance graphs. A graph @xmath is overlap interval if there
exists a bijective function @xmath where @xmath is a family of intervals
on the real line, such that @xmath if and only if @xmath and @xmath
overlap; i.e., @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . It is well known that circle
graphs and overlap interval graphs are the same class (see [ 20 ] ).
Moreover, circle graphs are also equivalent to alternance graphs.

Given a double alternance word @xmath , we denote by @xmath the word
that arises by traversing @xmath from right to left, for instance, if
@xmath , then @xmath . Given a graph @xmath and a vertex @xmath of
@xmath . The local complement of @xmath at @xmath , denoted by @xmath ,
is the graph that arises from @xmath by replacing @xmath by its
complementary graph. Two graphs @xmath and @xmath are locally equivalent
if and only if @xmath arises from @xmath by a finite sequence of local
complementations. This operation is strongly linked with circle graphs;
namely, if @xmath is a circle graph, then @xmath is a circle graph .
This is because, if @xmath represents the vertex @xmath in @xmath and
@xmath where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are subwords of @xmath , then
@xmath is a double alternance model for @xmath . Bouchet proved the
following theorem.

###### Theorem 1.1.

[ 5 ] Let @xmath be a graph. @xmath is a circle graph if and only if any
graph locally equivalent to @xmath has no induced subgraph isomorphic to
@xmath , @xmath , or @xmath (see Figure 1.1 ).

Bouchet also proved the following property of circle graphs. Let @xmath
and let @xmath be an antisymmetric integer matrix [ 4 ] . For @xmath ,
we denote @xmath . The matrix @xmath satisfies the property @xmath if
the following property (related to unimodularity) holds: @xmath for all
@xmath . Graph @xmath is unimodular if there is an orientation of @xmath
such that the resulting digraph satisfies property @xmath . Bouchet
proved that every circle graph admits such an orientation [ 4 ] .
Moreover, it was also Bouchet who proved that, if @xmath is a bipartite
graph such that its complement is circle, then @xmath is a circle graph
[ 6 ] . In [ 16 ] , the authors give a new and shorter prove for this
result.

Inspired by Theorem 1.1 , Geelen and Oum gave a new characterization of
circle graphs in terms of pivoting [ 21 ] . The result of pivoting a
graph @xmath with respect to an edge @xmath is the graph @xmath , where
@xmath stands for local complementation. A graph @xmath is pivot
equivalent to @xmath if @xmath arises from @xmath by a sequence of
pivoting operations. They proved, with the aid of a computer, that
@xmath is a circle graph if and only if each graph that is pivot
equivalent to @xmath contains none of 15 prescribed induced subgraphs.

Let @xmath and @xmath be two graphs such that @xmath , for each @xmath ,
and assume that @xmath . Let @xmath be a distinguished vertex of @xmath
, for each @xmath . The split composition of @xmath and @xmath with
respect to @xmath and @xmath is the graph @xmath whose vertex set is
@xmath and whose edge set is @xmath . The vertices @xmath and @xmath are
called the marker vertices . We say that @xmath has a split
decomposition if there exist two graphs @xmath and @xmath with @xmath ,
@xmath , such that @xmath with respect to some pair of marker vertices.
If so, @xmath and @xmath are called the factors of the split
decomposition. Those graphs that do not have a split decomposition are
called prime graphs . The concept of split decomposition is due to
Cunningham [ 9 ] .

Circle graphs turned out to be closed under this decomposition [ 4 ] and
in 1994 Spinrad presented a quadratic-time recognition algorithm for
circle graphs that exploits this peculiarity [ 34 ] . Also based on
split decomposition, Paul [ 31 ] presented an @xmath -time algorithm for
recognizing circle graphs, where @xmath is the inverse of the Ackermann
function.

In [ 11 ] De Fraysseix presented a characterization of circle graphs,
which leads to a novel interpretation of circle graphs as the
intersection graphs of induced paths of a given graph. A cocycle of a
graph @xmath with vertex set @xmath is the set of edges joining a vertex
of @xmath to a vertex of @xmath for some bipartition @xmath of @xmath .
A cocyclic-path is an induced path whose set of edges constitutes a
cocycle. A cocyclic-path intersection graph is a simple graph with
vertex set being a family of cocyclic-paths of a given graph, two
vertices being adjacent if and only if the corresponding cocyclic-paths
have an edge in common. Notice that the definition is restricted to
those graphs covered by cocyclic-paths any two of which have at most a
common edge. Fraysseix proved the following characterization of circle
graphs as cocyclic-path intersection graphs.

###### Theorem 1.2.

[ 11 ] Let @xmath be a graph. @xmath is a circle graph if and only if
@xmath is a cocyclic-path intersection graph.

A diamond is the complete graph with 4 vertices minus one edge. A claw
is the graph with 4 vertices that has 1 vertex with degree 3 and a
maximum independent set of size 3. Prisms are the graphs that arise from
the cycle @xmath by subdividing the edges that link the triangles.

A graph is Helly circle if it has a circle model whose chords are all
different and every subset of pairwise intersecting chords has a point
in common. A characterization by minimal forbidden induced subgraphs for
Helly circle graphs, inside circle graphs, was conjectured in [ 13 ] and
was proved some years later in [ 10 ] . Notice that this
characterization does not solve the general characterization of Helly
circle graphs by forbidden subgraphs.

###### Theorem 1.3.

[ 10 ] Let @xmath be a circle graph. @xmath is Helly circle if and only
if @xmath is diamond-free.

A graph @xmath is domino if each of its vertices belongs to at most two
cliques. In addition, if each of its edges belongs to at most one
clique, @xmath is linear-domino . Linear-domino graphs coincide with
@xmath claw,diamond @xmath -free graphs.

There are no known characterizations for the class of circle graphs by
minimal forbidden induced subgraphs. In order to obtain some results in
this direction, this problem was addressed by attempting to characterize
circle graphs by minimal forbidden induced subgraphs when given a graph
that belongs to a certain graph class. This is known as a partial
structural characterization. Some results in this direction are the
following.

###### Theorem 1.4.

[ 3 ] Let @xmath be a linear domino graph. Then, @xmath is a circle
graph if and only if @xmath contains no induced prisms.

The proof given in [ 3 ] is based on the fact that circle graphs are
closed under split decomposition [ 4 ] . As a corollary of the above
theorem, the following partial characterization of Helly circle graphs
is obtained.

###### Corollary 1.5.

[ 3 ] Let @xmath be a claw-free graph. Then, @xmath is a Helly circle
graph if and only if @xmath contains no induced prism and no induced
diamond.

A graph is cograph if it is @xmath -free. A graph is tree-cograph if it
can be constructed from trees by disjoint union and complement
operations. Let @xmath be a @xmath in some graph @xmath . A partner of
@xmath in @xmath is a vertex @xmath in @xmath such that @xmath induces
at least two @xmath ’s. A graph @xmath is @xmath -tidy if any @xmath has
at most one partner.

###### Theorem 1.6.

[ 3 ] Let @xmath be a @xmath -tidy graph. Then, @xmath is a circle graph
if and only if @xmath contains no @xmath , net @xmath , tent @xmath , or
tent-with-center as induced subgraph.

###### Theorem 1.7.

[ 3 ] Let @xmath be a tree-cograph. Then, @xmath is a circle graph if
and only if @xmath contains no induced (bipartite-claw) @xmath and no
induced co-(bipartite-claw).

#### 1.2 Basic definitions and notation

Let @xmath be a @xmath @xmath -matrix. We denote by @xmath and @xmath
the @xmath th row and the @xmath th column of matrix @xmath . From now
on, we associate each row @xmath with the set of columns in which @xmath
has a @xmath . For example, the intersection of two rows @xmath and
@xmath is the subset of columns in which both rows have a @xmath . Two
rows @xmath and @xmath are disjoint if there is no @xmath such that
@xmath . We say that @xmath is contained in @xmath if for each @xmath
such that @xmath also @xmath . We say that @xmath and @xmath are nested
if @xmath is contained in @xmath or @xmath is contained in @xmath . We
say that a row @xmath is empty if every entry of @xmath is @xmath , and
we say that @xmath is nonempty if there is at least one entry of @xmath
equal to @xmath . We say that two nonempty rows overlap if they are
non-disjoint and non-nested. For every nonempty row @xmath , let @xmath
and @xmath for each @xmath . Finally, we say that @xmath and @xmath
start (resp. end ) in the same column if @xmath (resp. @xmath ), and we
say @xmath and @xmath start (end) in different columns , otherwise.

We say a @xmath -matrix @xmath has the consecutive-ones property for the
rows (for short, C @xmath P) if there is permutation of the columns of
@xmath such that the 1’s in each row appear consecutively. Any such
permutation of the columns of @xmath is called a consecutive-ones
ordering for @xmath . In [ 35 ] , Tucker characterized all the minimal
forbidden submatrices for the C @xmath P, later known as Tucker matrices
. For the complete list of Tucker matrices, see Figure 1.2 .

Let @xmath and @xmath be @xmath -matrices. We say that @xmath is a
subconfiguration of @xmath if there is a permutation of the rows and the
columns of @xmath such that @xmath with this permutation results equal
to a submatrix of @xmath . Given a subset of rows @xmath of @xmath , we
say that @xmath induces a matrix @xmath if @xmath is a subconfiguration
of the submatrix of @xmath given by selecting only those rows in @xmath
.

All graphs in this work are simple, undirected, with no loops or
multiple edges. The pair @xmath is a split partition of a graph @xmath
if @xmath is a partition of the vertex set of @xmath and the vertices of
@xmath (resp. @xmath ) are pairwise adjacent (resp. nonadjacent), and we
denote it @xmath . A graph @xmath is a split graph if it admits some
split partition. Let @xmath be a split graph with split partition @xmath
, @xmath , and @xmath . Let @xmath and @xmath be linear orderings of
@xmath and @xmath , respectively. Let @xmath be the @xmath matrix
defined by @xmath if @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and @xmath ,
otherwise. From now on, we associate the row (resp. column) of the
matrix @xmath with the corresponding vertex in the independent set
(resp. vertex in the complete set) of the partition.

Given a graph @xmath , the graph @xmath is @xmath -free if it does not
contain @xmath as induced subgraph. For a family of graphs @xmath , a
graph @xmath is @xmath -free if @xmath is @xmath -free for every @xmath
.

### Preliminares

Consideremos un grafo split @xmath y supongamos que @xmath es
minimalmente no circle. Equivalentemente, todo subgrafo inducido @xmath
es circle. Si @xmath no es circle, entonces en particular @xmath no es
un grafo de permutación. Los grafos de permutación son exactamente
aquellos grafos de comparabilidad cuyo complemento también es un grafo
de comparabilidad [ 14 ] . Los grafos de comparabilidad han sido
caracterizados por subgrafos inducidos prohibidos en [ 17 ] .

###### Theorem 1.8 ([17]).

Un grafo es de comparabilidad si y sólo si no contiene como subgrafo
inducido a ninguno de los subgrafos de la Figura 1.3 y su complemento no
contiene como subgrafo inducido a ninguno de los subgrafos en la Figura
1.4 .

Esta caracterización de los grafos de comparabilidad induce una
caracterización por subgrafos inducidos prohibidos para la clase de los
grafos de permutación. Por lo tanto, como los grafos de permutación son
una subclase de los grafos circle, en particular @xmath no es un grafo
de permutación. Usando la lista de subgrafos inducidos minimales
prohibidos para los grafos de comparabilidad dada en las Figuras 1.3 y
1.4 y el hecho de que @xmath también es un grafo split, concluímos que
@xmath debe contener como subgrafo inducido un tent, un @xmath -tent, un
co- @xmath -tent o un net (Ver Figura 1.5 ).

En este capítulo, se define una partición de los conjuntos @xmath y
@xmath basada en el hecho de que @xmath contiene un tent, @xmath -tent o
co- @xmath -tent @xmath como subgrafo inducido. En cada caso, la
partición de @xmath depende de las adyacencias a los vértices de @xmath
, y la partición de @xmath a su vez depende de las adyacencias de cada
vértice independiente a las distintas particiones de @xmath . Se prueba
que estos subconjuntos efectivamente inducen una partición de @xmath y
@xmath , respectivamente. Estos resultados serán de gran utilidad en el
Capítulo 3 para dar motivación a la teoría de matrices desarrollada a lo
largo del mismo, y luego en el Capítulo 4, donde se enuncia y se
demuestra la caracterización pos subgrafos inducidos prohibidos para
grafos split circle.

### Chapter 2 Preliminaries

Let us consider a split graph @xmath and suppose that @xmath is
minimally non-circle. Equivalently, any proper induced subgraph of
@xmath is circle. If @xmath is not circle, then in particular @xmath is
not a permutation graph. Permutation graphs are exactly those
comparability graphs whose complement graph is also a comparability
graph [ 14 ] . Comparability graphs have been characterized by forbidden
induced subgraphs in [ 17 ] .

###### Theorem 2.1 ([17]).

A graph is a comparability graph if and only if it does not contain as
an induced subgraph any graph in Figure 2.1 and its complement does not
contain as an induced subgraph any graph in Figure 2.2 .

This characterization of comparability graphs leads to a forbidden
induced subgraph characterization for the class of permutation graphs.
Hence, since permutation graphs is a subclass of circle graphs, in
particular @xmath is not a permutation graph. Using the list of minimal
forbidden subgraphs for comparability graphs given in Figures 2.1 and
2.2 and the fact that @xmath is also a split graph, we conclude that
@xmath contains either a tent, a @xmath -tent, a co- @xmath -tent or a
net as an induced subgraph (See Figure 2.3 ).

As previously mentioned, the motivation to study circle graphs
restricted to split graphs came from chordal graphs. Remember that split
graphs are those chordal graphs for which its complement is also a
chordal graph. Let us consider the graph @xmath for @xmath depicted in
Figure 2.1 .

This is a chordal graph since @xmath contains no cycles of length
greater than @xmath . Moreover, it is easy to see that @xmath is not a
split graph. This follows from the fact that the maximum clique has size
@xmath , and the removal of any such clique leaves out a non-independent
set of vertices. The same holds for any clique of size smaller than
@xmath . Furthermore, if we apply local complement of the graph
sequentially on the vertices @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath , then we find @xmath induced by the subset @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . For more detail on this, see Figure
2.4 . It follows from the characterization given by Bouchet in 1.1 that
@xmath is not a circle graph.

This shows an example of a graph that is neither circle nor split, but
is chordal. In particular, it follows from this example (which is
minimally non-circle) that whatever list of forbidden subgraphs found
for split circle graphs is not enough to characterize those chordal
graphs that are also circle. Therefore, studying split circle graphs is
a good first step towards characterizing those chordal graphs that are
also circle.

Throughout the following sections, we will define some subsets in both
@xmath and @xmath depending on whether @xmath contains an induced tent,
@xmath -tent or co- @xmath -tent @xmath as an induced subgraph. We will
prove that these subsets induce a partition of both @xmath and @xmath .
In each case, the vertices in the complete partition @xmath are split
into subsets according to the adjacencies with the independent vertices
of @xmath , and the vertices in the independent partition @xmath are
split into subsets according to the adjacencies with each partition of
@xmath . These partitions will be useful in Chapter 3 , in order to give
motivation for the matrix theory developed in that chapter, and in
Chapter 4 , when we give the proof of the characterization by forbidden
induced subgraphs for split circle graphs. Notice that we do not
consider the case in which @xmath contains an induced net in order to
define the partitions of @xmath and @xmath , for it will be explained in
detail in Section 4.4 that this case can be reduced using the cases in
which @xmath contains a tent, a @xmath -tent and a co- @xmath -tent.

In Figures 2.6 and 2.5 , we define two graph families that will be
central throughout the sequel. These graphs are necessary to state the
main result of this part, which is the following characterization by
forbidden induced subgraphs for those split graphs that are also circle.

###### Theorem 2.2.

Let @xmath be a split graph. Then, @xmath is a circle graph if and only
if @xmath is @xmath -free.

#### 2.1 Partitions of S and K for a graph containing an induced tent

Let @xmath be a split graph where @xmath is a clique and @xmath is an
independent set. Let @xmath be an induced subgraph of @xmath isomorphic
to a tent. Let @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath where @xmath
@xmath @xmath , @xmath @xmath @xmath , and the neighbors of @xmath in
@xmath are precisely @xmath and @xmath .

We introduce sets @xmath as follows.

-    For each @xmath , let @xmath be the set of vertices of @xmath whose
    neighbors in @xmath are precisely @xmath and @xmath (where
    subindexes are modulo @xmath ).

-    For each @xmath , let @xmath be the set of vertices of @xmath whose
    only neighbor in @xmath is @xmath (where subindexes are modulo
    @xmath ).

See Figure 2.7 for a graphic idea of this. Notice that @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath are always nonempty sets. We say a vertex @xmath is complete
to the set of vertices @xmath if @xmath is adjacent to every vertex in
@xmath , and we say @xmath is anticomplete to @xmath if @xmath has no
neighbor in @xmath . We say that @xmath is adjacent to @xmath if @xmath
has at least one neighbor in @xmath . Notice that complete to @xmath
implies adjacent to @xmath if and only if @xmath is nonempty. For @xmath
in @xmath , let @xmath . Given two vertices @xmath and @xmath in @xmath
, we say that @xmath and @xmath are nested if either @xmath or @xmath .
In particular, given @xmath , if either @xmath or @xmath , then we say
that @xmath and @xmath are nested in @xmath . Additionally, if @xmath ,
then we say that @xmath is contained in @xmath .

###### Lemma 2.3.

If @xmath is @xmath -free, then @xmath is a partition of @xmath .

###### Proof.

Every vertex of @xmath is adjacent to precisely one or two vertices of
@xmath , for if not we find either a tent @xmath or a @xmath -sun with
center as induced subgraph of @xmath , a contradiction. ∎

Let @xmath and let @xmath be the set of vertices of @xmath that are
adjacent to some vertex in @xmath and some vertex in @xmath , are
complete to @xmath , @xmath , and are anticomplete to @xmath , @xmath
(where subindexes are modulo @xmath ). The following claims are
necessary to prove Lemma 2.9 , that states, on the one hand, which sets
of @xmath may be nonempty, and, on the other hand, that the sets @xmath
indeed induce a partition of @xmath . This shows that the adjacencies of
a vertex of @xmath have a circular structure with respect to the defined
partition of @xmath .

###### Claim 2.4.

If @xmath is @xmath -free, then there is no vertex @xmath in @xmath such
that @xmath is simultaneously adjacent to @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .
Moreover, there is no vertex @xmath in @xmath adjacent to @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath such that @xmath is anticomplete to any two of @xmath
, for @xmath .

Let @xmath in @xmath and let @xmath in @xmath for each @xmath , such
that @xmath is adjacent to each @xmath . Hence, @xmath @xmath @xmath
@xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath induce in @xmath a @xmath -sun with center,
a contradiction.

To prove the second statement, let @xmath in @xmath such that @xmath is
adjacent to @xmath for every @xmath . Suppose that @xmath is
anticomplete to @xmath and @xmath . Thus, we find a @xmath -sun induced
by the set @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath . If instead @xmath is anticomplete to @xmath and @xmath , then
we find a @xmath -sun induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and if @xmath is anticomplete to
@xmath and @xmath , then a @xmath -sun is induced by @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . @xmath

###### Claim 2.5.

If @xmath is @xmath -free and @xmath in @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and
@xmath , then @xmath is complete to @xmath , either for @xmath or for
@xmath .

Let @xmath in @xmath , @xmath in @xmath such that @xmath is adjacent to
@xmath and @xmath . Notice that the statement is exactly the same for
@xmath and for @xmath , so let us assume that @xmath is even.

If @xmath in @xmath is a non-neighbor of @xmath for each @xmath , then
we find an induced @xmath . Hence, @xmath is complete to @xmath for at
least one of @xmath . Suppose that @xmath is complete to @xmath . If
@xmath , then the claim holds. Hence, suppose that @xmath and suppose
@xmath in @xmath is a non-neighbor of @xmath . In particular, since
@xmath is adjacent to @xmath and @xmath , then @xmath is anticomplete to
@xmath by Claim 2.4 . However, in this case we find @xmath induced by
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . It
follows analogously if instead @xmath is complete to @xmath and is not
complete to @xmath , for we find the same induced subgraphs. Notice that
the proof is independent on whether @xmath or not, for every even @xmath
. @xmath

###### Claim 2.6.

If @xmath is @xmath -free and @xmath in @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and
@xmath , then either @xmath is complete to @xmath , or @xmath is
complete to @xmath for @xmath .

Once more, we assume without loss of generality that @xmath is nonempty,
for all @xmath . Given the simmetry of the odd-indexed and even-indexed
sets @xmath , we may also separate in two cases without losing
generality: if @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and @xmath and if @xmath is
adjacent to @xmath and @xmath .

Suppose first that @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and @xmath . By Claim
2.4 , @xmath is anticomplete to @xmath . If @xmath is nonadjacent to
some vertex @xmath in @xmath , then the set @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath induces a tent with center. Hence,
@xmath is complete to @xmath .

Suppose now that @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and @xmath . First, notice
that @xmath is complete to either @xmath or @xmath , for if not we find
a @xmath -sun induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath . Suppose that @xmath is complete to @xmath .
If @xmath is not complete to @xmath , then @xmath is complete to @xmath
and @xmath , for if not there is @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath for @xmath . @xmath

###### Remark 2.7.

As a consequence of the previous claims we also proved that, If @xmath
is @xmath -free, then:

-    For each @xmath , the sets @xmath are empty, for if not, there is a
    vertex @xmath in @xmath such that @xmath is adjacent to @xmath ,
    @xmath and @xmath (Claim 2.4 ). Moreover, the same holds for @xmath
    , for each @xmath .

-    For each @xmath , the sets @xmath are empty since every vertex
    @xmath in @xmath such that @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and @xmath
    is necessarily complete to either @xmath or @xmath (Claim 2.6 ).

###### Claim 2.8.

If @xmath is @xmath -free, then for each @xmath , every vertex in @xmath
is complete to @xmath .

We will prove this claim without loss of generality for @xmath .

Let @xmath in @xmath . By definition, @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and
nonadjacent to @xmath . Towards a contradiction, let @xmath and @xmath
in @xmath such that @xmath is nonadjacent to @xmath and @xmath is
adjacent to @xmath , and let @xmath in @xmath such that @xmath is
adjacent to @xmath . In this case, we find @xmath induced by the set
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

Analogously, if @xmath is in @xmath , then @xmath is induced by @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . @xmath

The following Lemma is a straightforward consequence of Claims 2.4 to
2.8 .

###### Lemma 2.9.

Let @xmath be a split graph that contains an induced tent. If @xmath is
@xmath -free, then all the following assertions hold:

-   @xmath is a partition of @xmath .

-    For each @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are empty.

-    For each @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are empty.

-    For each @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are complete to @xmath .

#### 2.2 Partitions of S and K for a graph containing an induced
@xmath-tent

Let @xmath be a split graph where @xmath is a clique and @xmath is an
independent set. Let @xmath be a @xmath -tent induced subgraph of @xmath
. Let @xmath where @xmath , @xmath , and the neighbors of @xmath in
@xmath are precisely @xmath and @xmath .

We introduce sets @xmath as follows.

-    Let @xmath be the set of vertices of @xmath whose only neighbor in
    @xmath is @xmath . Analogously, let @xmath be the set of vertices of
    @xmath whose only neighbor in @xmath is @xmath , and let @xmath be
    the set of vertices of @xmath whose only neighbor in @xmath is
    @xmath .

-    For each @xmath , let @xmath be the set of vertices of @xmath whose
    neighbors in @xmath are precisely @xmath and @xmath , for @xmath ,
    @xmath and @xmath or @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

-    Let @xmath be the set of vertices of @xmath that are anticomplete
    to @xmath .

The following Lemma is straightforward.

###### Lemma 2.10.

If @xmath is @xmath -free, then @xmath is a partition of @xmath .

###### Proof.

Every vertex in @xmath is adjacent to precisely one, two or no vertices
of @xmath , for if not we find a @xmath -tent @xmath . ∎

Let @xmath and let @xmath defined as in the previous section. We denote
@xmath (resp. @xmath ) to the set of vertices in @xmath that are
adjacent to @xmath and complete to @xmath , @xmath (resp. adjacent to
@xmath and complete to @xmath ). We denote @xmath to the set of vertices
in @xmath that are complete to @xmath .

In particular, we consider separately those vertices adjacent to @xmath
and complete to @xmath : we denote @xmath to the set that contains these
vertices, and @xmath to the subset of vertices of @xmath that are
adjacent but not complete to @xmath . Furthermore, we consider the set
@xmath as those vertices in @xmath that are adjacent but not complete to
@xmath .

###### Claim 2.11.

If @xmath in @xmath fullfils one of the following conditions:

-   @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and @xmath and is anticomplete to
    @xmath , for @xmath

-   @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and @xmath and is anticomplete to
    @xmath

-   @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and @xmath and is anticomplete to
    @xmath

Then, there is an induced tent in @xmath .

If @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and @xmath and is anticomplete to @xmath
, then we find a tent induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath . If instead @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and @xmath and
is anticomplete to @xmath , then the tent is induced by @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

If @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and @xmath and is anticomplete to @xmath
, then we find a tent induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath .

Finally, if @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and @xmath and is anticomplete
to @xmath , then the tent is induced by the set @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . @xmath

As a direct consequence of the previous claim, we will assume without
loss of generality that the subsets @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
of @xmath are empty.

###### Claim 2.12.

If @xmath is @xmath -free, then @xmath is empty. Moreover, if @xmath ,
then @xmath is empty.

Suppose there is a vertex @xmath in @xmath , let @xmath in @xmath and
@xmath in @xmath be vertices adjacent to @xmath . Thus, we find a @xmath
-sun induced by the set @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

If @xmath , suppose @xmath in @xmath , and let @xmath in @xmath , @xmath
in @xmath be vertices adjacent to @xmath . Notice that, by definition,
@xmath is complete to @xmath and @xmath , and anticomplete to @xmath .
Then, we find @xmath induced by the set @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . @xmath

We want to prove that @xmath is indeed a partition of @xmath ,
analogously as in the tent case. Towards this purpose, we state and
prove the following claims.

###### Claim 2.13.

If @xmath is @xmath -free and @xmath in @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and
@xmath and anticomplete to @xmath for @xmath and @xmath , then:

-    If @xmath , then @xmath is complete to @xmath and @xmath .

-    If @xmath , then @xmath is complete to @xmath and @xmath .

-    If @xmath , then @xmath lies in @xmath .

Let @xmath in @xmath adjacent to some vertices @xmath in @xmath and
@xmath in @xmath , such that @xmath is anticomplete to @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath . By the previous Claim, we know that @xmath is complete to
@xmath for if not there is an induced tent. Moreover, suppose that
@xmath is not complete to @xmath . Let @xmath in @xmath , @xmath in
@xmath and let @xmath in @xmath be a vertex nonadjacent to @xmath .
Then, we find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . The proof is analogous for @xmath
adjacent to @xmath and @xmath , and anticomplete to @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath .

Let @xmath in @xmath be a vertex adjacent to @xmath in @xmath and @xmath
in @xmath , such that @xmath is anticomplete to @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath (it is indistinct if @xmath ). Suppose there is a vertex @xmath
in @xmath nonadjacent to @xmath . In this case, we find a net @xmath
induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .
Moreover, suppose that @xmath is not complete to @xmath . Let @xmath in
@xmath nonadjacent to @xmath . Thus, we find @xmath induced by @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . The proof
is analogous for @xmath adjacent to @xmath and @xmath , and anticomplete
to @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

Finally, we know that in the third statement either @xmath or @xmath .
If @xmath , then @xmath is a vertex adjacent to @xmath and @xmath such
that @xmath is anticomplete to @xmath , @xmath (if nonempty) and @xmath
. Hence, as a direct consequence of the proof of Claim 2.12 , we find a
@xmath -sun. It follows that there is no such vertex @xmath adjacent to
@xmath and @xmath and thus necessarily @xmath . Let @xmath in @xmath
adjacent to @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath such that @xmath is
anticomplete to @xmath , @xmath and @xmath (it is indistinct if @xmath
). If @xmath , let @xmath in @xmath and suppose that @xmath is
nonadjacent to @xmath . Then, we find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . @xmath

###### Claim 2.14.

If @xmath is @xmath -free and @xmath in @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and
@xmath and @xmath is anticomplete to @xmath for @xmath and @xmath ,
then:

-    If @xmath , then @xmath is complete to @xmath and @xmath .

-    If @xmath , then @xmath lies in @xmath .

-    If @xmath , then @xmath lies in @xmath .

###### Proof.

Suppose first that @xmath . Let @xmath in @xmath such that @xmath is
adjacent to some vertices @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath and
@xmath has at least one non-neighbor in @xmath and @xmath each. Let
@xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath be two such vertices. If there are
vertices @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath such that @xmath and
@xmath are both nonadajcent to @xmath , then we find @xmath induced by
the set @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath . If instead @xmath is adjacent to a vertex
@xmath in @xmath and @xmath is nonadjacent to a vertex @xmath in @xmath
, then we find a tent with center induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . Conversely, if @xmath is adjacent to
@xmath in @xmath and is nonadjacent to some @xmath in @xmath , then we
find a net @xmath induced by the set @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . The proof is analogous by symmetry
for @xmath in @xmath .

Let us see now the case @xmath , thus either @xmath or @xmath . If
@xmath , then @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and @xmath and @xmath is
anticomplete to @xmath and @xmath (if nonempty). Thus, by Claim 2.11 we
may discard this case. Let @xmath in @xmath such that @xmath is adjacent
to some vertices @xmath in @xmath , @xmath in @xmath and @xmath is
nonadjacent to a vertex @xmath in @xmath . Suppose that @xmath is not
complete to @xmath and @xmath . Whether @xmath or not, if there is a
vertex @xmath in @xmath that is nonadjacent to @xmath , then we find a
net @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath . If @xmath , we find a net @xmath by replacing the
vertex @xmath in the previous set for any vertex in @xmath that is
nonadjacent to @xmath . Let us see that @xmath is also complete to
@xmath . If this is not true, then there is a vertex @xmath in @xmath
nonadjacent to @xmath . However, we find @xmath induced by @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

The proof for the third statement is analogous by symmetry. ∎

###### Claim 2.15.

If @xmath is @xmath -free, @xmath in @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and
@xmath and @xmath is anticomplete to @xmath , then:

-    If @xmath , then @xmath lies in @xmath .

-    If @xmath and @xmath , then @xmath lies in @xmath .

-    If @xmath , then @xmath lies in @xmath .

###### Proof.

Suppose first that @xmath . In this case, either @xmath or @xmath . If
@xmath , then @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and @xmath and is
anticomplete to @xmath . By Claim 2.11 , this case is discarded for
there is an induced tent. Hence, necessarily @xmath . Equivalently,
@xmath is adjacent to @xmath and @xmath and @xmath is anticomplete to
@xmath . Suppose there is a vertex @xmath in @xmath nonadjacent to
@xmath . Then, we find a net @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and thus @xmath must be complete
to @xmath . Furthermore, suppose @xmath is not complete to @xmath , thus
there is a vertex @xmath in @xmath nonadjacent to @xmath . Since @xmath
is complete to @xmath , we find @xmath induced by the set @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .
If @xmath , then @xmath is complete to @xmath , for if not we find a net
@xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath . Finally, if @xmath is not complete to @xmath , then there is a
vertex @xmath in @xmath nonadjacent to @xmath . In this case, we find
@xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath and this finishes the proof of the first statement.

Suppose now that @xmath . Thus, either @xmath or @xmath . By hypothesis,
@xmath . Suppose that @xmath , thus @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and
@xmath and @xmath is anticomplete to @xmath . By Claim 2.12 , if @xmath
, then @xmath is anticomplete to @xmath and @xmath , for if not we find
an induced @xmath . Hence, if @xmath , then we find @xmath induced by
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .
Thus, if @xmath , then necessarily @xmath . Let @xmath . Suppose that
@xmath is adjacent to @xmath and @xmath and that @xmath is anticomplete
to @xmath . If @xmath is nonadjacent to some vertices @xmath in @xmath
and @xmath in @xmath , then we find a @xmath -sun induced by @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . If @xmath
is not complete to @xmath in @xmath , then we find a tent induced by
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . The same holds for
@xmath by replacing the vertex @xmath for some vertex @xmath in @xmath
adjacent to @xmath and @xmath by @xmath . Notice that it was not
necessary for the argument that @xmath .

Finally, suppose that @xmath . By Claim 2.11 we can discard the case
where @xmath , thus we may assume that @xmath . However, the proof for
@xmath is analogous to the proof of the first statement.

∎

###### Claim 2.16.

Let @xmath in @xmath such that @xmath is adjacent to at least one vertex
in each nonempty @xmath , for all @xmath .

If @xmath is @xmath -free, then the following statements hold:

-    The vertex @xmath is complete to @xmath and @xmath , regardless of
    whether @xmath and @xmath are empty or not.

-    If @xmath , then @xmath is complete to @xmath .

-    If @xmath , then either @xmath is complete to @xmath or @xmath is
    complete to @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath in @xmath be a vertex adjacent to @xmath , for each @xmath ,
which are always nonempty sets. If @xmath is not complete to @xmath ,
then there is a vertex @xmath in @xmath nonadjacent to @xmath . Thus, we
find a tent induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath . The same holds if @xmath is not complete to @xmath , and thus
the first statement holds. Notice that, in fact, this holds regardless
of @xmath or @xmath being empty or not.

Suppose now that @xmath , and that there is a vertex @xmath in @xmath
such that @xmath is nonadjacent to @xmath . Then, we find @xmath induced
by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath .

Finally, let us suppose that @xmath and toward a contradiction, let
@xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath be two non-neighbors of @xmath ,
and @xmath in @xmath adjacent to @xmath . Then, we find @xmath induced
by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath . Notice that this holds even if @xmath . ∎

As a consequence of Claims 2.11 to 2.16 , we have the following Lemma.

###### Lemma 2.17.

Let @xmath be a split graph that contains an induced @xmath -tent and
contains no induced tent. If @xmath is @xmath -free, then all the
following assertions hold:

-   @xmath is a partition of @xmath .

-    For each @xmath , @xmath is empty.

-    For each @xmath , @xmath is empty.

-    The subsets @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are empty.

-    The following subsets coincide: @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
    @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

#### 2.3 Partitions of S and K for a graph containing an induced
co-@xmath-tent

Let @xmath be a split graph where @xmath is a clique and @xmath is an
independent set, and suppose that @xmath contains no induced tent or
@xmath -tent. Let @xmath be a co- @xmath -tent induced subgraph of
@xmath . Let @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath in @xmath such
that the neighbors of @xmath in @xmath are precisely @xmath and @xmath
and the neighbor of @xmath in @xmath is precisely @xmath .

We introduce sets @xmath as follows.

-    Let @xmath be the set of vertices of @xmath whose only neighbors in
    @xmath are @xmath and @xmath . Analogously, let @xmath be the set of
    vertices of @xmath whose only neighbors in @xmath are @xmath and
    @xmath , and let @xmath be the set of vertices of @xmath whose only
    neighbors in @xmath are @xmath and @xmath . Let @xmath be the set of
    vertices of @xmath whose only neighbors in @xmath are @xmath and
    @xmath , @xmath be the set of vertices of @xmath whose only
    neighbors in @xmath are @xmath and @xmath and @xmath be the set of
    vertices of @xmath whose only neighbors in @xmath are @xmath and
    @xmath .

-    Let @xmath be the set of vertices of @xmath whose neighbors in
    @xmath are precisely @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , and let @xmath be
    the set of vertices of @xmath whose neighbors in @xmath are
    precisely @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Let @xmath be the set of
    vertices of @xmath whose neighbors in @xmath are precisely @xmath ,
    @xmath and @xmath , and let @xmath be the set of vertices of @xmath
    whose neighbors in @xmath are precisely @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

-    Let @xmath be the set of vertices of @xmath whose only neighbor in
    @xmath is precisely @xmath , and let @xmath be the set of vertices
    of @xmath whose only neighbor in @xmath is precisely @xmath . Let
    @xmath be the set of vertices of @xmath whose only neighbor in
    @xmath is precisely @xmath , and let @xmath be the set of vertices
    of @xmath whose only neighbor in @xmath is precisely @xmath .

-    Let @xmath be the set of vertices of @xmath that are anticomplete
    to @xmath .

###### Remark 2.18.

If @xmath , then there is an induced @xmath -sun in @xmath . If @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath or @xmath , then we find an induced tent. Moreover, if
@xmath or @xmath , then we find an induced @xmath -tent in @xmath .
Hence, in virtue of the previous chapters, we assume that @xmath are
empty sets.

The following Lemma is straightforward.

###### Lemma 2.19.

Let @xmath be a split graph that contains no induced tent or @xmath
-tent. If @xmath is @xmath -free, then @xmath is a partition of @xmath .

###### Proof.

Every vertex in @xmath is adjacent to precisely one, two, three or no
vertices of @xmath , for if it is adjacent to every vertex in @xmath ,
then we find a co- @xmath -tent @xmath . Moreover, by the previous
remark, the only possibilities are the sets @xmath . ∎

Let @xmath and let @xmath defined as in the previous sections.

###### Remark 2.20.

If @xmath , then there is a split decomposition of @xmath . Let us
consider the subset @xmath on the one hand, and on the other hand a
vertex @xmath such that @xmath is complete to @xmath and is anticomplete
to @xmath . Let @xmath and @xmath be the subgraphs induced by the vertex
subsets @xmath and @xmath , respectively. Hence, @xmath is the result of
the split composition of @xmath and @xmath with respect to @xmath and
@xmath . The same holds if @xmath considering the subgraphs induced by
the vertex subsets @xmath and @xmath , where in this case @xmath is
complete to @xmath and is anticomplete to @xmath .

If we consider @xmath a minimally non-circle graph, then @xmath is a
prime graph, for if not one of the factors should be non-circle and thus
@xmath would not be minimally non-circle [ 5 ] . Hence, in order
characterize those circle graphs that contain an induced co- @xmath
-tent, we will assume without loss of generality that @xmath is a prime
graph, and therefore @xmath and @xmath .

###### Claim 2.21.

Let @xmath be a split graph that contains an induced co- @xmath -tent.
If @xmath in @xmath fullfils one of the following conditions:

-   @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and @xmath and is not complete to
    @xmath (resp. @xmath or @xmath )

-   @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and @xmath and is not complete to
    @xmath

-   @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and @xmath and is not complete to
    @xmath

-   @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and @xmath and is not complete to
    @xmath , for @xmath

-   @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and @xmath and is not complete to
    @xmath and @xmath

-   @xmath is adjacent to @xmath , @xmath and @xmath and is not complete
    to @xmath and @xmath

Then, @xmath contains either an induced tent or @xmath -tent.

###### Proof.

If @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and @xmath and is not complete to @xmath
, then we find a tent induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath . If instead it is not complete to @xmath , then we find
a tent induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .
It is analogous by symmetry if @xmath is not complete to @xmath . If
@xmath is adjacent to @xmath and @xmath and is not complete to @xmath ,
then the tent is induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath . It is analogous by symmetry if @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and
@xmath and is not complete to @xmath . If @xmath is adjacent to @xmath
and @xmath and is not complete to @xmath , then we find a tent induced
by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . It is analogous
by symmetry if @xmath . If @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and @xmath and
is not complete to @xmath and @xmath , then we find a 4-tent induced by
the set @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .
Finally, if @xmath is adjacent to @xmath , @xmath and @xmath and is not
complete to @xmath and @xmath , then there are tents induced by the sets
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . ∎

It follows from the previous claim that the following subsets are empty:
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

Moreover, the following subsets coincide: @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath .

###### Claim 2.22.

If there is a vertex @xmath in @xmath such that @xmath belongs to either
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath or
@xmath , then there is an induced tent or a @xmath -tent in @xmath .

###### Proof.

If @xmath in @xmath , then we find a tent induced by the set @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . If @xmath in @xmath , then
we find a @xmath -tent induced by the set @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . If @xmath in @xmath , then we find a
@xmath -tent induced by the set @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath . If @xmath in @xmath , then we find a @xmath
-tent induced by the set @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath . It is analogous for @xmath in @xmath , swaping @xmath
for @xmath . If @xmath in @xmath , then we find a @xmath -tent induced
by the set @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
. If @xmath in @xmath , then we find a @xmath -tent induced by the set
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . If @xmath
in @xmath , then we find a 4-tent induced by the set @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . Finally, If @xmath in
@xmath , then we find a @xmath -tent induced by the set @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . ∎

As a direct consequence of the previous claims, we will assume without
loss of generality that the following subsets are empty: @xmath for
@xmath , @xmath for @xmath , @xmath for @xmath , @xmath for @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

###### Claim 2.23.

If @xmath is @xmath -free and contains no induced tent or @xmath -tent,
then @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Moreover, if @xmath , then @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath in @xmath , @xmath in @xmath for @xmath such that @xmath is
adjacent to @xmath , @xmath and @xmath and is nonadjacent to @xmath .
Hence, we find @xmath induced by the vertex set @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . Hence, @xmath . Notice
that this also implies that, if @xmath , then every vertex in @xmath or
@xmath is complete to @xmath . Suppose now that @xmath lies in @xmath
and is not complete to @xmath . Thus, there is a vertex @xmath in @xmath
such that @xmath is nonadjacent to @xmath . Let @xmath in @xmath and
@xmath in @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath are adjacent to @xmath .
Hence, we find a tent induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath . ∎

As a consequence of the previous claim, we will assume througout the
proof that @xmath . This follows from the fact that the vertices in
@xmath are exactly those vertices in @xmath that are complete to @xmath
and @xmath , since the endpoints of both subsets coincide. The same
holds for the vertices in @xmath , which are those vertices in @xmath
that are complete to @xmath .

We want to prove that @xmath is indeed a partition of @xmath . Towards
this purpose, we need the following claims.

###### Claim 2.24.

If @xmath is @xmath -free and @xmath in @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and
@xmath and anticomplete to @xmath for @xmath and @xmath , then @xmath is
complete to @xmath .

###### Proof.

Once discarded the subsets of @xmath that induce a tent or @xmath -tent
and those that are empty, the remaining cases are @xmath .

Let @xmath in @xmath adjacent to @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath ,
and suppose there is a vertex @xmath in @xmath nonadjacent to @xmath .
Then, we find a net @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

If instead @xmath in @xmath is adjacent to @xmath in @xmath and @xmath
in @xmath and is nonadjacent to some @xmath in @xmath , then we find a
net @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath . ∎

###### Claim 2.25.

If @xmath is @xmath -free and @xmath in @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and
@xmath and anticomplete to @xmath for @xmath and @xmath , then:

-    If @xmath , then @xmath lies in @xmath .

-    If @xmath , then @xmath lies in @xmath .

-    If @xmath , then @xmath lies in @xmath or @xmath .

###### Proof.

Suppose first that @xmath . Equivalently, either @xmath or @xmath . Let
@xmath in @xmath such that @xmath is adjacent to some vertices @xmath in
@xmath and @xmath in @xmath . If there is a vertex @xmath in @xmath
nonadjacent to @xmath and a vertex @xmath in @xmath adjacent to @xmath ,
then we find a tent induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath . If instead @xmath is nonadjacent to @xmath , then we
find a @xmath -tent induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath . If instead @xmath is nonadjacent to @xmath
and is adjacent to @xmath , then we find a @xmath -tent induced by
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . Hence,
@xmath is complete to @xmath and @xmath . If @xmath , since @xmath is
anticomplete to @xmath , then we find a tent induced by @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

Let us prove the second statement. If @xmath , then either @xmath ,
@xmath or @xmath . First, we need to see that @xmath is complete to
@xmath and @xmath . If @xmath , then @xmath . If @xmath , then there are
vertices @xmath and @xmath adjacent to @xmath . Suppose that @xmath is
nonadjacent to some vertex in @xmath . Then, we find a net @xmath
induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
. If instead there is a vertex @xmath nonadjacent to @xmath , then there
is a net @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath . It is analogous by symmetry if @xmath . However, by
Claim 2.23 , @xmath and @xmath are empty sets. Suppose now that @xmath ,
let @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath be vertices adjacent to @xmath
and @xmath in @xmath nonadjacent to @xmath . Then, we find @xmath
induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath . It is analogous if @xmath is nonadjacent to some vertex in
@xmath . Notice that, if @xmath is not complete to @xmath , we find a
@xmath -tent induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath .

Finally, suppose that @xmath . Hence, either @xmath . Suppose @xmath .
Let @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath be vertices adjacent to @xmath
, and let @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath . If @xmath is
nonadjacent to @xmath , then we find a @xmath -tent induced by @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . Hence, @xmath is
complete to @xmath . If instead @xmath is nonadjacent to @xmath , then
we find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath and therefore @xmath lies in @xmath .

Suppose now that @xmath . Notice that, in this case, there is no vertex
@xmath adjacent to @xmath and @xmath such that @xmath is anticomplete to
@xmath , since in that case we find a tent induced by @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . Hence, we discard this case.

Suppose that @xmath . Let @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath adjacent
to @xmath , and let @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath . If both
@xmath and @xmath are nonadjacent to @xmath , then we find a @xmath
-tent induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath . Hence, either @xmath is complete to @xmath or @xmath . If
@xmath is nonadjacent to @xmath , then we find a net @xmath induced by
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . If
instead @xmath is nonadjacent to @xmath , then we find a tent induced by
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and therefore
@xmath lies in @xmath . ∎

###### Claim 2.26.

If @xmath is @xmath -free and @xmath in @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and
@xmath and anticomplete to @xmath for @xmath and @xmath , then either
@xmath lies in @xmath (or @xmath if @xmath ), or @xmath or @xmath .

###### Proof.

Notice that, if @xmath is adjacent to @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in
@xmath and nonadjacent to @xmath in @xmath , then @xmath is complete to
@xmath for if not we find @xmath -tent induced by @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . However, if @xmath in
@xmath is adjacent to @xmath , then we find a tent induced by @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . Hence, we discard this
case. Suppose @xmath . If @xmath is adjacent to @xmath in @xmath and
@xmath in @xmath and is nonadjacent to @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in
@xmath , then we find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . However, if @xmath is
adjacent to @xmath , then we find a tent induced by @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . Suppose @xmath . Let @xmath in
@xmath and @xmath in @xmath are adjacent to @xmath and let @xmath in
@xmath nonadjacent to @xmath . Thus, we find a tent induced by @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . Suppose @xmath . If @xmath
in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath are adjacent to @xmath , and @xmath in
@xmath and @xmath in @xmath are nonadjacent to @xmath , then we find a
@xmath -tent induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath . Suppose @xmath . Let @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in
@xmath adjacent to @xmath , and @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath
nonadjacent to @xmath . Thus, we find a @xmath -tent induced by @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . Suppose @xmath .
Let @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath adjacent to @xmath and let
@xmath in @xmath for @xmath . If @xmath is nonadjacent to @xmath , then
we find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , for each @xmath . Hence, @xmath lies in
@xmath . Suppose @xmath . Let @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath be
adjacent to @xmath , and @xmath in @xmath for @xmath . If @xmath is
nonadjacent to @xmath , then we find a tent induced by @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . Hence, if @xmath , then @xmath lies
in @xmath or @xmath , and if @xmath for any @xmath , then @xmath lies in
@xmath . Finally, suppose @xmath . Let @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in
@xmath adjacent to @xmath , and let @xmath in @xmath for @xmath . If
@xmath is nonadjacent to both @xmath and @xmath , then we find a @xmath
-tent induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath . Thus, either @xmath is complete to @xmath or @xmath . If @xmath
is complete to @xmath and not complete to @xmath , then we find a tent
induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . If
instead @xmath is complete to @xmath and not complete to @xmath , then
we find a net @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath . If @xmath is nonadjacent to @xmath , then we
find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath . Hence, @xmath lies in @xmath . ∎

###### Claim 2.27.

If @xmath is @xmath -free, then the sets @xmath for @xmath , @xmath for
@xmath and @xmath , @xmath for @xmath and @xmath for @xmath are empty,
unless @xmath in @xmath or @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath in @xmath for @xmath . If @xmath and @xmath is not complete
to every vertex in @xmath , then there is either a vertex @xmath in
@xmath or a vertex in @xmath in @xmath that are nonadjacent to @xmath .
Suppose there is such a vertex @xmath , and let @xmath in @xmath
adjacent to @xmath . Thus, we find a tent induced by @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . Similarly, we find a tent if there
is a vertex in @xmath nonadjacent to @xmath . If @xmath , then we find a
tent induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and @xmath is
nonadjacent to @xmath . Similarly, we find a tent if @xmath considering
two analogous vertices @xmath and @xmath in @xmath .

Let @xmath in @xmath for @xmath and let us assume in the case where
@xmath that @xmath is not complete to every vertex in @xmath . Thus,
there is a vertex @xmath (or maybe a vertex @xmath in @xmath if @xmath ,
which is indistinct to this proof) in @xmath that is nonadjacent to
@xmath . If @xmath , then there are vertices @xmath in @xmath and @xmath
in @xmath (resp. @xmath in @xmath if @xmath ) such that @xmath and
@xmath (resp. @xmath ) are adjacent to @xmath . Hence, we find a tent
induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . If
instead @xmath , then we find a @xmath -tent induced by @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , where @xmath in @xmath is
adjacent to @xmath for @xmath and @xmath in @xmath is nonadjacent to
@xmath for @xmath .

Let @xmath in @xmath for @xmath . In either case, there are vertices
@xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath nonadjacent to @xmath , and
vertices @xmath in @xmath for @xmath adjacent to @xmath . Thus, we find
@xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath .

Finally, let @xmath in @xmath for @xmath . Suppose first that @xmath or
that @xmath is not complete to @xmath , thus there is a vertex @xmath in
@xmath nonadjacent to @xmath . In that case, we find a tent induced by
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . If instead @xmath
in @xmath and is complete to @xmath , then we find @xmath induced by
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .
∎

###### Remark 2.28.

It follows from the previous proof that @xmath and @xmath .

###### Claim 2.29.

If @xmath is @xmath -free, @xmath and @xmath , then @xmath . Moreover,
if @xmath , then @xmath , and if @xmath , then @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath in @xmath , and @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath be
vertices nonadjacent to @xmath . Since there are vertices @xmath in
@xmath , @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath adjacent to @xmath , then
we find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

The proof is analogous if @xmath (resp. if @xmath ) considering two
vertices @xmath and @xmath in @xmath ( @xmath , @xmath in @xmath ) such
that @xmath is adjacent to @xmath (resp. @xmath ) and is nonadjacent to
@xmath (resp. @xmath ). ∎

###### Claim 2.30.

Let @xmath in @xmath such that @xmath is adjacent to at least one vertex
in each nonempty @xmath , for every @xmath . If @xmath is @xmath -free,
then the following statements hold:

-    The vertex @xmath is complete to @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

-    If @xmath for some @xmath , then @xmath is complete to @xmath .
    Moreover, @xmath is either complete to @xmath or @xmath .

###### Proof.

The first statement follows as a direct consequence of Claim 2.21 : if
@xmath is adjacent to @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , then @xmath is
complete to @xmath and @xmath . Moreover, @xmath is complete to @xmath .

To prove the second statement, suppose first that @xmath and @xmath .
Let us see that @xmath is complete to @xmath . Suppose there is a vertex
@xmath in @xmath such that @xmath is nonadjacent to @xmath , and let
@xmath in @xmath adjacent to @xmath for each @xmath . We find @xmath
induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath . The proof is analogous if @xmath and @xmath .

Let us suppose now that @xmath is not complete to @xmath and @xmath . We
find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , where @xmath in @xmath , @xmath in @xmath for
each @xmath and @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and is nonadjacent to
@xmath for each @xmath . The proof is analogous if @xmath and @xmath and
if @xmath , independently on whether @xmath or not.

∎

By simplicity, we will also consider that every vertex in @xmath and
@xmath lies in @xmath , and that in particular, if @xmath , then such
vertices are complete to @xmath . This follows from Claim 2.30 and
Remark 2.28 . As a consequence of Claims 2.21 to 2.30 , we have the
following Lemma.

###### Lemma 2.31.

Let @xmath be a split graph that contains an induced co- @xmath -tent
and contains no induced tent or @xmath -tent. If @xmath is @xmath -free,
then all the following assertions hold:

-   @xmath is a partition of @xmath .

-    For each @xmath , @xmath is empty.

-    For each @xmath , @xmath is empty.

-    For each @xmath , @xmath is empty, and @xmath is also empty.

-    For each @xmath , @xmath is empty.

-    For each @xmath , @xmath is empty.

-    The subsets @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are empty.

-    The following subsets coincide: @xmath for @xmath ; @xmath , @xmath
    , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath (as the case may be,
    according to whether @xmath or not, for @xmath ).

Since @xmath , we will consider these vertices as those in @xmath that
are complete to @xmath and @xmath . Moreover, those vertices that are
complete to @xmath and are adjacent to @xmath will be considered as in
@xmath , thus @xmath is the set of independent vertices that are
complete to @xmath and are adjacent but not complete to @xmath . These
results are summarized in Figure 2.12 .

### Matrices 2-nested

En este capítulo se definen y caracterizan las matrices @xmath -nested,
las cuales son fundamentales para describir cada porción del modelo
circle para aquellos grafos split que también son circle. Los resultados
de este capítulo son cruciales para la prueba del resultado más
importante del próximo capítulo, el cual da una caracterización completa
de aquellos grafos split circle por subgrafos inducidos prohibidos. La
definición de matriz @xmath -nested es muy técnica, por lo cual omitiré
los detalles en este resumen. Sin embargo, daré una versión reducida de
la definición y un ejemplo para entender un poco qué motivó el estudio
de estas matrices.

Las matrices enriquecidas se definen como aquellas matrices de @xmath ’s
y @xmath ’s para las cuales algunas de sus filas cuentan con una
etiqueta L, R o LR y algunas de ellas a su vez tienen asignado el color
rojo o azul. A su vez, dada una matriz enriquecida @xmath , decimos que
@xmath es una matriz LR-ordenable si admite un ordenamiento @xmath que
cumpla con: (1) la propiedad de los unos consecutivos para sus filas,
(2) la tira de @xmath ’s de aquellas filas etiquetadas con L (resp. con
R) comienzan en la primera columna (resp. terminan en la última columna)
y (3) aquellas filas etiquetadas con LR, o bien quedan como ordenadas
como una única tira de @xmath ’s que comienza en la primera columna o
termina en la última columna, o bien como dos tiras de @xmath ’s
separadas, una que comienza en la primera columna y otra que termina en
la última columna. Esto nos lleva a considerar los bloques de una matriz
enriquecida, una vez ordenada según @xmath . Para cada fila de @xmath
etiquetada con L o LR y que tiene un @xmath en la primera columna del
orden @xmath , llamamos L-bloque al subconjunto maximal de columnas
consecutivas empezando desde la primera en la cual la fila tiene un
@xmath . Los R-bloques se definen de manera análoga. Para toda fila sin
etiqueta, su U-bloque es el conjunto maximal de columnas consecutivas en
las que hay un @xmath en esa fila.

Las matrices @xmath -nested son aquellas matrices LR-ordenables que
admiten un bi-coloreo total de sus bloques que además cumple con una
lista de 9 propiedades. Estas propiedades se derivan de las condiciones
necesarias que se requieren para determinar la ubicación de las cuerdas
en una cierta porción del modelo círculo para un grafo split circle.
Para entender un poco más sobre estas condiciones, consideremos el grafo
split @xmath de la Figura 2.13 .

Este grafo es split y también es circle. Para comenzar a dar un modelo
circle del mismo, consideramos primero poner las cuerdas del subgrafo
isomorfo al tent, el cual está dado por aquellos vértices de color verde
claro y oscuro. Consideramos también los demás vértices de @xmath de
acuerdo a las particiones @xmath y @xmath descriptas en el capítulo
anterior. En nuestro ejemplo, tenemos que los vértices violetas @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath y @xmath pertenecen al subconjunto @xmath , y los
vértices naranjas @xmath son los únicos vértices independientes en
@xmath , y todos son adyacentes a vértices en @xmath . Los vértices
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath y @xmath sólo son adyacentes a @xmath y por lo
tanto pertenecen a @xmath . Por su parte, los vértices @xmath , @xmath y
@xmath también son adyacentes a @xmath , @xmath y @xmath y @xmath y
@xmath , respectivamente.

Para colocar las cuerdas correspondientes a todo vértice de @xmath es
necesario primero dibujar aquellas cuerdas que representan vértices en
@xmath . Esto se deduce del hecho de que las cuerdas correspondientes a
@xmath tienen un extremo en el arco @xmath y el otro extremo en el arco
@xmath , y las cuerdas de vértices en @xmath tienen ambos extremos
dentro del arco @xmath o ambos extremos dentro del arco @xmath , y
siempre intersecando cuerdas que representan vértices de @xmath . Luego,
para colocar las cuerdas que corresponden a @xmath debemos establecer un
ordenamiento de los vértices de este conjunto que respete el orden
parcial dado por la inclusión de los vecindarios de aquellos vértices en
@xmath . Por ejemplo, @xmath , luego sabemos que un ordenamiento para
las cuerdas de @xmath que nos permita dar un modelo circle debe contener
alguna de las siguientes subsecuencias: @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , o
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , o @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , o @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath . Además, como @xmath y @xmath y @xmath no están
anidados, las cuerdas correspondientes a @xmath y @xmath deben ser
dibujadas en distintas porciones del modelo circle, ya que representan
vértices independientes y por lo tanto sus cuerdas no pueden
intersecarse. Por su parte, @xmath es adyacente sólo a @xmath , luego
@xmath está contenido en @xmath y @xmath y es disjunto a @xmath . Luego,
la cuerda que represente @xmath puede ser colocada indistintamente en
cualquiera de las dos porciones del círculo que corresponden a la
partición @xmath .

Por lo tanto, cuando consideramos cómo colocar las cuerdas, nos
encontramos con dos decisiones importantes: (1) en qué orden debemos
poner las cuerdas que representan vértices en @xmath para que esto nos
permita dibujar aquellos vértices independientes adyacentes a @xmath , y
(2) en qué porción del modelo circle debemos poner ambos extremos de las
cuerdas que representan vértices en @xmath .

Al contrario que las cuerdas correspondientes a los vértices @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath y @xmath , las cuerdas que representan a @xmath , @xmath
y @xmath tienen sólo uno de sus extremos en algún arco designado para
@xmath , más precisamente, en los arcos @xmath y @xmath . Más aún, cada
uno de estos vértices tiene una única ubicación posible para cada
extremo de su cuerda. Si queremos colocar las cuerdas correspondientes a
los vértices @xmath , @xmath y @xmath , debemos notar primero que la
condición “anidados o disjuntos” también debe valer para los vecindarios
de los vértices @xmath , tanto si nos restringimos a @xmath como en las
demás particiones de @xmath . Más precisamente, como @xmath es adyacente
a @xmath , @xmath y @xmath , y @xmath no es adyacente a @xmath ,
entonces necesariamente @xmath debe estar contenido en @xmath . Algo
similar ocurre con @xmath y @xmath , mientras que @xmath y @xmath son
disjuntos.

Si consideramos la matriz enriquecida @xmath , las primeras cuatro filas
corresponden a @xmath y son filas sin etiqueta y sin color. Asimismo,
los vértices @xmath y @xmath corresponderían a filas etiquetadas con L y
coloreadas de rojo y azul, respectivamente, @xmath correspondería a una
fila etiquetada con R y coloreada de azul.

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Observemos que, como @xmath es adyacente a @xmath , @xmath y @xmath , la
cuerda que corresponde a @xmath es forzada a estar primera entre todas
las cuerdas correspondientes a vértices de @xmath . Esto se deduce de
que @xmath tiene una única ubicación posible, en la que uno de sus
extremos va dentro del arco @xmath , por lo que necesitamos que @xmath
sea la primera cuerda de @xmath que viene justo después de @xmath . Más
aún, esto se refuerza por el hecho de que @xmath es adyacente a @xmath y
@xmath , por lo que la cuerda que representa a @xmath debe ser dibujada
primero cuando consideramos el orden dado por los vecindarios de
aquellos vértices independientes que tienen al menos un extremo en el
arco @xmath . Luego, que @xmath sea el primero de los vértices en
cualquier ordenamiento válido para @xmath es una condición necesaria al
buscar un ordenamiento que cumpla con la propiedad de los unos
consecutivos para la matriz @xmath . Esta es una de las propiedades que
se consideran en la definición de @xmath -nested y LR-ordenamiento, que
está asociada a las etiquetas de las filas. A continuación damos un
modelo circle para el grafo @xmath en la Figura 2.14 .

### Chapter 3 @xmath-nested matrices

In this chapter, we will define and characterize nested and @xmath
-nested matrices, which are of fundamental importance to describe each
portion of a circle model for those split graphs that are also circle.
The results in this chapter are crucial for the proof of the main result
in the next chapter, which gives a complete characterization of split
circle graphs by minimal forbidden induced subgraphs.

In order to give some motivation for the definitions on this chapter,
let us consider the split graph @xmath represented in Figure 3.1 . Since
@xmath contains an induced tent @xmath , we can consider the partitions
@xmath and @xmath as defined in Section 2.1 .

Notice that every vertex in the complete partition of @xmath lies in
@xmath , for the only adjacency of these vertices with regard to @xmath
is the vertex @xmath . Thus, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .
Moreover, the orange vertices are the only independent vertices in
@xmath and these vertices are adjacent only to vertices in @xmath , thus
they all lie in @xmath . Furthermore, the graph @xmath is also a circle
graph. Indeed, we would like to give a circle model for @xmath . The
tent is a prime graph, and as such, @xmath admits a unique circle model.
Hence, let us begin by considering a circle model as the one presented
in Figure 3.2 , having only the chords that represent the subgraph
@xmath . We will consider the arcs and chords of a model described
clockwise. For example, in Figure 3.2 the arc @xmath is the portion of
the circle that lies between @xmath and @xmath when traversing the
circumference clockwise.

To place the chords corresponding to each vertex in @xmath , first we
need to place the chords that represent every vertex in @xmath . This
follows from the fact that a chord representing a vertex in @xmath has
one endpoint between the arc @xmath and the other endpoint between the
arc @xmath , and a chord representing a vertex in @xmath has either both
endpoints inside the arc @xmath or both endpoints inside the arc @xmath
, always intersecting chords representing vertices in @xmath . Thus, in
order to place the chords corresponding to each vertex of @xmath , we
need to establish an ordering of the vertices in @xmath that respects
the partial ordering relationship given by the neighbourhoods of the
vertices in @xmath . For example, since @xmath , it follows that an
ordering of the chords in @xmath that allows us to give a circle model
must contain one of the following subsequences: @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
or @xmath , @xmath , @xmath or @xmath , @xmath , @xmath or @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath . Moreover, since @xmath and @xmath and @xmath are not
nested, then the chords corresponding to @xmath and @xmath must be drawn
in distinct portions of the circle model, for they represent independent
vertices and thus the chords cannot intersect. The vertex @xmath is
adjacent only to @xmath , thus @xmath is contained in both @xmath and
@xmath and is disjoint with @xmath . Hence, the chord that represents
@xmath may be placed indistinctly in any of the two portions of the
circle corresponding to the partition @xmath .

Therefore, when considering the placement of the chords, we find
ourselves in front of two important decisions: (1) in which order should
we place the chords corresponding to the vertices in @xmath so that we
can draw the chords of those independent vertices adjacent to @xmath ,
and (2) in which portion of the circle model should we place both
endpoints of the chords corresponding to vertices in @xmath . We give a
circle model for @xmath in Figure 3.3

Yet in this small example of a split graph that is circle, it becomes
evident that there is a property that must hold for every pair of
independent vertices that have both of its endpoints placed within the
same arc of the circumference. This led to the definition of nested
matrices, which was the first step in order to translate some of these
problems to having certain properties in the adjacency matrix @xmath
(See Section 1.2 for more details on the definition of @xmath ).

###### Definition 3.1.

Let @xmath be a @xmath -matrix. We say @xmath is nested if there is a
consecutive-ones ordering for the rows and every two rows are disjoint
or nested.

###### Definition 3.2.

A split graph @xmath is nested if and only if @xmath is a nested matrix.

###### Theorem 3.3.

A @xmath -matrix is nested if and only if it contains no @xmath -gem as
a submatrix (See Figure 3.4 ).

###### Proof.

Since no Tucker matrix has the C @xmath P and the rows of the @xmath
-gem are neither disjoint nor nested, no nested matrix contains a Tucker
matrix or a @xmath -gem as submatrices. Conversely, as each Tucker
matrix contains a @xmath -gem as a submatrix, every matrix containing no
@xmath -gem as a submatrix is a nested matrix. ∎

Let us consider the matrix @xmath that corresponds to the example given
in Figure 3.1 , where the rows are given by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath , and the columns are @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Notice that the existance of a C @xmath P for the columns of the matrix
@xmath is a necessary condition to find an ordering of the vertices in
@xmath that is compatible with the partial ordering given by containment
for the vertices in @xmath . Moreover, if the matrix @xmath is nested,
then any two independent vertices are either nested or disjoint. In
other words, if @xmath is nested, then we can draw every chord
corresponding to an independent vertex in @xmath in the same arc of the
circumference. However, this is not the case in the previous example,
for the vertices @xmath and @xmath are neither disjoint nor nested, and
thus they cannot be drawn in the same portion of the circle model.
Hence, @xmath is not a nested matrix, and thus the notion of nested
matrix is not enough to determine whether there is a circle model for a
given split graph or not.

Let us see one more example. Consider @xmath to be the split graph
presented in Figure 3.5 . Notice that this graph is equal to @xmath plus
three new independent vertices.

Moreover, unlike @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , the chords that
represent these new independent vertices @xmath , @xmath and @xmath have
only one of its endpoints in the arcs corresponding to the area of the
circle designated for @xmath , this is, in the arcs @xmath and @xmath .
Furthermore, each of these new vertices has a unique possible placement
for each endpoint of their corresponding chord. If we consider the rows
given by the vertices @xmath and the columns given by @xmath , then the
adjacency matrix @xmath in this example is as follows:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As in the previous example, @xmath is not a nested matrix. Furthermore,
notice that in this case not every adjacency of each independent vertex
@xmath is depicted in this matrix, since @xmath , @xmath and @xmath all
are adjacent to at least one vertex in @xmath .

Let us concentrate in the placement of the endpoints of the chords
representing @xmath , @xmath and @xmath that lie between the arcs @xmath
and @xmath . Notice that the “nested or disjoint” property must still
hold, and not only for those vertices in @xmath . More precisely, since
@xmath is adjacent to @xmath , @xmath and @xmath and @xmath is
nonadjacent to @xmath and adjacent to @xmath and @xmath , then
necessarily @xmath must be contained in @xmath . Something similar
occurs with @xmath and @xmath , whereas @xmath and @xmath are disjoint.

There is one situation in this example that did not occur in the
previous one. Since @xmath is adjacent to @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ,
then the chord corresponding to the vertex @xmath is forced to be placed
first within every chord corresponding to @xmath . This follows from the
fact that a chord that represents @xmath has a unique possible placement
inside the arc @xmath , for we need @xmath to be the first chord of
@xmath that comes right after @xmath . Moreover, this is confirmed by
the fact that @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and @xmath , thus the chord
corresponding to the vertex @xmath must be drawn first when considering
the ordering given by the neighbourhoods of those independent vertices
that have at least one endpoint lying in @xmath . It follows from the
previous that @xmath being the first vertex in the ordering is a
necessary condition when searching for a consecutive-ones ordering for
the matrix @xmath . See Figure 3.6 , where we give a circle model for
the graph @xmath .

The previously described situations must also hold for each partition
@xmath of @xmath . We translated the problem of giving a circle model to
the fullfilment of some properties for each of the matrices @xmath ,
where @xmath and these partitions depend on whether @xmath contains an
induced tent, @xmath -tent or co- @xmath -tent. This led to the
definition of enriched matrices, which allowed us to model some of the
above mentioned properties, and also others that came up when
considering split graphs containing a @xmath -tent and a co- @xmath
-tent.

###### Definition 3.4.

Let @xmath be a @xmath -matrix. We say @xmath is an enriched matrix if
all of the following conditions hold:

1.   Each row of @xmath is either unlabeled or labeled with one of the
    following labels: L or R or LR. We say that a row is an LR-row
    (resp. L-row, R-row) if it is labeled with LR (resp. L, R).

2.   Each row of @xmath is either uncolored or colored with either blue
    or red.

3.   The only colored rows may be those labeled with L or R, and those
    LR-rows having a @xmath in every column.

4.   The LR-rows having a @xmath in every column are all colored with
    the same color.

The underlying matrix of @xmath is the @xmath -matrix that coincides
with @xmath that has neither labels nor colored rows.

We will denote the color assignment for a row with a colored bullet at
the right side of the matrix.

The color assignment for some of the rows represents in which arc of the
circle corresponding to @xmath we must draw one or both endpoints when
considering the placement of the chords. Some of the independent
vertices have a unique possible placement, and some of them can be –a
priori– drawn in either two of the arcs corresponding to @xmath .
Moreover, the labeling of the rows explains ‘’from which direction does
the chord come from” if we are standing in a particular portion of the
circle. For example, the following is the matrix @xmath for the graph
represented in Figure 3.6 considered as an enriched matrix –taking into
account all the information on the placement of the chords:

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

###### Definition 3.5.

Let @xmath be an enriched matrix. We say @xmath is LR-orderable if there
is a linear ordering @xmath for the columns of @xmath such that each of
the following assertions holds:

-   @xmath is a consecutive-ones ordering for every non-LR row of @xmath
    .

-    The ordering @xmath is such that the ones in every nonempty row
    labeled with L (resp. R) start in the first column (resp. end in the
    last column).

-   @xmath is a consecutive-ones ordering for the complements of every
    LR-row of @xmath .

Such an ordering is called an LR-ordering . For each row of @xmath
labeled with L or LR and having a @xmath in the first column of @xmath ,
we define its L-block (with respect to @xmath ) as the maximal set of
consecutive columns of @xmath starting from the first one on which the
row has a 1. R-blocks are defined on an entirely analogous way. For each
unlabeled row of @xmath , we say its U-block (with respect to @xmath )
is the set of columns having a @xmath in the row. The blocks of @xmath
with respect to @xmath are its L-blocks, its R-blocks and its U-blocks.

###### Definition 3.6.

Let @xmath be an enriched matrix. We say an L-block (resp. R-block,
U-block) is colored if there is a 1-color assignment for every entry of
the block.

A block bi-coloring for the blocks of @xmath is a color assignment with
either red or blue for some L-blocks, U-blocks and R-blocks of @xmath .
A block bi-coloring is total if every L-block, R-block and U-block of
@xmath is colored, and is partial if otherwise.

Notice that for every enriched matrix, the only colored rows are those
labeled with L or R and those empty LR-rows. Moreover, for every
LR-orderable matrix, there is an ordering of the columns such that every
row labeled with L (resp. R) starts in the first column (resp. ends in
the last column), and thus all its @xmath ’s appear consecutively. Thus,
if an enriched matrix is also LR-orderable, then the given coloring
induces a partial block bi-coloring (see Figure 3.7 ), in which every
empty LR-row remains the same, whereas for every nonempty colored
labeled row, we color all its @xmath ’s with the color given in the
definition of the matrix.

We now define @xmath -nested matrices, which will allow us to address
and solve both the problem of ordering the columns in each adjacency
matrix @xmath of a split graph for each partition @xmath , and the
problem of deciding if there is a feasible distribution of the
independent vertices adjacent to @xmath between the two portions of the
circle corresponding to @xmath . This allows to give a circle model for
the given graph. We give a complete characterization of these matrices
by forbidden subconfigurations at the end of this chapter.

###### Definition 3.7.

Let @xmath be an enriched matrix. We say @xmath is @xmath -nested if
there exists an LR-ordering @xmath of the columns and an assignment of
colors red or blue to the blocks of @xmath such that all of the
following conditions hold:

1.   If an LR-row has an L-block and an R-block, then they are colored
    with distinct colors.

2.   For each colored row @xmath in @xmath , any of its blocks is
    colored with the same color as @xmath in @xmath .

3.   If an L-block of an LR-row is properly contained in the L-block of
    an L-row, then both blocks are colored with different colors.

4.   Every L-block of an LR-row and any R-block are disjoint. The same
    holds for an R-block of an LR-row and any L-block.

5.   If an L-block and an R-block are not disjoint, then they are
    colored with distinct colors.

6.   Each two U-blocks colored with the same color are either disjoint
    or nested.

7.   If an L-block and a U-block are colored with the same color, then
    either they are disjoint or the U-block is contained in the L-block.
    The same holds replacing L-block for R-block.

8.   If two distinct L-blocks of non-LR-rows are colored with distinct
    colors, then every LR-row has an L-block. The same holds replacing
    L-block for R-block.

9.   If two LR-rows overlap, then the L-block of one and the R-block of
    the other are colored with the same color.

An assignment of colors red and blue to the blocks of @xmath that
satisfies all these properties is called a (total) block bi-coloring .

###### Remark 3.8.

We will give some insight on which properties we are modeling with
Definition 3.7 , which are necessary conditions that each matrix @xmath
must fullfil in order to give a circle model for any split graph
containing a tent, @xmath -tent or co- @xmath -tent.

The LR-rows represent independent vertices that have both endpoints in
the arcs corresponding to @xmath . The difference between these rows and
those that are unlabeled, is that one endpoint of the chords must be
placed in one of the arcs corresponding to @xmath and the other endpoint
must be placed in the other arc corresponding to @xmath . Hence, the
first property ensures that, when deciding where to place the chord
corresponding to an LR-row, if the ordering indicates that the chord
intersects some of its adjacent vertices in one arc and the other in the
other arc, then the distinct blocks corresponding to the row must be
colored with distinct colors.

With the second property, we ensure that the colors that are
pre-assigned are respected, since they correspond to independent
vertices with a unique possible placement.

The third property refers to the ordering given by containement for the
vertices. We will further on see that every LR-row represents vertices
that are adjacent to almost every vertex in the complete partition
@xmath of @xmath . Hence, when dividing the LR-rows into blocks, we need
to ensure that each of its block is not properly contained in the
neighbourhoods of vertices that are nonadjacent to at least one
partition of @xmath . Something similar must hold for L-rows
(resp. R-rows) and U-rows, and L-rows (resp. R-rows) and LR-rows. This
is modeled by properties 7 and 8 .

The properties 4 , 5 , 6 and 9 refer to the previously discussed
‘’nested or disjoint” property that we need to ensure in order to give a
circle model for @xmath .

This chapter is organized as follows. In Section 3.1 we give some more
definitions which are necessary to state a characterization of @xmath
-nested matrices. In Section 3.2 we define and characterize admissible
matrices, which give necessary conditions for a matrix to admit a total
block bi-coloring. In Section 3.3 we define and characterize
LR-orderable and partially @xmath -nested matrices, and then we prove
some properties of LR-orderings in admissible matrices. Finally, in
Section 3.4 we prove Theorem LABEL:teo:2-nested_caract_bymatrices ,
which characterizes @xmath -nested matrices by forbidden
subconfigurations.

#### 3.1 A characterization for @xmath-nested matrices

In this section, we begin by giving some definitions and examples that
are necessary to state Theorem LABEL:teo:2-nested_caract_bymatrices ,
which is presented at the end of this section and is the main result of
this chapter. The proof of Theorem LABEL:teo:2-nested_caract_bymatrices
will be given in Section 3.4 .

###### Definition 3.9.

Let @xmath be an enriched matrix. The dual matrix of @xmath is defined
as the enriched matrix @xmath that coincides with the underlying matrix
of @xmath and for which every row of @xmath that is labeled with L
(resp. R) is now labeled with R (resp. L) and every other row remains
the same. Also, the color assigned to each row remains as in @xmath .

The @xmath -gem, @xmath -gem and @xmath -gem are the following enriched
matrices:

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

respectively.

###### Definition 3.10.

Let @xmath be an enriched matrix. We say that @xmath contains a gem
(resp. doubly-weak gem ) if it contains a @xmath -gem (resp. a @xmath
-gem) as a subconfiguration. We say that @xmath contains a weak gem if
it contains a @xmath -gem such that, either the first is an L-row
(resp. R-row) and the second is a U-row, or the first is an LR-row and
the second is a non-LR-row. We say that a @xmath -gem is badly-colored
if the entries in the column in which both rows have a @xmath are in
blocks colored with the same color.

Let @xmath be an LR row of @xmath . We denote with @xmath to the
complement of @xmath , this is, the row that has a @xmath in each
coordinate of @xmath that has a 0, and has a @xmath in each coordinate
of @xmath that has a 1.

###### Definition 3.11.

Let @xmath be an enriched matrix and let @xmath be a LR-ordering. We
define @xmath as the enriched matrix that arises from @xmath by:

-    Replacing each LR-row by its complement.

-    Adding two distinguished rows: both rows have a @xmath in every
    column, one is labeled with L and the other is labeled with R.

In Figures 3.10 , 3.11 , 3.12 , 3.13 and 3.14 we define some matrices,
for they play an important role in the sequel. We will use green and
orange to represent red and blue or blue and red, respectively. For
every enriched matrix represented in the figures of this chapter, if a
row labeled with L or R appears in black, then it may be colored with
either red or blue indistinctly. Moreover, whenever a row is labeled
with L (LR) (resp. R (LR) ), then such a row may be either a row labeled
with L or LR (resp. R or LR) indistinctly.

The matrices @xmath represented in Figure 3.11 are defined as follows:
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , for every odd @xmath . In the case
of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , the labeled rows may be either L or LR
indistinctly, and in the case of their dual matrices, the labeled rows
may be either R or LR indistinctly.

The matrices @xmath in Figure 3.12 are defined as follows. If @xmath is
odd, then @xmath for @xmath , and if @xmath is even, then @xmath for
@xmath . The remaining matrices have the same size whether @xmath is
even or odd: @xmath for @xmath , @xmath for @xmath , @xmath for @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath for @xmath , @xmath for every @xmath and @xmath for
@xmath . With regard to the coloring of the labeled rows, if @xmath is
even, then the first and last row of @xmath and @xmath are colored with
the same color, and in @xmath and @xmath are colored with distinct
colors.

In the matrices @xmath , the integer @xmath represents the number of
unlabeled rows between the first row and the first LR-row. The matrices
@xmath described in Figure 3.13 are defined as follow: @xmath for every
@xmath , @xmath for every @xmath and @xmath ; @xmath for every @xmath ,
@xmath for every @xmath , @xmath ; @xmath for every @xmath , @xmath for
every @xmath and @xmath . If @xmath is even, then the first and last row
of every matrix in @xmath are colored with distinct colors.

Now we are in conditions to state Theorem
LABEL:teo:2-nested_caract_bymatrices , which characterizes @xmath
-nested matrices by forbidden subconfigurations and is the main result
of this chapter. The proof for this theorem will be given at the end of
the chapter.

###### Theorem 3.12 (label=teo:2-nested_caract_bymatrices).

Let @xmath be an enriched matrix. Then, @xmath is @xmath -nested if and
only if @xmath contains none of the following listed matrices or their
dual matrices as subconfigurations:

-   @xmath , @xmath , @xmath or @xmath for every even @xmath (See Figure
    3.15 )

-    Every enriched matrix in the family @xmath (See Figure 3.10 )

-    Every enriched matrix in the family @xmath (See Figure 3.11 )

-    Every enriched matrix in the family @xmath (See Figure 3.12 )

-    Every enriched matrix in the family @xmath (See Figure 3.13 )

-    Monochromatic gems, monochromatic weak gems, badly-colored
    doubly-weak gems

and @xmath contains no Tucker matrices and none of the enriched matrices
in @xmath or their dual matrices as subconfigurations (See Figure 3.14
).

Throughout the following sections we will give some definitions and
characterizations that will allow us to prove this theorem. In Section
3.2 we will define and characterize the notion of admissibility, which
englobes all the properties we need to consider when coloring the blocks
of an enriched matrix. In Section 3.3 , we give a characterization for
LR-orderable matrices by forbidden subconfigurations. Afterwards, we
define and characterize partially @xmath -nested matrices, which are
those enriched matrices that admit an LR-ordering and for which the
given pre-coloring of those labeled rows induces a partial block
bi-coloring. These definitions and characterizations allow us to prove
Lemmas 3.36 and 3.38 , which are of fundamental importance for the proof
of Theorem LABEL:teo:2-nested_caract_bymatrices .

#### 3.2 Admissibility

In this section we will define the notion of admissibility for an
enriched @xmath -matrix, which will allow us to characterize those
enriched matrices for which there is a total block bi-coloring for
@xmath . In the next chapter, we will see that such a block bi-coloring
is a necessary condition to give a circle model.

Notice that the existance of a block bi-coloring for an enriched matrix
is a property that can be defined and characterized by subconfigurations
and forbidden submatrices.

Let us consider the matrices defined in 3.10 . The matrices in this
family are all examples of enriched matrices that do not admit a total
block bi-coloring as defined in Definition 3.7 .

For example, let us consider @xmath . In order to have a block
bi-coloring for every block of @xmath , it is necessary that @xmath
admits an LR-ordering of its columns. In particular, in such an ordering
every row labeled with L starts in the first column. Hence, if there is
indeed an LR-ordering for @xmath , then the existance of two distinct
non-nested rows labeled with L is not possible. The same holds if both
rows are labeled with R. We can use similar arguments to see that @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath and @xmath do not admit an LR-ordering.

Let us consider the matrix @xmath . In this case, we see that condition
5 does not hold for the enriched matrix @xmath .

Consider now the matrix @xmath . It follows from property 8 that if an
enriched matrix has two distinct rows labeled with L and colored with
distinct colors, then every LR-row has an L-block, and thus @xmath does
not admit a total block-bi-coloring. Suppose now that @xmath is a
submatrix of some enriched matrix and that the LR-row is nonempty.
Notice that, if the LR-row has an L-block then it is properly contained
in both rows labeled with L. It follows from this and property 3 of the
definition of @xmath -nested that, that the L-block of the LR-row must
be colored with a distinct color than the one given to each row labeled
with L. However, each of these rows is colored with a distinct color,
thus a total block-bi-coloring is not possible in that case.

If we consider the enriched matrix @xmath , then it follows from
property 4 that there is no possible LR-ordering such that the L-block
of the LR-row does not intersect the L-row, and the same follows for the
R-block of the LR-row and the R-row of @xmath .

Let us consider an the enriched matrix in which we find @xmath as a
subconfiguration.If the LR-row has an L-block, then it is contained in
the L-row, and the same holds for the R-block of the LR-row and the
R-row. By property 3 , the L-block must be colored with a distinct color
than the L-row, and the R-block must be colored with a distinct color
than the R-row. Equivalently, the L-block and the R-block of the LR-row
are colored with the same color. However, this is not possible by
property 1 . Similarly, we can see that @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath do not admit a total block bi-coloring, also having in
mind that the property 9 must hold pairwise for LR-rows.

###### Definition 3.13.

Let @xmath be an enriched matrix. We define the following list of
properties:

1.   If two rows are labeled both with L or both with R, then they are
    nested.

2.   If two rows with the same color are labeled one with L and the
    other with R, then they are disjoint.

3.   If two rows with distinct colors are labeled one with L and the
    other with R, then either they are disjoint or there is no column
    where both have @xmath entries.

4.   If two rows @xmath and @xmath have distinct colors and are labeled
    one with L and the other with R, then any LR-row with at least one
    non-zero column has nonempty intersection with either @xmath or
    @xmath .

5.   If two rows @xmath and @xmath with distinct colors are labeled both
    with L or both with R, then for any LR-row @xmath , @xmath is
    contained in @xmath or @xmath is contained in @xmath .

6.   If two non-disjoint rows @xmath and @xmath with distinct colors,
    one labeled with L and the other labeled with R, then any LR-row is
    disjoint with regard to the intersection of @xmath and @xmath .

7.   If two rows with the same color are labeled one with L and the
    other with R, then for any LR-row @xmath one of them is contained in
    @xmath . Moreover, the same holds for any two rows with distinct
    colors and labeled with the same letter.

8.   For each three non-disjoint rows such that two of them are LR-rows
    and the other is labeled with either L or R, two of them are nested.

9.   If two rows @xmath and @xmath with distinct colors are labeled one
    with L and the other with R, and there are two LR-rows @xmath and
    @xmath such that @xmath is neither disjoint or contained in @xmath
    and @xmath is neither disjoint or contained in @xmath , then @xmath
    is nested in @xmath or viceversa.

10.  For each three LR-rows, two of them are nested.

For each of the above properties, we will characterize the set of
minimal forbidden subconfigurations with the following Lemma.

###### Lemma 3.14.

For any enriched matrix @xmath , all of the following assertions hold:

1.  @xmath satisfies 1 if and only if @xmath contains no @xmath or its
    dual matrix as a subconfiguration.

2.  @xmath satisfies 2 if and only if @xmath contains no @xmath or its
    dual matrix as a subconfiguration.

3.  @xmath satisfies 3 if and only if @xmath contains no @xmath or its
    dual matrix as a subconfiguration.

4.  @xmath satisfies 4 if and only if @xmath contains no @xmath , @xmath
    or their dual matrices as subconfigurations.

5.  @xmath satisfies 5 if and only if @xmath contains no @xmath , @xmath
    or their dual matrices as subconfigurations.

6.  @xmath satisfies 6 if and only if @xmath contains no @xmath or its
    dual matrix as a subconfiguration.

7.  @xmath satisfies 7 if and only if @xmath contains no @xmath , @xmath
    , @xmath , @xmath or their dual matrices as subconfigurations.

8.  @xmath satisfies 8 if and only if @xmath contains no @xmath , @xmath
    , @xmath or their dual matrices as subconfigurations.

9.  @xmath satisfies 9 if and only if @xmath contains no @xmath , @xmath
    , @xmath or its dual matrix as a subconfiguration.

10. @xmath satisfies 10 if and only if @xmath contains no @xmath ,
    @xmath , @xmath or their dual matrices as subconfigurations.

###### Proof.

First, we will find every forbidden subconfiguration given by statement
1 .

Let @xmath and @xmath be two rows labeled with the same letter, and
suppose they are not nested. Thus, there is a column in which @xmath has
a @xmath and @xmath has a @xmath , and another column in which @xmath
has a @xmath and @xmath has a @xmath . Since the color of each row is
irrelevant in the definition, we find @xmath as a forbidden
subconfiguration in @xmath .

Let us find now every forbidden subconfiguration given by statement 2 .
Let @xmath and @xmath be rows labeled with distinct letters and colored
with the same color. If @xmath and @xmath are not disjoint, then there
is a column in which both rows have a @xmath . In this case, we find
@xmath as a forbidden subconfiguration in @xmath .

For statement 3 , let @xmath and @xmath be two rows labeled with
distinct letters and colored with distinct colors, and suppose they are
not disjoint and there is a column @xmath such that both rows have a
@xmath in column @xmath . Thus, there is a column @xmath such that both
rows have a @xmath in column @xmath . If @xmath and @xmath have the same
color, then we find @xmath as a subconfiguration. Hence, @xmath is a
forbidden subconfiguration in @xmath .

With regard to statement 4 , let @xmath and @xmath be two rows labeled
with distinct letters and colored with distinct colors. Let @xmath be a
non-zero LR-row. Suppose that @xmath is disjoint with both @xmath and
@xmath . Hence, there is a column @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath
have a @xmath and @xmath has a @xmath . Moreover, either there are two
distinct columns @xmath and @xmath such that the column @xmath has a
@xmath in row @xmath and a @xmath in the other rows, for @xmath , or
there is a column @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath both have a @xmath
in column @xmath and @xmath has a @xmath . If the last statement holds,
we find @xmath as a subconfiguration considering only the submatrix
given by the rows @xmath and @xmath . If instead there are two distinct
columns @xmath and @xmath as described above, then we find @xmath as a
minimal forbidden subconfiguration in @xmath .

For statement 5 , let @xmath and @xmath be two rows labeled with L and
colored with distinct colors, and let @xmath be an LR-row. If @xmath and
@xmath are not nested, then we find @xmath . Suppose that @xmath and
@xmath are nested. If neither @xmath or @xmath are contained in @xmath ,
then there is a column @xmath in which @xmath and @xmath have a @xmath
and @xmath has a @xmath . Thus, @xmath is a forbidden subconfiguration
in @xmath .

For statement 6 , let @xmath and @xmath be two non-disjoint rows colored
with distinct colors, @xmath labeled with L and @xmath labeled with R.
Since they are non-disjoint, there is at least one column @xmath in
which both rows have a @xmath . Suppose that for every such column
@xmath , there is an LR-row @xmath having a @xmath in that column. Then,
we find @xmath as a subconfiguration in @xmath .

For statement 7 , let @xmath be an LR-row and let @xmath and @xmath be
two rows labeled with L and R respectively, and colored with the same
color. If @xmath and @xmath are not disjoint, then we find @xmath .
Suppose that @xmath and @xmath are disjoint. If neither @xmath is
contained in @xmath nor @xmath is contained in @xmath , then there are
columns @xmath such that @xmath has a @xmath and @xmath has a @xmath ,
for @xmath . Thus, we find @xmath as a subconfiguration of @xmath . If
instead @xmath and @xmath are both labeled with L and colored with
distinct colors, and neither is contained in @xmath , then either they
are not nested –in which case we find @xmath – or we find @xmath in
@xmath .

Suppose that @xmath satisfies 8 . Let @xmath be a row labeled with L,
and @xmath and @xmath two distinct LR-rows such that none of them are
nested in the others. Thus, we have three possibilities. If there are
three columns @xmath @xmath such that @xmath has a @xmath and the other
rows have a @xmath , then we find @xmath as a subconfiguration of @xmath
. If instead there are three rows @xmath , @xmath such that @xmath and
@xmath have a @xmath and @xmath has a @xmath in @xmath (mod 3), then we
find @xmath as a subconfiguration. The remaining possibility, is that
there are 4 columns @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath have a @xmath and
@xmath has a @xmath in @xmath , @xmath has a @xmath and @xmath and
@xmath have a @xmath in @xmath , @xmath has a @xmath and @xmath and
@xmath have a @xmath in @xmath , and @xmath and @xmath have a @xmath and
@xmath has a @xmath in @xmath . Moreover, since all three rows are
pairwise non-disjoint, either there is a fifth column for which @xmath
and @xmath have a @xmath and @xmath has a @xmath (in which case we find
@xmath ), or @xmath has a @xmath and @xmath and @xmath have a @xmath (in
which case we have @xmath ), or all three rows have a @xmath in such
column. In this case, we find @xmath has a subconfiguration of @xmath .

For statement 9 , let @xmath and @xmath be two rows labeled with L and
R, respectively, and colored with distinct colors. Let @xmath and @xmath
be two LR-rows such that @xmath is neither disjoint or contained in
@xmath and @xmath is neither disjoint or contained in @xmath . If @xmath
is also not contained in @xmath or @xmath is not contained in @xmath ,
then we find @xmath . Thus, suppose that @xmath is contained in @xmath
and @xmath is contained in @xmath . Moreover, we may assume that for any
column such that @xmath and @xmath have a @xmath , @xmath has a @xmath ,
(and analogously for @xmath and @xmath having a @xmath and @xmath ), for
if not we find @xmath . Hence, there is a column @xmath in @xmath having
a @xmath in @xmath and @xmath and having a @xmath in @xmath and @xmath ,
and another column @xmath having a @xmath in @xmath and @xmath and
having a @xmath in @xmath and @xmath . Moreover, since @xmath and @xmath
are not disjoint and @xmath and @xmath are not disjoint (and @xmath is
nested in @xmath and @xmath is nested in @xmath ), then there are
columns @xmath and @xmath such that @xmath , @xmath and @xmath have a
@xmath and @xmath has a @xmath in @xmath and @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
have a @xmath and @xmath has a @xmath . Therefore, we find @xmath as a
subconfiguration of @xmath .

It follows by using a similar argument as in the previous statements
that, if @xmath satisfies 10 , then that there are no @xmath , @xmath or
@xmath in @xmath .

∎

###### Corollary 3.15.

Every enriched matrix @xmath that admits a total block bi-coloring
contains none of the matrices in @xmath . Equivalently, if @xmath admits
a total block bi-coloring, then every property listed in 3.13 hold.

Another example of families of enriched matrices that do not admit a
total block bi-coloring are @xmath and @xmath , which are the matrices
shown in Figures 3.12 and 3.13 , respectively. Therefore, since the
existance of a total block bi-coloring is a property that must hold for
every subconfiguration of an enriched matrix, if an enriched matrix
@xmath admits a total block bi-coloring, then it is a necessary
condition that @xmath contains none of the matrices in @xmath or @xmath
. With this in mind, we give the following definition, which is also a
characterization by forbidden subconfigurations.

###### Definition 3.16.

Let @xmath be an enriched matrix. We say @xmath is admissible if and
only if @xmath is @xmath -free.

#### 3.3 Partially 2-nested matrices

This section is organized as follows. First, we give some definitions
and examples that will help us obtain a characterization of LR-orderable
matrices by forbidden subconfigurations, which were defined in 3.5 .
Afterwards, we define and characterize partially @xmath -nested
matrices, which are those enriched matrices that admit an LR-ordering
and for which the given pre-coloring of those labeled rows of @xmath
induces a partial block bi-coloring.

###### Definition 3.17.

A tagged matrix is a matrix @xmath , each of whose rows are either
uncolored or colored with blue or red, together with a set of at most
two distinguished columns of @xmath . The distinguished columns will be
refered to as tag columns .

###### Definition 3.18.

Let @xmath be an enriched matrix. We define the tagged matrix of @xmath
as a tagged matrix, denoted by @xmath , whose underlying matrix is
obtained from @xmath by adding two columns, @xmath and @xmath , such
that: (1) the column @xmath has a @xmath if @xmath is labeled L or LR
and @xmath otherwise, (2) the column @xmath has a @xmath if @xmath is
labeled R or LR and @xmath otherwise, and (3) the set of distinguished
columns of @xmath is @xmath . We denote @xmath to the tagged matrix of
@xmath . By simplicity we will consider column @xmath as the first and
column @xmath as the last column of @xmath and @xmath .

The following remarks will allow us to give a simpler proof for the
characterization of LR-orderable matrices.

###### Remark 3.19.

If @xmath has the C @xmath P, then the distinguished rows force the tag
columns @xmath and @xmath to be the first and last columns of @xmath ,
respectively.

###### Remark 3.20.

An admissible matrix @xmath is LR-orderable if and only if the tagged
matrix @xmath has the C @xmath P for the rows.

###### Theorem 3.21.

An admissible matrix @xmath is LR-orderable if and only if the tagged
matrix @xmath does not contain any Tucker matrices, nor @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath for @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath as
subconfigurations.

###### Proof.

@xmath This follows from the last remark.

@xmath Suppose that the tagged matrix @xmath does not contain any of the
above listed submatrices as subconfigurations, and still the C @xmath P
does not hold for the rows of @xmath .

Hence, there is a Tucker matrix @xmath such that @xmath is a submatrix
of @xmath .

Suppose without loss of generality that, if @xmath intersects only one
tag column, then this tag column is @xmath , since the analysis is
symmetric if assumed otherwise and gives as a result in each case the
dual matrix.

Case (1 ) Suppose first that @xmath intersects one or both of the
distinguished rows. Thus, the underlying matrix of @xmath (i.e., the
matrix without the tags) is either @xmath , or @xmath , or @xmath for
some @xmath . We consider each case separately.

Case (1.1) @xmath

In this case, the distinguished row is @xmath and thus the last column
is a tag column. Hence @xmath , which results in a contradiction.

Case (1.2) @xmath

If @xmath is a distinguished row, then we find @xmath as a forbidden
submatrix given by the second and third rows. It is symmetric if the
distinguished row is either the second or the third row, and therefore
this case is not possible.

Case (1.3) @xmath

In this case, the distinguished rows can be only the first and the last
row.

Suppose only the first row @xmath of @xmath is a distinguished row.
Thus, the first column is a tag column.

Hence, @xmath is a submatrix of @xmath , and this results in a
contradiction. The same holds if instead the last row is the sole
distinguished row.

Finally, suppose both the first and the last row are distinguished. If
this is the case, then the columns @xmath and @xmath are tag columns.

Suppose first that @xmath . Since every row is a labeled row, then every
row is colored. Moreover, the first and second row have distinct colors,
for if not we find @xmath as a submatrix. The same holds for the second
and third row, and also for the third and fourth row. However, this
implies that the second and third row induce @xmath , hence this case is
not possible.

If instead @xmath for @xmath , then @xmath is a submatrix of @xmath ,
and thus we reached a contradiction.

Case (2 ) Suppose that @xmath does not intersect any distinguished row.

If @xmath does not have any tag column, then @xmath is a submatrix of
@xmath . Thus, @xmath does not have the C @xmath P and we conclude that
@xmath is a Tucker matrix.

Suppose that instead one of the columns in @xmath is a tag column.

Case (2.1) @xmath for some @xmath .

Notice that, if any of the columns is a tag column, then we find @xmath
as a submatrix, which results in @xmath not being admissible and thus
reaching a contradiction.

Case (2.2) @xmath for some @xmath

As in the previous case, some of the columns are not elegible for being
tag columns. If there is only one tag column, the only remaining
possibilities for tag columns are column @xmath or column @xmath , for
in any other case we find @xmath as a submatrix. Analogously, if instead
@xmath intersects both tag columns, then these columns are also columns
@xmath and @xmath .

However, if @xmath is either column @xmath or column @xmath , then
@xmath is a submatrix of @xmath . Notice that we can reorder the columns
of @xmath to have the same disposition of the rows by taking column
@xmath as the first column. Analogously, if @xmath is either column
@xmath or @xmath , then we find the dual matrix of @xmath as a
submatrix.

Finally, suppose that both columns are tag columns. Notice that the
first and second rows are colored with distinct colors, for if not we
find @xmath as a submatrix. The same holds for the last two rows of
@xmath . Hence, if @xmath , then we find @xmath as a submatrix given by
the second and third rows. If instead @xmath , then @xmath is a
submatrix of @xmath , which results once more in a contradiction.

Case (2.3) @xmath for some @xmath .

In this case, the only possibilities for tag columns are column 1,
column @xmath and column @xmath , for if not we find @xmath as a
submatrix. Once more, it is easy to see that we can reorder the columns
in such a way to have the same disposition of the rows with column
@xmath or column @xmath replacing column 1.

Suppose first that the tag column is the first column. In that case, we
find @xmath as a submatrix of @xmath , which also results in a
contradiction since @xmath is admissible.

If instead the tag column is column @xmath , then we use an analogous
reasoning to find @xmath as a submatrix and thus reaching a
contradiction.

Suppose now that both the first column and the last column of @xmath are
tag columns.

Since @xmath is admissible, this case is not possible for the first and
last row induce @xmath or @xmath as submatrices, depending on whether
the rows are colored with the same color or with distinct colors,
respectively.

Case (2.4) @xmath

In this case, the only elegible columns for being tag columns are column
1, column 3 and column 5, since if any other column is a tag column, we
find @xmath as a submatrix, thus contradicting the hypothesis of
pre-admissibility for @xmath and thus for @xmath . Furthermore, the
election of the tag column is symmetric since there is a reordering of
the rows that allows us to obtain the same matrix if the tag column is
either column 1, column 3 or column 5, disregarding the election of the
column. Hence, we have two possibilities: when column @xmath is the sole
tag column of @xmath , and when the two tag columns are columns @xmath
and 3. If column @xmath is the only tag column, then we find @xmath as a
submatrix. If instead the columns @xmath and 3 are both tag columns,
then the first row and the second row are colored with the same color,
for if not there is @xmath as a submatrix and this is not possible since
@xmath is admissible. Thus, in this case we find @xmath as a submatrix.

Case (2.5) @xmath

Once more and using the same argument, the only elegible columns for
being tag columns are columns 2, 3 or 5. Moreover, if the second column
is the sole tag column, then there is a reordering of the rows such that
the matrix obtained is the same as the matrix when the third column is
the tag column. If column 5 is the only tag column, then we find @xmath
as in Case 1. 1. If instead column 2 is the only tag column, then the
first and second rows have the same color, for if not we find @xmath as
a submatrix of @xmath , and thus we have @xmath . Finally, if columns 2
and 5 are both tag columns, then the first and last row induce @xmath as
a submatrix, disregarding the coloring of the rows and thus this case is
also not possible.

This finishes every possible case, and therefore we have reached a
contradiction by assuming that @xmath does not contain any of the listed
submatrices and still the C @xmath P does not hold for @xmath . ∎

When giving the guidelines to draw a circle model for any split graph
@xmath , not only is important that the adjacency matrix of each
partition of @xmath results admissible and LR-orderable. We also need to
ensure that there is an LR-ordering that satisfies a certain property
when considering how to split every LR-row into its L-block and its
R-block. The following definition states necessary conditions for the
LR-ordering that we need to consider to obtain a circle model. We will
call this a suitable LR-ordering . The lemma that follows ensures that,
if a matrix @xmath is admissible and LR-orderable, then we can always
find a suitable LR-ordering for the columns of @xmath .

###### Definition 3.22.

An LR-ordering @xmath is suitable if the L-blocks of those LR-rows with
exactly two blocks are disjoint with every R-block, the R-blocks of
those LR-rows with exactly two blocks are disjoint with the L-blocks and
for each LR-row the intersection with any U-block is empty with either
its L-block or its R-block.

###### Theorem 3.23.

If @xmath is admissible, LR-orderable and contains no @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath or @xmath for every even @xmath , then there is at least one
suitable LR-ordering.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be an admissible LR-orderable matrix. Toward a contradiction,
suppose that every LR-ordering is non-suitable. If @xmath is an
LR-ordering of @xmath , since @xmath is non-suitable, then either (1)
there is a U-block @xmath such that @xmath is not disjoint with the
L-block and the R-block of @xmath , or (2) there is an LR-row @xmath
such that its L-block is not disjoint with some R-block. In both cases,
there is no possible reordering of the columns to obtain a suitable
LR-ordering.

Notice that, since @xmath is admissible, the LR-rows can be split into a
two set partition such that the LR-rows in each set are totally ordered.
Moreover, any two LR-rows for which the L-block of one intersects the
R-block of the other are in distinct sets of the partition and thus the
columns may be reordered by moving the portion of the block that one of
the rows has in common with the other all the way to the right (or
left). Hence, if two such blocks intersect and there is no possible
LR-reordering of the columns, then there is at least one non-LR row
blocking the reordering. Throughout the proof and by simplicity, we will
say that a row or block @xmath is chained to the left (resp. to the
right) of another row or block @xmath if @xmath and @xmath overlap and
@xmath intersects @xmath in column @xmath (resp. @xmath ).

Case (1 ) Let @xmath be the L-block of @xmath and @xmath be the R-block
of @xmath . Suppose first there is a U-block @xmath such that @xmath
intersects both @xmath and @xmath .

Let @xmath , this is, the first column in which @xmath has a @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath in which both rows @xmath and @xmath have a @xmath .
Since it is not possible to rearrange the columns to obtain a suitable
LR-ordering, in particular, there are two columns @xmath and @xmath in
which @xmath has @xmath , one before and one after the string of @xmath
’s of @xmath . Moreover, there is at least one row @xmath distinct to
@xmath and @xmath blocking the reordering of the columns @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath .

Case (1.1) Suppose @xmath is the only row blocking the reordering.
Notice that @xmath is neither disjoint nor nested with @xmath and there
is at least one column in which @xmath has a @xmath and @xmath has a
@xmath . We may assume without loss of generality that this is column
@xmath . Suppose @xmath is unlabeled. The only possibility is that
@xmath overlaps with @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , for if not we can
reorder the columns to obtain a suitable LR-ordering. In that case, we
find @xmath in @xmath . If instead @xmath is labeled with either L or R,
then we find @xmath in @xmath considering columns @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath and both tag columns. If @xmath is an LR-row
and @xmath is the only row blocking the reordering, then either the
L-block of @xmath is nested in the L-block of @xmath and the R-block of
@xmath contains the R-block of @xmath , or viceversa. However, in that
case we can move the portion of the L-block of @xmath that intersects
@xmath to the right and thus we find a suitable LR-ordering, therefore
this case is not possible.

Case (1.2) Suppose now there is a sequence of rows @xmath for some
@xmath blocking the reordering such that @xmath and @xmath overlap for
each @xmath . Moreover, there is either –at least– one row that overlaps
@xmath or @xmath . We may assume without loss of generality that @xmath
is such a row and that @xmath and @xmath overlap. Suppose that @xmath
and @xmath are unlabeled rows. Notice that, either all the rows are
chained to the left of @xmath or to the right. Furthermore, since @xmath
contains no @xmath and we assumed that @xmath and @xmath overlap, if
@xmath is chained to the left of @xmath , then @xmath is contained in
@xmath for every @xmath , and if @xmath is chained to the right of
@xmath , then @xmath is contained in @xmath for every @xmath . In either
case, we find @xmath considering the columns @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath . Suppose that @xmath is the only labeled row in the sequence
and that @xmath is labeled with R. If @xmath and @xmath overlap, then we
find @xmath as in the previous paragraphs. Thus, we assume @xmath is
nested in @xmath . Since the sequence of rows is blocking the
reordering, the rows @xmath are chained one to one to the right and
@xmath , therefore we find @xmath as a subconfiguration. The only
remaining possibility is that there are two labeled rows in the sequence
blocking the reordering. Since there are no @xmath or @xmath , then
either these two rows are labeled with the same letter and nested, or
they are labeled one with L and the other with R and are disjoint. We
may assume without loss of generality that @xmath and @xmath are such
labeled rows.

If @xmath and @xmath are both labeled with L, then necessarily one is
nested in the other, for @xmath is an LR-ordering. In that case, one has
a @xmath in column @xmath and the other has a @xmath , for if not we can
reorder the columns moving @xmath –and maybe some other columns in which
@xmath has a @xmath – to the right. Hence, in this case we find @xmath
as a subconfiguration of the submatrix given by considering the rows
@xmath . It is analogous if @xmath and @xmath are labeled with R.

If instead @xmath and @xmath are labeled one with L and the other with
R, then we have two possibilities. Either @xmath are nested in @xmath ,
or @xmath is chained to the right of @xmath and @xmath is chained to the
left. In either case, if @xmath or @xmath have a @xmath in some column
in which @xmath has a @xmath and @xmath has a @xmath , then we find
@xmath . If instead @xmath is nested in @xmath and @xmath is nested in
@xmath , then we find @xmath as a subconfiguration considering the
columns @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

Case (2 ) Suppose now that there is a row @xmath such that the L-block
@xmath of @xmath and the R-block @xmath of @xmath are not disjoint.
Notice that, by definition of R-block, @xmath is either labeled with R
or LR. Once more, we consider @xmath the first column in which @xmath
has a @xmath .

Since @xmath and @xmath intersect, there is a column @xmath such that
@xmath and @xmath both have a @xmath in column @xmath .

Case (2.1) Suppose first that there is exactly one row @xmath blocking
the possibility of reordering the columns to obtain a suitable
LR-ordering. Notice that, for a row to block the reordering of the
columns, such row must have a @xmath in @xmath and at least one column
with a @xmath . We have three possible cases:

Case (2.1.1) Suppose first that @xmath is unlabeled. If @xmath is
labeled with LR and @xmath does not intersect the L-block of @xmath ,
then we can move to the R-block of @xmath those columns in which @xmath
has @xmath and @xmath has @xmath . If @xmath intersects the L-block of
@xmath , then this is precisely as in the previous case. Thus, we assume
@xmath is labeled with R. If @xmath is not nested in either @xmath nor
@xmath , then there is a column @xmath in which @xmath and @xmath have a
@xmath and @xmath has a @xmath , and a column @xmath in which @xmath and
@xmath have a @xmath and @xmath has a @xmath . In that case, we find
@xmath considering the columns @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and
both tag columns. If @xmath is nested in @xmath , then we can reorder by
moving to the right all the columns in which @xmath and @xmath both have
@xmath and mantaining those columns in which @xmath has a @xmath
together. If instead @xmath is nested in @xmath , then we find @xmath as
a subconfiguration.

Case (2.1.2) Suppose now that @xmath is labeled with L. If @xmath is
labeled with R, then @xmath and @xmath are colored with distinct colors,
for if not we find @xmath . Thus, we find @xmath as a subconfiguration
in the submatrix given by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . Moreover, notice
that, if @xmath is also labeled with R, then it is possible to move all
those columns of @xmath that have a @xmath and intersect @xmath (and
@xmath ) in order to obtain a suitable LR-ordering and thus @xmath did
not block the reordering. If instead @xmath is an LR-row, then we find
either @xmath , @xmath or @xmath , depending on where is the string of
@xmath ’s in row @xmath . Also notice that it is indistinct in this case
if @xmath is labeled with R.

Case (2.1.3) Suppose @xmath is labeled with LR. If @xmath is an LR-row,
since @xmath is admissible, then either @xmath is nested in @xmath or
@xmath is nested in @xmath (we may assume this since it is analogous if
@xmath contains @xmath or @xmath : we will see that @xmath is not
blocking the reordering). If @xmath is nested in @xmath , then we can
move the part of the L-block @xmath that intersects @xmath all the way
to the right and then we have a suitable reordering. It is analogous if
@xmath is nested in @xmath . If @xmath is labeled with R, then we may
assume that @xmath is not nested in @xmath , for if not we have a
similar situation as in the previous paragraphs. The same holds if
@xmath and @xmath are nested LR-rows. We know that the L-block @xmath of
@xmath intersects the R-block @xmath . Hence, in the column @xmath the
row @xmath has a @xmath and @xmath has a @xmath , and in the column
@xmath the row @xmath has a @xmath and @xmath has a @xmath . Moreover,
since @xmath and @xmath are not nested, then there is a column greater
than @xmath in which @xmath has a @xmath and @xmath and @xmath have a
@xmath . In this case, we find @xmath as a subconfiguration.

Case (2.2) Suppose now that it is not possible to reorder the columns to
obtain a suitable LR-ordering, since there is a sequence of rows @xmath
, with @xmath , blocking –in particular– the reordering of the columns
@xmath and @xmath .

We may assume that the sequence of rows is either chained to the right
–and thus @xmath is labeled with R– or to the left –and thus @xmath is
labeled with L, for if not we find @xmath as in the first case. Suppose
that @xmath is labeled with R. If the sequence @xmath is chained to the
left, then we find @xmath as a subconfiguration. If instead the sequence
@xmath is chained to the right, then we find @xmath . Suppose now that
@xmath is an LR-row. Since the L-block of @xmath and the R-block of
@xmath intersect, then these rows are not nested. Whether the sequence
is chained to the right or to the left, we may assume that @xmath is
nested in @xmath and is disjoint with @xmath . Let @xmath be the number
of @xmath ’s between the L-block and the R-block of @xmath . Depending
on whether @xmath is odd or even, we find @xmath or @xmath ,
respectively, as a subconfiguration of the submatrix given by
considering the rows @xmath .

This finishes the proof.

∎

###### Definition 3.24.

Let @xmath be an enriched matrix. We say @xmath is partially @xmath
-nested if the following conditions hold:

-   @xmath is admissible, LR-orderable and contains no @xmath , @xmath ,
    @xmath or @xmath for every even @xmath .

-    Each pair of non-LR-rows colored with the same color are either
    disjoint or nested in @xmath .

-    If an L-block (resp. R-block) of an LR-row is colored, then any
    non-LR row colored with the same color is either disjoint or
    contained in such L-block (resp. R-block).

-    If an L-block (resp. R-block) of an LR-row @xmath is colored and
    there is a distinct LR-row @xmath for which its L-block
    (resp. R-block) is also colored with the same color, then @xmath and
    @xmath are nested in @xmath .

###### Remark 3.25.

Notice that the second statement of the definition of partially @xmath
-nested implies that there are no monochromatic gems or monochromatic
weak gems in @xmath , since @xmath is admissible and thus any two
labeled non-LR-rows do not contain @xmath as a subconfiguration.
Moreover, the third statement implies that there are no monochromatic
weak gems in @xmath . Furthermore, the last statement implies that there
are no badly-colored doubly-weak gems in @xmath .

The following Corollary is a consequence of the previous remark and
Theorem 3.21 .

###### Corollary 3.26.

An admissible matrix @xmath is partially @xmath -nested if and only if
@xmath contains no @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , monochromatic gems nor
monochromatic weak gems nor badly-colored doubly-weak gems and the
tagged matrix @xmath does not contain any Tucker matrices, @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath for @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
.

#### 3.4 A characterization of @xmath-nested matrices

We begin this section stating and proving a lemma that characterizes
when a partial @xmath -coloring can be extended to a total proper @xmath
-coloring, for every partially @xmath -colored connected graph @xmath .
Then, we give the definition and some properties of the auxiliary matrix
@xmath , which will help us throughout the proof of Theorem
LABEL:teo:2-nested_caract_bymatrices at the end of the section.

###### Lemma 3.27.

Let @xmath be a connected graph with a partial proper @xmath -coloring
of the vertices. Then, the partial @xmath -coloring can be extended to a
total proper @xmath -coloring of the vertices of @xmath if and only if
all of the following conditions hold:

-    There are no even induced paths such that the only colored vertices
    of the path are its endpoints, and they are colored with the same
    color

-    There are no odd induced paths such that the only colored vertices
    of the path are its endpoints, and they are colored with distinct
    colors

-    There are no induced uncolored odd cycles

-    There are no induced odd cycles with exactly one colored vertex

-    There are no induced cycles of length 3 with exactly on uncolored
    vertex

###### Proof.

The if case is trivial.

On the other hand, for the only if part, suppose all of the given
statements hold. Notice that, since @xmath has a given proper partial
@xmath -coloring of the rows, then there are no adjacent vertices
pre-colored with the same color.

Let @xmath be the induced uncolored subgraph of @xmath . We will prove
this by induction on the number of vertices of @xmath .

For the base case, this is to say when @xmath , let @xmath in @xmath .
If @xmath cannot be colored, since @xmath is the only uncolored vertex
in @xmath , then there are two vertices @xmath and @xmath such that
@xmath and @xmath have distinct colors. Thus, the set @xmath either
induces an odd path in @xmath of length 3 with the endpoints colored
with distinct colors, or an induced @xmath with exactly one uncolored
vertex, which results in a contradiction.

For the inductive step, suppose that we can extend the partial @xmath
-coloring of @xmath to a proper @xmath -coloring if @xmath .

Suppose that @xmath . If @xmath is not connected, then for any isolated
vertex we have the same situation as in the base case. Hence, we assume
@xmath is connected. Let @xmath in @xmath such that @xmath is maximum.
Every vertex @xmath in @xmath must be colored with the same color, for
if not we find either a @xmath with exactly on uncolored vertex or an
odd induced path with its endpoints colored with distinct colors.
Suppose that such a color is red. Thus, we can color @xmath with blue.
We will see that the graph @xmath defined as @xmath fullfils every
listed property. It is straightforward that there are no uncolored odd
cycles, for there were no odd uncolored cycles in @xmath . Furthermore,
using the same argument, we see that there are no induced odd cycles
with exactly one colored vertex, for this would imply that there is an
odd uncolored cycle @xmath in @xmath such that @xmath is a vertex of
@xmath .

Since every statement of the list holds for @xmath when @xmath is
uncolored, if there was an even induced path @xmath such that the only
colored vertices are its endpoints and they are colored with the same
color, then the only possibility is that one of the endpoints of @xmath
is @xmath . Let @xmath be the uncolored vertex of @xmath such that
@xmath is adjacent to @xmath . Since @xmath is maximum, then there is a
vertex @xmath in @xmath such that @xmath is nonadjacent to @xmath .
Hence, there is an odd induced path @xmath in the pre-colored @xmath
given by @xmath such that the only colored vertices of @xmath are its
endpoints and they are colored with the same color, which results in a
contradiction.

The same argument holds if there is an odd induced path in @xmath .

Finally, there are no @xmath with exactly one uncolored vertex, for in
that case we would have an odd cycle in the pre-colored @xmath with
exactly one colored vertex, and this results once more in a
contradiction.

∎

Let @xmath be an enriched matrix, and let @xmath be the enriched
submatrix of @xmath given by considering every LR-row of @xmath . We now
give a useful property for this enriched submatrix when @xmath is
admissible.

###### Lemma 3.28.

If @xmath is admissible, then @xmath contains no @xmath or @xmath , for
every odd @xmath .

###### Proof.

Toward a contradiction, suppose that @xmath contains either @xmath or
@xmath in @xmath as subconfiguration, for some odd @xmath . Moreover,
since @xmath , we find the following enriched submatrix in @xmath as a
subconfiguration:

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Since these three rows induce @xmath , this is not possible. It follows
from the same argument that there is no @xmath in @xmath . Therefore, if
@xmath contains no @xmath , then @xmath contains no @xmath or @xmath ,
for all odd @xmath .

∎

###### Remark 3.29.

It follows from Lemma 3.28 that, if @xmath is admissible, then there is
a partition of the LR-rows of @xmath into two subsets @xmath and @xmath
such that every pair of rows in each subset are either nested or
disjoint. Moreover, since @xmath contains no @xmath as a
subconfiguration, every pair of LR-rows that lie in the same subset
@xmath are nested, for each @xmath . Equivalently, the LR-rows in each
subset @xmath are totally ordered by inclusion, for each @xmath .

Let @xmath be an admissible matrix, let @xmath and @xmath be a partition
of the LR-rows of @xmath such that every pair of rows in @xmath is
nested, for each @xmath . Since there is no @xmath , there is a row
@xmath such that @xmath is labeled with L and contains every L-block of
those rows in @xmath that are labeled with L. Analogously, we find a row
@xmath such that every R-block of a row in @xmath labeled with R is
contained in @xmath . Moreover, there are two rows @xmath in @xmath and
@xmath in @xmath such that every row in @xmath is contained in @xmath ,
for each @xmath . This property allows us to well define the following
auxiliary matrix, which will be helpful throughout the proof of Theorem
LABEL:teo:2-nested_caract_bymatrices .

###### Definition 3.30.

Let @xmath be an enriched matrix and let @xmath be a suitable
LR-ordering of @xmath . The enriched matrix @xmath is the result of
applying the following rules to @xmath :

-    Every empty row is deleted.

-    Each LR-row @xmath with exactly one block is replaced by a row
    labeled with either L or R, depending on whether it has an L-block
    or an R-block.

-    Each LR-row @xmath with exactly two blocks, is replaced by two
    uncolored rows, one having a @xmath in precisely the columns of its
    L-block and labeled with L, and another having a @xmath in precisely
    the columns of its R-block and labeled with R. We add a column
    @xmath with @xmath in precisely these two rows and @xmath otherwise.

-    If there is at least one row labeled with L or R in @xmath , then
    each LR-row @xmath whose entries are all @xmath ’s is replaced by
    two uncolored rows, one having a @xmath in precisely the columns of
    the maximum L-block and labeled with L, and another having a @xmath
    in precisely the complement of the maximum L-block and labeled
    with R. We add a column @xmath with @xmath in precisely these two
    rows and @xmath otherwise.

Notice that every non-LR-row remains the same.

###### Remark 3.31.

Let @xmath be a partially @xmath -nested matrix. Since @xmath is
admissible, LR-orderable and contains no @xmath , @xmath , @xmath or
@xmath for every even @xmath , then by Theorem 3.23 we know that there
exists a suitable LR-ordering @xmath . Hence, whenever we consider
defining the matrix @xmath for such a matrix @xmath , we will always use
a suitable LR-ordering @xmath to do so.

Let us consider @xmath as defined in 3.30 according to a suitable
LR-ordering @xmath . Suppose there is at least one LR-row in @xmath .
Recall that, since @xmath is admissible, the LR-rows may be split into
two disjoint subsets @xmath and @xmath such that the LR-rows in each
subset are totally ordered by inclusion. This implies that there is an
inclusion-wise maximal LR-row @xmath for each @xmath , @xmath . If we
assume that @xmath and @xmath overlap, then either the L-block of @xmath
is contained in the L-block of @xmath and the R-block of @xmath contains
the R-block of @xmath , or viceversa. Hence, if there is at least one
LR-row in @xmath , since @xmath is suitable and @xmath contains no
@xmath , @xmath or uncolored rows labeled with either L or R, then the
following holds:

-    There is an inclusion-wise maximal L-block @xmath in @xmath such
    that every R-block in @xmath is disjoint with @xmath .

-    There is an inclusion-wise maximal R-block @xmath in @xmath such
    that every L-block in @xmath is disjoint with @xmath .

Therefore, when defining @xmath we replace each LR-row having two
strings of @xmath ’s by two distinct rows, one labeled with L and the
other labeled with R, such that the new row labeled with L does not
intersect with any row labeled with R and the new row labeled with R
does not intersect with any row labeled with L.

We denote @xmath to the submatrix induced by considering every non-
@xmath column of @xmath . Notice that @xmath differs from @xmath only in
its LR-rows, which are either deleted or replaced in @xmath by labeled
uncolored rows. The following is a straightforward consequence of this.

###### Lemma 3.32.

If @xmath is admissible and LR-orderable, then @xmath is admissible and
LR-orderable.

Let us consider an enriched @xmath -matrix @xmath . From now on, for
each row @xmath in @xmath that is colored, we consider its blocks
colored with the same color as @xmath in @xmath .

###### Definition 3.33.

A @xmath -color assignment for the blocks of an enriched matrix @xmath
is a proper @xmath -coloring if @xmath is admissible, the L-block and
R-block of each LR-row of @xmath are colored with distinct colors, and
@xmath contains no monochromatic gems, weak monochromatic gems or
badly-colored doubly-weak gems as subconfigurations.

Given a @xmath -color assignment for the blocks an enriched matrix
@xmath , we say it is a proper @xmath -coloring of @xmath if it is a
proper @xmath -coloring of @xmath .

###### Remark 3.34.

Let @xmath be an enriched matrix. If @xmath is admissible, then the
given pre-coloring of the blocks is a (partial) proper @xmath -coloring.
This follows from the fact that every pre-colored row is either labeled
with L or R, of is an empty LR-row, thus there are no monochromatic
gems, monochromatic weak gems or badly-colored weak gems in @xmath for
they would induce @xmath .

In Figure 3.18 we give an example of the matrix @xmath with a
pre-coloring that is a proper @xmath -coloring, since @xmath is
admissible and contains no monochromatic gems, monochromatic weak gems
or badly-colored doubly-weak gems (there is no pre-colored nonempty
LR-row).

In Figure 3.19 , we show two distinct coloring extensions for the
pre-coloring of @xmath , and how each of these colorings induce a
coloring for @xmath . The first one –represented by @xmath – is a proper
@xmath -coloring of @xmath , whereas the second one represented by
@xmath is not. This follows from the fact that the first LR-row and the
first L-row of @xmath induce a monochromatic weak gem.

The following is a straightforward consequence of Remark 3.25 .

###### Lemma 3.35.

Let @xmath be an enriched matrix. If @xmath is partially @xmath -nested,
then the given pre-coloring of @xmath is a proper partial @xmath
-coloring. Moreover, if @xmath is partially @xmath -nested and admits a
total @xmath -coloring, then @xmath with such @xmath -coloring is
partially @xmath -nested.

###### Lemma 3.36.

Let @xmath be an enriched matrix. Then, @xmath is @xmath -nested if
@xmath is partially @xmath -nested and the given partial block
bi-coloring of @xmath can be extended to a total proper @xmath -coloring
of @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be an enriched matrix that is partially @xmath -nested and
for which the given pre-coloring of the blocks can be extended to a
total proper @xmath -coloring of @xmath . In particular, this induces a
total block bi-coloring for @xmath . Indeed, we want to see that a
proper @xmath -coloring induces a total block bi-coloring for @xmath .
Notice that the only pre-colored rows may be those labeled with L or R
and those empty LR-rows.

Let us see that each of the properties that define @xmath -nested hold.

1.   Since @xmath is an enriched matrix and the only rows that are not
    pre-colored are the nonempty LR-rows and those that correspond to
    U-blocks, then there is no ambiguity when considering the coloring
    of the blocks of a pre-colored row (Prop. 2 of @xmath -nested).

2.   If @xmath is partially @xmath -nested, then in particular is
    admissible, LR-orderable and contains no @xmath , @xmath or @xmath .
    Thus, by Theorem 3.23 , there is a suitable LR-ordering @xmath for
    the columns of @xmath . We consider @xmath ordered according to
    @xmath from now on. Since @xmath is suitable, then every L-block of
    an LR-row and an R-block of a non-LR-row are disjoint, and the same
    holds for every R-block of an LR-row and an L-block of a non-LR-row
    (Prop. 4 of @xmath -nested).

3.   Since @xmath is admissible, thus there are no subconfigurations as
    in @xmath . Moreover, since @xmath is partially @xmath -nested, by
    Corollary 3.26 there are no monochromatic gems or weak gems and no
    badly-colored doubly-weak gems induced by pre-colored rows. It
    follows from this and the fact that the LR-ordering is suitable,
    that Prop. 8 of @xmath -nested holds.

4.   The pre-coloring of the blocks of @xmath can be extended to a total
    proper @xmath -coloring of @xmath . This induces a total block
    bi-coloring for @xmath , for which we can deduce the following
    assertions:

    -    Since there is a total proper @xmath -coloring of @xmath , in
        particular the L-block and R-block of each LR-row are colored
        with distinct colors. (Prop. 1 of @xmath -nested).

    -    Each L-block and R-block corresponding to distinct LR-rows with
        nonempty intersection are also colored with distinct colors
        since there are no badly-colored doubly-weak gems in @xmath
        (Prop. 9 of @xmath -nested).

    -    Since @xmath is admissible, every L-block and R-block
        corresponding to distinct non-LR-rows are colored with different
        colors since there is no @xmath in @xmath (Prop. 5 of @xmath
        -nested)

    -    Since there are no monochromatic weak gems in @xmath , an
        L-block of an LR-row and an L-block of a non-LR row that
        contains the L-block must be colored with distinct colors.
        Furthermore, if any L-block and a U-block are not disjoint and
        are colored with the same color, then the U-block is contained
        in the L-block. (Prop. 3 and 7 of @xmath -nested)

    -    There is no monochromatic gem in @xmath , then each two
        U-blocks colored with the same color are either disjoint or
        nested. (Prop. 6 of @xmath -nested)

∎

###### Lemma 3.37.

Let @xmath be an enriched matrix. If @xmath admits a suitable
LR-ordering, then @xmath contains no @xmath , @xmath , @xmath or @xmath
for every even @xmath .

###### Proof.

The result follows trivially if @xmath contains no LR-rows, since @xmath
admits an LR-ordering, thus if we consider @xmath without its LR-rows,
that submatrix has the C @xmath P and hence it contains no Tucker
matrices. Toward a contradiction, suppose that @xmath contains either
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath or @xmath for some even @xmath . Since there is
no @xmath for every @xmath , then in particular there is no @xmath or
@xmath where at most one of the rows is an LR-row. Moreover, it is easy
to see that, if we reorder the columns of @xmath , then there is no
possible LR-ordering in which every L-block and every R-block are
disjoint. Similarly, consider @xmath , whose first row has a @xmath in
every column. We may assume that the last row is an LR-row for any other
reordering of the columns yields an analogous situation with one of the
rows. However, whether the first row is unlabeled or not, the first and
the last row prevent a suitable LR-ordering. The reasoning is analogous
for any even @xmath .

Suppose that @xmath contains @xmath , and let @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath be the rows of @xmath depicted as follows:

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

If the first row is an LR-row, then either @xmath or @xmath is an
LR-row, for if not we find @xmath in @xmath , which is not possible
since there is an LR-ordering in @xmath . The same holds if the second
row is an LR-row. If @xmath is an LR-row, then @xmath is an LR-row, for
if not @xmath must have a consecutive string of @xmath ’s, thus, if
@xmath is an unlabeled row, then it intersect both blocks of @xmath ,
and if @xmath is an R-row, then its R-block intersects the L-block of
@xmath . However, if we move the columns so that the L-block of @xmath
does not intersect the R-block of @xmath , then we either cannot split
@xmath into two blocks such that one starts one the left and the other
ends on the right, of we cannot maintain a consecutive string of @xmath
’s in @xmath . It follows analogously if we assume that @xmath is an
LR-row, thus @xmath is not an LR-row. By symmetry, we assume that @xmath
is also a non-LR-row, and thus the proof is analogous if only @xmath and
@xmath may be LR-rows.

Suppose @xmath contains @xmath . Let us denote @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath to the rows of @xmath depicted as follows:

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

If @xmath is an LR-row, then necessarily @xmath or @xmath are LR-rows,
for if not we find @xmath in @xmath . If only @xmath and @xmath are
LR-rows, then we find @xmath in @xmath . If instead only @xmath and
@xmath are LR-rows, then –as it is– whether @xmath is an R-row or an
unlabeled row, the block of @xmath intersects the L-block and the
R-block of @xmath (and also the L-block of @xmath ). The only
possibility is to move the second column all the way to the right and
split @xmath into two blocks and give the R-block of @xmath length
@xmath . However in this case, it is not possible to move another column
and obtain an ordering that keeps all the @xmath ’s consecutive for
@xmath and @xmath not intersecting both blocks of @xmath simultaneously.
Thus, @xmath is also an LR-row. However, for any ordering of the
columns, either it is not possible to simultaneously split the string of
@xmath ’s in @xmath and keep the L-block of @xmath starting on the left,
or it is not possible to simultaneously maintain the string of @xmath ’s
in @xmath consecutive and the L-block of @xmath disjoint with the
R-block of @xmath . It follows analogously if both @xmath and @xmath are
LR-rows. Hence, @xmath is a non-LR-row, and by symmetry, we may assume
that @xmath is also a non-LR-row. Suppose now that @xmath is an LR-row.
If @xmath is not an LR-row, then there is no possible way to reorder the
columns and having a consecutive string of @xmath ’s for the rows @xmath
, @xmath and @xmath simultaneously, unless we move the fourth column all
the way to the left. However in that case, either @xmath is an L-row and
its L-block intersects the R-block of @xmath of it is an unlabeled row
that intersects both blocks of @xmath . Moreover, the same holds if
@xmath is an LR-row, with the difference that in this case the R-block
of @xmath intersects the L-block of @xmath or the string of @xmath ’s in
@xmath and @xmath is not consecutive.

∎

###### Lemma 3.38.

Let @xmath be an enriched matrix. If @xmath is @xmath -nested, then
@xmath is partially @xmath -nested and the total block bi-coloring
induces a proper total @xmath -coloring of @xmath .

###### Proof.

If @xmath is @xmath -nested, then in particular there is an LR-ordering
@xmath for the columns. Moreover, by properties 4 and 7, such an
ordering is suitable.

Suppose first there is a monochromatic gem in @xmath . Such a gem is not
induced by two unlabeled rows since in that case property 6 of the
definition of @xmath -nested matrix would not hold. Hence, such a gem is
induced by at least one labeled row. Moreover, if one is a labeled row
and the other is an unlabeled row, then property 7 would not hold. Thus,
both rows are labeled. By property 5, if the gem is induced by two
non-disjoint L-block and R-block, then it is not monochromatic,
disregarding on whether they correspond to LR-rows or non-LR-rows.
Hence, exactly one of the rows is an LR-row. However, by property 4, an
L-block of an LR-row and an R-block of a non-LR-row are disjoint, thus
they cannot induce a gem.

Suppose there is a monochromatic weak gem in @xmath , thus at least one
of its rows is a labeled row. It is not possible that exactly one of its
rows is a labeled row and the other is an unlabeled row, since property
7 holds. Moreover, these rows do not correspond to rows labeled with L
and R, respectively, for properties 4 and 5 hold. Furthermore, both rows
of the weak gem are LR-rows, since if exactly one is an LR-row, then
properties 3, 4 and 7 hold and thus it is not possible to have a weak
gem. However, in that case, property 5 guarantees that this is also not
possible.

Finally, there is no badly-colored doubly-weak gem since properties 4, 5
and 9 hold.

Now, let us see that @xmath is admissible. Since there is an LR-ordering
of the columns, there are no @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath or @xmath in @xmath . Moreover, by property 5, there is no
@xmath . As we have previously seen, there are no monochromatic gems or
monochromatic weak gems. Hence, it is easy to see that if there is a
total block bi-coloring, then @xmath contains none of the matrices in
@xmath or @xmath as a subconfiguration. Suppose there is @xmath . By
property 8, if there are two L-blocks of non-LR-rows colored with
distinct colors, then every LR-row has a nonempty L-block, and in this
case such an L-block is contained in both rows labeled with L. However,
by property 3, the L-block of the LR-row is properly contained in the
L-blocks of the non-LR-rows, thus it must be colored with a distinct
color than the color assigned to each L-block of a non-LR-row, and this
leads to a contradiction. By property 4, there is no @xmath . Let us
suppose there is @xmath given by the rows @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ,
were @xmath is labeled with L and @xmath and @xmath are LR-rows. Suppose
that @xmath is colored with red. Since the L-block of @xmath is
contained in @xmath , by property 3, then the L-block of @xmath is
colored with blue. The same holds for the L-block of @xmath . However,
@xmath and @xmath are not nested, thus by property 9 the L-blocks of
@xmath and @xmath are colored with distinct colors, which results in a
contradiction.

Let us suppose there is @xmath given by the rows @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath , were @xmath is labeled with L and colored with red,
@xmath is labeled with R and colored with blue, and @xmath and @xmath
are LR-rows. Since the L-block of @xmath is properly contained in @xmath
, then by property 3, it is colored with blue. By property 1, the
R-block of @xmath is colored with red. Using a similar argument, we
assert that the R-block of @xmath is colored with red and the L-block of
@xmath is colored with blue. However, @xmath and @xmath are non-disjoint
and non-nested, thus the L-block of @xmath and the R-block of @xmath are
colored with distinct colors, which results in a contradiction.

By Lemma 3.37 , since there is a suitable LR-ordering, then @xmath
contains no @xmath , @xmath , @xmath or @xmath for every even @xmath .

Finally, by property 9 and the fact that there is an LR-ordering, there
are no @xmath nor @xmath .

Therefore @xmath is partially @xmath -nested.

Finally, we will see that the total block bi-coloring for @xmath induces
a proper total @xmath -coloring of @xmath . Since every property of
@xmath -nested holds, then it is straightforward that there are no
monochromatic gems or monochromatic weak gems or badly-colored weak gems
in @xmath . For more details on this, see Remark 3.25 and Lemma 3.36
since the same arguments are detailed there. Moreover, since property 1
of @xmath -nested holds, the L-block and R-block of the same LR-row are
colored with distinct colors. Therefore, it follows that a total block
bi-coloring of @xmath induces a proper total @xmath -coloring of @xmath
.

∎

The following corollary is a straightforward consequence of the
previous.

###### Corollary 3.39.

Let @xmath be an enriched matrix. If @xmath is partially @xmath -nested
and @xmath is obtained from @xmath by extending its partial coloring to
a total proper @xmath -coloring, then @xmath is @xmath -nested if and
only if for each LR-row its L-block and R-block are colored with
distinct colors and @xmath contains no monochromatic gems, monochromatic
weak gems or badly-colored doubly-weak gems as subconfigurations.

We are now ready to give the proof for the main result of this chapter.

###### Theorem 3.40.

Let @xmath be an enriched matrix. Then, @xmath is @xmath -nested if and
only if @xmath contains none of the following listed matrices or their
dual matrices as subconfigurations:

-   @xmath , @xmath , @xmath or @xmath for every even @xmath (See Figure
    3.15 )

-    Every enriched matrix in the family @xmath (See Figure 3.10 )

-    Every enriched matrix in the family @xmath (See Figure 3.11 )

-    Every enriched matrix in the family @xmath (See Figure 3.12 )

-    Every enriched matrix in the family @xmath (See Figure 3.13 )

-    Monochromatic gems, monochromatic weak gems, badly-colored
    doubly-weak gems

and @xmath contains no Tucker matrices and none of the enriched matrices
in @xmath or their dual matrices as subconfigurations (See Figure 3.14
).

The proof is organized as follows. The if case follows immediately using
Lemma 3.38 and the characterizations of admissibility, LR-orderable and
partially @xmath -nested given in the previous sections. For the only if
case, we have two possible cases: (1) either there are no labeled rows
in @xmath , or (2) there is at least one labeled row in @xmath (either
L, R or LR). In each case, we define an auxiliary graph @xmath that is
partially @xmath -colored according to the pre-coloring of the blocks of
@xmath . Toward a contradiction, we suppose that @xmath is not
bipartite. Using the characterization given in Lemma 3.27 , we know
there is one of the @xmath possible kinds of paths or cycles, we analyse
each case and reach a contradiction. A complete proof of case (1) has
been published in [ 30 ] .

###### Proof.

Suppose @xmath is @xmath -nested. In particular, @xmath is partially
@xmath -nested with the given pre-coloring and the block bi-coloring
induces a total proper @xmath -coloring of @xmath . Thus, by Corollary
3.26 , @xmath is admissible and contains no @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath for every even @xmath , monochromatic gems, monochromatic weak
gems or badly-colored doubly-weak gems as subconfigurations, and @xmath
contains no Tucker matrices, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , for any @xmath as
subconfigurations. In particular, since @xmath is admissible, there is
no @xmath induced by any three LR-rows.

Moreover, notice that every pair of consecutive rows of any of the
matrices @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath for all odd @xmath induces a gem,
and there is an odd number of rows in each matrix. Thus, if one of these
matrices is a submatrix of @xmath , then there is no proper @xmath
-coloring of the blocks. Therefore, @xmath contains no @xmath , @xmath ,
and @xmath for any odd @xmath as submatrices. A similar argument holds
for @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , changing ’gem’ for ’weak gem’ whenever
one of the two rows considered is a labeled row.

Conversely, suppose @xmath is not @xmath -nested. Henceforth, we assume
that @xmath is admissible.

If @xmath is not partially @xmath -nested, then either @xmath contains
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath for some even @xmath , or there is a
submatrix @xmath in @xmath such that @xmath represents the same
configuration as one of the forbidden submatrices for partially @xmath
-nested stated above, and thus @xmath is a subconfiguration of @xmath .

Henceforth, we assume that @xmath is partially @xmath -nested. . If
@xmath is partially @xmath -nested but is not @xmath -nested, then the
pre-coloring of the rows of @xmath (which is a proper partial @xmath
-coloring of @xmath since @xmath is admissible) cannot be extended to a
total proper @xmath -coloring of @xmath .

Case (1 ) There are no labeled rows in @xmath .

We define the auxiliary graph @xmath where the vertex set @xmath has one
vertex for each row in @xmath , and two vertices @xmath and @xmath in
@xmath are adjacent if and only if the rows @xmath and @xmath are
neither disjoint nor nested. By abuse of language, @xmath will refer to
both the vertex @xmath in @xmath and the row @xmath of @xmath . In
particular, the definitions given in the introduction apply to the
vertices in @xmath ; i.e., we say two vertices @xmath and @xmath in
@xmath are nested (resp. disjoint ) if the corresponding rows @xmath and
@xmath are nested (resp. disjoint). And two vertices @xmath and @xmath
in @xmath start (resp. end ) in the same column if the corresponding
rows @xmath and @xmath start (resp. end) in the same column. It follows
from the definition of @xmath -nested matrices that @xmath is a @xmath
-nested matrix if and only if there is a bicoloring of the auxiliary
graph @xmath or, equivalently, if @xmath is bipartite (i.e., @xmath does
not have contain cycles of odd length), since there are no labeled rows
in @xmath ,and thus there are no pre-colored vertices in @xmath .

Let @xmath be a linear ordering of the columns such that the matrix
@xmath does not contain any @xmath , @xmath and @xmath for every odd
@xmath or Tucker matrices as subconfigurations. Due to Tucker’s Theorem,
since there are no Tucker submatrices in @xmath , the matrix @xmath has
the C @xmath P.

Toward a contradiction, suppose that the auxiliary graph @xmath is not
bipartite. Hence there is an induced odd cycle @xmath in @xmath .

Suppose first that @xmath has an induced odd cycle @xmath of length 3,
and suppose without loss of generality that the first rows of @xmath are
those corresponding to the cycle @xmath . Since @xmath and @xmath are
adjacent, both begin and end in different columns. The same holds for
@xmath and @xmath , and @xmath and @xmath . We assume without loss of
generality that the vertices start in the order of the cycle, in other
words, that @xmath .

Since @xmath starts first, it is clear that @xmath , thus the column
@xmath of @xmath is the same as the first column of the matrix @xmath .

Since @xmath has the C @xmath P and @xmath and @xmath are adjacent, then
@xmath . As stated before, @xmath starts before @xmath and thus @xmath .
Hence, column @xmath is equal to the second column of @xmath .

The third column of @xmath is @xmath , for @xmath is adjacent to @xmath
and @xmath , hence it is straightforward that @xmath .

To find the next column of @xmath , let us look at column @xmath .
Notice that @xmath . Since @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and @xmath , and
@xmath and @xmath both start after @xmath , then necessarily @xmath ,
and thus @xmath is equal to the fourth column of @xmath .

Finally, we look at the column @xmath . Notice that @xmath . Since
@xmath has the C @xmath P, @xmath and @xmath , then @xmath and @xmath ,
which is equal to last column of @xmath . Therefore we reached a
contradiction that came from assuming that there is a cycle of length 3
in @xmath .

Suppose now that @xmath has an induced odd cycle @xmath of length @xmath
. We assume without loss of generality that the first @xmath rows of
@xmath are those in @xmath and that @xmath is ordered according to the C
@xmath P.

###### Remark 3.41.

Let @xmath be vertices in @xmath . If @xmath and @xmath are adjacent and
@xmath starts before @xmath , then @xmath and @xmath , @xmath .

###### Remark 3.42.

If @xmath and @xmath for some @xmath , then for all @xmath , @xmath is
nested in @xmath . The same holds if @xmath and @xmath . Since @xmath
and @xmath , then @xmath and @xmath are not disjoint, thus necessarily
@xmath is nested in @xmath . It follows from this argument that this
holds for @xmath .

Notice that @xmath and @xmath are nonadjacent, hence they are either
disjoint or nested. Using this fact and Remark 3.41 , we split the proof
into two cases.

Case (1.1) @xmath and @xmath are nested We may assume without loss of
generality that @xmath is nested in @xmath , for if not, we can
rearrange the cycle backwards as @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . Moreover, we
will assume without loss of generality that both @xmath and @xmath start
before @xmath . First, we need the following Claim.

###### Claim 3.43.

If @xmath and @xmath are nested, then @xmath is nested in @xmath , for
@xmath .

Suppose first that @xmath and @xmath are disjoint, and toward a
contradiction suppose that @xmath and @xmath are disjoint. In this case,
@xmath . The contradiction is clear if @xmath . If instead @xmath and
@xmath starts before @xmath , then @xmath for all @xmath , which
contradicts the assumption that @xmath is nested in @xmath . Hence,
necessarily @xmath is nested in @xmath and @xmath and @xmath are
disjoint. This implies that @xmath and once more, @xmath for all @xmath
, which contradicts the fact that @xmath is nested in @xmath .

Suppose now that @xmath is nested in @xmath . Toward a contradiction,
suppose that @xmath is not nested in @xmath . Thus, @xmath and @xmath
are disjoint since they are nonadjacent vertices in @xmath . Notice
that, if @xmath is nested in @xmath , then @xmath and @xmath .
Furthermore, since @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and nonadjacent to
@xmath , then @xmath . This holds for every odd @xmath .

If @xmath , since @xmath is nested in @xmath , then @xmath , which
results in a contradiction for @xmath and @xmath are adjacent.

Suppose that @xmath . If @xmath and @xmath are disjoint for all @xmath ,
then @xmath and @xmath are nonadjacent for @xmath is nested in @xmath ,
which results in a contradiction. Conversely, if @xmath and @xmath are
not disjoint for some @xmath , then they are adjacent, which also
results in a contradiction that came from assuming that @xmath and
@xmath are disjoint. Therefore, since @xmath is nested in @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath are nonadjacent and @xmath is adjacent to @xmath for
all @xmath , then necessarily @xmath is nested in @xmath , which
finishes the proof of the Claim.

###### Claim 3.44.

Suppose that @xmath and @xmath are nested. Then, if @xmath is nested in
@xmath , then @xmath for all @xmath . If instead @xmath and @xmath are
disjoint, then @xmath for all @xmath .

Recall that, by the previous Claim, since @xmath is nested in @xmath for
all @xmath , in particular @xmath is nested in @xmath . Moreover, since
@xmath and @xmath are adjacent, notice that, if @xmath is nested in
@xmath , then @xmath , and if @xmath and @xmath are disjoint, then
@xmath .

It follows from Remark 3.42 that, if @xmath , then @xmath is nested in
@xmath for all @xmath , which contradicts the fact that @xmath and
@xmath are adjacent. The proof of the first statement follows from
applying this argument successively.

The second statement is proven analogously by applying Remark 3.42 if
@xmath , and afterwards successively for all @xmath .

If @xmath and @xmath are disjoint, then we obtain @xmath first, by
putting the first row as the last row, and considering the submatrix
given by columns @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
(using the new ordering of the rows). If instead @xmath is nested in
@xmath , then we obtain @xmath by taking the submatrix given by the
columns @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

Case (1.2) @xmath and @xmath are disjoint

We assume without loss of generality that @xmath and @xmath .

###### Claim 3.45.

If @xmath and @xmath are disjoint, then @xmath for all @xmath .

Notice first that, in this case, @xmath is nested in @xmath , for all
@xmath . If not, then using Remark 3.42 , we notice that it is not
possible for the vertices @xmath to induce a cycle. This implies, in
particular, that @xmath is nested in @xmath and thus @xmath .
Furthermore, using this and the same remark, we conclude that @xmath for
all @xmath , therefore proving Claim 3.45 .

In this case, we obtain @xmath by considering the submatrix given by the
columns @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

Case (2 ) There is at least one labeled row in @xmath .

We wish to extend the partial pre-coloring given for @xmath . By
Corollary 3.39 , if @xmath is obtained by extending the pre-coloring of
@xmath and @xmath is @xmath -nested, then neither two blocks
corresponding to the same LR-row are colored with the same color, nor
there are monochromatic gems, monochromatic weak gems or badly-colored
doubly-weak gems in @xmath . Let us consider the auxiliary matrix @xmath
, defined from a suitable LR-ordering @xmath of the columns of @xmath .
Notice that, if there is at least one labeled row in @xmath , then there
is at least one labeled row in @xmath and these labeled rows in @xmath
correspond to rows of @xmath that are labeled with either L, R, or LR.

Let @xmath be the graph whose vertices are the rows of @xmath . We say a
vertex is an LR-vertex (resp. non-LR vertex) if it corresponds to a
block of an LR-row (resp. non-LR row) of @xmath . The adjacencies in
@xmath are as follows:

-    Two non-LR vertices are adjacent in @xmath if the underlying
    uncolored submatrix of @xmath determined by these two rows contains
    a gem or a weak gem as a subconfiguration.

-    Two LR-vertices corresponding to the same LR-row in @xmath are
    adjacent in @xmath .

-    Two LR-vertices @xmath and @xmath corresponding to distinct LR-rows
    are adjacent if @xmath and @xmath are labeled with the same letter
    in @xmath and the LR-rows corresponding to @xmath and @xmath overlap
    in @xmath .

-    An LR-vertex @xmath and a non-LR vertex @xmath are adjacent in
    @xmath if the rows corresponding to @xmath and @xmath are not
    disjoint and @xmath is not contained in @xmath .

The vertices of @xmath are partially colored with the pre-coloring given
for the rows of @xmath .

Notice that every pair of vertices corresponding to the same LR-row
@xmath induces a gem in @xmath that contains the column @xmath , and two
adjacent LR-vertices @xmath and @xmath in @xmath do not induce a any
kind of gem in @xmath , except when considering both columns @xmath and
@xmath .

The following Claims will be useful throughout the proof.

###### Claim 3.46.

Let @xmath be a cycle in @xmath . Then, there are at most 3 consecutive
LR-vertices labeled with the same letter. The same holds for any path
@xmath in @xmath .

Let @xmath , @xmath and @xmath be 3 consecutive LR-vertices in @xmath ,
all labeled with the same letter. Notice that any subset in @xmath of
LR-vertices labeled with the same letter in @xmath corresponds to a
subset of the same size of distinct LR-rows in @xmath . By definition,
two LR-vertices are adjacent in @xmath only if they are labeled with the
same letter and the corresponding rows in @xmath contain a gem, or
equivalently, if they are not nested. Moreover, notice that once the
columns of @xmath are ordered according to @xmath , these rows have a
@xmath in the first non-tag column and a @xmath in the last non-tag
column. Hence, if there were 4 consecutive LR-vertices @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath in the cycle @xmath of @xmath and all of them are
labeled with the same letter, then @xmath and @xmath are not nested,
@xmath and @xmath are not nested and @xmath and @xmath must be nested.
Thus, since @xmath and @xmath and @xmath and @xmath are also nested,
then @xmath either contains @xmath and @xmath or is nested in both. In
either case, since @xmath and @xmath are not nested, then @xmath and
@xmath are not nested and this results in a contradiction. @xmath

###### Claim 3.47.

There are at most 6 uncolored labeled consecutive vertices in @xmath .
The same holds for any path @xmath in @xmath .

This follows from the previous claim and the fact that every pair of
uncolored labeled vertices labeled with distinct rows are adjacent only
if they correspond to the same LR-row in @xmath . @xmath

If @xmath is not @xmath -nested, then the partial @xmath -coloring given
for @xmath cannot be extended to a total proper @xmath -coloring of the
vertices. Notice that the only pre-colored vertices are those labeled
with either L or R, and those LR vertices corresponding to an empty row,
which we are no longer considering when defining @xmath . According to
Lemma 3.27 we have 5 possible cases.

Case (2.1) There is an even induced path @xmath such that the only
colored vertices are @xmath and @xmath , and they are colored with the
same color.

We assume without loss of generality througout the proof that @xmath is
labeled with L, since it is analogous otherwise by symmetry.

If @xmath are unlabeled rows, then we find either @xmath or @xmath which
is not possible since @xmath is admissible.

Suppose there is at least one LR-vertex in @xmath . Recall that, an
LR-vertex and a non-LR-vertex are adjcent in @xmath only if the rows in
@xmath are both labeled with the same letter and the LR-row is properly
contained in the non-LR-row.

Suppose that every LR-vertex in @xmath is nonadjacent with each other.
Let @xmath be the first LR-vertex in @xmath , and suppose first that
@xmath . Since @xmath is an LR-vertex and is adjacent to @xmath , then
@xmath is labeled with L and @xmath . Hence, since we are assuming there
are no adjacent LR-vertices in @xmath and @xmath , then @xmath is not an
LR-vertex, thus it is unlabeled since we are considering a suitable
LR-ordering to define @xmath . Let @xmath be the maximal sequence of
consecutive unlabeled vertices in @xmath that starts in @xmath . Thus,
@xmath for every @xmath .

Notice that there are no other LR-vertices in @xmath : toward a
contradiction, let @xmath be the next LR-vertex in @xmath . If @xmath is
labeled with L, since @xmath is nested in @xmath , then @xmath is
adjacent to @xmath , which is not possible. It is analogous if @xmath is
labeled with R. Thus, @xmath is unlabeled for every @xmath . Moreover,
the vertex @xmath is labeled with L, for if not we find @xmath in @xmath
induced by @xmath and @xmath and this is not possible since @xmath is
admissible. However, in that case we find @xmath .

Hence, if @xmath is an isolated LR-vertex (i.e., nonadjacent to other
LR-vertices), then @xmath . It follows that @xmath is an unlabeled
vertex. Notice that a similar argument as in the previous paragraph
proves that there are no more LR-vertices in @xmath : since @xmath is
nested in @xmath , it follows that any other LR-vertex is adjacent to
@xmath . Suppose first that @xmath is labeled with L and let @xmath be
the maximal sequence of unlabeled vertices in @xmath that starts in
@xmath .

Since @xmath is the only LR-vertex in @xmath , if @xmath is labeled with
L, then necessarily @xmath for if not @xmath is adjacent to @xmath .
However, since in that case @xmath and @xmath is nonadjacent to every
other vertex in @xmath , then we find @xmath . Analogously, if @xmath is
labeled with R, since @xmath for every @xmath , then @xmath is adjacent
to @xmath which leads to a contradiction.

Suppose now that @xmath is labeled with R and remember that @xmath .
Furthermore, @xmath is unlabeled for every @xmath . Moreover, @xmath is
nested in @xmath for every @xmath , for if not @xmath would be adjacent
to @xmath . However, in that case @xmath is adjacent to @xmath , whether
labeled with R or L, and this results in a contradiction.

Notice that we have also proven that, when considering an admissible
matrix and a suitable LR-ordering to define @xmath , there cannot be an
isolated LR-vertex in such a path @xmath , disregarding of the parity of
the length of @xmath . This last part follows from the previous and the
fact that, if the length is 3 and @xmath has one LR-vertex, since the
endpoints are colored with distinct colors, then we find @xmath if the
endpoints are labeled with the same letter and @xmath if the endpoints
are labeled one with L and the other with R. Moreover, the ordering
would not be suitable, which is a necessary condition for the well
definition of @xmath , and thus of @xmath . If the length of @xmath is
odd and greater than 3, then the arguments are analogous as in the even
case. The following Claim is a straightforward consequence of the
previous.

###### Claim 3.48.

If there is an isolated LR-vertex in @xmath , then it is the only
LR-vertex in @xmath . Moreover, there are no two nonadjacent LR-vertices
in @xmath . Equivalently, every LR-vertex in @xmath lies in a sequence
of consecutive LR-vertices.

We say a subpath @xmath of @xmath is an LR-subpath if every vertex in
@xmath is an LR-vertex. We say an LR-subpath @xmath in @xmath is maximal
if @xmath is not properly contained in any other LR-subpath of @xmath .

We say that two LR-vertices @xmath and @xmath are consecutive in the
path @xmath (resp. in the cycle @xmath ) if either @xmath or @xmath is
unlabeled for every @xmath .

It follows from Claims 3.46 , 3.47 and 3.48 that there is one and only
one maximal LR-subpath in @xmath . Thus, we have one subcase for each
possible length of such maximal LR-subpath of @xmath , which may be any
integer between @xmath and @xmath , inclusive.

Case (2.1.1) Let @xmath and @xmath be the two adjacent LR-vertices that
induce the maximal LR-subpath. Suppose first that both are labeled with
L and that @xmath . Since @xmath is an LR-vertex, @xmath is nested in
@xmath and @xmath contains @xmath . Moreover, @xmath is labeled with R,
for if not @xmath is also adjacent to @xmath . This implies that the
R-block of the LR-row corresponding to @xmath contains @xmath in @xmath
, for if not we find @xmath . However, either the R-block of @xmath
intersects the L-block of @xmath –which is not possible since we are
considering a suitable LR-ordering–, or @xmath is disjoint with @xmath
since the LR-rows corresponding to @xmath and @xmath are nested, and
thus we find @xmath . Hence, @xmath .

By Claim 3.48 and since there is no other LR-vertex in the maximal
LR-subpath, there are no other LR-vertices in @xmath . Equivalently,
@xmath are unlabeled vertices. Moreover, this sequence of unlabeled
vertices is chained to the right, since if it was chained to the left,
then every left endpoint of @xmath for @xmath would be greater than
@xmath and thus @xmath results adjacent to @xmath . Hence, we find
@xmath in @xmath as a subconfiguration of the submatrix given by
considering the rows corresponding to @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , which
is not possible since @xmath is admissible. The proof is analogous if
@xmath , with the difference that we find @xmath in @xmath .
Furthermore, the proof is analogous if @xmath and @xmath are labeled
with distinct letters.

Case (2.1.2) Let @xmath be the maximal LR-subpath of @xmath . Suppose
first that not every vertex in @xmath is labeled with the same letter.

If @xmath is labeled with R, since there is a sequence of unlabeled
vertices between @xmath and @xmath , then @xmath is labeled with R. This
follows from the fact that if not, @xmath would be adjacent to either
@xmath or some vertex in the unlabeled chain. The same holds for @xmath
and thus we are in the previous situation. Hence, @xmath is labeled with
L and we have the following claim.

###### Claim 3.49.

For every maximal LR-subpath of @xmath , the first vertex is labeled
with L.

Suppose @xmath and @xmath are both labeled with L and @xmath is labeled
with R. Notice that, if @xmath , then @xmath is labeled with L, @xmath
is labeled with R and @xmath may be labeled with either L or R.

Since @xmath and @xmath are labeled with distinct letters, then they
correspond to the same LR-row in @xmath . Notice that @xmath is
contained in @xmath . Thus, since @xmath and @xmath are adjacent, the
R-block corresponding to @xmath in @xmath contains @xmath . Therefore,
we find @xmath or @xmath as a subconfiguration of the submatrix induced
by considering all the rows of @xmath .

If instead @xmath and @xmath are both labeled with R, then @xmath and
@xmath are the two blocks of the same LR-row in @xmath . Hence, since
@xmath and @xmath are adjacent and @xmath is nonadjacent to @xmath ,
then @xmath contains @xmath and thus the L-block of the LR-row
corresponding to @xmath contains @xmath . Once again, we find either
@xmath or @xmath .

Suppose now that all vertices in @xmath are labeled with the same letter
and suppose first that @xmath . Since @xmath and @xmath are adjacent,
then every vertex in @xmath is labeled with L. Notice that @xmath since
@xmath is uncolored and the endpoints of @xmath are colored with the
same color. Since @xmath is adjacent to @xmath , then @xmath and @xmath
. Since @xmath is even and @xmath , then @xmath is an unlabeled vertex.
Moreover, for every unlabeled vertex @xmath such that @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath , for if not @xmath and @xmath would be adjacent. However,
@xmath is not labeled with L for in that case it would be adjacent to
@xmath . Furthermore, if @xmath is labeled with R, then we find @xmath ,
which is not possible since we assumed @xmath to be admissible.

Suppose now that @xmath . In this case, there is a sequence of unlabeled
vertices between @xmath and @xmath . If every vertex in @xmath is
labeled with L, since @xmath and @xmath are nonadjacent (and thus @xmath
is nested in @xmath ) and @xmath is nonadjacent with @xmath , then
@xmath , @xmath . It follows that @xmath is contained between @xmath and
@xmath for every @xmath and therefore @xmath is adjacent either to
@xmath or @xmath , which results in a contradiction.

If every vertex in @xmath is labeled with R, then @xmath and @xmath for
if not @xmath would be adjacent to @xmath and @xmath . Hence, if @xmath
, then @xmath would be adjacent also to @xmath . Hence, there is at
least one unlabeled vertex @xmath with @xmath . Moreover, for every such
vertex @xmath holds that @xmath and @xmath . Hence, if @xmath is labeled
with R, then @xmath is adjacent to @xmath . If instead @xmath is labeled
with L, then we find @xmath as a subconfiguration in the submatrix of
@xmath induced by @xmath and the LR-rows corresponding to @xmath and
@xmath .

Case (2.1.3) Let @xmath be the maximal LR-subpath of @xmath . Notice
that either 2 are labeled with L and 2 are labeled with R, or @xmath is
labeled with L and 3 are labeled with R, or viceversa. Moreover, by
Claim 3.49 we know that @xmath is labeled with L. Every vertex @xmath
such that @xmath or @xmath is an unlabeled vertex.

Suppose first that @xmath is the only vertex in @xmath labeled with L.
Thus, @xmath is the R-block of the LR-row in @xmath corresponding to
@xmath . Hence, either @xmath or viceversa. Notice that there is at
least one unlabeled vertex @xmath between @xmath and @xmath , for if not
@xmath is adjacent to @xmath or @xmath . Moreover, either @xmath is
contained in @xmath or in @xmath for every @xmath . In any case, @xmath
results adjacent to either @xmath or @xmath , which results in a
contradiction.

Hence, at least @xmath and @xmath are labeled with L. Suppose that
@xmath is labeled with R –and thus @xmath is labeled with R. Notice
that, if @xmath , then there is no possibility for @xmath for, if @xmath
is labeled with R, then @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and if @xmath is
labeled with L, then @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and @xmath . However,
the same holds if @xmath since there is at least one unlabeled vertex
@xmath with @xmath and thus for every such vertex holds @xmath and
therefore this case is not possible.

Finally, suppose that @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are labeled with L and
thus @xmath is labeled with R. Thus, @xmath is labeled with R and is
nested in @xmath . Moreover, there is a chain of unlabeled vertices
@xmath between @xmath and @xmath such that @xmath is nested in @xmath
for every @xmath . Furthermore, @xmath and @xmath : if @xmath , then
@xmath and since @xmath and @xmath are nonadjacent to @xmath , then
@xmath . If instead @xmath , then for every unlabeled vertex @xmath
between @xmath and @xmath , @xmath , except for @xmath for which holds
@xmath . Hence, since @xmath and @xmath are nonadjacent to every such
vertex, then @xmath for @xmath . We find @xmath in @xmath since the
R-block corresponding to @xmath is contained in @xmath and thus the
R-block intersects the chain of vertices between @xmath and @xmath .

We have the following as a consequence of the previous arguments.

###### Claim 3.50.

Let @xmath and @xmath be the first LR-vertices that appear in @xmath .
If @xmath is also labeled with L, then @xmath . Moreover, if @xmath is
also an LR-vertex that is labeled with L, then @xmath .

Case (2.1.4) Let @xmath be the maximal LR-subpath of @xmath . By Claim
3.49 , @xmath is labeled with L. Moreover, either (1) @xmath and @xmath
are labeled with L and @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are labeled with R, or
(2) @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are labeled with L and @xmath and @xmath
are labeled with R. It follows from Claim 3.50 that @xmath .

Let us suppose the first statement. If @xmath , then there is at least
one unlabeled vertex in @xmath between @xmath and @xmath , for if not
@xmath would be adjacent to @xmath . Since every vertex @xmath for
@xmath is contained in @xmath , it follows that @xmath is adjacent to
@xmath and thus this is not possible. Hence, @xmath . Furthermore,
@xmath , and since @xmath is nonadjacent to @xmath , then @xmath . Since
there is a sequence of unlabeled vertices between @xmath and @xmath ,
then we find @xmath if @xmath is nested in the R-block of @xmath , or
@xmath otherwise.

Suppose now (2), this is, @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are labeled with L
and @xmath and @xmath are labeled with R. By Claim 3.50 , @xmath and
@xmath . Furthermore, since @xmath is nonadjacent to @xmath , it follows
that @xmath . In this case, we find @xmath if @xmath is nested in the
R-block of @xmath , or @xmath otherwise.

Case (2.1.5) Suppose by simplicity that the length of @xmath is 8 (the
proof is analogous if @xmath ), and thus let @xmath be the maximal
LR-subpath of @xmath of length 6. Notice that @xmath is labeled with R
and colored with the same color as @xmath . Hence, @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath are labeled with L and @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are labeled
with R. By Claim 3.50 , @xmath and @xmath . It follows that @xmath ,
since @xmath and @xmath are nonadjacent. Using an analogous argument, we
see that @xmath , @xmath and @xmath for if not it would be adjacent to
@xmath . Since consecutive LR-vertices are adjacent, the LR-rows
corresponding to @xmath and @xmath are not nested, and the same holds
for the LR-rows in @xmath of @xmath and @xmath . Since @xmath is
admissible, the LR-rows of @xmath and @xmath are nested. This implies
that the L-block of the LR-row corresponding to @xmath contains the
L-block of @xmath and @xmath . Moreover, since the LR-rows of @xmath and
@xmath are nested, the LR-rows of @xmath and @xmath are not and @xmath
is contained in @xmath , then the L-block of @xmath contains the L-block
of @xmath . Hence, @xmath contains @xmath and thus @xmath results
adjacent to @xmath , which is a contradiction.

Case (2.2) There is an odd induced path @xmath such that the only
colored vertices are @xmath and @xmath , and they are colored with
distinct colors.

Throughout the previous case proof we did not take under special
consideration the parity of @xmath , with one exception: when @xmath and
the maximal LR-subpath has length @xmath . In other words, notice that
for every other case, we find the same forbidden submatrices of
admissibility with the appropriate coloring for those colored labeled
rows.

Suppose that @xmath , the maximal LR-subpath has length @xmath , and
suppose without loss of generality that @xmath and @xmath are the
LR-vertices (it is analogous otherwise by symmetry). If both are labeled
with L, then @xmath is contained in @xmath and thus the R-block of
@xmath properly contains the R-block of @xmath . Moreover, since @xmath
is unlabeled and adjacent to @xmath –which should be labeled with R
since the LR-ordering is suitable–, it follows that there is at least
one column in which the R-block of the LR-row corresponding to @xmath
has a @xmath and @xmath has a @xmath . Furthermore, there exists such a
column in which also the R-block of @xmath has a @xmath . Since @xmath
and @xmath are adjacent, then @xmath and thus there is also a column in
which @xmath has a @xmath , @xmath has a @xmath and @xmath has a @xmath
. Moreover, there is a column in which @xmath , @xmath and @xmath have a
@xmath and @xmath and the R-blocks of @xmath and @xmath all have a
@xmath , and an analogous column in which @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
have a @xmath and @xmath and the R-blocks of @xmath and @xmath have a
@xmath . It follows that there is @xmath in @xmath which is not possible
since @xmath is admissible. If instead @xmath is labeled with L and
@xmath is labeled with R, then @xmath and @xmath are the L-block and
R-block of the same LR-row @xmath in @xmath , respectively. We can find
a column in @xmath in which @xmath and @xmath have a @xmath and the
other rows have a @xmath , a column in which only @xmath has a @xmath ,
a column in which only @xmath has a @xmath (notice that @xmath is
unlabeled), and a column in which @xmath , @xmath and @xmath have a
@xmath and @xmath has a @xmath . It follows that there is @xmath in
@xmath , which results in a contradiction.

Case (2.3) There is an induced uncolored odd cycle @xmath of length
@xmath .

If every vertex in @xmath is unlabeled, then the proof is analogous as
in case 3.4 , where we considered that there are no labeled vertices of
any kind.

Suppose there is at least one LR-vertex in @xmath . Notice that there no
labeled vertices in @xmath corresponding to rows in @xmath labeled with
L or R, which are the only colored rows in @xmath .

Suppose @xmath . If 2 or 3 vertices in @xmath are LR-vertices, then
there is either @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath or
@xmath . If instead there is exactly one LR-vertex and since every
uncolored vertex corresponds either to an unlabeled row or to an LR-row,
then we find @xmath in @xmath .

Suppose that @xmath and let @xmath be an uncolored odd cycle of length
@xmath . Suppose first that there is exactly one LR-vertex in @xmath .
We assume without loss of generality by symmetry that @xmath is such
LR-vertex and that @xmath is labeled with L in @xmath .

Hence, either @xmath is nested in @xmath , or @xmath is disjoint with
@xmath , for every @xmath . If @xmath is nested in @xmath for every
@xmath , since @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and nonadjacent to @xmath
for every @xmath , then @xmath and @xmath . Hence, we either find @xmath
or @xmath induced by the columns @xmath .

If instead @xmath is disjoint with @xmath for all @xmath , then @xmath
is nested in @xmath for every @xmath . In this case, we find @xmath or
@xmath induced by the columns @xmath .

Now we will see what happens if there is more than one LR-vertex in
@xmath . First we need the following Claim.

###### Claim 3.51.

If @xmath and @xmath in @xmath are two nonadjacent consecutive
LR-vertices, then there is one sense of the cycle for which there is
exactly one unlabeled vertex between @xmath and @xmath .

If @xmath , then we have to see what happens if @xmath and @xmath are
such vertices and @xmath is an LR-vertex. We are assuming that @xmath
and @xmath are unlabeled since by hypothesis @xmath and @xmath are
consecutive LR-vertices in @xmath . Suppose that @xmath and @xmath are
labeled with L and for simplicity assume that @xmath . Thus, @xmath is
labeled with L, for if not @xmath can only be adjacent to @xmath or
@xmath and not both. Moreover, since @xmath is nonadjacent to @xmath ,
then @xmath is contained in @xmath and @xmath . In this case, we find
@xmath as a subconfiguration in @xmath .

If instead @xmath is labeled with L and @xmath is labeled with R, then
@xmath is the L-block of the LR-row corresponding to @xmath . In this
case, we find @xmath as a subconfiguration of @xmath .

Let @xmath , and suppose without loss of generality that @xmath and
@xmath are such LR-vertices. Thus, by hypothesis, @xmath and @xmath are
unlabeled vertices. Suppose first that @xmath and @xmath are labeled
with L and @xmath . Then @xmath . If @xmath is unlabeled for every
@xmath , then @xmath is nested in @xmath and thus @xmath cannot be
adjacent to @xmath . Moreover, for every @xmath , @xmath is not an
LR-vertex labeled with L either. Suppose to the contrary that @xmath is
an LR-vertex labeled with L. Since @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and the
LR-rows corresponding to @xmath and @xmath are nested, then @xmath is
also adjacent to @xmath , which is not possible since we are assuming
that @xmath . If instead @xmath , since there is a sequence of unlabeled
vertices between @xmath and @xmath , then @xmath and thus it is adjacent
to @xmath . By an analogous argument, we may assert that @xmath is not
an LR-vertex for every @xmath . The proof is analogous if @xmath .

Thus, let us suppose now that @xmath is labeled with L and @xmath is
labeled with R. If @xmath is the L-block of the LR-row corresponding to
@xmath , since @xmath and @xmath are nonadjacent, then @xmath and hence
@xmath . Moreover, @xmath is not an LR-vertex for in that case @xmath
must be labeled with L and thus @xmath is also adjacent to @xmath .
Furthermore, since at least @xmath is an unlabeled vertex, then every
LR-vertex @xmath in @xmath with @xmath is labeled with L, for if not
@xmath is either adjacent to @xmath or nonadjacent to @xmath (or the
maximal sequence of unlabeled vertices in @xmath that contains @xmath ).
Thus, we may assume that there no other LR-vertices in @xmath , perhaps
with the exception of @xmath . However, if @xmath is an LR-vertex
labeled with L, since it is adjacent to @xmath , then it is also
adjacent to @xmath . And if @xmath is unlabeled, then @xmath is adjacent
to @xmath , @xmath or @xmath ( @xmath must contain this vertices so that
it results nonadjacent to them, but @xmath is the limit since @xmath is
labeled with R and thus it ends in the last column).

Analogously, if @xmath is unlabeled, then @xmath is nonadjacent to
@xmath since it must be contained in @xmath . Finally, if @xmath is an
LR-vertex labeled with R, then it is contained in @xmath . Thus, the
only possibility is that @xmath is an LR-vertex labeled with R and
@xmath is the L-block of the corresponding LR-row. However, since @xmath
is admissible, either @xmath is nested in @xmath or @xmath is nested in
@xmath . In the first case, it results also adjacent to @xmath and in
the second case it results nonadjacent to @xmath , which is a
contradiction. Notice that the arguments are analogous if the number of
unlabeled vertices in both senses of the cycle is more than @xmath .
Therefore, there is one sense of the cycle in which there is exactly one
unlabeled vertex between any two nonadjacent consecutive LR-vertices of
@xmath . @xmath

This Claim follows from the previous proof.

###### Claim 3.52.

If @xmath is an odd uncolored cycle in @xmath , then there are at most
two nonadjacent LR-vertices.

Suppose that @xmath and @xmath are consecutive nonadjacent LR-vertices,
where @xmath . It follows from Claim 3.51 that @xmath or @xmath . We
assume the first without loss of generality, and suppose that @xmath is
labeled with L. Suppose there is at least one more LR-vertex nonadjacent
to both @xmath and @xmath , and let @xmath be the first LR-vertex that
appears in @xmath after @xmath . It follows from Claim 3.51 that @xmath
. If @xmath and and @xmath are labeled with distinct letters, since
@xmath is an unlabeled vertex, then @xmath is contained in @xmath , and
thus @xmath cannot be labeled with L or R for, in either case, it would
be adjacent to @xmath . Thus, every LR-vertex in @xmath must be labeled
with the same letter. Let us assume for simplicity that @xmath (the
proof is analogous for every odd @xmath ) and that @xmath . Since @xmath
is nonadjacent to @xmath , then the corresponding LR-rows are nested.
The same holds for @xmath and @xmath . Moreover, @xmath contains both
@xmath and @xmath , and the R-block of @xmath contains the R-block of
@xmath . Furthermore, since @xmath and @xmath are adjacent, the R-block
of the LR-row corresponding to @xmath contains the R-block of the LR-row
corresponding to @xmath and thus the R-block of @xmath also contains the
R-block of @xmath , which results in @xmath and @xmath being adjacent
and thus, in a contradiction that came from assuming that there is are
at least three nonadjacent LR-vertices in @xmath . @xmath

We now continue with the proof of the case. Notice first that, as a
consequence of the previous claim and Claim 3.47 , either there are
exactly two nonadjacent LR-vertices in @xmath or every LR-vertex is
contained in a maximal LR-subpath of length at most @xmath .

Case (2.3.1) Suppose there are exactly two LR-vertices in @xmath and
that they are nonadjcent. Let @xmath and @xmath be such LR-vertices.
Suppose without loss of generality that @xmath . Hence, every vertex
that lies between @xmath and @xmath is nested in @xmath , since they are
all unlabeled vertices by hypothesis. Thus, if @xmath and @xmath are
both labeled with L, then we find @xmath contaned in the submatrix
induced by the columns @xmath . If instead @xmath is labeled with L and
@xmath is labeled with R, then we find @xmath contained in the same
submatrix.

Case (2.3.2) Suppose instead that @xmath and @xmath are the only
LR-vertices in @xmath . If @xmath and @xmath are the L-block and R-block
of the same LR-row, then we find @xmath in @xmath . If instead they are
both labeled with L, then every other vertex @xmath in @xmath is
unlabeled and @xmath is nested in @xmath or @xmath for every @xmath ,
depending on whether @xmath or viceversa. Suppose that @xmath . If there
is a column in which both @xmath and the R-block of @xmath have a @xmath
, then we find @xmath in @xmath . If there is not such a column, then we
find @xmath in @xmath .

Case (2.3.3) Suppose that the maximal LR-subpath @xmath in @xmath has
length @xmath , and suppose @xmath . If @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are
labeled with the same letter, then either @xmath or @xmath , and since
@xmath and @xmath are nonadjacent if @xmath , either @xmath or @xmath .
Suppose without loss of generality that all three LR-vertices are
labeled with L, @xmath and @xmath . In this case, there is a sequence of
unlabeled vertices between @xmath and @xmath such that the column index
of the left endpoints of the vertices decreases as the vertex path index
increases. As in the previous case, if there is a column such that the
R-block of @xmath and @xmath have a @xmath , then we find @xmath in
@xmath contained in the submatrix induced by the columns @xmath . If
instead there is not such column, then we find @xmath contained in the
same submatrix.

If @xmath and @xmath are labeled with L and @xmath is labeled with R,
then there is a sequence of unlabeled vertices @xmath such that the
column index of the left endpoints of such vertices decreases as the
path index increases. Moreover, since @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and
nonadjacent to @xmath , then @xmath . Hence, we find @xmath contained in
the submatrix of @xmath induced by the columns @xmath .

Case (2.3.4) Suppose that the maximal LR-subpath @xmath in @xmath has
length @xmath and that @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . Suppose that
@xmath and @xmath are labeled with L and @xmath and @xmath are labeled
with R. If @xmath , then @xmath cannot be adjacent to @xmath . Thus
@xmath and @xmath . Since there is a chain of unlabeled vertices and its
left endpoints decrease as the cycle index increases, then we find
@xmath considering the submatrix induced by every row in @xmath . If
instead @xmath is labeled with L and the other three LR-vertices are
labeled with R, then first let us notice that @xmath is the R-block of
@xmath , the LR-rows of @xmath and @xmath are nested and @xmath .
Moreover, @xmath , for if not @xmath would not be adjacent to @xmath .
Thus, the left endpoint of the chain of unlabeled vertices between
@xmath and @xmath decreases as the cycle index increases. Hence, if
@xmath , then we find @xmath induced by the LR-rows corresponding to
@xmath and @xmath and the unlabeled row corresponding to @xmath .
Suppose that @xmath . Since @xmath and @xmath is the R-block of @xmath ,
then the L-block of the LR-row corresponding to @xmath contains both
@xmath and the L-block of @xmath . We find @xmath in @xmath as a
subconfiguration of the submatrix induced by the rows @xmath .

Case (2.3.5) Suppose now that @xmath is the longest LR-subpath in @xmath
, and suppose that @xmath and @xmath are labeled with L and that the
remaining rows in @xmath are labeled with R. Since @xmath is adjacent to
@xmath , then @xmath and @xmath . Since the LR-rows corresponding to
@xmath and @xmath are nested, then @xmath is contained in the L-block
corresponding to @xmath , and since @xmath , the R-block of @xmath is
also contained in @xmath . Thus, we find @xmath in @xmath as a
subconfiguration considering the LR-rows corresponding to @xmath and
@xmath and @xmath . The proof is analogous if @xmath has length @xmath ,
and thus this case is finished.

Case (2.4) There is an induced odd cycle @xmath with exactly one colored
vertex. We assume without loss of generality that @xmath is the only
colored vertex in the cycle @xmath , and that @xmath is labeled with L.
Notice that, if there are no LR-vertices in @xmath , then the proof is
analogous as in the case in which we considered that there are no
labeled vertices of any kind. Hence, we assume there is at least one
LR-vertex in @xmath .

###### Claim 3.53.

If there is at least one LR-vertex @xmath in @xmath and @xmath , then
@xmath is the only LR-vertex in @xmath .

Let @xmath be the LR-vertex in @xmath with the minimum index, and
suppose first that @xmath is labeled with L. Since @xmath and @xmath is
a non-LR row in @xmath , then @xmath , for if not they would be
adjacent. Moreover, @xmath for every @xmath . Toward a contradiction,
let @xmath the first LR-vertex in @xmath with @xmath and suppose @xmath
is labeled with L. Notice that the only possibility for such vertex is
@xmath . This follows from the fact that, if @xmath is unlabeled, then
@xmath is contained in @xmath , and the same holds for every unlabeled
vertex between @xmath and @xmath . Hence, if there was other LR-vertex
@xmath labeled with L such that @xmath , then it would be adjacent to
@xmath which is not possible. Then, @xmath and thus @xmath contains
@xmath for every @xmath . However, @xmath and @xmath are adjacent, and
since @xmath must be an unlabeled vertex, then @xmath is not disjoint
with @xmath , which results in a contradiction.

Suppose that instead @xmath is labeled with R. Using the same argument,
we see that, if @xmath , then every unlabeled vertex between @xmath and
@xmath is contained in @xmath and thus it is not possible that @xmath
results adjacent to @xmath if it is unlabeled. Hence, @xmath . Moreover,
there must be at least one more LR-vertex labeled with R since if not,
it is not possible for @xmath and @xmath to be adjacent. Thus, @xmath
must be labeled with R and @xmath is the L-block of the LR-row
corresponding to @xmath . Furthermore, @xmath is contained in @xmath .
We find @xmath in @xmath as a subconfiguration in the submatrix induced
by considering every row. Therefore, @xmath is the only LR-vertex in
@xmath . @xmath

The following is a straightforward consequence of the previous proof and
the fact that, if @xmath is the first LR-vertex in @xmath and @xmath ,
then every unlabeled vertex that follows @xmath is nested in @xmath ,
thus if @xmath is adjacent to @xmath then @xmath must be nested in
@xmath .

###### Claim 3.54.

If @xmath in @xmath is an LR-vertex and @xmath , then @xmath .

It follows from Claim 3.47 that there are at most 6 consecutive
LR-vertices in such a cycle @xmath . Let @xmath be the maximal
LR-subpath and suppose that @xmath and @xmath is labeled with L. Notice
that, if @xmath is labeled with R, then @xmath and @xmath are labeled
with L. Moreover, since there is a sequence of unlabeled vertices
between @xmath and @xmath and @xmath is nonadjacent to @xmath , then
@xmath is contained in @xmath and thus it results adjacent to @xmath ,
which is not possible. Then, necessarily @xmath is labeled with L and
thus @xmath is labeled with R. Moreover, if @xmath , then @xmath
contains @xmath and every unlabeled vertex between @xmath and @xmath ,
and if @xmath , then @xmath . In either case, @xmath contains @xmath .
Hence, at most @xmath is labeled with L and there are no other
LR-vertices labeled with L for they would be adjacent to @xmath or
@xmath . In particular, the last vertex of the cycle @xmath is not
labeled with L, thus, since it is uncolored, @xmath is an unlabeled
vertex. However, @xmath is adjacent to @xmath , and this results in a
contradiction. Therefore, it is easy to see that it is not possible to
have more than 4 consecutive LR-vertices in @xmath . Furthermore, in the
case of @xmath , either @xmath and @xmath are labeled with L and @xmath
and @xmath are labeled with R, or @xmath and @xmath are labeled with R
and @xmath is labeled with L.

###### Claim 3.55.

Suppose @xmath is an LR-vertex and let @xmath be another LR-vertex in
@xmath . Then, either @xmath or @xmath . Moreover, in this last case,
@xmath is an LR-vertex for every @xmath .

Notice first that, if @xmath is an LR-vertex, then by definition of
@xmath , @xmath is labeled with L and @xmath . If @xmath or @xmath ,
then we are done. Suppose that @xmath and there is a sequence of
unlabeled vertices @xmath between @xmath and @xmath , where @xmath .
Hence, since @xmath , then @xmath for @xmath . In that case, @xmath is
labeled with the same letter than @xmath and @xmath . Moreover, since
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath are nonadjacent and thus @xmath which is not
possible since @xmath . The contradiction came for assuming that there
is a sequence of unlabeled vertices between @xmath and @xmath and that
@xmath . Hence, if @xmath , then every vertex between @xmath and @xmath
is an LR-vertex. Since we know that the maximal LR-subpath in @xmath has
length at most @xmath and @xmath is an LR-vertex, then necessarily
@xmath must be either @xmath , @xmath or @xmath . @xmath

We now split the proof in two cases.

Case (2.4.1) @xmath is an LR-vertex.

Suppose first that @xmath is the only LR-vertex in @xmath . By
definition of @xmath , @xmath is labeled with L and @xmath . Since there
are no other LR-vertices in @xmath , then @xmath for every @xmath . In
this case, we find @xmath as a subconfiguration contained in the
submatrix of @xmath induced by the columns @xmath .

Suppose now that there is exactly one more LR-vertex @xmath with @xmath
. If @xmath , then by the previous claim we know that @xmath . If @xmath
is labeled with L, then we find @xmath contained in the submatrix of
@xmath induced by the columns @xmath . If instead @xmath is labeled with
R, then @xmath and this is not possible since the LR-ordering used to
define @xmath is suitable. Suppose that @xmath . If @xmath is labeled
with L, then @xmath , and if @xmath is labeled with R, then @xmath is
the R-block corresponding to the same LR-row of @xmath in @xmath . In
either case, since every other vertex @xmath in @xmath is unlabeled,
then @xmath for every @xmath . Thus, if @xmath is labeled with L, then
we find @xmath contained in the submatrix of @xmath induced by the
columns @xmath . If instead @xmath is labeled with R, then we find
@xmath in @xmath contained in the submatrix induced by the columns
@xmath .

Suppose that there are exactly two LR-vertices distinct than @xmath . As
a consequence of Claim 3.55 , we see that these vertices are necessarily
@xmath and @xmath . If @xmath and @xmath are LR-vertices and are both
labeled with L, then @xmath and @xmath correspond to two distinct
LR-rows that are not nested. Moreover, since @xmath , then @xmath and
thus @xmath . Thus, since @xmath is unlabeled and there is at least one
column for which the R-blocks of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath have @xmath
, @xmath and @xmath , respectively, we find @xmath contained in the
submatrix of @xmath induced by columns @xmath to @xmath .

If instead @xmath or @xmath (or both) are labeled with R, then @xmath
corresponds to the same LR-row in @xmath as @xmath . This follows from
the fact that, if @xmath and @xmath correspond to the same LR-row in
@xmath , then @xmath is labeled with L and @xmath is labeled with R.
Hence, since @xmath , @xmath cannot be adjacent to @xmath and thus this
is not possible. However, if @xmath is the R-block of the LR-row
corresponding to @xmath , then we find @xmath in @xmath induced by the
three rows corresponding to @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , and @xmath .

Suppose that there are exactly three LR-vertices other than @xmath .
Hence, these vertices are @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Recall that
@xmath and @xmath are labeled with L, and that two LR-vertices labeled
with distinct letters are adjacent only if they correspond to the same
LR-row in @xmath . In any case, @xmath is labeled with R. However, since
@xmath is labeled with L and @xmath , then @xmath results either
adjacent to @xmath , @xmath or @xmath , which is a contradiction.

Case (2.4.2) @xmath is not an LR-vertex.

By Claim 3.54 , if there is an LR-vertex @xmath , then there are no
other LR-vertices and @xmath .

In either case, since there is a exactly one LR-vertex in @xmath (we are
assuming that there is at least one LR-vertex for if not the proof is as
in Case 1.), then @xmath contains @xmath for every @xmath . If @xmath is
labeled with L, then there is @xmath as a subconfiguration in @xmath of
the submatrix given by columns @xmath . If instead @xmath is labeled
with R, then we find @xmath as a subconfiguration in the same submatrix.

Case (2.5) There is an induced @xmath -cycle with exactly one uncolored
vertex.

Let @xmath . We assume without loss of generality that @xmath and @xmath
are the colored vertices. Since @xmath is defined by considering a
suitable LR-ordering and @xmath and @xmath are adjacent colored
vertices, then @xmath and @xmath are labeled with distinct letters, for
if not, the underlying uncolored matrix induced by these rows either
induce @xmath or not induce any kind of gem. Moreover, @xmath and @xmath
are colored with distinct colors since @xmath is admissible and thus
there is no @xmath . Furthermore, @xmath is unlabeled for if not it
cannot be adjacent to both @xmath and @xmath , since in that case @xmath
should be nested in both @xmath and @xmath . However, we find @xmath as
a submatrix of @xmath , and this is a contradiction.

This finishes the proof, since we have reached a contradiction by
assuming that @xmath is partially @xmath -nested but not @xmath -nested.

∎

### Caracterización por subgrafos prohibidos para grafos split circle

El resultado más importante de este capítulo es el Teorema
LABEL:teo:circle_split_caract , en el cual se utiliza la teoría
matricial desarrollada en el capítulo anterior.

Denotamos @xmath a la familia de grafos obtenidos al considerar el tent
@xmath , todos los soles impares con centro y aquellos grafos cuya
matriz de adyacencia @xmath representa la misma configuración que alguna
de las matrices de Tucker, con la excepción de @xmath para todo @xmath
impar o @xmath para todo @xmath impar. Denotamos @xmath a la familia de
grafos obtenida al considerar todos los grafos cuya matriz de adyacencia
@xmath representa la misma configuración que @xmath , @xmath o @xmath
para algún @xmath impar. Una representación gráfica de estos grafos
puede verse en las Figuras 3.20 y 3.21 . Ninguno de estos grafos es un
grafo círculo (ver Apéndice).xs

###### Theorem 3.56 (label=teo:circle_split_caract_esp).

Sea @xmath un grafo split. Entonces, @xmath es un grafo circle si y sólo
si @xmath no contiene ningún grafo de las familias @xmath y @xmath (Ver
Figuras 3.20 y 3.21 ).

En las Secciones @xmath a @xmath se estudia el problema de caracterizar
aquellos grafos split que además son circle. En cada una de estas
secciones, consideramos un grafo split @xmath que contiene un cierto
subgrafo @xmath , donde @xmath puede ser un tent, un @xmath -tent o un
co- @xmath -tent. Cada sección es un caso de la prueba del Teorema
LABEL:teo:circle_split_caract_esp . Usando las particiones de @xmath y
@xmath descriptas en el Capítulo @xmath , definimos una matriz
enriquecida para cada partición @xmath de @xmath y otras cuatro matrices
auxiliares (no enriquecidas) que nos ayudarán a con los detalles a la
hora de dar un modelo circle para el grafo @xmath . Al final de cada
sección, se demuestra que @xmath es circle si y sólo si las matrices
enriquecidas definidas en cada sección son @xmath -nested y las cuatro
matrices no enriquecidas son nested, dando las pautas necesarias para
encontrar un modelo circle en cada caso.

El primer caso, tratado en la Sección @xmath , consiste en considerar un
grafo split @xmath que contiene un tent como subgrafo inducido. Este es
el caso más simple de todos, dada la simetría entre la mayoría de los
conjuntos de la partición de @xmath y @xmath , y ya que las matrices
enriquecidas @xmath definidas en la Sección @xmath no tienen filas LR en
su definición. En el segundo caso, el cual se trata en la Sección @xmath
, consideramos un grafo split @xmath que no contiene subgrafos isomorfos
al tent pero sí contiene un @xmath -tent como subgrafo inducido. La
mayor diferencia con el caso anterior, es que la matriz enriquecida
@xmath definida en la Sección @xmath sí puede tener filas LR. En la
Sección @xmath consideramos un grafo split @xmath que no contiene
subgrafos isomorfos al tent ni al @xmath -tent, pero sí contiene co-
@xmath -tent como subgrafo inducido. En este caso, el mayor obstáculo es
que, a diferencia del tent y del @xmath -tent, el co- @xmath -tent no es
un grafo primo. Además, la matriz enriquecida @xmath definida en la
Sección @xmath puede tener filas LR. Finalmente, en la Sección @xmath se
explica en detalle cómo el caso en que @xmath contiene un net se reduce
utilizando los tres casos previos.

### Chapter 4 Characterization by forbidden subgraphs for split circle
graphs

The main result of this chapter is Theorem LABEL:teo:circle_split_caract
, which uses the matrix theory developed in the previous chapter.

We denote @xmath to the family of graphs obtained by considering the
tent @xmath , all the odd-suns with center and those graphs whose @xmath
matrix represents the same configuration as a Tucker matrix distinct to
@xmath for every odd @xmath or @xmath for every odd @xmath . We denote
@xmath to the family of graphs obtained by considering those graphs
whose @xmath matrix represents the same configuration as either @xmath ,
@xmath or @xmath for some odd @xmath . For a representation of these
graphs, see Figures 2.6 and 2.5 .

###### Theorem 4.1 (label=teo:circle_split_caract).

Let @xmath be a split graph. Then, @xmath is a circle graph if and only
if @xmath is @xmath -free (See Figures 4.1 and 4.2 ).

All the graphs depicted in Figures 4.1 and 4.2 are non-circle graphs
(see Appendix). It follows that if @xmath is a circle graph, then it
contains none the graphs in Figures 4.1 and 4.2 as induced subgraph.

This chapter is organized as follows. In Sections 4.1 , 4.2 , 4.3 and
4.4 we address the problem of characterizing those split graphs that are
also circle. In each of these sections, we consider a split graph @xmath
that contains an induced subgraph @xmath , where @xmath is either a
tent, a @xmath -tent or a co- @xmath -tent, and each of these is a case
of the proof of Theorem LABEL:teo:circle_split_caract . Using the
partitions of @xmath and @xmath described in Chapter 2, we define one
enriched @xmath -matrix for each partition @xmath of @xmath and four
auxiliary non-enriched @xmath -matrices that will help us give a circle
model for @xmath . At the end of each section, we prove that @xmath is
circle if and only if these enriched matrices are @xmath -nested and the
four non-enriched matrices are nested, giving the guidelines for a
circle model in each case.

The first case, adressed in Section 4.1 , consists of considering a
split graph @xmath that contains a tent as an induced subgraph. This is
the simplest case, given the symmetry between most of the partitions of
@xmath and @xmath and since the enriched matrices @xmath that are
defined in Section 4.1.1 do not have any LR-rows. In the second case,
adressed in Section 4.2 , we consider a split graph @xmath that contains
no tent but contains a @xmath -tent as an induced subgraph. The main
difference with the previous section is that the enriched matrix @xmath
defined in Section 4.2.1 may have some LR-rows. In Section 4.3 we
consider a split graph @xmath that contains no tent or @xmath -tent, but
contains a co- @xmath -tent as an induced subgraph. In this case, the
main obstacles are that the co- @xmath -tent is not a prime graph and
that the enriched matrix @xmath defined in Section 4.3.1 may have some
LR-rows. Finally, in Section 4.4 we explain in detail how to reduce the
case in which @xmath contains a net as an induced subgraph using the
previous cases.

#### 4.1 Split circle graphs containing an induced tent

In this section we will address the first case of the proof of Theorem
LABEL:teo:circle_split_caract , which is the case where @xmath contains
an induced tent. This section is subdivided as follows. In Section 4.1.1
, we use the partitions of @xmath and @xmath given in Section 2.1 to
define the matrices @xmath for each @xmath and prove some properties
that will be useful further on. In Subsection 4.1.2 , the main results
are the necessity of the @xmath -nestedness of each @xmath for @xmath to
be @xmath -free and the guidelines to give a circle model for a split
graph @xmath containing an induced tent in Theorem 4.6 .

Notice that the net @xmath , the @xmath -tent @xmath and the co- @xmath
-tent @xmath are the graphs whose @xmath matrix represents the same
configuration as @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , respectively.

##### 4.1.1 Matrices @xmath

Let @xmath and @xmath as in Section 2.1 . For each @xmath , let @xmath
be an enriched @xmath -matrix having one row for each vertex @xmath such
that @xmath belongs to @xmath or @xmath for some @xmath , and one column
for each vertex @xmath and such that the entry corresponding to the row
@xmath and the column @xmath is @xmath if and only if @xmath is adjacent
to @xmath in @xmath . For each @xmath , we mark those rows corresponding
to vertices of @xmath with L and those corresponding to vertices of
@xmath with R.

Moreover, we color some of the rows of @xmath as follows.

-    If @xmath , then we color each row corresponding to a vertex @xmath
    for some @xmath with color red and each row corresponding to a
    vertex @xmath for some @xmath with color blue.

-    If @xmath , then we color each row corresponding to a vertex @xmath
    for some @xmath with color red if @xmath or @xmath (modulo @xmath )
    and with color blue otherwise.

Example:

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

The following results are useful in the sequel.

###### Claim 4.2.

Let @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath , for @xmath such that @xmath
. If @xmath is admissible for each @xmath , then the following
assertions hold:

-    If @xmath , then @xmath and @xmath are nested in @xmath . Moreover,
    if @xmath , then @xmath and @xmath are nested in both @xmath and
    @xmath .

-    For each @xmath , there is a vertex @xmath in @xmath such that for
    every @xmath and every @xmath in @xmath , the vertex @xmath is
    adjacent to @xmath .

Let @xmath , @xmath in @xmath , for some @xmath . Toward a
contradiction, suppose without loss of generality that @xmath and @xmath
are not nested in @xmath , since by symmetry the proof is analogous in
@xmath . Since @xmath and @xmath are both adjacent to at least one
vertex in @xmath , then there are vertices @xmath , @xmath in @xmath
such that @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and nonadjacent to @xmath , and
@xmath is adjacent to @xmath and nonadjacent to @xmath . Moreover, since
@xmath and @xmath lie in @xmath and @xmath , then by definition of
@xmath the corresponding rows are labeled with the same letter and
colored with the same color. Therefore, we find @xmath induced by the
rows corresponding to @xmath and @xmath , and the columns @xmath and
@xmath , which results in a contradiction for @xmath is admissible. The
proof is analogous if @xmath . Moreover, the second statement of the
claim follows from the previous argument and the fact that there is a
C1P for the columns of @xmath . @xmath

##### 4.1.2 Split circle equivalence

In this subsection, we will use the matrix theory developed in Chapter 3
to characterize the forbidden induced subgraphs that arise in a split
graph that contains an induced tent when this graph is not a circle
graph. We will start by proving that, given a split graph @xmath that
contains an induced tent, if @xmath is @xmath -free, then the matrices
@xmath for each @xmath are @xmath -nested.

###### Lemma 4.3.

If @xmath is not @xmath -nested, for some @xmath , then @xmath contains
an induced subgraph of the families @xmath or @xmath .

###### Proof.

We will prove each case assuming that either @xmath or @xmath , since
the matrices @xmath are analogous when @xmath is odd or even, and thus
the proof depends solely on the parity of @xmath .

The proof is organized as follows. First, we will assume that @xmath is
not admissible. In that case, @xmath contains one of the forbidden
subconfigurations stated in Theorem 3.16 . Once we reach a
contradiction, we will assume that @xmath is admissible but not
LR-orderable, thus @xmath contains one of the forbidden
subconfigurations in Theorem 3.21 , once again reaching a contradiction.
The following steps are to assume that @xmath is LR-orderable but not
partially @xmath -nested, and finally that @xmath is partially @xmath
-nested but not @xmath -nested. We will use the characterizations given
in Corollary 3.26 and Theorem for each case, respectively.

Recall that for each vertex @xmath of the tent, @xmath lies in @xmath by
definition and thus @xmath for every @xmath . Notice that, if @xmath is
@xmath -free, then in particular, for each @xmath , @xmath contains no
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath or @xmath for every even @xmath since these
matrices are the adjacency matrices of non-circle graphs.

Case (1 ) Suppose first that @xmath is not admissible. By Theorem 3.16
and since @xmath contains no LR-rows, then @xmath contains either @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath or @xmath , @xmath for some @xmath .

Case (1.1) @xmath contains @xmath .

Let @xmath and @xmath in @xmath be the vertices whose adjacency is
represented by the first and second row of @xmath , respectively, and
let @xmath and @xmath in @xmath be the vertices whose adjacency is
represented by the first and second column of @xmath , respectively.

Notice that both rows of @xmath are labeled with the same letter, and
the coloring given to each row is indistinct. We assume without loss of
generality that both rows are labeled with L, due to the symmetry of the
problem.

Case (1.1.1) Suppose first that @xmath . In this case, @xmath and @xmath
lie in @xmath or @xmath . Hence, there are vertices @xmath and @xmath in
@xmath such that @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and is nonadjacent to
@xmath (induces modulo @xmath ). By Claim 4.2 there is a vertex @xmath
in @xmath (resp. @xmath in @xmath ) adjacent to every vertex in @xmath
(resp. @xmath ). Thus, if both @xmath and @xmath lie in @xmath , since
@xmath is adjacent to every vertex in @xmath by definition, then we find
a net @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath . If instead both @xmath and @xmath lie in @xmath , then we find
a tent with center induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath .

Thus, let us suppose that @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath . Let
@xmath in @xmath such that @xmath is adjacent to @xmath . Recall that
@xmath is complete to @xmath . Let @xmath in @xmath such that @xmath is
adjacent to @xmath , and let @xmath be any vertex in @xmath . Since
@xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath , then @xmath and @xmath are
nonadjacent to @xmath , and also @xmath is nonadjacent to @xmath .
Hence, we find a @xmath -sun induced by the set @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

Case (1.1.2) Suppose now that @xmath . Thus, the vertices @xmath and
@xmath belong to either @xmath , @xmath or @xmath . Suppose @xmath in
@xmath and @xmath in @xmath , and let @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in
@xmath such that @xmath is adjacent to @xmath . Since @xmath is complete
to @xmath , then @xmath is adjacent to @xmath , and both @xmath and
@xmath are nonadjacent to @xmath . Hence, we find co- @xmath -tent
@xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath . The same holds if @xmath lies in @xmath .

If instead @xmath and @xmath lie in @xmath , then we find a net @xmath
induced by the set @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

Finally, if @xmath and @xmath lie in @xmath , then we find a tent @xmath
induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, where @xmath is a vertex in @xmath adjacent to @xmath and @xmath .

Case (1.2) @xmath contains @xmath .

As in the previous case, let @xmath and @xmath in @xmath be the vertices
whose adjacency is represented by the first and second row of @xmath ,
respectively, and let @xmath in @xmath be the vertex whose adjacency is
represented by the column of @xmath .

Notice that both rows of @xmath are labeled with distinct letters and
are colored with the same color. We assume without loss of generality
that @xmath is labeled with L and @xmath is labeled with R. Moreover, if
@xmath is odd, then it is not possible to have two such vertices
corresponding to rows in @xmath labeled with distinct letters and
colored with the same color.

Case (1.2.1) Let us suppose that @xmath . In this case, either @xmath in
@xmath and @xmath in @xmath , or @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath .

If @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath , then we find a @xmath -sun
induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , where @xmath in @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and nonadjacent
to @xmath , @xmath in @xmath is adjacent to both @xmath and @xmath ,
@xmath in @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and nonadjacent to @xmath , and
@xmath in @xmath is nonadjacent to both @xmath and @xmath .

Suppose that @xmath lies in @xmath and @xmath lies in @xmath . In this
case, we find a tent @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
are vertices analogous as those described in the previous paragraph. The
same holds if @xmath in @xmath or @xmath in @xmath .

Case (1.3) @xmath in @xmath .

Let @xmath and @xmath in @xmath be the vertices whose adjacency is
represented by the first and second row of @xmath , respectively, and
let @xmath and @xmath in @xmath be the vertices whose adjacency is
represented by the first and second column of @xmath , respectively.

Both rows of @xmath are labeled with distinct letters and colored with
distinct colors, for the ‘’same color” case is covered since we proved
that there is no @xmath as a submatrix of @xmath . We assume without
loss of generality that @xmath is labeled with L and @xmath is labeled
with R.

Case (1.3.1) Suppose that @xmath . Thus, @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in
@xmath . In this case we find a tent with center induced by @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , where @xmath in
@xmath is adjacent to @xmath and nonadjacent to @xmath and @xmath in
@xmath is adjacent to @xmath and nonadjacent to @xmath . We find the
same forbidden subgraph if @xmath in @xmath or @xmath .

Case (1.3.2) Suppose that @xmath . In this case, @xmath in @xmath , and
@xmath in @xmath .

Suppose first that @xmath . If @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath ,
then we find co- @xmath -tent @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , where @xmath in @xmath is
adjacent to @xmath and nonadjacent to @xmath , and @xmath in @xmath is
adjacent to @xmath and nonadjacent to @xmath . If instead @xmath in
@xmath , then we find once more a co- @xmath -tent @xmath induced by the
same set of vertices with the exception of @xmath and adding a vertex
@xmath in @xmath adjacent to @xmath and nonadjacent to @xmath . The same
forbidden subgraph can be found if @xmath in @xmath , if @xmath .

If instead @xmath , then necesarily @xmath in @xmath . If @xmath in
@xmath , then we find a tent with center induced by the subset @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , where @xmath in
@xmath is adjacent to @xmath and nonadjacent to @xmath , and @xmath in
@xmath is adjacent to @xmath and nonadjacent to @xmath . If @xmath in
@xmath , then we find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , where @xmath in
@xmath is adjacent to @xmath and nonadjacent to @xmath , @xmath in
@xmath is adjacent to @xmath and nonadjacent to @xmath , and @xmath in
@xmath is nonadjacent to both @xmath and @xmath .

Case (1.4) There is @xmath as a submatrix of @xmath , with @xmath . Let
@xmath be the vertices in @xmath represented by the rows of @xmath , and
let @xmath be the vertices in @xmath that are represented by columns
@xmath to @xmath of @xmath . Notice that @xmath and @xmath are labeled
with the same letter, and depending on whether @xmath is odd or even,
then @xmath and @xmath are colored with distinct colors or with the same
color, respectively. We assume without loss of generality that @xmath
and @xmath are both labeled with L.

Case (1.4.1) Suppose first that @xmath is odd. If @xmath , then there
are no vertices @xmath and @xmath labeled with the same letter and
colored with distinct colors as in @xmath . Hence, suppose that @xmath .
In this case, @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath . Let @xmath in
@xmath be a vertex adjacent to both @xmath and @xmath , and let @xmath
in @xmath adjacent to @xmath . Thus, we find @xmath induced by the
subset @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

Case (1.4.2) Suppose @xmath is even. We split this in two cases,
depending on the parity of @xmath . If @xmath , then @xmath and @xmath
lie in @xmath . Suppose that @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath . Let
@xmath in @xmath adjacent to @xmath and @xmath . Hence, we find @xmath
induced by the subset @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath . The same holds if both @xmath and @xmath lie
in @xmath . If instead @xmath and @xmath both lie in @xmath , then we
find @xmath induced by the same subset but replacing @xmath for a vertex
@xmath in @xmath adjacent to both @xmath and @xmath .

Suppose now that @xmath . In this case, @xmath and @xmath lie in @xmath
. In either case, there is a vertex @xmath in @xmath that is adjacent to
both @xmath and @xmath . Hence, we find @xmath induced by @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

Case (1.5) There is @xmath as a submatrix of @xmath , for some @xmath .
Let @xmath be the vertices in @xmath represented by the rows of @xmath ,
and let @xmath be the vertices in @xmath that are represented by columns
@xmath to @xmath of @xmath . Notice that @xmath and @xmath are labeled
with distinct letters, and as in the previous case, depending on whether
@xmath is odd or even, @xmath and @xmath are either colored with
distinct colors or with the same color, respectively. We assume without
loss of generality that @xmath is labeled with L and @xmath is labeled
with R.

Case (1.5.1) Suppose first that @xmath is odd. If @xmath , then @xmath
lies in @xmath , and @xmath lies in @xmath . If @xmath lies in @xmath
and @xmath lies in @xmath , then we find @xmath induced by @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , where @xmath in @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and nonadjacent to
@xmath , and @xmath in @xmath adjacent to @xmath and nonadjacent to
@xmath . If @xmath lies in @xmath and @xmath lies in @xmath , then we
find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , with @xmath in @xmath
adjacent to @xmath and nonadjacent to @xmath . If instead @xmath lies in
@xmath and @xmath lies in @xmath , then we find @xmath induced by @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , with @xmath in @xmath adjacent to @xmath and nonadjacent to
@xmath .

Suppose that @xmath . In this case, @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in
@xmath . In either case, we find a @xmath -sun induced by @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
with @xmath in @xmath adjacent to @xmath and nonadjacent to @xmath , and
@xmath in @xmath adjacent to @xmath and nonadjacent to @xmath .

Case (1.5.2) Suppose now that @xmath is even. If @xmath , then there no
two rows in @xmath labeled with distinct letters and colored with the
same color. Hence, let @xmath . In this case, either @xmath in @xmath
and @xmath in @xmath , or @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath .

If @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath , then we find a @xmath -sun
induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , where @xmath in @xmath is
nonadjacent to both @xmath and @xmath , @xmath in @xmath is adjacent to
@xmath and nonadjacent to @xmath , and @xmath in @xmath is adjacent to
@xmath and nonadjacent to @xmath .

If instead @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath , then we find a @xmath
-sun induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , with @xmath in @xmath adjacent to both @xmath and @xmath .

Since we have reached a contradiction for every forbidden submatrix of
admissibility, then the matrix @xmath is admissible.

Case (2 ) @xmath is admissible but not LR-orderable.

Then it contains a Tucker matrix, or one of the following submatrices:
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
or their corresponding dual matrices, for any @xmath .

We will assume throughout the rest of the proof that, for each pair of
vertices @xmath and @xmath that lie in the same subset @xmath of @xmath
, there are vertices @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath such that
both @xmath and @xmath are adjacent to @xmath and @xmath . This is given
by Claim 4.2 .

Suppose there is @xmath as a submatrix of @xmath . Let @xmath be the
vertices of @xmath represented by rows @xmath to @xmath of @xmath , and
let @xmath be the vertices in @xmath represented by colums @xmath to
@xmath . Thus, if @xmath is even, then we find either a @xmath -sun
induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and if
@xmath is odd, then we find a @xmath -sun with center induced by the
subset @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

For any other Tucker matrix, we find the homonym forbidden subgraph
induced by the subset @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath .

Suppose that @xmath contains one of the following submatrices: @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , or their
corresponding dual matrices, for any @xmath . Let @xmath be such a
submatrix. In this case, we have the following remark.

Notice that, for any tag column @xmath of @xmath that denoted which
vertices are labeled with L, there is a vertex @xmath in either @xmath
or @xmath such that the vertices represented by a labeled row in @xmath
are adjacent in @xmath to @xmath . If instead the tag column @xmath
denoted which vertices are labeled with R, then we find an analogous
vertex @xmath in either @xmath or @xmath .

Depending on whether there is one or two tag columns in @xmath , we find
the homonym forbidden subgraph induced by the vertices in @xmath and
@xmath represented by the rows and non-tagged columns of @xmath plus one
or two vertices @xmath and @xmath as described in the previous remark.

Case (3 ) @xmath is LR-orderable but not partially @xmath -nested. Thus,
since there are no LR-rows in @xmath , then there is either a
monochromatic gem or a monochromatic weak gem in @xmath .

Let @xmath and @xmath in @xmath the independent vertices represented by
the rows of the monochromatic gem. Notice that both rows are labeled
rows, since every unlabeled row in @xmath is uncolored. It follows from
this that a monochromatic gem or a monochromatic weak gem is induced
only by two rows labeled with L or R, and thus both are the same case.

Case (3.1) If @xmath , since both vertices need to be colored with the
same color, then @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath . In that case,
we find @xmath in @xmath since both rows are labeled with the same
letter, which results in a contradiction for we assumed that @xmath is
admissible. The same holds if both vertices belong to either @xmath or
@xmath .

Case (3.2) If instead @xmath , then we have three possibilities. Either
@xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath , or @xmath in @xmath and @xmath
in @xmath , or @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath . The first case is
analogous to the @xmath case stated above. For the second and third
case, since both rows are labeled with distinct letters, then we find
@xmath as a submatrix of @xmath . This results once more in a
contradiction, for @xmath is admissible.

Therefore, @xmath is partially @xmath -nested.

Case (4 ) @xmath is partially @xmath -nested but not @xmath -nested.

Hence, for every proper @xmath -coloring of the rows of @xmath , there
is either a monochromatic gem or a monochromatic weak gem. Notice that,
in such a gem, there is at least one unlabeled row for there are no
LR-rows in @xmath and we have just proven that @xmath is partially
@xmath -nested. We consider the columns of the matrix @xmath ordered
according to an LR-ordering. Let us suppose without loss of generality
that there is a monochromatic gem, since the case in which one of the
rows is labeled with L or R and the other is unlabeled is analogous. Let
@xmath and @xmath be the rows that induce such a gem, and suppose that
the gem induced by @xmath and @xmath is colored with red.

Since there is no possible @xmath -coloring for which these two rows are
colored with distinct colors, then there is at least one distinct row
@xmath colored with blue that forces @xmath to be colored with red. If
@xmath is unlabeled, then @xmath and @xmath are neither disjoint or
nested. If @xmath is labeled with L or R, then @xmath and @xmath induce
a weak gem.

If @xmath forces the coloring only on @xmath , let @xmath be a row such
that @xmath forces @xmath to be colored with red. Suppose first that
@xmath forces the coloring only to the row @xmath . Hence, there is a
submatrix as the following in @xmath :

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

If there are no more rows forcing the coloring of @xmath and @xmath ,
then this submatrix can be colored blue-red-blue-red. Since this is not
possible, there are rows @xmath and @xmath such that every row forces
the coloring of the next one -and only that row- including @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Moreover, if this is the longest chain of
vertices with this property, then @xmath and @xmath are labeled rows,
for if not, we can proper color again the rows and thus extending the
pre-coloring, which would be a contradiction. Hence, we find either
@xmath or @xmath in @xmath , and this also results in a contradiction,
for @xmath is admissible.

Suppose now that @xmath forces the red color on both @xmath and @xmath .
Thus, if @xmath is unlabeled, then @xmath is neither nested nor disjoint
with both @xmath and @xmath . Since @xmath and @xmath are neither
disjoint nor nested, either @xmath or @xmath . Suppose without loss of
generality that @xmath . Since @xmath is neither disjoint or nested with
@xmath , then either @xmath or @xmath , and the same holds for @xmath or
@xmath .

If @xmath , then @xmath and @xmath , and thus we find @xmath induced by
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
which results in a contradiction.

Analogously, if @xmath , then @xmath and @xmath , and thus we find
@xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath .

If instead @xmath is labeled with L or R, then the proof is analogous
except that we find @xmath instead of @xmath as a subconfiguration in
@xmath .

Therefore, we have reached a contradiction in every case and thus @xmath
is @xmath -nested.

∎

Let @xmath and @xmath as in Section 2.1 , and the matrices @xmath for
each @xmath as in the previous subsection.

Suppose @xmath is @xmath -nested for each @xmath . Let @xmath be a
coloring for every matrix @xmath . Hence, every row in each matrix
@xmath is colored with either red or blue, and this is a proper @xmath
-coloring extension of the given precoloring (or equivalently, a block
bi-coloring), and there is an LR-ordering @xmath for each @xmath .

Let @xmath be the ordering of the vertices of @xmath given by
concatenating the LR-orderings @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . Let
@xmath and consider the columns of @xmath ordered according to @xmath .

For each vertex @xmath in @xmath , if @xmath , then the R-block
corresponding to @xmath in @xmath and the L-block corresponding to
@xmath in @xmath are colored with the same color. Thus, we consider the
row corresponding to @xmath in @xmath colored with that color. Notice
that, if @xmath , then @xmath is complete to each @xmath . Thus, when
defining @xmath we did not consider such vertices since they do not
interfere with the possibility of having an LR-ordering of the columns,
for such a vertex would have a @xmath in each column of @xmath .

If instead @xmath , then the R-block corresponding to @xmath in @xmath
and the L-block corresponding to @xmath in @xmath are colored with
distinct colors. Moreover, notice that the row corresponding to @xmath
in @xmath has both an L-block and an R-block. Thus, we consider its
L-block colored with the same color assigned to @xmath in @xmath and the
R-block colored with the same color assigned to @xmath in @xmath .
Notice that the distinct coloring in @xmath and @xmath makes sense,
since we are describing vertices whose chords must have one of its
endpoints drawn in the @xmath portion of the circle and the other
endpoint in the @xmath portion of the circle. Throughout the following,
we will denote @xmath to the row corresponding to @xmath in @xmath .

Let @xmath . Hence, @xmath lies in @xmath for some @xmath . Notice that,
a row representing a vertex @xmath in @xmath is entirely colored with
the same color. Moreover, this is also true for a row representing
@xmath in @xmath such that @xmath . However, if @xmath in @xmath and
@xmath , then @xmath and @xmath are colored with distinct colors.

###### Definition 4.4.

We define the @xmath -matrix @xmath as the matrix obtained by
considering only those rows representing vertices in @xmath and adding
two distinct columns @xmath and @xmath such that the entry @xmath is
defined as follows:

-    If @xmath and @xmath is colored with red, then the entry @xmath has
    a @xmath if @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and a @xmath otherwise, for
    every @xmath in @xmath , and @xmath = @xmath .

-    If @xmath and @xmath is colored with red, then the entry @xmath has
    a @xmath if @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and a @xmath otherwise, for
    every @xmath in @xmath , and @xmath , @xmath . Analogously, if
    @xmath and instead @xmath is colored with red, then the entry @xmath
    has a @xmath if @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and a @xmath otherwise,
    for every @xmath in @xmath , and @xmath , @xmath .

The matrix @xmath is defined in an entirely analogous way, changing red
for blue in the definition.

We define the @xmath -matrix @xmath as the submatrix of @xmath obtained
by considering only those rows corresponding to vertices @xmath in
@xmath with @xmath for which @xmath is colored with red. The matrix
@xmath is defined as the submatrix of @xmath obtained by considering
those rows corresponding to vertices @xmath in @xmath with @xmath for
which @xmath is colored with blue.

###### Lemma 4.5.

Suppose that @xmath is @xmath -nested for every @xmath . If @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath or @xmath are not nested, then @xmath contains @xmath as
a minimal forbidden induced subgraph for the class of circle graphs.

###### Proof.

Suppose first that @xmath is not nested. Then, there is a @xmath -gem.
Since @xmath is @xmath -nested for every @xmath , in particular there
are no monochromatic gems in each @xmath . Let @xmath and @xmath be two
rows that induce a @xmath -gem in @xmath and let @xmath in @xmath and
@xmath in @xmath be the vertices corresponding to such rows in @xmath .
Notice that, in each case the proof will be analogous whenever two rows
overlap and the corresponding two vertices lie in the same subset.

The rows in @xmath represent vertices in the following subsets of @xmath
: @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath or @xmath . Notice that @xmath , @xmath .

Case (1 ) @xmath in @xmath . Thus, @xmath in @xmath since @xmath is
admissible. We find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . It follows analogously if @xmath
in @xmath , for in this case the only possibility is @xmath in @xmath
since @xmath is complete to @xmath .

Case (2 ) @xmath in @xmath . Since @xmath is complete to @xmath , @xmath
is complete to @xmath and @xmath is admissible, the only possibility is
@xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath . We find @xmath induced by @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath if @xmath
in @xmath or @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath if @xmath in @xmath .

Case (3 ) @xmath in @xmath . In this case, the only possibility is that
@xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath , since @xmath and @xmath are
admissible. We find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

Thus, @xmath is nested. Let us suppose that @xmath is not nested. The
rows in @xmath represent vertices in the following subsets of @xmath :
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath or @xmath . Notice that @xmath .

Case (1 ) @xmath in @xmath . Thus, @xmath in @xmath . We find @xmath
induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath . The proof is analogous by symmetry if @xmath in @xmath .
Notice that there is no @xmath -gem induced by @xmath and @xmath since
@xmath is admissible.

Case (2 ) @xmath in @xmath . Since @xmath is complete to @xmath , the
only possibility is @xmath in @xmath . We find @xmath induced by @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

Case (3 ) @xmath in @xmath . In this case, the only possibility is that
@xmath in @xmath , since @xmath is admissible. We find @xmath induced by
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath if
@xmath in @xmath and induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath if @xmath in @xmath .

Suppose now that @xmath is not nested. The rows in @xmath represent
vertices in the following subsets of @xmath : @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath or @xmath . Suppose that @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath .
Thus, we find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . The proof is analogous if the
vertices lie in @xmath . Suppose that @xmath in @xmath , thus @xmath in
@xmath . We find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and therefore @xmath is nested.

Suppose that @xmath is not nested. The rows in @xmath represent vertices
in @xmath or @xmath . If @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath , then we
find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath . It follows analogously if one of both lie in
@xmath or one or both lie in @xmath changing @xmath and @xmath for some
analogous @xmath , @xmath in @xmath or @xmath , @xmath in @xmath ,
respectively.

This finishes the proof and therefore the four matrices are nested. ∎

###### Theorem 4.6.

Let @xmath be a split graph containing an induced tent. Then, @xmath is
a circle graph if and only if @xmath are @xmath -nested and @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath are nested.

###### Proof.

Necessity is clear by the previous lemmas and the fact that the graphs
in families @xmath and @xmath are all non-circle. Suppose now that each
of the matrices @xmath is @xmath -nested, and that the matrices @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath are nested. Let @xmath be an LR-ordering for
the columns of @xmath for each @xmath , and let @xmath be the ordering
obtained by concatenation of @xmath for all the vertices in @xmath .
Consider the circle divided into twelve pieces as in Figure 4.2(a) . For
each @xmath and for each vertex @xmath we place a chord having one end
in @xmath and the other end in @xmath , in such a way that the ordering
of the endpoints of the chords in @xmath and @xmath is @xmath .

Let us see how to place the chords for every subset @xmath of @xmath .

Notice that, by Lemma 4.5 for every subset @xmath such that @xmath , all
the vertices in @xmath are nested according to the ordering @xmath . In
other words, the vertices in each @xmath are totally ordered by
inclusion. Moreover, it is also a consequence of Lemma 4.5 and Claim 4.2
, that if @xmath and @xmath , then every vertex in @xmath is contained
in every vertex of @xmath .

Furthermore, let @xmath . Notice that, since @xmath is labeled with L in
@xmath , @xmath is labeled with R in @xmath , any row in each of these
subsets is colored with red and @xmath is admissible and LR-orderable,
then there is no vertex in @xmath such that the corresponding column has
value @xmath in two distinct vertices in @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively. Equivalently, the vertex set @xmath is empty.

A similar situation occurs with the vertices in @xmath and @xmath for
each @xmath , for the vertices in each subset are labeled with R and L
respectively, and since @xmath is @xmath -nested, then the rows
corresponding to vertices in @xmath end in the last column of @xmath and
the vertices corresponding to @xmath start in the first column of @xmath
. Furthermore, this implies that the sets @xmath and @xmath are
disjoint. The same holds for @xmath and @xmath .

We will place the chords according to the ordering @xmath given for
every vertex in @xmath . For each subset @xmath , we order its vertices
with the inclusion ordering of the neighbourhoods in @xmath and the
ordering @xmath . When placing the chords corresponding to the vertices
of each subset, we do it from lowest to highest according to the
previously stated ordering given for each subset.

Hence, we first place the chords of every subset @xmath .

-    If @xmath , then we place one endpoint in @xmath and the other
    endpoint in @xmath .

-    If @xmath , then we place one endpoint in @xmath and the other
    endpoint in @xmath .

-    If @xmath , then we place one endpoint in @xmath and the other
    endpoint in @xmath .

Afterwards, we place the chords that represent vertices in @xmath .

-    If @xmath , then we place one endpoint in @xmath and the other
    endpoint in @xmath .

-    If @xmath , then we place one endpoint in @xmath and the other
    endpoint in @xmath .

-    If @xmath , then we place one endpoint in @xmath and the other
    endpoint in @xmath .

We denote @xmath and @xmath to the placement in the circle given to the
chords of @xmath corresponding to the first and last column of @xmath ,
respectively. We denote @xmath to the placement of the chord
corresponding to the vertex @xmath of the tent @xmath , which lies
between @xmath and @xmath , and @xmath to the placement of the chord of
the vertex @xmath that lies between @xmath and @xmath .

For each @xmath , we give the placement of the chords corresponding to
the vertices in @xmath :

-    For @xmath , we place one endpoint in @xmath , and the other
    endpoint between @xmath and the chord corresponding to @xmath in
    @xmath .

-    For @xmath , we place one endpoint between the chord corresponding
    to @xmath in @xmath and @xmath , and the other endpoint in @xmath .

-    For @xmath , we place one endpoint in @xmath , and the other
    endpoint between @xmath and the chord corresponding to @xmath in
    @xmath .

-    For @xmath , we place one endpoint between the chord corresponding
    to @xmath in @xmath and @xmath , and the other endpoint in @xmath .

-    For @xmath , we place one endpoint in @xmath , and the other
    endpoint between @xmath and the chord corresponding to @xmath in
    @xmath .

-    For @xmath , we place one endpoint between the chord corresponding
    to @xmath in @xmath and @xmath , and the other endpoint in @xmath .

Finally, for the vertices in @xmath , we place the chords as follows:

-    For @xmath , we place one endpoint in @xmath and the other endpoint
    in @xmath .

-    For @xmath , we place one endpoint in @xmath and the other endpoint
    in @xmath .

-    For @xmath , we place one endpoint in @xmath and the other endpoint
    in @xmath .

This gives a circle model for the given split graph @xmath . ∎

#### 4.2 Split circle graphs containing an induced @xmath-tent

In this section we will address the second case of the proof of Theorem
LABEL:teo:circle_split_caract , which is the case where @xmath contains
an induced @xmath -tent. The difference between this case and the tent
case, is that one of the matrices that we need to define contains
LR-rows, which does not happen in the tent case. This section is
subdivided as follows. In Subsection 4.2.1 , we define the matrices
@xmath for each @xmath and demonstrate some properties that will be
useful further on. In subsections 4.2.2 and 4.2.3 , we prove the
necessity of the @xmath -nestedness of each @xmath for @xmath to be a
circle graph, and give the guidelines to draw a circle model for a split
graph @xmath containing an induced @xmath -tent in Theorem 4.19 .

##### 4.2.1 Matrices @xmath

Let @xmath and @xmath as in Section 2.2 . For each @xmath , let @xmath
be an enriched @xmath -matrix having one row for each vertex @xmath such
that @xmath belongs to @xmath or @xmath for some @xmath and one column
for each vertex @xmath and such that such that the entry corresponding
to row @xmath and column @xmath is @xmath if and only if @xmath is
adjacent to @xmath in @xmath . For each @xmath , we mark those rows
corresponding to vertices of @xmath with L and those corresponding to
vertices of @xmath with R. Those vertices in @xmath and @xmath are
labeled with LR.

As in the previous section, some of the rows of @xmath are colored.
However, since we do not have the same symmetry as in the tent case, we
will give a description of every matrix separately, for each @xmath (See
Figure 4.4 ).

Notice that, since @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are complete to
@xmath , then they are not considered for the definition of the matrix
@xmath . The same holds for @xmath with regard to @xmath , @xmath with
regard to @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath with regard to
@xmath , and @xmath with regard to @xmath . Also notice that we
considered @xmath and @xmath as two distinct subsets of @xmath .
Moreover, every vertex in @xmath is labeled with LR and every vertex in
@xmath is labeled with L. Furthermore, every row that represents a
vertex in @xmath is an empty LR-row in @xmath . Since we need @xmath to
be an enriched matrix, by definition of enriched matrix every row
corresponding to a vertex in @xmath must be colored with the same color.
We will give more details on this in Subsection 4.2.3 .

###### Remark 4.7.

Claim 4.2 remains true if @xmath contains an induced @xmath -tent. The
proof is analogous as in the tent case.

##### 4.2.2 Split circle equivalence

In this subsection, we will prove a result analogous to Lemma 4.3 . In
this case, the matrices @xmath contain no LR-rows, for each @xmath ,
hence the proof is very similar to the one given in Subsection 4.1.2 for
the tent case.

###### Lemma 4.8.

If @xmath is not @xmath -nested, for some @xmath , then @xmath contains
one of the forbidden subgraphs in @xmath or @xmath .

###### Proof.

Relying on the symmetry between some of the sets @xmath , we will only
prove the statement for @xmath . The proof is organized analogously as
in Lemma 4.3 . As in Lemma 4.3 , notice that, if @xmath is @xmath -free,
then in particular, for each @xmath , @xmath contains no @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath or @xmath for every even @xmath since these matrices are the
adjacency matrices of non-circle graphs.

Case (1 ) @xmath is not admissible

It follows from Theorem 3.16 and the fact that @xmath contains no
LR-rows that @xmath contains some submatrix @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath or @xmath for some @xmath .

Let @xmath and @xmath in @xmath be the vertices whose adjacency is
represented by the first and second row of @xmath , for each @xmath ,
and let @xmath and @xmath in @xmath be the vertices whose adjacency is
represented by the first and second column of @xmath respectively, for
each @xmath , and @xmath in @xmath is the vertex whose adjacency is
represented by the column of @xmath .

Case (1.1) @xmath contains @xmath

We assume without loss of generality that both rows are labeled with L.

Case (1.1.1) Suppose that @xmath . Since the coloring is indistinct, the
vertices @xmath and @xmath may belong to one or two of the following
subclasses: @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . Suppose first
that @xmath and @xmath both lie in @xmath , thus @xmath . If @xmath and
@xmath are non-disjoint, then we find a tent induced by @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , where @xmath in @xmath is adjacent
to both @xmath and @xmath . If instead there is no such vertex @xmath ,
then there are vertices @xmath and @xmath in @xmath such that @xmath is
adjacent to @xmath and nonadjacent to @xmath , and @xmath is adjacent to
@xmath and nonadjacent to @xmath . Then, we find @xmath induced by
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath .

Suppose that @xmath and @xmath lie in @xmath . If @xmath and @xmath are
non-disjoint, then we find net @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . We find the same subgraph
very similarly if @xmath and @xmath lie both in @xmath or in @xmath and
neither @xmath nor @xmath is complete to @xmath . If @xmath in @xmath
and @xmath in @xmath , then we find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

If @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath , then we find tent with center
induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
. Moreover, we find the same subgraph if @xmath and @xmath in @xmath and
only @xmath is complete to @xmath and if @xmath and @xmath in @xmath or
in @xmath and are both complete to @xmath .

If instead @xmath and @xmath are disjoint, then we find @xmath induced
by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath .

Case (1.1.2) Suppose that @xmath . If @xmath and @xmath lie in @xmath ,
and @xmath and @xmath are disjoint, then we find @xmath as in the
previous case, induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . If instead @xmath and
@xmath are non-disjoint, then we find net @xmath induced by @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . Similarly, we find
the same subgraphs if @xmath and @xmath lie in @xmath .

Case (1.1.3) Suppose that @xmath . If @xmath and @xmath lie in @xmath
and @xmath and @xmath are disjoint, then we find @xmath induced by
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath . If @xmath and @xmath are non-disjoint, then we find a net
@xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath . Similarly, we find the same subgraphs if @xmath and @xmath in
@xmath .

Suppose that @xmath and @xmath lie in @xmath . If @xmath and @xmath are
not disjoint, then we find a tent induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath . If @xmath and @xmath are disjoint, then we
find a @xmath -sun induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

If @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath , then we find @xmath induced
by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
. The proof is analogous if @xmath and @xmath in @xmath or @xmath .

Case (1.2) @xmath contains @xmath

Case (1.2.1) Suppose that @xmath . In this case, @xmath lies in @xmath
and @xmath lies in @xmath . If @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath is
not complete to @xmath , then we find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
. If @xmath lies in @xmath but is complete to @xmath , then by
definition of @xmath , @xmath is not complete to @xmath . Let @xmath in
@xmath be a vertex nonadjacent to @xmath and let @xmath in @xmath be the
vertex represented by the column of @xmath . Thus, @xmath and @xmath are
adjcent to @xmath . If @xmath is also adjacent to @xmath , then we find
@xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath . If instead @xmath is nonadjacent to @xmath , then we
find a net @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath . The same forbidden subgraph arises when considering
a vertex @xmath in @xmath such that there is a vertex @xmath in @xmath
adjacent to @xmath and nonadjacent to @xmath . Suppose now that @xmath
in @xmath and @xmath is nested in @xmath with regard to @xmath . If
@xmath is adjacent to @xmath and @xmath , then we find a tent with
center induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . If instead @xmath is
nonadjacent to @xmath , then we find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

Case (1.2.2) If @xmath , then there are no vertices labeled with
distinct letters and colored with the same color.

Case (1.2.3) Suppose that @xmath , We have two possibilities: either
@xmath lies in @xmath and @xmath lies in @xmath , or @xmath lies in
@xmath and @xmath lies in @xmath . If @xmath lies in @xmath and @xmath
lies in @xmath , then we find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . If @xmath lies in @xmath
and @xmath lies in @xmath , then we find @xmath induced by @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath .

Case (1.3) @xmath contains @xmath

Case (1.3.1) Let @xmath . In this case, @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in
@xmath , hence we find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

Case (1.3.2) Suppose that @xmath . In this case, @xmath in @xmath and
@xmath lies in @xmath . We find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

Case (1.3.3) Finally, let @xmath . We have two possibilities. If @xmath
lies in @xmath and @xmath lies in @xmath , then we find @xmath induced
by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath . If @xmath in @xmath and @xmath lies in @xmath , then we find
@xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

Case (1.4) Suppose there is @xmath in @xmath for some @xmath . Let
@xmath be the vertices corresponding to the rows in @xmath and @xmath be
the vertices corresponding to the columns in @xmath . Thus, @xmath and
@xmath are labeled with the same letter.

Case (1.4.1) Let @xmath , and suppose first that @xmath is odd. Hence,
@xmath and @xmath are colored with distinct colors. If @xmath in @xmath
and @xmath in @xmath , then we find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .
Conversely, if @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath , then we find
@xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath .

Suppose instead that @xmath is even, hence @xmath and @xmath are colored
with the same color. If @xmath and @xmath lie in @xmath , since there is
no @xmath , then Claim 4.2 and Claim 4.2 hold and thus @xmath and @xmath
are nested in @xmath . Hence, we find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . We find the same
forbidden subgraph if @xmath and @xmath lie both in @xmath by changing
@xmath for @xmath .

Case (1.4.2) Let @xmath . Since there are no vertices labeled with the
same letter and colored with distinct colors, then it is not possible to
find @xmath for any odd @xmath . If instead @xmath is even, then either
@xmath and @xmath lie in @xmath or @xmath and @xmath lie in @xmath . If
@xmath and @xmath lie in @xmath , then we find @xmath induced by @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . We find
the same forbidden subgraph if @xmath and @xmath lie in @xmath or @xmath
by changing @xmath for @xmath and @xmath for @xmath .

Case (1.4.3) Suppose that @xmath , and suppose first that @xmath is odd.
If @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath , then we find @xmath induced
by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . If
instead @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath , then we find @xmath
induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . We find the same forbidden subgraphs if
@xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath by changing @xmath for @xmath ,
and if @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath by changing @xmath for
@xmath and @xmath for @xmath .

Suppose that @xmath is even. If @xmath and @xmath lie in @xmath , then
it follows from Claim 4.2 that they are nested in @xmath , hence we find
@xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath . If @xmath and @xmath lie in @xmath we find the same
forbidden subgraph by changing @xmath for @xmath . It follows
analogously for @xmath and @xmath lying both in @xmath or @xmath .

Case (1.5) Suppose there is @xmath in @xmath for some @xmath . Let
@xmath be the vertices corresponding to the rows in @xmath and @xmath be
the vertices corresponding to the columns in @xmath . Thus, @xmath and
@xmath are labeled with the distinct letters.

Case (1.5.1) Let @xmath , and suppose that @xmath is odd. In this case,
@xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath , and we find @xmath induced by
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath . If instead @xmath is even, then @xmath in
@xmath and @xmath in @xmath , and we find @xmath induced by @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

Case (1.5.2) Let @xmath . If @xmath is even, then there are no vertices
labeled with the same letter and colored with distinct colors in @xmath
.

If instead @xmath is odd, then @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath .
In this case, we find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

Case (1.5.3) Suppose that @xmath . Let @xmath be odd. If @xmath lies in
@xmath and @xmath in @xmath , then we find @xmath induced by @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath . If instead @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath ,
then we find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

If instead @xmath is even, then @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath .
In this case we find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

Notice that @xmath has no LR-rows, thus there are no @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath or @xmath as
subconfigurations. Hence, @xmath is admissible for each @xmath , and
thus it follows for @xmath for symmetry.

Furthermore, it follows by the same argument as in the tent case that it
is not possible that @xmath is admissible but not LR-orderable.

Case (2 ) Suppose that @xmath is LR-orderable and is not partially
@xmath -nested.

Since there are no LR-rows in @xmath for each @xmath , if @xmath is not
partially @xmath -nested, then there is either a monochromatic gem or a
monochromatic weak gem in @xmath as a subconfiguration. Remember that
every colored row in @xmath is a row labeled with L or R, hence both
rows of a monochromatic gem or weak gem are labeled rows. However, this
is not possible since in each case we find either @xmath or @xmath , and
this results in a contradiction for we showed that @xmath is admissible
and therefore @xmath is partially @xmath -nested.

Case (3 ) Suppose that @xmath is partially @xmath -nested and is not
@xmath -nested .

If @xmath is partially @xmath -nested and is not @xmath -nested, then,
for every proper @xmath -coloring of the rows of @xmath , there is a
monochromatic gem or a monochromatic wek gem indued by at least one
unlabeled row. This proof is also analogous as in the tent case (See
Lemma 4.3 for details).

∎

##### 4.2.3 The matrix @xmath

In this subsection we will demostrate a lemma analogous to Lemma 4.8 but
for the matrix @xmath . In other words, we will use the matrix theory
developed in Chapter 3 in order to characterize the @xmath matrix when
the split graph @xmath that contains an induced @xmath -tent is also a
circle graph. Although the result is the same –we will find all the
forbidden subgraphs for the class of circle graphs given when @xmath is
not @xmath -nested–, the most important difference between this matrix
and the matrices @xmath for each @xmath , is that @xmath contains
LR-rows.

First, we will define how to color those rows that correspond to
vertices in @xmath , since we defined @xmath as an enriched matrix and
these rows are the only empty LR-rows in @xmath . Remember that all the
empty LR-rows must be colored with the same color. Hence, if there is at
least one red row labeled with L or one blue row labeled with R
(resp. blue row labeled with L or red row labeled with R), then we color
every LR-row in @xmath with blue (resp. with red). This will give a
@xmath -color assignment to each empty LR-row only If @xmath is @xmath
-free.

###### Lemma 4.9.

Let @xmath be a split graph that contains an induced @xmath -tent and
such that @xmath contains no induced tent, and let @xmath as defined in
the previous section. If @xmath and one of the following holds:

-    There is at least one red row @xmath and one blue row @xmath , both
    labeled with L (resp. R)

-    There is at least one row @xmath labeled with L and one row @xmath
    labeled with R, both colored with red (resp. blue).

Then, we find either @xmath or @xmath -sun as an induced subgraph of
@xmath .

###### Proof.

We assume that @xmath contains no @xmath , for we will prove this in
Lemma 4.10 .

Let @xmath be a vertex corresponding to a red row labeled with L, @xmath
be the vertex corresponding to a blue row labeled with L, and @xmath in
@xmath . Thus, @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath . In either case,
we find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath or @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , depending on whether @xmath
in @xmath or in @xmath . Suppose now that @xmath is a vertex
corresponding to a red row labeled with L and @xmath is a vertex
corresponding to a red row labeled with R. Thus, @xmath in @xmath and
@xmath in @xmath . If @xmath in @xmath , then there is a @xmath -sun
induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath . If instead @xmath in @xmath , then we find a tent with center
induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
. This finished the proof since the other cases are analogous by
symmetry. ∎

In order to prove the following lemma, we will assume without loss of
generality that @xmath .

###### Lemma 4.10.

Let @xmath be a split graph containing an induced @xmath -tent such that
@xmath contains no induced tent, and let @xmath . If @xmath is not
@xmath -nested, then @xmath contains an induced subgraph of the families
@xmath or @xmath .

###### Proof.

We will assume proven Lemma 4.8 . This is, we assume that the matrices
@xmath @xmath are @xmath -nested. In particular, it follows that any
pair of vertices @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath such that @xmath
and @xmath are nested in @xmath . Moreover, there is a vertex @xmath in
@xmath adjacent to both @xmath and @xmath .

Throughout the proof, we will refer indistinctly to a row @xmath
(resp. a column @xmath ) and the vertex in the independent
(resp. complete) partition of @xmath whose adjacency is represented by
the row (resp. column). The structure of the proof is analogous as in
Lemmas 4.3 and 4.8 . The only difference is that, in this case @xmath
admits LR-rows by definition, and thus we have to consider all the
forbidden subconfigurations for every characterization in each case.

Case (1 ) Suppose that @xmath is not admissible.

Hence, @xmath contains at least one of the matrices @xmath , @xmath for
some @xmath or @xmath , @xmath for some @xmath or @xmath , for some
@xmath .

Case (1.1) @xmath contains @xmath . Let @xmath and @xmath be the
vertices represented by the first and second row of @xmath respectively,
and @xmath , @xmath in @xmath represented by the first and second column
of @xmath , respectively.

Case (1.1.1) Suppose first that both vertices are colored with the same
color. Since the case is symmetric with regard of the coloring, we may
assume that both rows are colored with red, hence either @xmath and
@xmath lie in @xmath , or @xmath and @xmath lie in @xmath . If @xmath
and @xmath lie in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath is adjacent to both @xmath
and @xmath , then we find a net @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . We find the same forbidden
subgraph if either @xmath and @xmath lie in @xmath changing @xmath for
some @xmath in @xmath adjacent to both @xmath and @xmath , @xmath for
some @xmath in @xmath nonadjacent to both @xmath and @xmath and @xmath
for @xmath . We also find the same subgraph if @xmath and @xmath lie in
@xmath , changing @xmath for some @xmath in @xmath adjacent to both
@xmath and @xmath and @xmath for @xmath . If instead @xmath in @xmath
and @xmath in @xmath , since by definition every vertex in @xmath is
adjacent but not complete to @xmath , then there are vertices @xmath in
@xmath and @xmath in @xmath such that @xmath is nonadjacent to both, and
@xmath is adjacent to @xmath and is nonadjacent to @xmath . Thus, we
find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

Case (1.1.2) Suppose now that both rows are colored with distinct
colors. By symmetry, assume without loss of generality that @xmath is
colored with red and @xmath is colored with blue. Hence, @xmath lies in
@xmath , and @xmath lies in @xmath . If @xmath in @xmath , then there is
a vertex @xmath in @xmath nonadjacent to @xmath and @xmath . Hence, we
find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath @xmath . If instead @xmath in @xmath or @xmath
, then we find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

Case (1.2) @xmath contains @xmath . Let @xmath and @xmath be the
vertices that represent the rows of @xmath , and let @xmath in @xmath be
the vertex that represents the column of @xmath . Suppose without loss
of generality that both rows are colored with red, hence @xmath in
@xmath and @xmath in @xmath . Notice that we are assuming there is no
@xmath in @xmath , thus, if @xmath is not complete to @xmath , then
there is a vertex @xmath in @xmath adjacent to @xmath and nonadjacent to
@xmath . If @xmath in @xmath , then we find a @xmath -sun induced by
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .
If @xmath in @xmath is not complete to @xmath , then we find a tent
induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . If
instead @xmath in @xmath is complete to @xmath , then we find a @xmath
induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath .

Case (1.3) @xmath contains @xmath . Let @xmath and @xmath be the first
and second row of @xmath , and let @xmath and @xmath be the vertices
corresponding to first and second column of @xmath , respectively. By
symmetry we suppose without loss of generality that @xmath is colored
with blue and @xmath is colored with red. Thus, @xmath lies in @xmath
and @xmath lies in @xmath . If @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath ,
then we find a @xmath -sun with center induced by @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath . If instead @xmath in @xmath , since @xmath is not complete to
@xmath and we assume that @xmath is admissible, then there is a vertex
@xmath in @xmath adjacent to @xmath and nonadjacent to @xmath , for if
not we find @xmath in @xmath . We find a tent induced by @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . The same holds if @xmath in @xmath
and @xmath in @xmath , for @xmath is admissible and @xmath is adjacent
but not complete to @xmath . Moreover, if @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in
@xmath , then we find a tent induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath . Finally, if @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in
@xmath , then there are vertices @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath
such that @xmath is nonadjacent to @xmath and adjacent to @xmath , and
@xmath is nonadjacent to @xmath and adjacent to @xmath . Hence, we find
@xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

###### Remark 4.11.

If @xmath is @xmath -free, then @xmath if @xmath , and viceversa.

Case (1.4) @xmath contains @xmath . Let @xmath and @xmath be the
vertices corresponding to the rows of @xmath labeled with L and R,
respectively, @xmath be the vertex corresponding to the LR-row, and
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath in @xmath be the vertices corresponding to
the columns of @xmath . An uncolored LR-row in @xmath represents a
vertex in @xmath . Notice that there is no vertex @xmath in @xmath for
some @xmath adjacent to both @xmath and @xmath , since @xmath is
complete to @xmath , thus we find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

If @xmath is colored with red and @xmath is colored with blue, then
@xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath . We find @xmath induced by @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
.

Conversely, if @xmath is colored with blue and @xmath is colored with
red, then @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath . It follows by symmetry
that it suffices to see what happens if @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in
either @xmath or @xmath . If @xmath in @xmath , then we find @xmath
induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . If instead
@xmath in @xmath , then we find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

Case (1.5) @xmath contains @xmath . Let @xmath and @xmath be the
vertices represented by the rows labeled with L, @xmath be the vertex
represented by the LR-row and @xmath in @xmath corresponding to the only
column of @xmath . Suppose without loss of generality that @xmath is
colored with red and @xmath is colored with blue. Thus, @xmath lies in
@xmath and @xmath lies in @xmath . In either case, we find @xmath : if
@xmath in @xmath , then it is induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and if @xmath in
@xmath or @xmath , then it is induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

Case (1.6) @xmath contains @xmath . Let @xmath and @xmath be the
vertices representing the rows labeled with L and R, respectively,
@xmath be the vertex corresponding to the LR-row, and @xmath in @xmath
corresponding to the column of @xmath . Suppose without loss of
generality that @xmath is colored with blue and @xmath is colored with
red.

###### Remark 4.12.

If @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath , then we may assume that there
are vertices @xmath and @xmath in @xmath such that @xmath is adjacent to
@xmath and is nonadjacent to @xmath and @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and
is nonadjacent to @xmath , for if not @xmath is not admissible, for
@xmath .

By the previous remark, notice that, if @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in
@xmath , then there is a tent induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , where @xmath is a vertex nonadjacent to
@xmath . The same holds if @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath , where
the tent is induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , with @xmath in @xmath adjacent to @xmath and nonadjacent to
@xmath . Finally, if @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath , then we
find a @xmath -sun with center induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

###### Remark 4.13.

If @xmath is @xmath -free and contains no induced tent, then any two
vertices @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath are disjoint in @xmath .
The same holds for any two vertices @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in
@xmath in @xmath .

Case (1.7) @xmath contains @xmath . Let @xmath and @xmath be the
vertices represented by the rows labeled with L and R, respectively,
@xmath be the vertex corresponding to the LR-row, and @xmath and @xmath
in @xmath corresponding to the first and second column of @xmath ,
respectively. Suppose without loss of generality that @xmath and @xmath
are both colored with red, thus @xmath lies in @xmath and @xmath lies in
@xmath . Since @xmath is admissible for every @xmath , then there is no
vertex in @xmath adjacent to both @xmath and @xmath . It follows that,
since @xmath is complete to @xmath , then @xmath in @xmath . However, we
find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

The following remark is a consequence of the previous statement.

###### Remark 4.14.

If @xmath is @xmath -free, @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath , then
for every vertex @xmath in @xmath either @xmath or @xmath . The same
holds for @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath .

Case (1.8) @xmath contains @xmath or @xmath . Thus, there is a vertex
@xmath in some @xmath with @xmath such that @xmath is adjacent to the
three vertices corresponding to every row of @xmath , thus we find a net
@xmath . The same holds if there is @xmath .

Case (1.9) @xmath contains @xmath or @xmath . In that case, there is an
induced tent.

Case (1.10) @xmath contains @xmath or @xmath . It is straightforward
that in this case we find @xmath .

Case (1.11) @xmath contains @xmath . Let @xmath and @xmath be the
vertices represented by the rows labeled with L and R, respectively,
@xmath and @xmath be the vertices represented by the LR-rows and @xmath
in @xmath be the vertices corresponding to the columns of @xmath .
Suppose without loss of generality that @xmath is colored with red and
@xmath is colored with blue. Hence, @xmath lies in @xmath and @xmath
lies in @xmath . Let @xmath in @xmath adjacent to @xmath and nonadjacent
to @xmath and let @xmath in @xmath adjacent to @xmath and nonadjacent to
@xmath . Hence, we find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

Case (1.12) Suppose that @xmath contains @xmath

Case (1.12.1) If @xmath is even, let @xmath be the vertices represented
by the rows of @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath are labeled both with L
or both with R, @xmath is a vertex corresponding to the LR-row, and
@xmath in @xmath the vertices corresponding to the columns. Suppose
without loss of generality that @xmath and @xmath are labeled with L. It
follows that either @xmath and @xmath lie in @xmath , or @xmath and
@xmath lie in @xmath or @xmath lies in @xmath and @xmath lies in @xmath
. In either case, there is @xmath in @xmath adjacent to both @xmath and
@xmath . Moreover, @xmath is also adjacent to @xmath . Thus, this vertex
set induces a @xmath -sun with center.

Case (1.12.2) If @xmath is odd, since @xmath has @xmath rows (thus there
are @xmath vertices), then the subset of vertices given by @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath induces an even @xmath -sun.

Case (1.13) Suppose that @xmath contains @xmath .

Let @xmath and @xmath be the vertices corresponding to the labeled rows,
@xmath in @xmath be the vertices corresponding to the columns of @xmath
, and suppose without loss of generality that @xmath and @xmath are
labeled with R.

Case (1.13.1) Suppose first that @xmath is odd, @xmath is colored with
red and @xmath is colored with blue. Thus, @xmath in @xmath and @xmath
in @xmath , or viceversa. If @xmath in @xmath , then let @xmath in
@xmath for @xmath such that @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and @xmath ,
@xmath is adjacent to @xmath and nonadjacent to @xmath , and @xmath is
nonadjacent to both @xmath and @xmath . We find @xmath induced by @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . If @xmath in
@xmath , then we find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , with
@xmath in @xmath adjacent to @xmath and nonadjacent to @xmath .

Conversely, suppose @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath . If @xmath
lies in @xmath , then @xmath is induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , with @xmath in @xmath for @xmath
such that @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and @xmath , @xmath is adjacent
to @xmath and nonadjacent to @xmath , and @xmath is nonadjacent to both
@xmath and @xmath . If instead @xmath in @xmath , then it is induced by
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

Case (1.13.2) Suppose now that @xmath is even, and thus both @xmath and
@xmath are colored with the same color. Suppose without loss of
generality that are both colored with red, and thus @xmath and @xmath
lie in @xmath . If @xmath and @xmath in @xmath , then we find @xmath
induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . We find the same
forbidden subgraph if @xmath and @xmath lie in @xmath or @xmath , by
changing @xmath for @xmath , and @xmath and @xmath for @xmath and @xmath
, where @xmath is nonadjacent to both @xmath and @xmath and @xmath is
adjacent to both. If only @xmath lies in @xmath , then we find @xmath
induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , with @xmath in @xmath for @xmath . If only @xmath
lies in @xmath , then we find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , with
@xmath in @xmath for @xmath .

Case (1.14) Suppose that @xmath contains @xmath . Let @xmath and @xmath
be the vertices corresponding to the labeled rows, @xmath in @xmath be
the vertices corresponding to the columns of @xmath .

Case (1.14.1) Suppose first that @xmath is odd, and suppose that @xmath
is labeled with L and colored with blue and @xmath is labeled with R and
colored with red. In this case, @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath .
If @xmath in @xmath , then we find a @xmath -sun if @xmath in @xmath ,
induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath . If @xmath in @xmath , then we find a @xmath -sun
induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . Moreover, if
@xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath , then we find a @xmath -sun
induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . Finally, if
@xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath , then we find @xmath induced by
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath .

Case (1.14.2) Suppose now that @xmath is even, and suppose without loss
of generality that @xmath and @xmath are both colored with red. Thus,
@xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath . If @xmath in @xmath , then we
find @xmath -sun induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath . If instead @xmath in @xmath , then we find @xmath -sun
induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

Case (1.15) @xmath contains @xmath .

Let @xmath , @xmath and @xmath be the labeled rows and @xmath in @xmath
be the vertices corresponding to the columns of @xmath . Suppose without
loss of generality that @xmath is the vertex corresponding to the row
labeled with LR, @xmath corresponding to the row labeled with L, @xmath
labeled with R. Notice that @xmath lies in @xmath .

Case (1.15.1) Suppose @xmath is even, thus @xmath and @xmath are colored
with the same color. Suppose without loss of generality that they are
both colored with red. Hence, @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath . If
@xmath lies in @xmath , then we find a @xmath -sun with center induced
by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . If instead @xmath in @xmath ,
then we find a @xmath -sun with center induced by @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

Case (1.15.2) Suppose @xmath is odd, thus assume without loss of
generality that @xmath is colored with red and @xmath is colored with
blue. Hence, @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath . We find a @xmath
-sun with center induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath .

Case (1.16) @xmath contains @xmath .

Let @xmath , @xmath and @xmath be the labeled rows and @xmath in @xmath
be the vertices corresponding to the columns of @xmath . Suppose without
loss of generality @xmath and @xmath are labeled with L and that @xmath
is the vertex corresponding to the row labeled with LR.

Case (1.16.1) Suppose @xmath is even, hence @xmath and @xmath lie in
@xmath . In this case we find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath .

Case (1.16.2) Suppose @xmath is odd, and suppose that @xmath is colored
with red and @xmath is colored with blue. Thus, @xmath in @xmath and
@xmath in @xmath . If @xmath in @xmath , then we find @xmath induced by
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . If instead @xmath lies in
@xmath , then we find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

Case (1.17) @xmath contains @xmath .

Case (1.17.1) Suppose first that @xmath contains @xmath or @xmath , and
let @xmath , @xmath and @xmath be the vertices that respresent the
LR-row, the R-row and the unlabeled row, respectively. Independently on
where does @xmath lie in, there is vertex @xmath in @xmath such that
@xmath is adjacent to @xmath and @xmath and nonadjacent to @xmath , then
we find an induced tent with center.

Case (1.17.2) If @xmath contains @xmath for some even @xmath , then we
find @xmath induced by every row and column of @xmath . If instead
@xmath is odd, then we find @xmath induced by every row and column of
@xmath and a vertex @xmath in some @xmath with @xmath . We choose such a
vertex @xmath adjacent to @xmath , and thus since @xmath in @xmath ,
@xmath is also adjacent to @xmath and @xmath are nonadjacent to @xmath
for they represent vertices in @xmath .

Case (1.18) @xmath contains @xmath .

Suppose @xmath contains @xmath . It is straightforward that the rows and
columns induce a co- @xmath -tent @xmath . Furthermore, if @xmath , then
@xmath is even. The rows and columns of @xmath induce a @xmath -sun.

Case (1.19) @xmath contains @xmath .

If @xmath , then we can find an tent induced by the last three columns
and the last three rows. If instead @xmath , then we find a @xmath -sun
with center induced by every unlabeled row, every column but the first
and one more column –which will be the center– representing any vertex
in @xmath , since @xmath .

Case (1.20) @xmath contains @xmath .

Let @xmath be the vertices represented by the rows of @xmath and @xmath
be the vertices in @xmath represented by the columns. The rows
corresponding to @xmath and @xmath are labeled with L and R,
respectively, and the row corresponding to @xmath is an LR-row.

Case (1.20.1) Suppose first that @xmath . If @xmath is even, then @xmath
and @xmath are colored with the same color. Suppose without loss of
generality that both are colored with red, thus @xmath lies in @xmath
and @xmath lies in @xmath . In that case, there are vertices @xmath in
@xmath for @xmath such that @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and nonadjacent
to @xmath and @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and nonadjacent to @xmath .
We find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath

If instead @xmath is odd, then @xmath and @xmath are colored with the
same colors. Suppose without loss of generality that they are both
colored with red. Hence, @xmath lies in @xmath and @xmath lies in @xmath
. In either case, we find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath if @xmath lies in @xmath , and induced
by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath if
@xmath lies in @xmath .

Case (1.20.2) Suppose that @xmath . The proof is very similar to the
case @xmath . If @xmath is odd, then @xmath and @xmath are colored with
the same color. If it is red, then we find @xmath induced by @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath if @xmath lies in
@xmath , and we find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath if
@xmath lies in @xmath .

If instead @xmath is even, then @xmath and @xmath are colored with
distinct colors. Then, we find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

Case (1.21) @xmath contains @xmath .

Let @xmath be the vertices represented by the rows of @xmath and @xmath
be the vertices in @xmath represented by the columns. The rows
corresponding to @xmath and @xmath are labeled with L and R,
respectively, and the rows corresponding to @xmath and @xmath are
LR-rows.

Case (1.21.1) Suppose first that @xmath . If @xmath is odd, then @xmath
and @xmath are colored with the same color. We assume without loss of
generality that they are colored with red. Thus, @xmath lies in @xmath
and @xmath lies in @xmath . In either case, @xmath is anticomplete to
@xmath . Hence, we find @xmath induced by every row and column of @xmath
and an extra column that represents a vertex in @xmath adjacent to
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath and nonadjacent to @xmath , for @xmath ,
@xmath . If instead @xmath is even, then we assume that @xmath and
@xmath are colored with red and blue, respectively. Thus, @xmath lies in
@xmath and @xmath lies in @xmath . We find @xmath induced by every row
and every column of @xmath , the row corresponding to @xmath and two
columns corresponding to vertices @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath
such that @xmath is adjacent to @xmath , @xmath and @xmath and is
nonadjacent to @xmath , and @xmath is adjacent to @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath and is nonadjacent to @xmath , for each @xmath , @xmath .

Case (1.21.2) Suppose @xmath . The proof is analogous to the previous
case if @xmath is even. If instead @xmath is odd, then @xmath lies in
@xmath and @xmath lies in @xmath . If @xmath in @xmath , then we find
@xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath . If instead @xmath , then we find @xmath induced by every row
and every column of @xmath and one more column representing a vertex in
@xmath adjacent to every vertex represented by a labeled row.

Case (1.22) @xmath contains @xmath .

Let @xmath be the vertices represented by the rows of @xmath and @xmath
be the vertices in @xmath represented by the columns. The rows
corresponding to @xmath and @xmath are labeled with L and R,
respectively, and the rows corresponding to @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath are LR-rows.

Suppose @xmath . If @xmath is even, then we find @xmath induced by
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . The same subgraph
arises if @xmath .

Suppose now that @xmath is odd, thus @xmath and @xmath are colored with
the same color. We can assume without loss of generality that @xmath
lies in @xmath and @xmath lies in @xmath . If @xmath , then we find
@xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , where @xmath in @xmath is adjacent to @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath . The same subgraph arises if @xmath . If @xmath in @xmath ,
then there are vertices @xmath in @xmath , for @xmath such that @xmath
is adjacent to @xmath and is nonadjacent to @xmath , @xmath is
nonadjacent to both and @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and nonajcent to
@xmath . If @xmath , we find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
. If instead @xmath , then we find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath .

Therefore, @xmath is admissible.

Case (2 ) Suppose now that @xmath is admissible but not LR-orderable,
thus @xmath contains either a Tucker matrix, or @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath for some @xmath .

Toward a contradiction, it suffices to see that @xmath does not contain
any Tucker matrix, for in the case of the matrices listed in Figure 3.17
, each labeled column can be replaced by a column that represents a
vertex that belongs to the same subclasses considered in the analysis
for a Tucker matrix with at least one LR-row, and since some of the rows
may be non-LR-rows, then that case can be reduced to a particular case.

Let @xmath be a Tucker matrix contained in @xmath . Thoughout the proof,
when we refer to an LR-row in @xmath , we refer to the row in @xmath ,
this is, the complement of the row that appears in @xmath .

Case (2.1) Suppose first that @xmath contains @xmath , for some @xmath .
Let @xmath be the vertices corresponding to the rows of @xmath , and
@xmath in @xmath be the vertices corresponding to the columns.

###### Remark 4.15.

If two non-LR-rows in @xmath are labeled with the same letter, then they
induce @xmath . Moreover, any pair of consecutive non-LR-rows labeled
with distinct letters induce @xmath or @xmath . This follows from the
fact that @xmath is admissible. Hence, there are at most two non-LR-rows
in @xmath and such rows are non-consecutive and labeled with distinct
letters. Furthermore, since @xmath is admissible, it is easy to see that
there are at most two LR-rows in @xmath , for if not such rows induce
@xmath , @xmath or @xmath .

Case (2.1.1) Suppose first that @xmath and that @xmath is the only
LR-row in @xmath .

If rows @xmath and @xmath are unlabeled, then we find a net @xmath
induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, where @xmath is any vertex in @xmath . The same holds if either @xmath
or @xmath are labeled rows, by accordingly replacing @xmath for some
@xmath such that @xmath is nonadjacent to both @xmath and @xmath (there
are no labeled rows complete to each partition @xmath of @xmath ). By
the previous remark, if both @xmath and @xmath are labeled rows, then
they are labeled with distinct letters. Thus, we find @xmath induced by
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
where @xmath in @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and nonadjacent to @xmath
and @xmath in @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and nonadjacent to @xmath ,
or viceversa. Such vertices exist since we assumed @xmath admissible for
every @xmath .

If instead @xmath and @xmath are LR-rows, then we find a tent by
considering any vertex @xmath in @xmath for some @xmath such that @xmath
is nonadjacent to @xmath . The tent is induced by the set @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . Every other case is
analogous by symmetry. Moreover, if @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are
LR-rows, then there is a vertex @xmath in @xmath with @xmath such that
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath are adjacent to @xmath , hence we find a net
@xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath .

Case (2.1.2) Suppose now that @xmath , and let us suppose first that
there is exactly one LR-row in @xmath . Thus, we may assume that @xmath
is the only LR-row in @xmath . Notice first that, if @xmath is odd, then
we find @xmath in @xmath induced by the vertices represented by every
row and column. Hence, we may assume that @xmath is even. By Remark 4.15
, there are at most two labeled rows in @xmath and such rows are labeled
with distinct letters.

If either there are no labeled rows or there is exactly one labeled row,
then we find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , where @xmath
is any vertex in some @xmath that is nonadjacent to the only labeled
row.

Suppose there are two labeled rows in @xmath . If there are two labeled
rows @xmath and @xmath , then it suffices to see what happens if @xmath
belongs to @xmath and @xmath belongs to either @xmath , @xmath or @xmath
. If @xmath belongs to @xmath , then there is a vertex @xmath in @xmath
nonadjacent to both @xmath and @xmath , and thus we also find @xmath
induced by the same vertex set as before. If instead @xmath lies in
@xmath , then there are vertices @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath
such that @xmath is adjacent to both @xmath and @xmath . Hence, if
@xmath is even, then we find an @xmath -sun. If instead @xmath is odd,
then we find a @xmath -sun with center, where the center is given by the
LR-vertex @xmath . Using a similar argument, if @xmath lies in @xmath ,
then we find an even sun or an odd sun with center considering the same
vertex set as before plus @xmath .

Suppose now that @xmath and @xmath are LR-rows. If @xmath is even and
every row @xmath with @xmath is unlabeled (or is at most one is a
labeled row), then we find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , where @xmath is any vertex in some @xmath such that each @xmath
is nonadjacent to @xmath for every @xmath . Moreover, if @xmath is odd,
then we find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . The same holds
if there is exactly one labeled row since we can always choose when
necessary a vertex in some @xmath with @xmath that is nonadjacent to
such labeled vertex.

Let us suppose there are exactly two labeled rows @xmath and @xmath . By
Remark 4.15 , these rows are non-consecutive and are labeled with
distinct letters. As in the previous case, @xmath belongs to @xmath and
@xmath belongs to either @xmath or @xmath . If @xmath belongs to @xmath
, then there is a vertex @xmath in @xmath nonadjacent to both @xmath and
@xmath , and thus we find @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . If instead
@xmath lies in @xmath , then we find @xmath in @xmath adjacent to both
@xmath and @xmath and thus we find either an even sun or an odd sun with
center as in the previous case. Using a similar argument, if @xmath lies
in @xmath , then we find an even sun if @xmath is even or an odd sun
with center if @xmath is odd.

Finally, suppose @xmath and @xmath are LR-rows, where @xmath . If @xmath
, then we find a @xmath -sun induced by every row and every column,
hence, suppose that @xmath . In that case, we find a tent contained in
the subgraph induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath if @xmath and @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath if @xmath . Thus, let @xmath . However, in that case we
find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . Therefore, there is no
@xmath in @xmath .

Case (2.2) Suppose that @xmath contains @xmath . Let @xmath be the
vertices corresponding to the rows, and @xmath in @xmath the vertices
representing the columns. If @xmath is odd and there are no labeled
rows, then we find @xmath by considering @xmath , @xmath . Moreover, if
there are no LR-rows and @xmath is odd, then we find @xmath as an
induced subgraph. Hence, we assume from now on that there is at least
one LR-row.

###### Remark 4.16.

As in the previous case, there are at most two rows labeled with L or R
in @xmath , for any three LR-rows induce an enriched submatrix that
contains either @xmath , @xmath or @xmath . Moreover, since @xmath is
admisssible, then there are at most three LR-rows.

If @xmath and @xmath with @xmath are two rows labeled with either L or
R, then they are labeled with distinct letters for if not we find @xmath
. Moreover, they are not consecutive since in that case we find either
@xmath or @xmath . Thus, since @xmath belongs to @xmath and @xmath
belongs to either @xmath or @xmath or @xmath , one of the following
holds:

-    If @xmath in @xmath , then we find a @xmath -sun if @xmath is even
    or a @xmath -sun with center if @xmath is odd (the center is @xmath
    ) induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
    @xmath , @xmath .

-    If @xmath in @xmath (resp. @xmath ), then we find a @xmath -sun if
    @xmath is even or a @xmath -sun with center if @xmath is odd (the
    center is @xmath ) induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
    (resp. @xmath , @xmath ).

Furthermore, suppose @xmath and @xmath are rows labeled with either L or
R, where @xmath . If @xmath , then they are labeled with distinct
letters for if not we find @xmath . Moreover, they are colored with
distinct colors for if not we find @xmath . If instead @xmath , then
they are labeled with the same letter for if not we find @xmath or
@xmath .

As a consequence of the previous remark we may assume without loss of
generality that, if there are rows labeled with either L or R, then
these rows are either @xmath and @xmath , @xmath and @xmath or @xmath
and @xmath for every other case is analogous. Moreover, if @xmath and
@xmath (resp. @xmath ) are labeled rows, then we may assume they are
colored with distinct colors.

Case (2.2.1) Suppose there is exactly one LR-row and suppose first that
@xmath is the only LR-row. If every non-LR row is unlabeled or @xmath
and @xmath are labeled rows, since they are labeled with the same letter
(for if not we find @xmath or @xmath considering @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath ), then we find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , where @xmath is any vertex in @xmath . Moreover, if
@xmath is a labeled row, then we find either a @xmath -sun or a @xmath
-sun with center, depending on whether @xmath is even or odd, induced by
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , thus we finished this case.

If @xmath is an LR-row, then we find @xmath or @xmath (depending on
whether @xmath is odd or even) induced by every column of @xmath and the
rows @xmath to @xmath . It does not depend on whether there are or not
rows labeled with L or R.

Suppose @xmath is an LR-row for some @xmath . Let @xmath be the first
column in which @xmath has a @xmath and @xmath be column in which @xmath
has a @xmath , then we find a tent induced by columns @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath and the rows @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

If @xmath is an LR-row, then we find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath .

If @xmath is an LR-row and either every other row is unlabeled or there
is exactly one labeled row, then we find @xmath induced by @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , where @xmath is any vertex in @xmath
such that the vertex representing the only labeled row is nonadjacent to
@xmath . Suppose there are two labeled rows. It follows from Remark 4.16
that such rows are either @xmath and @xmath or @xmath and @xmath for
some @xmath . However, if @xmath is a labeled row for some @xmath , then
we find either an even sun or an odd sun with center analgously as we
have in Remark 4.16 . If instead @xmath and @xmath are labeled rows,
then they are labeled with the same letter and thus we are in the same
situation as if there were no labeled rows in @xmath since we can find a
vertex that results nonadjacent to both @xmath and @xmath .

Case (2.2.2) Suppose there are two LR-rows. If @xmath and @xmath are
LR-rows, then we find @xmath as we have in the case where only @xmath is
an LR-row. Suppose @xmath and @xmath are LR-rows. If @xmath , then we
find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath where
@xmath in @xmath . Such a vertex exists, since @xmath and @xmath are
either unlabeled rows or are rows labeled with the same letter, for if
they were labeled with distinct letters we would find @xmath or @xmath .
Thus, there is a vertex that is nonadjacent to both @xmath and @xmath
and is adjacent to @xmath and @xmath . If @xmath , then we find a tent
induced by rows @xmath , @xmath and @xmath and columns @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath . Moreover, if @xmath is an LR-row for @xmath and @xmath and
@xmath are non-LR-rows, then we find a tent induced by the rows @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath and the columns @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

Thus, it remains to see what happens if @xmath and @xmath and @xmath and
@xmath are LR-rows. If @xmath and @xmath are LR-rows, then we find
@xmath induced by all the rows of @xmath and every column except for
column @xmath , which is replaced by some vertex @xmath in @xmath (since
in this case, if there are two labeled rows, then they must be @xmath
for some @xmath and @xmath , thus they are labeled with the same letter,
hence there is a vertex @xmath nonadjacent to both). Finally, if @xmath
and @xmath are LR-rows, then we find a @xmath -sun or a @xmath -sun with
center, depending on whether @xmath is even or odd, contained in the
subgraph induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , where @xmath in @xmath is
nonadjacent to every non-LR row (same argument as before). Therefore,
there is no @xmath in @xmath .

Case (2.3) Suppose that @xmath contains @xmath , let @xmath be the rows
of @xmath and @xmath be the columns of @xmath . If there are no LR-rows,
then we find @xmath , hence we assume there is at least one LR-row. As
in the previous cases, since @xmath is admissible, there are at most two
LR-rows in @xmath .

Notice that every pair of rows @xmath and @xmath with @xmath are not
labeled with the same letter, since they induce @xmath . Once more, if
such rows are labeled with distinct letters, then they are not
consecutive for in that case we would find @xmath or @xmath .
Furthermore, if such @xmath and @xmath are labeled rows, then we find
either an even sun or an odd sun with center. Moreover, if @xmath and
@xmath , then @xmath and @xmath are not both labeled rows, for the same
arguments holds. Hence, if there are two labeled rows, then such rows
must be @xmath and @xmath for some @xmath such that @xmath .

Case (2.3.1) There is exactly one LR-row. Suppose first that @xmath is
an LR-row. In this case, we find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath . If
@xmath is an LR-row, for some @xmath , then we find @xmath induced by
@xmath , @xmath .

If @xmath is an LR-row, then we also find @xmath , induced by @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath .

If instead @xmath is an LR-row, then we find an even @xmath -sun or an
odd @xmath -sun with center @xmath .

Case (2.3.2) Suppose now there are two LR-rows @xmath and @xmath . If
@xmath and @xmath and @xmath are not consecutive rows, then we find a
tent induced by the rows @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , and columns @xmath
in @xmath adjacent to both @xmath and @xmath and nonadjacent to @xmath ,
and @xmath (or @xmath if @xmath ) and @xmath (or @xmath if @xmath ). The
same subgraph contains an induced tent if @xmath and @xmath . If instead
@xmath or @xmath and @xmath , then we find @xmath (or @xmath if @xmath
induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
with @xmath in @xmath adjacent to both @xmath and @xmath .

Finally, if @xmath and @xmath are LR-rows, then we find @xmath induced
by every row @xmath and column @xmath . If instead @xmath and @xmath are
LR-rows with @xmath , then we find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , therefore
there is no @xmath in @xmath .

Case (2.4) Suppose that @xmath contains @xmath , let @xmath be the rows
of @xmath and @xmath be the columns of @xmath . If there are no labeled
rows, then we find @xmath as an induced subgraph, and since @xmath is
admissible and any three rows are not pairwise nested, then there are at
most two LR-rows, hence we assume there are exactly either one or two
LR-rows.

If the row @xmath is an LR-row for @xmath , then we find @xmath induced
by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . Moreover, if only @xmath is an
LR-row, then we find @xmath induced by all the rows and columns of
@xmath . Thus, we assume there are exactly two LR-rows. If @xmath and
@xmath are LR-rows, then we find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . The same holds if @xmath and @xmath
are LR-rows, with @xmath . Finally, if @xmath and @xmath are LR-rows,
then we find a tent induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath . It follows analogously by symmetry if @xmath and
@xmath or @xmath and @xmath are LR-rows, therefore there is no @xmath in
@xmath .

Case (2.5) Suppose that @xmath contains @xmath , let @xmath be the rows
of @xmath and @xmath be the columns of @xmath . Once more, if there are
no LR-rows, then we find @xmath as an induced subgraph, thus we assume
there is at least one LR-row. Moreover, since any three rows are not
pairwise nested, there are at most two LR-rows.

Case (2.5.1) If @xmath is the only LR-row, then we find a tent induced
by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . The same holds
if @xmath is the only LR-row.

If @xmath is the only LR-row and every other row is unlabeled or are all
labeled with the same letter, then we find @xmath induced by @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath where @xmath in @xmath
adjacent only to @xmath . Suppose there are at least two rows labeled
with either L or R. Notice that, if @xmath and @xmath are labeled, then
they are labeled with distinct letters for if not they contain @xmath .
Moreover, @xmath (resp. @xmath ) and @xmath cannot be both labeled, for
in that case they contain either @xmath or @xmath or @xmath . Hence,
there are at most two rows labeled with either L or R, and they are
necessarily @xmath and @xmath . In that case, there is a vertex @xmath
in some @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath are adjacent to @xmath and
@xmath is nonadjacent to @xmath , thus we find a tent induced by @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

If @xmath is the only LR-row and every other row is unlabeled or are
(one, two or) all labeled with the same letter, then we find @xmath
induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath where
@xmath in @xmath adjacent only to @xmath .

Case (2.5.2) Suppose there are exactly two LR-rows. If @xmath and @xmath
are such LR-rows, then we find a tent induced by @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , thus we discard this case. If
instead @xmath and @xmath are LR-rows and every other row is unlabeled
or (one or) all are labeled with the same letter, then we find @xmath
induced by every row and column plus a vertex @xmath in some @xmath such
that both @xmath and @xmath are nonadjacent to @xmath . Moreover, since
@xmath and @xmath are neither disjoint or nested and there is a column
in which both rows have a @xmath , then they are not labeled with
distinct letters, disregarding of the coloring, for in that case we find
@xmath or @xmath .

If exactly @xmath and @xmath are LR-rows and every other row is
unlabeled or are (one or) all labeled with the same letter, then we find
a tent induced by every row and column plus a vertex @xmath in some
@xmath such that both @xmath and @xmath are nonadjacent to @xmath . Once
more, @xmath and @xmath are not labeled with distinct letters since in
that case we find either @xmath or @xmath .

If exactly @xmath and @xmath are LR-rows and every other row is
unlabeled or either @xmath or @xmath is labeled with L or R, then we
find @xmath induced by every row and column plus a vertex @xmath in some
@xmath such that both @xmath and @xmath are nonadjacent to @xmath . Once
more, @xmath and @xmath are not labeled with the same letter for they
would induce @xmath , neither they are labeled with distinct letters
since in that case we find either @xmath or @xmath .

If @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are LR-rows, since there is a vertex
@xmath with @xmath such that @xmath is nonadjacent to @xmath , then we
find a tent induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath . Analogously, if @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are LR-rows and
@xmath is not, then the tent is induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath . The same holds if all 4 rows are LR-rows,
where the tent is induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath . Finally, if @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are LR-rows, since
there is a vertex @xmath with @xmath such that @xmath is nonadjacent to
@xmath , then we find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

Case (3 ) Therefore, we may assume that @xmath is admissible and
LR-orderable but is not partially @xmath -nested. Since there are no
uncolored labeled rows and those colored rows are labeled with either L
or R and do not induce any of the matrices @xmath , then in particular
no pair of pre-colored rows of @xmath induce a monochromatic gem or a
monochromatic weak gem, and there are no badly-colored gems since every
LR-row is uncolored, therefore @xmath is partially @xmath -nested.

Case (4 ) Finally, let us suppose that @xmath is partially @xmath
-nested but is not @xmath -nested. As in the previous cases, we consider
@xmath ordered with a suitable LR-ordering. Let @xmath be a matrix
obtained from @xmath by extending its partial pre-coloring to a total
@xmath -coloring. It follows from Lemma 3.39 that, if @xmath is not
@xmath -nested, then either there is an LR-row for which its L-block and
R-block are colored with the same color, or @xmath contains a
monochromatic gem or a monochromatic weak gem or a badly-colored doubly
weak gem.

If @xmath contains a monochromatic gem where the rows that induce such a
gem are not LR-rows, then the proof is analogous as in the tent case.
Thus, we may assume that at least one of the rows is an LR-row.

Case (4.1) Let us suppose first that there is an LR-row @xmath for which
its L-block @xmath and R-block @xmath are colored with the same color.
If these two blocks are colored with the same color, then there is
either one odd sequence of rows @xmath that force the same color on each
block, or two distinct sequences, one that forces the same color on each
block.

Case (4.1.1) Let us suppose first that there is one odd sequence @xmath
that forces the color on both blocks. If @xmath , then notice this is
not possible since we are coloring @xmath using a suitable LR-ordering.
If there is not a suitable LR-ordering, then @xmath is not admissible or
LR-orderable, which results in a contradiction. Thus, let @xmath and
assume without loss of generality that @xmath intersects @xmath and
@xmath intersects @xmath . Moreover, we assume that each of the rows in
the sequence @xmath is colored with a distinct color and forces the
coloring on the previous and the next row in the sequence. If @xmath are
all unlabeled rows, then we find an even @xmath -sun. If instead @xmath
is an L-row, then @xmath is properly contained in @xmath . Thus, @xmath
are not contained in @xmath , since at least @xmath intersects @xmath .
If @xmath is unlabeled or labeled with R, then we find an even @xmath
-sun. If instead @xmath is labeled with L, since @xmath is odd, then we
find @xmath in @xmath which is not possible since we are assuming @xmath
admissible.

Case (4.1.2) Suppose now that there are two independent sequences @xmath
and @xmath that force the same color on @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively. Suppose without loss of generality that @xmath and @xmath
are colored with red. If @xmath and @xmath , then we find @xmath , which
is not possible. Hence, we assume that either @xmath or @xmath . Suppose
that @xmath and @xmath . In this case, there is a labeled row in each
sequence, for if not we can change the coloring for each row in one of
the sequences and thus each block of @xmath can be colored with distinct
colors. We may assume that @xmath is labeled with L and @xmath is
labeled with R (for the LR-ordering used to color @xmath is suitable and
thus there is no R-row intersecting @xmath , and the same holds for each
L-block and @xmath ). As in the previous paragraphs, we assume that each
row in each sequence forces the coloring on both the previous and the
next row in its sequence. In that case, @xmath is contained in @xmath
and @xmath is contained in @xmath . Moreover, @xmath represents a vertex
in @xmath , @xmath lies in @xmath or @xmath and @xmath lies in @xmath or
@xmath (depending on whether they are colored with red or blue,
respectively). Suppose first that they are both colored with red, thus
@xmath lies in @xmath and @xmath lies in @xmath . In this case @xmath
and @xmath are both even. If @xmath lies in @xmath , since there is a
@xmath in some @xmath adjacent to both @xmath and @xmath , then we find
@xmath contained in the submatrix induced by each row and column on
which the rows in @xmath and both sequences are not null and the column
representing @xmath . If instead @xmath lies in @xmath , we find @xmath
contained in the same submatrix but adding three columns representing
vertices @xmath in @xmath for @xmath . The same holds if @xmath and
@xmath are both blue. Suppose now that @xmath is colored with red and
@xmath is colored with blue. Thus, @xmath is even and @xmath is odd. In
this case, we find @xmath contained in the submatrix induced by the row
that represents @xmath , two columns representing any two vertices in
@xmath and @xmath and each row and column on which the rows in @xmath
and both sequences are not null. The proof is analogous if either @xmath
or @xmath .

Hence, we may assume there is either a monochromatic weak gem in which
one of the rows is an LR-row or a badly-colored doubly-weak gem in
@xmath , for the case of a monochromatic gem or a monochromatic weak gem
where one of the rows is an L-row (resp. R-row) and the other is
unlabeled is analogous to the tent case.

Case (4.2) Let us suppose there is a monochromatic weak gem in @xmath ,
and let @xmath and @xmath be the rows that induce such gem, where @xmath
is an LR-row. Suppose first that @xmath is a pre-colored row. Suppose
without loss of generality that the monochromatic weak gem is induced by
@xmath and the L-block of @xmath and that @xmath and @xmath are both
colored with red. We denote @xmath to the L-block of @xmath . If @xmath
is labeled with R, then @xmath is the L-block of some LR-row @xmath in
@xmath and @xmath is the R-block of itself. However, since the
LR-ordering we are considering to color @xmath is suitable, then the
L-block of an LR-row has empty intersection with the R-block of a non-LR
row and thus this case is not possible.

If @xmath is labeled with L, since they induce a weak gem, then @xmath
is properly contained in @xmath . Since @xmath is a row labeled with L
in @xmath , then @xmath is a pre-colored row. Moreover, since @xmath is
colored with the same color as @xmath , then there is either a blue
pre-colored row, or a sequence of rows @xmath where @xmath forces the
red coloring of @xmath . In either case, there is a pre-colored row in
that sequence that forces the color on @xmath , and such row is either
labeled with L or with R.

Suppose first that such row is labeled with L. If @xmath is a the blue
pre-colored row that forces the red coloring on @xmath , then @xmath is
properly contained in @xmath . However, in that case we find @xmath
which is not possible since @xmath is admissible. Hence, we assume
@xmath is a sequence of unlabeled rows and that @xmath is a labeled row
such that this sequence forces @xmath to be colored with red, and each
row in the sequence forces the color on both its predecesor and its
succesor. If @xmath is even, then @xmath is colored with blue, and if
@xmath is odd then @xmath is colored with red. In either case, we find
@xmath contained in the submatrix induced by rows @xmath .

If instead the row @xmath that forces the coloring on @xmath is labeled
with R, since the LR-ordering used to color @xmath is suitable, then the
intersection between @xmath and @xmath is empty. Hence, @xmath , thus we
assume that @xmath are unlabeled rows and @xmath . If @xmath is odd,
then @xmath is colored with red, and if @xmath is even, then @xmath is
colored with blue. In either case we also find @xmath , which is not
possible since @xmath is admissible.

Suppose now that @xmath is an unlabeled row. Notice that, since @xmath
and @xmath induce a weak gem, then @xmath is not nested in @xmath .

Hence, either the coloring of both rows is forced by the same sequence
of rows or the coloring of @xmath and @xmath is forced for each by a
distinct sequence of rows. As in the previous cases, we assume that the
last row of each sequence represents a pre-colored labeled row.

Suppose first that both rows are forced to be colored with red by the
same row @xmath . Thus, @xmath is a labeled row pre-colored with blue.
Moreover, since @xmath forces @xmath to be colored with red, then @xmath
is not contained in @xmath and thus there is a column @xmath in which
@xmath has a @xmath and @xmath has a @xmath .

We may also assume that @xmath has a @xmath in such a column since
@xmath is also not contained in @xmath . Moreover, since @xmath forces
@xmath to be colored with red, then @xmath is labeled with the same
letter than @xmath and @xmath is not contained in @xmath , thus we can
find a column @xmath in which @xmath has a @xmath and @xmath and @xmath
both have a @xmath . Furthermore, since @xmath and @xmath are both
labeled with the same letter and the three rows have pairwise nonempty
intersection, then there is a column @xmath in which all three rows have
a @xmath . Since @xmath is a row labeled with either L or R in @xmath ,
then there are vertices @xmath , @xmath with @xmath , @xmath such that
@xmath is adjacent to @xmath and nonadjacent to @xmath . Moreover, since
@xmath is an LR-row, then @xmath is adjacent to both @xmath and @xmath
and @xmath is nonadjacent to @xmath and @xmath . Hence, we find @xmath
induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath .

Suppose instead there is a sequence of rows @xmath that force the
coloring of both @xmath and @xmath , where @xmath are unlabeled rows and
@xmath is labeled with either L or R and is pre-colored.

We have two possibilities: either @xmath is labeled with L or with R.

If @xmath is labeled with L and @xmath forces the coloring of @xmath ,
then we have the same situation as in the previous case. Thus we assume
@xmath is nested in @xmath . In this case, since @xmath and @xmath are
labeled with L, the vertices @xmath are nested in @xmath and thus they
are chained from right to left. Moreover, since @xmath and @xmath are
colored with the same color, then there is an odd index @xmath such that
@xmath contains @xmath and does not contain @xmath . Hence, we find
@xmath considering the rows @xmath .

Suppose now that @xmath is labeled with R. Since @xmath is colored using
a suitable LR-ordering, then @xmath and @xmath have empty intersection,
thus there is a sequence of unlabeled rows @xmath , chained from left to
right. Notice that it is possible that @xmath . Suppose first that
@xmath is even. If @xmath , then there is an odd number of unlabeled
rows between @xmath and @xmath . In this case we find a @xmath -sun
contained in the subgraph induced by rows @xmath . If instead @xmath ,
then @xmath and @xmath and @xmath and @xmath both induce a @xmath -gem,
and thus we find a @xmath -sun in the same subgraph. If @xmath is odd,
then there is an even number of unlabeled rows between @xmath and @xmath
. Once more, we find a @xmath -sun contained in the subgraph induced by
rows @xmath .

Notice that these are all the possible cases for a weak gem. This
follows from the fact that, if there is a pre-colored labeled row that
forces the coloring upon @xmath then it forces the coloring upon @xmath
and viceversa. Moreover, if there is a sequence of rows that force the
coloring upon @xmath , then one of these rows of the sequence also
forces the coloring upon @xmath , and viceversa. Furthermore, since the
label of the pre-colored row of the sequence determines a unique
direction in which the rows overlap in chain, then there is only one
possibility in each case, as we have seen in the previous paragraphs. It
follows that the case in which there is a sequence forcing the coloring
upon each @xmath and @xmath can be reduced to the previous case.

Case (4.3) Suppose there is a badly-colored doubly-weak gem in @xmath .
Let @xmath and @xmath be the LR-rows that induce the doubly-weak gem.
Since the suitable LR-ordering determines the blocks of each LR-row,
then the L-block of @xmath properly contains the L-block of @xmath and
the R-block of @xmath is properly contained in the R-block of @xmath ,
or viceversa. Moreover, the R-block of @xmath may be empty. Let us
denote @xmath and @xmath (resp. @xmath and @xmath ) to the L-blocks
(resp. R-blocks) of @xmath and @xmath .

There is a sequence of rows that forces the coloring on both LR-rows
simultaneously or there are two sequences of rows and each forces the
coloring upon the blocks of @xmath and @xmath , respectively. Whenever
we consider a sequence of rows that forces the coloring upon the blocks
of @xmath and @xmath , we will consider a sequence in which every row
forces the coloring upon its predecessor and its succesor, a pre-colored
row is either the first or the last row of the sequence, the first row
of the sequence forces the coloring upon the corresponding block of
@xmath and the last row forces the coloring upon the corresponding block
of @xmath . It follows that, in such a sequence, every pair of
consecutive unlabeled rows overlap. We can also assume that there are no
blocks corresponding to LR-rows in such a sequence, for we can reduce
this to one of the cases.

Suppose first there is a sequence of rows @xmath that forces the
coloring upon both LR-rows simultaneously. We assume that @xmath
intersects @xmath and @xmath intersects @xmath .

If @xmath forces the coloring on both L-blocks, then we have four cases:
(1) either @xmath are all unlabeled rows, (2) @xmath is the only
pre-colored row, (3) @xmath is the only pre-colored row or (4) @xmath
and @xmath are the only pre-colored rows. In either case, if @xmath is a
minimal sequence that forces the same color upon both @xmath and @xmath
, then @xmath is odd.

Case (4.3.1) Suppose @xmath are unlabeled. If @xmath , then we find
@xmath contained in the submatrix induced by @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
. Suppose @xmath , thus we have two possibilities. If @xmath , since
@xmath is odd, then we find a @xmath -sun contained in the submatrix
induced by considering all the rows @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . If
instead @xmath , then we find @xmath contained in the same submatrix.

Case (4.3.2) Suppose @xmath is the only pre-colored row. Since @xmath is
a pre-colored row and forces the color red upon the L-block of @xmath ,
then @xmath contains @xmath and @xmath is colored with blue. If @xmath ,
then we find @xmath in the submatrix given by considering the rows
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , having in mind that there is a column
representing some @xmath in @xmath in which the row corresponding to
@xmath has a @xmath and the rows corresponding to @xmath and @xmath both
have @xmath . This follows since @xmath is unlabeled and thus represents
a vertex that lies in @xmath , and @xmath is pre-colored and labeled
with L or R and, thus it represents a vertex that is not adjacent to
every partition @xmath of @xmath . If instead @xmath , then we find
@xmath contained in the submatrix induced by the rows @xmath if @xmath ,
and induced by the rows @xmath if @xmath .

Case (4.3.3) Suppose @xmath is the only pre-colored row. In this case,
@xmath properly contains @xmath and we can assume that the rows @xmath
are contained in @xmath . If @xmath , then we find an even @xmath -sun
in the submatrix induced by the rows @xmath . If instead @xmath , then
we find @xmath in the submatrix given by rows @xmath .

Case (4.3.4) Suppose that @xmath and @xmath are the only pre-colored
rows. Thus, we can assume that @xmath properly contains @xmath and
@xmath properly contains @xmath , thus @xmath properly contains @xmath .
Hence, we find @xmath induced by the rows @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
which is not possible since @xmath is admissible.

The only case we have left is when @xmath forces the coloring upon
@xmath and @xmath . This follows from the fact that, if @xmath forces
the color upon @xmath and @xmath , then this case can be reduced to case
(4.3. 4.16 ).

Hence, either (1) @xmath are unlabeled rows, (2) @xmath is the only
pre-colored row, or (3) @xmath and @xmath are the only pre-colored rows.
Notice that in either case, @xmath is even and thus for (1) we find
@xmath , which results in a contradiction since @xmath is admissible.
Moreover, in the remaining cases, @xmath properly contains @xmath and
@xmath . Since @xmath and @xmath overlap, we find @xmath which is not
possible for @xmath is admissible.

This finishes the proof.

∎

Let @xmath , @xmath as in Section 2.2 and the matrices @xmath for @xmath
as defined in the previous subsection. Suppose @xmath is @xmath -nested
for each @xmath . Let @xmath be a proper @xmath -coloring for @xmath for
each @xmath and @xmath be a proper @xmath -coloring for @xmath .
Moreover, there is a suitable LR-ordering @xmath for each @xmath .

Let @xmath be the ordering of the vertices of @xmath given by
concatenating the orderings @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , as
defined in Subsection 4.1.2 . Let @xmath . Hence, @xmath lies in @xmath
for some @xmath . Notice that there are at most two rows @xmath in
@xmath and @xmath in @xmath both representing @xmath . Also notice that
the row @xmath represents the adjacencies of @xmath with regard to
@xmath for each @xmath , and if @xmath , then @xmath and @xmath are
colored with distinct colors.

###### Definition 4.17.

We define the @xmath -matrices @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath as in
the previous subsection, considering only those independent vertices
that are not in @xmath .

Notice that the only nonempty subsets @xmath with @xmath that we are
considering are those with @xmath . Hence, the rows of @xmath are those
representing vertices in @xmath and the rows of @xmath are those
representing vertices in @xmath .

###### Lemma 4.18.

Suppose that @xmath is @xmath -nested for each @xmath . If @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath or @xmath are not nested, then @xmath contains @xmath ,
@xmath or @xmath as forbidden induced subgraphs for the class of circle
graphs.

###### Proof.

Notice that the only partial rows considered in @xmath and @xmath may be
those in @xmath and @xmath , respectively. Thus, if the partial row
coincides with the row in @xmath or @xmath , then we can consider the
matrices @xmath and @xmath without these rows since the compatiblity
with the rest of the rows was already considered when analysing if
@xmath and @xmath are @xmath -nested or not.

Suppose first that @xmath is not nested. Thus, there is a @xmath -gem.
Let @xmath and @xmath be two rows that induce a gem in @xmath and @xmath
in @xmath with @xmath and @xmath in @xmath with @xmath be the
corresponding to vertices in @xmath . Suppose without loss of generality
that @xmath starts before @xmath , thus @xmath . Since @xmath is @xmath
-nested for every @xmath , in particular there are no monochromatic gems
in each @xmath . Moreover, if @xmath , then we find @xmath in @xmath or
@xmath , respectively.

Notice that every row in @xmath represents a vertex that belongs to one
of the following subsets of @xmath : @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath or @xmath . Analogously, every row in @xmath represents
a vertex belonging to either @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath or @xmath .

Case (1 ) Suppose first that @xmath . We have two cases:

Case (1.1) @xmath , @xmath in @xmath . Suppose without loss of
generality that both vertices lie in @xmath since the proof is analogous
otherwise. Let @xmath in @xmath such that @xmath is adjacent to @xmath
and @xmath is nonadjacent to @xmath for @xmath (mod 2). Notice that
@xmath and @xmath are labeled with R in @xmath and are labeled with L in
@xmath . Moreover, since @xmath and @xmath are admissible, then there
are vertices @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath adjacent to both
@xmath and @xmath , for if not we find @xmath in each matrix. Moreover,
there is a vertex @xmath in @xmath nonadjacent to both. We find @xmath
induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath .

The proof is analogous if @xmath and @xmath in @xmath , where @xmath is
induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath or @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , depending on whether only one lies in @xmath or both lie in
@xmath . If @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath is the vertex
represented by a partial row in @xmath , then it is not possible that
these rows induce a gem since they do not intersect. Thus, we assume
that @xmath in @xmath . We find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath if @xmath in @xmath
(thus necessarily @xmath in @xmath since they induce a @xmath -gem). If
instead @xmath in @xmath , since @xmath is complete to @xmath , then one
of the columns of the @xmath -gem is induced by the column @xmath .
Thus, there is a vertex @xmath in @xmath adjacent to @xmath and
nonadjacent to @xmath . Hence, we find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

Case (1.2) @xmath , @xmath in @xmath . Suppose that @xmath in @xmath and
@xmath in @xmath . Let @xmath in @xmath nonadjacent to both. There are
vertices @xmath , @xmath in @xmath such that @xmath is adjacent only to
@xmath and @xmath is adjacent to both. Moreover, there are vertices
@xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath such that @xmath is adjacent to
both and @xmath is adjacent only to @xmath . We find @xmath induced by
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .
The proof is analogous if both lie in @xmath changing @xmath for other
vertex in @xmath adjacent only to @xmath (exists since both rows induce
a gem), and if both lie in @xmath we can find two vertices @xmath and
@xmath in @xmath to replace @xmath and @xmath in the previous subset.
Notice that, if instead @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath we also
find @xmath changing @xmath for some vertex @xmath in @xmath in the same
subset. This is the only case we had to see in which @xmath .
Furthermore, the partial rows corresponding to @xmath cannot induce a
gem with a row corresponding to a vertex in @xmath since we aer assuming
that @xmath is admissible.

Case (2 ) Suppose now that @xmath . Since @xmath and both rows induce a
gem, then @xmath . Thus, the only possibility is @xmath in @xmath and
@xmath in @xmath . In this case we find @xmath induced by @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

Hence @xmath is nested. Suppose now that @xmath is not nested, and let
@xmath in @xmath with @xmath and @xmath in @xmath with @xmath two
vertices for which its rows in @xmath induce a @xmath -gem. Once more,
we assume that @xmath .

Case (1 ) Suppose that the gem is induced by two rows corresponding to
two vertices @xmath and @xmath such that @xmath is a partial row, thus
@xmath in @xmath . Notice that the @xmath -gem may be induced by the
column @xmath .

Case (1.1) @xmath in @xmath .

Case (1.1.1) @xmath in @xmath . We find @xmath induced by @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . Notice
that, since @xmath is complete to @xmath , the @xmath -gem cannot be
induced by @xmath and a vertex @xmath in @xmath complete to @xmath ,
since we are considering that every vertex in @xmath is also complete to
@xmath (for if not we have previously shown a forbidden subgraph).

Case (1.1.2) @xmath in @xmath . In this case we find @xmath induced by
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath if @xmath in @xmath is not complete to @xmath . If instead @xmath
in @xmath is complete to @xmath , then it is not complete to @xmath (for
we split those vertices that are adjacent to @xmath into two disjoint
subsets, @xmath and @xmath ). Moreover, one of the columns that induce
the @xmath -gem is the column @xmath . Thus, there are vertices @xmath
in @xmath , @xmath and @xmath in @xmath such that @xmath is adjacent to
@xmath and is nonadjacent to @xmath and @xmath and @xmath is adjacent to
@xmath and is nonadjacent to @xmath and @xmath . Hence, we find @xmath
induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath .

Case (1.2) @xmath in @xmath . In this case, @xmath in @xmath . Since
these rows induce a gem and @xmath has a @xmath in every column
corresponding to @xmath , there are vertices @xmath in @xmath and @xmath
in @xmath such that @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and @xmath is
nonadjacent to @xmath , and @xmath is nonadjacent to @xmath and @xmath
is adjacent to @xmath . Thus, we find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

Case (2 ) Suppose now that @xmath .

Case (2.1) @xmath , @xmath in @xmath . Suppose first that both lie in
@xmath . In that case we find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . If instead one of both
lie in @xmath , then we change @xmath for some analogous @xmath in
@xmath , and if one of both lie in @xmath we change @xmath for some
analogous @xmath in @xmath .

Case (2.2) @xmath , @xmath in @xmath . In this case, we find @xmath
induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath .

Case (2.3) @xmath , @xmath in @xmath . Remember that @xmath are those
independent vertices that are not complete to @xmath and @xmath are
those independent vertices that are not complete to @xmath .

Case (2.3.1) If both lie in @xmath , then we find @xmath induced by
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

Case (2.3.2) If @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath , then we find
@xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath . The same holds if instead @xmath in @xmath or
if both lie in @xmath . Moreover, we find the same subgraph induced by
the same subset if @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath , since there
is a vertex in @xmath that is nonadjacent to @xmath .

Case (2.3.3) If both lie in @xmath , then we find @xmath induced @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

Case (3 ) Suppose now that @xmath . The case where @xmath , @xmath in
@xmath is analogous as Case 4.2.3 . Let @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in
@xmath . We find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

Case (4 ) Suppose that @xmath , thus @xmath . In this case, @xmath in
@xmath and @xmath in @xmath . We find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

Hence @xmath is nested. Suppose that @xmath is not nested, thus let
@xmath and @xmath in @xmath two vertices whose rows induce a @xmath
-gem. If both lie in @xmath , then we find @xmath induced by @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . If
instead one or both lie in @xmath , we find the same subgraph changing
@xmath for some analogous @xmath in @xmath .

Finally, suppose that @xmath is not nested, and let @xmath and @xmath in
@xmath be two vertices whose rows induce a @xmath -gem. If both lie in
@xmath , then we find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . Similarly, we find @xmath
induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath if @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath or if both lie in
@xmath , changing @xmath for an analogous vertex @xmath in @xmath . If
instead @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath , then we find @xmath
induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

∎

###### Theorem 4.19.

Let @xmath be a split graph containing an induced @xmath -tent. Then,
@xmath is a circle graph if and only if @xmath are @xmath -nested and
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are nested.

###### Proof.

Necessity is clear by the previous lemmas and the fact that the graphs
in families @xmath and @xmath are all non-circle. Suppose now that each
of the matrices @xmath is @xmath -nested and the matrices @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath or @xmath are nested. Let @xmath be the ordering for all
the vertices in @xmath obtained by concatenating each suitable
LR-ordering @xmath for @xmath .

Consider the circle divided into twelve pieces as in Figure 4.5 . For
each @xmath and for each vertex @xmath we place a chord having one
endpoint in @xmath and the other endpoint in @xmath , in such a way that
the ordering of the endpoints of the chords in @xmath and @xmath is
@xmath .

Let us see how to place the chords for each subset @xmath of @xmath .
First, some useful remarks.

###### Remark 4.20.

The following assertions hold:

-    By Lemma 4.18 , all the vertices in @xmath are nested, for every
    pair @xmath , @xmath . This follows since any two vertices in @xmath
    are nondisjoint. Moreover, in each @xmath , all the vertices are
    colored with either one color (the same), or they are colored
    red-blue or blue-red. Hence, these vertices are represented by rows
    in the matrices @xmath and @xmath and therefore they must be nested
    since each of these matrices is a nested matrix.

-    As a consequence of the previous and Claim 4.2 , if @xmath and
    @xmath , then every vertex in @xmath is nested in every vertex of
    @xmath .

-    Also as a consequence of the previous and Lemma 4.18 , if we
    consider only those vertices labeled with the same letter in some
    @xmath , then there is a total ordering of these vertices. This
    follows from the fact that, if two vertices @xmath and @xmath are
    labeled with the same letter in some @xmath , since @xmath is –in
    particular– admissible, then they are nested in @xmath . Moreover,
    if @xmath and @xmath are labeled with L in @xmath , then they are
    either complete to @xmath or labeled with R in @xmath . Thus, there
    is an index @xmath such that @xmath is labeled with R in @xmath ,
    for @xmath . Therefore, we can find in such a way a total ordering
    of all these vertices.

-    If @xmath and @xmath are labeled with distinct letters in some
    @xmath , then they are either disjoint in @xmath (if they are
    colored with the same color) or @xmath (if they are colored with
    distinct colors), for there are no @xmath or @xmath in @xmath for
    all @xmath .

Notice that, when we define the matrix @xmath , we pre-color every
vertex in @xmath with the same color. Since, we are assuming @xmath is
@xmath -nested and thus in particular is admissible, the subset @xmath
if and only if the vertices represented in @xmath are either all
vertices in @xmath and vertices that are represented by labeled rows
@xmath , all of them colored and labeled with the same color and letter
L or R.

Moreover, since @xmath is admissible, the sets @xmath are empty, for
@xmath and @xmath . The same holds for the sets @xmath , for @xmath and
@xmath .

If @xmath , then the placing of the chords that represent vertices with
one or both endpoints in @xmath is very similar as in the tent case.
Suppose that @xmath .

Before proceeding with the guidelines to draw the circle model, we have
some remarks on the relationship between the vertices in @xmath with
either @xmath or @xmath , and those vertices in @xmath . This follows
from the proof of Lemma 4.10 :

###### Remark 4.21.

Let @xmath be a circle graph that contains no induced tent but contains
an induced @xmath -tent, and such that each matrix @xmath is @xmath
-nested for every @xmath . Then, all of the following statements hold:

-    If @xmath , then @xmath , and viceversa.

-    If @xmath , then @xmath , and viceversa.

-    If @xmath , then @xmath , and viceversa.

-    If @xmath , then @xmath .

Let @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath , with either @xmath or @xmath
. Suppose first that @xmath . Since @xmath is @xmath -nested, the
submatrix induced by the rows that represent @xmath and @xmath in @xmath
contains no monochromatic gems or monochromatic weak gems. If instead
@xmath , since @xmath is admissible, then the submatrix induced by the
rows that represent @xmath and @xmath in @xmath contains no
monochromatic weak gem, and thus we can place the endpoint of @xmath
corresponding to @xmath in the arc portion @xmath and the @xmath
endpoint of @xmath in @xmath , or viceversa.

Remember that, since we are considering a suitable LR-ordering, there is
an L-row @xmath such that any L-row and every L-block of an LR-row are
contained in @xmath and every R-row and R-block of an LR-row are
contained in the complement of @xmath . Moreover, since we have a block
bi-coloring for @xmath , then for each LR-row one of its blocks is
colored with red and the other is colored with blue. Hence, for any
LR-row, we can place one endpoint in the arc portion @xmath using the
ordering given for the block that colored with red, and the other
endpoint in the arc portion @xmath using the ordering given for the
block that is colored with blue.

Notice that, if @xmath is @xmath -nested, then all the rows labeled with
L (resp. R) and colored with the same color and those L-blocks
(resp. R-blocks) of LR-rows are nested. In particular, the L-block
(resp. R-block) of every LR-row contains all the L-blocks of those rows
labeled with L (resp. R) that are colored with the same color.
Equivalently, let @xmath be an LR-row in @xmath with its L-block @xmath
colored with red and its R-block @xmath colored with blue, @xmath be a
row labeled with L and @xmath be a row labeled with R. Hence, if @xmath
, @xmath and @xmath are colored with the same color, then @xmath
contains @xmath and @xmath . This holds since we are considering a
suitable LR-ordering and a total block bi-coloring of the matrix @xmath
, thus it contains no @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath or @xmath .

Since every matrix @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are nested, there
is a total ordering for the rows in each of these matrices. Hence, there
is a total ordering for all the rows that intersect that are colored
with the same color, or with red-blue or with blue-red, respectively.
Moreover, if @xmath and @xmath are two vertices in @xmath such that they
both have rows representing them in one of these matrices –hence, they
are colored with the same color or sequence of colors–, then either
@xmath and @xmath are disjoint or they are nested.

With this in mind, we give guidelines to build a circle model for @xmath
.

We place first the chords corresponding to every vertex in @xmath ,
using the ordering @xmath . For each subset @xmath , we order its
vertices with the inclusion ordering of the neighbourhoods in @xmath and
the ordering @xmath . When placing the chords corresponding to the
vertices of each subset, we do it from lowest to highest according to
the previously stated ordering given for each subset.

Notice that there are no other conditions besides being disjoint or
nested outside each of the following subsets: @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath . For the subset @xmath , we only need to
consider if every vertex in @xmath are disjoint or nested. The same
holds for the subsets @xmath , @xmath , considering @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively.

Since each matrix @xmath is @xmath -nested for every @xmath , if there
are vertices in both @xmath and @xmath , then they are disjoint in
@xmath . The same holds for vertices in @xmath and @xmath , and @xmath
and @xmath . This is in addition to every property seen in Remark 4.21 .

First, we place those vertices in @xmath for each @xmath , considering
the ordering given by inclusion. If @xmath in @xmath and the row that
represents @xmath is colored with red, then both endpoints of the chord
corresponding to @xmath are placed in @xmath . If instead the row is
colored with blue, then both endpoints are placed in @xmath .

For each @xmath in @xmath , if the row that represents @xmath in @xmath
is colored with red (resp. blue) , then we place the endpoint
corresponding to @xmath in the portion @xmath (resp. @xmath ) . We apply
the same rule for the endpoint corresponding to @xmath .

Let us consider now the vertices in @xmath . If @xmath is @xmath -free,
then all the rows in @xmath are colored with the same color. Moreover,
if @xmath , then either every row labeled with L or R in @xmath is
labeled with L and colored with red or labeled with R and colored with
blue, or viceversa. Suppose first that every row labeled with L or R in
@xmath is labeled with L and colored with red or labeled with R and
colored with blue. In that case, every row representing a vertex @xmath
in @xmath is colored with blue, hence we place one endpoint of the chord
corresponding to @xmath in @xmath and the other endpoint in @xmath . In
both cases, the endpoint of the chord corresponding to @xmath is the
last chord of an independent vertex that appears in the portion of
@xmath and is the first chord of an independent vertex that appears in
the portion of @xmath . We place all the vertices in @xmath in such a
manner. If instead every row labeled with L or R in @xmath is labeled
with L and colored with blue or labeled with R and colored with red,
then every row representing a vertex in @xmath is colored with red. We
place the endpoints of the chord in @xmath and @xmath , as the last and
first chord that appears in that portion, respectively.

Finally, let us consider now a vertex @xmath in @xmath . Here we have
two possibilities: (1) the row that represents @xmath has only one
block, (2) the row that represents the row that represents @xmath has
two blocks of @xmath ’s. Let us consider the first case. If the row that
represents @xmath has only one block, then it is either an L-block or an
R-block. Suppose that it is an L-block. If the row in @xmath is colored
with red, then we place one endpoint of the chord as the last of @xmath
and the other endpoint in @xmath , considering in this case the partial
ordering given for every row that has an L-block colored with red in
@xmath . If instead the row in @xmath is colored with blue, then we
place one endpoint of the chord as the first of @xmath and the other
endpoint in @xmath , considering in this case the partial ordering given
for every row that has an L-block colored with blue in @xmath . The
placement is analogous for those LR-rows that are an R-block.

Suppose now that the row that represents @xmath has an L-block @xmath
and an R-block @xmath . If @xmath is colored with red, then @xmath is
colored with blue. We place one endpoint of the chord in @xmath ,
considering the partial ordering given by every row that has an L-block
colored with red in @xmath , and the other enpoint of the chord in
@xmath , considering the partial ordering given by every row that has an
R-block colored with blue in @xmath . The placement is analogous if
@xmath is colored with blue.

This gives a circle model for the given split graph @xmath .

∎

#### 4.3 Split circle graphs containing an induced co-4-tent

In this section we will address the last case of the proof of Theorem
LABEL:teo:circle_split_caract , which is the case where @xmath contains
an induced co- @xmath -tent. This case is mostly similar to the @xmath
-tent case, with one particular difference: the co- @xmath -tent is not
a prime graph, and thus there is more than one possible circle model for
this graph.

This section is subdivided as follows. In Subsection 4.3.1 , we define
the matrices @xmath for each @xmath and prove some properties that will
be useful further on. In Subsection 4.3.2 we prove the necessity of the
@xmath -nestedness of each @xmath for @xmath to be a circle graph and
give the guidelines to draw a circle model for a split graph @xmath
containing an induced co- @xmath -tent in Theorem 4.26 .

##### 4.3.1 Matrices @xmath

Let @xmath and @xmath as in Section 2.3 . For each @xmath , let @xmath
be a @xmath -matrix having one row for each vertex @xmath such that
@xmath belongs to @xmath or @xmath for some @xmath and one column for
each vertex @xmath and such that such that the entry corresponding to
row @xmath and column @xmath is @xmath if and only if @xmath is adjacent
to @xmath in @xmath . For each @xmath , we label those rows
corresponding to vertices of @xmath with L and those corresponding to
vertices of @xmath with R, with the exception of those rows in @xmath
that represent vertices in @xmath and @xmath which are labeled with LR.
Notice that we have considered those vertices that are complete to
@xmath and @xmath and are also adjacent to @xmath and @xmath divided
into two distinct subsets. Thus, @xmath are those vertices that are not
complete to @xmath and therefore the corresponding rows are labeled with
R in @xmath and with L in @xmath . As in the @xmath -tent case, there
are LR-rows in @xmath . Moreover, there may be some empty LR-rows, which
represent those independent vertices that are complete to @xmath and
@xmath and are anticomplete to @xmath . These vertices are all
pre-colored with the same color, and that color is assigned depending on
whether @xmath or @xmath .

We color some of the remaining rows of @xmath as we did in the previous
sections, to denote in which portion of the circle model the chords have
to be drawn. In order to characterize the forbidden induced subgraphs of
@xmath and using an argument of symmetry, we will only analyse the
properties of the matrices @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
, since the matrices @xmath @xmath are symmetric to @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath , respectively.

We will consider 5 distinct cases, according to whether the subsets
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath are empty or not, for the matrices we need to
define may be different in each case.

Using the symmetry of the subclasses @xmath and @xmath , the cases we
need to study are the following: (1) @xmath , (2) @xmath , @xmath , (3)
@xmath , @xmath , (4) @xmath , @xmath , (5) @xmath , @xmath

In (1), the subsets are given as described in Table 2.12 , and thus the
matrices we need to analyse are as follows:

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

In (2), the matrices @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are analogous. The
subclasses @xmath and @xmath may be nonempty and are analogous to the
subclasses @xmath and @xmath , respectively. Moreover, the vertices in
@xmath are analogous to those vertices in @xmath , which are represented
as empty LR-rows in @xmath .

For its part, the matrices @xmath and @xmath are as follows:

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Therefore this case can be considered as a particular case of case (1).

If instead we are in case (3), then the matrices @xmath and @xmath are
analogous as in (1). In this case there are no LR-vertices in any of the
matrices.

For its part, the matrices @xmath and @xmath are as follows:

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

In case (4), the matrices @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are analogous as in
case (3). There is no matrix @xmath and thus there are no LR-vertices.
Notice that the subset @xmath contains only vertices that are complete
to @xmath and thus @xmath . Furthermore, this subset is equivalent to
@xmath in case (1). Moreover, in this case, the vertices in @xmath in
@xmath are analogous as those vertices in @xmath and thus the matrix
@xmath results analogous as in case (3). Also notice that those vertices
in @xmath can be placed all having one endpoint in the arc @xmath and
the other in @xmath . It follows that @xmath , thus these vertices are
complete to @xmath and hence @xmath . Moreover, those vertices in @xmath
are complete to @xmath and thus we can consider @xmath and @xmath .

Finally, let us consider case (5). When considering those vertices in
@xmath , it follows easily that @xmath and thus these vertex subset is
equivalent to those vertices in @xmath (in case (1) ) that are complete
to @xmath . Hence, we consider these vertices as in @xmath and @xmath .
The subset @xmath of vertices of @xmath is split in three distinct
subsets: @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . The rows representing vertices in
@xmath are pre-colored with blue and labeled with L, only in @xmath ,
and are equivalent to those vertices in @xmath in case (1). For their
part, the rows that represent @xmath are pre-colored with red and
labeled with R, and they appear only in @xmath . These rows are
equivalent to those in @xmath in case (1). Finally, the vertices in
@xmath are represented by uncolored empty LR-rows in @xmath , resulting
equivalent to those vertices in @xmath in case (1).

Therefore, it suffices to see what happens if @xmath , since the
matrices defined in the cases (2) to (5) have the same rows or less that
each of the corresponding matrices @xmath defined for case (1). In other
words, the case @xmath is the most general of all.

Let us suppose that @xmath . The Claims in Chapter 2 and the following
prime circle model allow us to assume that some subsets of @xmath are
empty.

We denote @xmath to the set of vertices in @xmath that are complete to
@xmath , are adjacent to @xmath and @xmath but are not complete to
@xmath , and analogously @xmath is the set of vertices in @xmath that
are complete to @xmath , are adjacent to @xmath and @xmath but are not
complete to @xmath . Hence, @xmath denotes the vertices of @xmath that
are complete to @xmath and are adjacent to @xmath .

###### Remark 4.22.

Claim 4.2 remains true if @xmath contains an induced co- @xmath -tent.
The proof is analogous as in the tent case.

##### 4.3.2 Split circle equivalence

In this subsection, we will show results analogous to Lemmas 4.8 and
4.10 .

###### Lemma 4.23.

If @xmath , @xmath are not @xmath -nested, then @xmath contains one of
the forbidden subgraphs in @xmath or @xmath .

###### Proof.

Using the argument of symmetry, we will prove this for the matrices
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

Let us suppose that one of the matrices @xmath is not @xmath -nested. By
Lemma 3.36 , suppose that @xmath is not partially @xmath -nested. The
structure of the proof is analogous as in Lemmas 4.3 , 4.8 and 4.10 ,
and as in those lemmas we notice that, if @xmath is @xmath -free, then
in particular, for each @xmath , @xmath contains no @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath or @xmath for every even @xmath since these matrices are the
adjacency matrices of non-circle graphs.

Case (1 ) Suppose that one of the matrices @xmath is not admissible, for
some @xmath .

Case (1.1) Suppose first that @xmath is not admissible. Hence, since
@xmath has no uncolored labeled rows, or any rows labeled with R or LR,
then @xmath contains either @xmath or @xmath . Suppose that @xmath
contains @xmath . Let @xmath and @xmath in @xmath , @xmath and @xmath in
@xmath such that @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and nonadjacent to @xmath
(mod 2), for @xmath .

Notice that, if @xmath and @xmath have empty intersection in @xmath ,
then we find a @xmath -tent induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . The same holds for any two vertices @xmath
and @xmath in @xmath (considering @xmath instead of @xmath ), hence we
may assume that there is a vertex @xmath in @xmath –for @xmath as
appropriate– adjacent to both @xmath and @xmath .

Thus, if both @xmath and @xmath lie in @xmath , then we find a net
@xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath . If @xmath and @xmath both lie in or @xmath or @xmath , then we
find a net @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath (since @xmath , however the same holds using any
vertex in @xmath nonadjacent to both @xmath and @xmath ). If @xmath in
@xmath and @xmath in @xmath , then we find @xmath induced by @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . If @xmath
in @xmath is analogous changing @xmath by @xmath .

Suppose there is @xmath as a subconfiguration of @xmath , and suppose
@xmath is even, thus @xmath and @xmath lie both in @xmath or both in
@xmath . If both lie in @xmath , then we find @xmath induced by @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . If instead both lie in @xmath , then
we find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . Suppose
@xmath is odd, then @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath , or
viceversa. In the first case, we find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . In the second case, we find @xmath
induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , therefore @xmath is admissible.

Case (1.2) Suppose @xmath is not admissible. Since @xmath has no
uncolored labeled rows, or LR rows, or blue rows labeled with R, or red
rows labeled with L, then @xmath contains either @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath for some @xmath even or @xmath for some @xmath odd. Suppose there
is @xmath . Let @xmath and @xmath be the rows of @xmath , and @xmath and
@xmath in @xmath such that @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and is
nonadjacent to @xmath (mod 2) for @xmath . If @xmath and @xmath lie in
@xmath , then we know by the previous case that there is a vertex @xmath
in @xmath adjacent to both. However, in this case we find a tent induced
by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . The same holds
if @xmath and @xmath lie in @xmath , changing @xmath by @xmath and
@xmath by @xmath , thus there is no @xmath .

Suppose there is @xmath , let @xmath and @xmath be the rows of @xmath ,
one is labeled with L and the other is labeled with R. Thus, @xmath in
@xmath and @xmath in @xmath , or viceversa. Let @xmath and @xmath in
@xmath such that @xmath is adjacent to both @xmath and @xmath and @xmath
is nonadjacent to @xmath and @xmath . Then, we find @xmath induced by
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
and thus there is no @xmath .

Suppose there is @xmath for some even @xmath . If @xmath and @xmath lie
in @xmath , then we find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath . If instead @xmath and @xmath lie in @xmath , then we also find
@xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and hence there is
no @xmath .

Suppose there is @xmath for some odd @xmath . Thus, @xmath in @xmath and
@xmath in @xmath , or viceversa. In that case, we find @xmath induced by
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and therefore
@xmath is admissible.

Case (1.3) Suppose @xmath is not admissible. Since there are no LR-rows,
or uncolored labeled rows, then there is either @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath or @xmath .

Suppose there is @xmath , let @xmath and @xmath be the rows of @xmath
and @xmath and @xmath in @xmath the columns of @xmath . The vertices
@xmath and @xmath lie in @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath or @xmath .
First notice that, in either case, if the intersection is empty in
@xmath (resp. @xmath for @xmath ), then we find a @xmath -tent induced
by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath (resp.
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath ).

If @xmath and @xmath both lie in @xmath , then we find a tent induced by
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . The same holds if
both lie in @xmath or @xmath . If @xmath and @xmath lie in @xmath , then
we find net @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath . The same holds by symmetry if both lie in @xmath .
If @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath , then we find @xmath induced
by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
. The same holds if @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath , therefore
there is no @xmath .

Suppose there is @xmath , let @xmath and @xmath be the rows of @xmath
and @xmath in @xmath be the non-tag column of @xmath . Suppose that
@xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath . Then, we find @xmath induced by
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath . The same holds by symmetry if @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in
@xmath , thus there is no @xmath .

Suppose there is @xmath , let @xmath and @xmath be the rows of @xmath ,
and @xmath and @xmath in @xmath be the columns of @xmath . If @xmath in
@xmath and @xmath in @xmath , then we find @xmath induced by @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . The other
case is analogous, therefore there is no @xmath .

Suppose there is @xmath with @xmath even. If @xmath and @xmath in @xmath
, then we find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . If
instead @xmath and @xmath in @xmath , then we find @xmath induced by
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . It is analogouos by symmetry if
@xmath and @xmath are colored with blue, thus there is no @xmath with
@xmath even, hence suppose @xmath is odd. If @xmath in @xmath and @xmath
in @xmath , then we find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . If
instead @xmath in @xmath and @xmath , then we find @xmath induced by
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . It is analgous for
the other cases.

Suppose there is @xmath . If @xmath is even, then @xmath in @xmath and
@xmath in @xmath , or the analogous blue labeled rows. However, in that
case we find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . If instead @xmath is odd, then
@xmath in @xmath and @xmath or the analogous labeled rows. In that case,
we find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , therefore @xmath is admissible.

Case (1.4) Suppose @xmath is not admissible. Since there are no LR-rows
or uncolored labeled rows, or rows labeled with L, then there is either
@xmath or @xmath . Suppose there is @xmath , let @xmath and @xmath be
the rows of @xmath and @xmath and @xmath in @xmath be the columns of
@xmath . If @xmath and @xmath lie in @xmath , then we find a net @xmath
induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
. Once more, if the intersection in @xmath is empty, then we find a
@xmath -tent induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath .

If @xmath and @xmath in @xmath , then we find a tent induced by @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . If instead @xmath in @xmath
and @xmath in @xmath , then we find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , thus there is no
@xmath .

Suppose there is @xmath . If @xmath is even, then @xmath and @xmath lie
in @xmath . In that case, we find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath . If instead @xmath is odd, then @xmath in
@xmath and @xmath in @xmath , or viceversa. In the first case, we find
@xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .
In the second case, we find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
and therefore @xmath is admissible.

Case (1.5) Finally, suppose @xmath is not admissible. Notice that, if
there is @xmath , then we find a tent, and if there is @xmath , then we
find @xmath . Since there are no red labeled rows, then there is either
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath with even @xmath ,
@xmath with even @xmath , @xmath with even @xmath , @xmath with even
@xmath , @xmath or @xmath .

Suppose there is @xmath , let @xmath and @xmath be the rows, and @xmath
, @xmath in @xmath be the columns of @xmath . If @xmath and @xmath lie
in @xmath , then we find a net @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . If instead @xmath and
@xmath lie in @xmath , since @xmath and @xmath are not complete to
@xmath , then there is either a @xmath -tent (if there is no vertex in
@xmath adjacent to both, induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath ), or a net @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , therefore there is no
@xmath .

Suppose there is @xmath , let @xmath and @xmath be the rows, and @xmath
in @xmath be the non-tag column. Let @xmath in @xmath (notice that
@xmath is complete to @xmath and is not complete to @xmath ) and @xmath
in @xmath (is not complete to @xmath and is complete to @xmath ). Thus,
we find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , hence there is no @xmath . Suppose there is
@xmath , let @xmath , @xmath and @xmath be the rows where @xmath is an
LR-row, and @xmath and @xmath in @xmath be the columns of @xmath . In
that case, @xmath lies in @xmath , @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath
, hence we find a @xmath -tent induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , therefore there is no @xmath .
Suppose there is @xmath , let @xmath be any row labeled with either L or
R, and @xmath and @xmath LR-rows in @xmath . In either case, there is a
vertex @xmath in @xmath with @xmath such that @xmath is adjacent to
@xmath , and hence we find a net @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , thus there is also no
@xmath .

Suppose there is @xmath , and suppose that @xmath is even. Since @xmath
and @xmath correspond to rows labeled with either L or R, in either case
@xmath and @xmath are complete to @xmath . Hence, we find an odd @xmath
-sun with center induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . Moreover, if
@xmath is odd, then we find a @xmath -sun induced by the same subset.

Suppose there is @xmath where @xmath is even. If @xmath and @xmath are
labeled with L, then they are both complete to @xmath and @xmath .
Analogously, if they are labeled with R, then they are both complete to
@xmath and @xmath . In the first case, we find @xmath induced by @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . It is analogous if they are
labeled with R.

Suppose there is @xmath where @xmath is even. However, we find a @xmath
-sun induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and thus it
is not possible.

If there is @xmath with even @xmath , then we find a @xmath -sun with
center induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

If instead there is @xmath with @xmath even, then we find @xmath induced
by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath if @xmath and @xmath lie
in @xmath . It is analogous if @xmath and @xmath lie in @xmath using
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

Finally, if there is @xmath , then we find @xmath , and if there is
@xmath then we find a @xmath -sun if @xmath is even, and a @xmath -sun
with center if @xmath is odd.

Therefore @xmath is admissible for every @xmath .

Case (2 ) Let @xmath and suppose that @xmath is not LR-orderable, then
@xmath contains either a Tucker matrix or @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath for some @xmath (see
Figure 3.17 ).

The proof of this case is analogous as in Lemma 4.10 , since in most
situations we only use the fact that @xmath is admissible. Moreover,
whenever we consider two labeled rows @xmath and @xmath labeled with
distinct letters, we have at least two vertices @xmath in @xmath and
@xmath in @xmath such that @xmath is adjcent to @xmath and nonadjacent
to @xmath and @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and nonadjacent to @xmath .
Moreover, there is always a vertex @xmath in @xmath that is adjacent to
both. This holds whether they are labeled with the same letter or not.

Case (3 ) Therefore, we may assume that @xmath is admissible and
LR-orderable but is not partially @xmath -nested. Since there are no
uncolored labeled rows and those colored rows are labeled with either L
or R and do not induce any of the matrices @xmath , then in particular
no pair of pre-colored rows of @xmath induce a monochromatic gem or a
monochromatic weak gem, and there are no badly-colored gems since every
LR-row is uncolored, therefore @xmath is partially @xmath -nested.

Case (4 ) Finally, let us suppose that @xmath is partially @xmath
-nested but is not @xmath -nested. As in the previous cases, we consider
@xmath ordered with a suitable LR-ordering. Let @xmath be a matrix
obtained from @xmath by extending its partial pre-coloring to a total
@xmath -coloring. It follows from Lemma 3.39 that, if @xmath is not
@xmath -nested, then either there is an LR-row for which its L-block and
R-block are colored with the same color, or @xmath contains a
monochromatic gem or a monochromatic weak gem or a badly-colored doubly
weak gem.

If @xmath contains a monochromatic gem where the rows that induce such a
gem are not LR-rows, then the proof is analogous as in the tent case.
Thus, we may assume that at least one of the rows is an LR-row and hence
let @xmath .

Case (4.1) Let us first suppose there is an LR-row @xmath for which its
L-block @xmath and R-block @xmath are colored with the same color. If
these two blocks are colored with the same color, then there is either
one odd sequence of rows @xmath that force the same color on each block,
or two distinct sequences, one that forces the same color on each block.

Case (4.1.1) If there is one odd sequence @xmath that forces the color
on both blocks, then the proof is analogous as in 4.10 .

Case (4.1.2) Suppose there are two independent sequences @xmath and
@xmath that force the same color on @xmath and @xmath , respectively.
Suppose without loss of generality that @xmath and @xmath are colored
with red. If @xmath and @xmath , then we find @xmath , which is not
possible. Hence, we assume that either @xmath or @xmath . Suppose that
@xmath and @xmath , thus there is one labeled row in each sequence. We
may assume that @xmath is labeled with L and @xmath is labeled with R,
since LR-ordering used to color @xmath is suitable. As in the proof of
Lemma 4.10 , we assume throughout the proof that each row in each
sequence forces the coloring on both the previous and the next row in
its sequence. Thus in this case, @xmath is contained in @xmath and
@xmath is contained in @xmath . Moreover, @xmath represents a vertex in
@xmath , @xmath lies in @xmath and @xmath lies in @xmath , and thus both
are colored with blue and @xmath and @xmath are both odd. If @xmath lies
in @xmath , since there is a @xmath in @xmath adjacent to both @xmath
and @xmath , then we find @xmath contained in the submatrix induced by
each row and column on which the rows in @xmath and both sequences are
not null and the column representing @xmath . The proof is analogous if
either @xmath or @xmath .

Hence, we assume there is either a monochromatic weak gem in which one
of the rows is an LR-row or a badly-colored doubly-weak gem in @xmath ,
for the case of a monochromatic gem or a monochromatic weak gem where
one of the rows is an L-row (resp. R-row) and the other is unlabeled is
analogous to the tent case. Moreover, if an LR-row and an unlabeled row
(or a row labeled with L or R) induce a monochromatic gem, then in
particular these rows induce a monochromatic weak gem.

However, the proof follows analogously as in Lemma 4.10 and therefore,
If @xmath is @xmath -free, then @xmath is @xmath -nested for each @xmath
.

∎

###### Definition 4.24.

We define the matrices @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath as in Section
4.2.3 . Similarly, we have the following Lemma for these matrices.

###### Lemma 4.25.

Suppose that @xmath is @xmath -nested for each @xmath . If @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath or @xmath are not nested, then @xmath contains @xmath as
a minimal forbidden induced subgraph for the class of circle graphs.

###### Proof.

Suppose that @xmath is not nested, and let @xmath and @xmath be the
vertices represented by the rows that induce a @xmath -gem in @xmath .
The rows in @xmath represent vertices in the following subsets of @xmath
: @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath or @xmath . Notice that, by
definition, these last two subsets are not complete to @xmath .

Notice that the vertices in @xmath do not induce @xmath -gems in @xmath
.

Case (1 ) Suppose that @xmath in @xmath . Since @xmath and @xmath are
complete to @xmath and @xmath is complete to @xmath , the only
possibility is that @xmath in @xmath . In that case, we find @xmath
induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath in @xmath , @xmath and @xmath in
@xmath and @xmath in @xmath . We find the same forbidden subgraph if
@xmath and @xmath lie both in @xmath , with vertices @xmath , @xmath in
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath in @xmath , @xmath in @xmath and @xmath
instead of @xmath .

Case (2 ) Let @xmath in @xmath .

Case (2.1) If @xmath in @xmath , then @xmath lies in @xmath or in @xmath
since every vertex in @xmath , @xmath is contained in every vertex of
@xmath , and every vertex in @xmath is properly contained in every
vertex of @xmath . If @xmath in @xmath , then we find @xmath induced by
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .
If instead @xmath in @xmath , then we find @xmath induced by @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , since
there is a vertex @xmath in @xmath adjacent to @xmath and nonadjacent to
@xmath and a vertex @xmath in @xmath adjacent to @xmath and nonadjacent
to @xmath (which is represented in the @xmath -gem by the column @xmath
).

Case (2.2) If @xmath in @xmath , then @xmath lies in @xmath or in @xmath
. However, the first is not possible since @xmath is admissible. The
proof if @xmath lies in @xmath follows analogously as in the previous
subcase.

Case (3 ) Suppose @xmath in @xmath . Since @xmath is admissible and
@xmath is complete to @xmath , then the only possibility is that @xmath
in @xmath . We find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

Suppose that @xmath is not nested, and let @xmath and @xmath be the
vertices represented by the rows that induce a @xmath -gem in @xmath .
The rows in @xmath represent vertices in the following subsets of @xmath
: @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath or @xmath .

Notice that the vertices in @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
do not induce @xmath -gems in @xmath . The same holds for those vertices
in @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , however in this case this follows from
the fact that @xmath is admissible.

Case (1 ) Suppose @xmath in @xmath . Since @xmath is admissible, then
@xmath lies in @xmath . If @xmath in @xmath , then we find @xmath
induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath . If @xmath in @xmath or @xmath , then we find @xmath induced
by the same subset changing @xmath for some vertex in @xmath or @xmath ,
respectively.

Case (2 ) Let @xmath in @xmath , thus @xmath in @xmath . We assume that
@xmath in @xmath , since the proof is analogous if @xmath in @xmath . We
find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath if @xmath in @xmath . If instead @xmath in
@xmath or @xmath , then the subset is the same with the exception of
@xmath , which is replaced by an analogous vertex in @xmath or @xmath ,
respectively.

Case (3 ) Suppose @xmath in @xmath . Thus, @xmath in @xmath . Since
@xmath is never complete to @xmath and both vertices induce a @xmath
-gem, we find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

Case (4 ) Suppose @xmath in @xmath . Thus, @xmath in @xmath . Since
@xmath , we find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

Case (5 ) Suppose @xmath in @xmath . Thus, @xmath in @xmath . We find
@xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath if @xmath in @xmath , and if @xmath in @xmath we change
@xmath for an analogous vertex in @xmath .

Case (6 ) Suppose @xmath in @xmath . Thus, @xmath in @xmath . Since
@xmath is not complete to @xmath , then we find @xmath induced by @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

Suppose that @xmath is not nested, and let @xmath and @xmath be the
vertices represented by the rows that induce a @xmath -gem. The rows in
@xmath represent vertices in either @xmath or @xmath .

Suppose that @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath . Since none of the
vertices is complete to @xmath , @xmath is admissible and these rows are
R-rows in @xmath , then there is no @xmath and thhus there are three
vertices @xmath , @xmath and @xmath in @xmath such that @xmath is
nonadjacent to both @xmath and @xmath , @xmath is adjacent to both
@xmath and @xmath and @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and nonadjacent to
@xmath . We find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . It follows analogously if both
vertices lie in @xmath , and if both lie in @xmath only changing @xmath
for an analogous @xmath in @xmath .

Suppose that @xmath is not nested, and let @xmath and @xmath be the
vertices represented by the rows that induce a @xmath -gem. The rows in
@xmath represent vertices in @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath or @xmath .

Case (1 ) Suppose that @xmath and @xmath in @xmath . In either case,
@xmath and @xmath are not complete to @xmath by definition. Since @xmath
is admissible, thus there is no @xmath and there are vertices @xmath and
@xmath in @xmath such that @xmath is nonadjacent to @xmath and @xmath
and @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and is nonadjacent to @xmath . We find
@xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath if @xmath and @xmath lie in @xmath . It follows
analogously if @xmath or @xmath lie in @xmath changing @xmath for an
analogous vertex @xmath in @xmath .

Case (2 ) Suppose that @xmath and @xmath in @xmath . Since every vertex
in @xmath and @xmath is complete to @xmath , then none of these vertices
induce a @xmath -gem in @xmath . Thus, @xmath and @xmath lie in @xmath .
Moreover, since every vertex in @xmath is complete to @xmath , then it
is not possible that both vertices lie in @xmath . Let @xmath and @xmath
in @xmath such that @xmath is adjacent to both and @xmath is adjacent to
@xmath and is nonadjacent to @xmath . Notice that in that case we are
assuming that, if one of the vertices lies in @xmath , then such vertex
is @xmath . If @xmath in @xmath , then we find @xmath induced by @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . If
instead @xmath in @xmath , we find @xmath with the same subset only
changing @xmath for some analogous @xmath in @xmath .

Case (3 ) Suppose that @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath . Notice
that, if @xmath in @xmath , then @xmath is contained in @xmath and thus
such vertices cannot induce a @xmath -gem in @xmath . Thus, @xmath in
@xmath . In this case, there is a vertex @xmath in @xmath that is
nonadjacent to both @xmath and @xmath since none of these vertices is
complete to @xmath by definition and @xmath is admissible. If @xmath in
@xmath , then we find we find @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . If instead @xmath in
@xmath and @xmath and @xmath induce a @xmath -gem, then @xmath in @xmath
. We find @xmath with the same subset as before, only changing @xmath
for some analogous @xmath in @xmath .

This finishes the proof.

∎

The main result of this section is the following theorem, which follows
directly from the previous lemmas.

###### Theorem 4.26.

Let @xmath be a split graph containing an induced co- @xmath -tent.
Then, @xmath is a circle graph if and only if @xmath are @xmath -nested
and @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are nested.

###### Proof.

Necessity is clear by the previous lemmas and the fact that the graphs
in families @xmath and @xmath are all non-circle. Suppose now that each
of the matrices @xmath is @xmath -nested and the matrices @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath or @xmath are nested. Let @xmath be the ordering for all
the vertices in @xmath obtained by concatenating each suitable
LR-ordering @xmath for @xmath .

Consider the circle divided into sixteen pieces as in Figure 4.10 . For
each @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and for each vertex @xmath we
place a chord having one endpoint in @xmath and the other endpoint in
@xmath , in such a way that the ordering of the endpoints of the chords
in @xmath and @xmath is @xmath . Throughout the following, we will
consider the circular ordering clockwise.

Let us see how to place the chords for each subset @xmath of @xmath .

The vertices with exactly endpoint in @xmath that are not LR-vertices in
@xmath are @xmath and @xmath . Since @xmath is admissible, the vertices
in @xmath and @xmath do not intersect in @xmath . Moreover, since there
are no pre-colored red rows, then there are no vertices with exactly one
endpoint in @xmath . Furthermore, the vertices in @xmath and @xmath are
represented by LR-rows in @xmath . These last ones are exactly those
empty LR-rows. Since @xmath is @xmath -nested, then all of these
vertices can be drawned in the circle model. It follows that, if @xmath
, then either @xmath or @xmath . On the other hand, those nonempty
LR-rows in @xmath correspond to vertices in @xmath . Each of these
vertices with two blocks in @xmath have one endpoint in @xmath , placed
according to the ordering @xmath of the nonempty columns of its red
block, and the other endpoint placed in @xmath according to the ordering
@xmath of the nonempty columns of its blue block. It follows analogously
for those nonempty LR-vertices with exactly one block.

Notice that in @xmath (resp. in @xmath by symmetry) there are no R-rows
(resp. L-rows). Since @xmath is @xmath -nested, then all the vertices
that have exactly one endpoint in @xmath (resp. @xmath ) are nested and
thus such endpoint can be placed without issues. The same holds for
every vertex with both endpoints in @xmath and @xmath . Moreover, the
only vertices with exactly one endpoint in @xmath may be those in @xmath
, for all the vertices in @xmath are nested and have the endpoint
corresponding to @xmath placed between @xmath and the first endpoint of
a vertex in @xmath (or @xmath if this set is empty). The vertices in
@xmath are nested, and thus each endpoint of these vertices may be
placed in the ordering given by @xmath and @xmath , respectively,
between @xmath and @xmath .

The only vertices that have exactly one endpoint in @xmath are those in
@xmath . The vertices that have exactly one endpoint in @xmath are those
in @xmath . Since @xmath is @xmath -nested and @xmath is nested, then
these vertices are all nested and thus we can place the chords according
to the ordering @xmath . Those vertices in @xmath have the endpoint
corresponding to @xmath placed right after @xmath , and before any of
the chords with endpoint in @xmath . The same holds by symmetry for
those chords with exactly one endpoint in @xmath and @xmath .

The vertices with exactly one endpoint in @xmath are @xmath and @xmath .
Since @xmath is admissible, the vertices in @xmath and @xmath do not
intersect in @xmath . Moreover, since @xmath is @xmath -nested and
@xmath and @xmath are nested, then the vertices in @xmath are nested and
thus we can place both of its endpoints following the ordering given by
@xmath . The vertices with exactly one endpoint in @xmath are those in
@xmath (which we have already shown where to place) and those in @xmath
. These last vertices are nested since @xmath is nested and thus we
place both its endpoints according to @xmath . Notice that, since @xmath
is admissible, then the vertices in @xmath and @xmath do not intersect
in @xmath .

Since @xmath is nested, if @xmath , then @xmath , and viceversa. The
same holds for @xmath and @xmath . Moreover, if @xmath , then every
vertex in @xmath is nested in @xmath , and if @xmath , then every vertex
in @xmath is nested in @xmath . It follows analogously by symmetry for
those vertices in @xmath .

Those vertices with exactly one endpoint in @xmath are those in @xmath .
These vertices are nested since @xmath is @xmath -nested and @xmath is
nested. Thus, if these subsets are nonempty, then @xmath . Therefore, we
can place both its enpoints according to @xmath , one in @xmath and the
other between @xmath and @xmath . The vertices that have exactly one
endpoint in @xmath are those in @xmath , and since @xmath is nested,
then these vertices are all nested and therefore we place both its
endpoints according to @xmath .

Finally, all the vertices represented by unlabeled rows in each @xmath
for @xmath represent the vertices in @xmath . These vertices are
entirely colored with either red or blue, and are either disjoint or
nested with every other vertex colored with its color. Hence, we place
both endpoints of the corresponding chord in @xmath if it is colored
with red, and in @xmath if it is colored with blue, according to the
ordering @xmath given for @xmath .

This gives the guidelines for a circle model for @xmath .

∎

#### 4.4 Split circle graphs containing an induced net

Let @xmath be a split graph. If @xmath is a minimally non-circle graph,
then it contains either a tent, or a @xmath -tent, or a co- @xmath
-tent, or a net as induced subgraphs. In the previous sections, we have
addressed the problem of having a split minimally-non-circle graph that
contains an induced tent, @xmath -tent and co- @xmath -tent,
respectively. Let us consider a split graph @xmath that contains no
induced tent, @xmath -tent or co- @xmath -tent, and suppose there is a
net subgraph in @xmath .

We define @xmath as the subset of vertices in @xmath that are adjacent
only to @xmath if @xmath , and if @xmath as those vertices in @xmath
that are adjacent to @xmath and @xmath . We define @xmath as the subset
of vertices in @xmath that are nonadjacent to @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
. Let @xmath in @xmath . We denote @xmath to the vertices that are false
twins of @xmath .

###### Remark 4.27.

The net is not a prime graph. Moreover, if @xmath , @xmath for any pair
@xmath , then @xmath is not prime. For example, if @xmath and @xmath ,
then a split decomposition can be found considering the subgraphs @xmath
and @xmath .

Since in the proof we consider a minimally non-circle graph @xmath , it
follows from the previous remark that at least two of @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath must be nonempty so that @xmath results prime. However, in
that case we find a @xmath -tent as an induced subgraph. Therefore, as a
consequence of this and the previous sections, we have now proven the
characterization theorem given at the begining of the chapter.

###### Theorem 4.28.

Let @xmath be a split graph. Then, @xmath is a circle graph if and only
if @xmath is @xmath -free (See Figures 4.1 and 4.2 ).

## Part II Minimal completions

### Introducción

Dado un grafo @xmath y una clase de grafos @xmath , un problema de
modificación de grafos consiste en estudiar cómo agregar o borrar
minimalmente vértices o aristas de @xmath de forma tal de obtener un
grafo que pertenezca a la clase @xmath .

Dado que los grafos pueden ser utilizados para representar diversos
problemas del mundo real y estructuras teóricas, no es difícil observar
que los problemas de modificación permiten modelar un amplio número de
aplicaciones prácticas en distintos campos. Algunos ejemplos son: redes;
álgebra numérica; biología molecular; bases de datos, etc. Es entonces
natural que estos problemas sean ampliamente estudiados.

Una clase de grafos @xmath es una familia de grafos que tiene la
propiedad @xmath , por ejemplo, @xmath puede ser la propiedad de ser
cordal, o planar, o perfecto, etc.

El problema de modificación que estudiamos es el problema de @xmath
-completación. Una @xmath -completación de un grafo @xmath es un
supergrafo @xmath tal que @xmath pertenece a la clase @xmath y @xmath .
En otras palabras, queremos hallar un conjunto de aristas @xmath tal
que, al agregarlas a @xmath , el grafo resultante pertenezca a la clase
@xmath . Las aristas en @xmath se llaman aristas de relleno . Una @xmath
-completación se dice mínima si para todo conjunto de aristas @xmath tal
que @xmath pertenece a @xmath , entonces @xmath . Una @xmath
-completación es minimal si para todo subconjunto @xmath , el supergrafo
@xmath no pertenece a @xmath .

El problema de calcular una completación mínima de un grafo arbitrario a
una clase de grafos específica ha sido ampliamente estudiado, ya que
tiene aplicaciones en áreas tan diversas como biología molecular,
álgebra computacional, y más precisamente en aquellas áreas que
involucran el modelado basado en grafos donde las aristas que no están
se deben a la falta de data, como por ejemplo en problemas de clustering
de datos [ 19 , 29 ] . Desafortunadamente, las completaciones mínimas de
grafos arbitrarios a clases de grafos específicas como los cografos,
grafos bipartitos, grafos cordales, etc., son NP-hard de computar [ 29 ,
7 , 36 ] .

Por esta razón, la investigación actual en este tópico se enfoca en
hallar completaciones minimales de grafos arbitrarios a clases de grafos
específicas de la forma más eficiente desde el punto de vista
computacional. Más aún, aunque el problema de completar minimalmente es
y ha sido muy estudiado, se desconocen caracterizaciones estructurales
para la mayoría de los problemas para los cuales se ha dado un algoritmo
polinomial para hallar tal completación. Estudiar la estructura de las
completaciones minimales puede permitir hallar algoritmos de
reconocimiento eficientes.

Las completaciones minimales de un grafo arbitrario a un grafo de
intervalos y de intervalos propios han sido estudiadas en [ 8 , 33 ] .
En estos casos particulares, una completación minimal se puede hallar en
@xmath y @xmath , repsectivamente. Sin embargo, no hay resultados en la
literatura que se refieran a la complejidad del problema de
reconocimiento, en ninguno de los dos casos.

La motivación más conocida para los problemas de Modificación Mínima de
Intervalos viene de la biología molecular, y es una de las razones
principales por las cuales los grafos de intervalos comenzaron a
estudiarse. En un artículo de 1959 [ 1 ] , Benzer mostró fuertes
evidencias de que la colección de ADN que compone a un gen bacterial es
lineal, de la misma forma que la estructura de los genes en los
cromosomas. Esta estructura lineal puede ser representada como
intervalos en la recta real que se solapan, ergo, como un grafo de
intervalos. Sin embargo, el mapeo de la estructura genética se hace por
observación indirecta. Es decir, esta estructura lineal no es observada
de forma directa, sino que es inferida por cómo se pueden recombinar
algunos de los fragmentos del genoma original. Para estudiar diversas
propiedades de una cierta secuencia de ADN, la pieza original de ADN es
fragmentada en pedazos más pequeños. Estos fragmentos luego son clonados
varias veces utilizando varios métodos biológicos, y toman el nombre de
clones. En este proceso, la posición de cada clon en el pedazo original
de ADN se pierde, aunque como generalmente varias copias de la misma
pieza de ADN se fragmentan de diferentes formas, algunos clones se
solapan. El problema de reconstruir el arreglo original de los clones en
la secuencia original se denomina mapeo físico de ADN. Decidir si dos
clones se solapan o no es la parte crítica en la cual pueden surgir
errores, dado que es un proceso basado en información parcial. Sabemos
que, una vez que se decide una forma de ordenar estos clones consistente
en términos de solapamiento, el modelo resultando debería representar a
un grafo de intervalos. Sin embargo, puede haber algún falso positivo o
falso negativo, debido a la interpretación errónea de alguno de los
datos. Corregir el modelo para deshacerse de inconsistencias es entonces
equivalente a remover o agregar aristas al grafo que representa el set
de datos, de modo tal que se convierta en un grafo de intervalos. Por
supuesto, queremos cambiar el grafo original lo menos posible. Más aún,
cuando todos los clones tienen el mismo tamaño, es decir, que la
secuencia de ADN ha sido fragmentada en partes iguales, el grafo
resultando debe ser no sólo de intervalos, sino de intervalos propios.

Se mostró en [ 23 , 36 , 18 , 19 ] que el problema de @xmath
-completación es NP-completo si @xmath es la familia de los grafos
cordales, de intervalos o de intervalos propios.

### Chapter 1 Introduction

Given a graph @xmath and a graph class @xmath , a graph modification
problem consists in studying how to minimally add or delete vertices or
edges from @xmath such that the resulting graph belongs to the class
@xmath .

As graphs can be used to represent various real world and theoretical
structures, it is not difficult to see that these modification problems
can model a large number of practical applications in several different
fields. Some examples are: networks reliability; numerical algebra;
molecular biology; computer vision; and relational databases. It is thus
natural that such problems have been widely studied.

A graph class @xmath is a family of graphs having the property @xmath ,
for example, @xmath can be the property of being chordal, or planar, or
perfect, etc.

The modification problem we studied is the @xmath -completion problem. A
@xmath -completion of a graph @xmath is a supergraph @xmath such that
@xmath belongs to @xmath and @xmath . In other words, we want to find a
set of edges @xmath such that, when added to @xmath , the resulting
graph belongs to the class @xmath . The edges in @xmath are referred to
as fill edges . A @xmath -completion is minimum if for any set of edges
@xmath such that @xmath belongs to @xmath , then @xmath . A @xmath
-completion is minimal if for any proper subset @xmath , the supergraph
@xmath does not belong to @xmath .

The problem of calculating a minimum completion in an arbitrary graph to
a specific graph class has been rather studied, since it has
applications in areas such as molecular biology, computational algebra,
and more specifically in those areas that involve modelling based in
graphs where the missing edges are due to lack of data, for example in
data clustering problems [ 19 , 29 ] . Unfortunately, minimum
completions of arbitrary graphs to specific graph classes, such as
cographs, bipartite graphs, chordal graphs, etc., have been showed to be
NP-hard to compute [ 29 , 7 , 36 ] .

For this reason, current research on this topic is focused in finding
minimal completions of arbitrary graphs to specific graph classes in the
most efficient way possible from the computational point of view. And
even though the minimal completion problem is and has been rather
studied, structural characterizations are still unknown for most of the
problems for which a polynomial algorithm to find such a completion has
been given. Studying the structure of minimal completions may allow to
find efficent recognition algorithms.

Minimal completions from an arbitrary graph to interval graphs and
proper interval graphs have been studied in [ 8 , 33 ] . In these
particular cases, a minimal completion can be found in @xmath and @xmath
respectively, but there are no results in the literature that refer to
the complexity of the recognition problem in both cases.

The most well known motivation for Minimum Interval Modification
problems, comes from molecular biology, and it is one of the main
reasons why interval graphs started being studied in the first place. In
a paper from 1959 [ 1 ] , Benzer first gave strong evidences that the
collection of DNA composing a bacterial gene was linear, just like the
structure of the genes themselves in the chromosome. This linear
structure could be represented as overlapping intervals on the real
line, and therefore as an interval graph. However, mapping of the
genetic structure is done by indirect observation. That is, such linear
structure is not observed directly, but it is inferred by how various
fragments of the original genome can be recombined. In order to study
various properties of a certain DNA sequence, the original piece of DNA
is fragmented into smaller pieces. This fragments are then cloned many
times using various biological methods, and take the name of clones. In
this process the position of each clone on the original stretch of DNA
is lost, but since usually many copies of the same piece of DNA are
fragmented in different ways, some clones will overlap. The problem of
reconstructing the original arrangements of the clones in the original
sequence is called physical mapping of DNA. Deciding whether two clones
overlap or not is the critical part where errors may arise, since it is
a process based on partial information. We know that once we decide an
arrangement of these clones consistent with the overlapping, the
resulting model should represent an interval graph. However, there might
be some false positive or false negatives, due to erroneous
interpretation of some data. Correcting the model to get rid of
inconsistencies is then equivalent to remove or add edges to the graph
representing the dataset, so that it becomes interval. Of course we want
to change it as little as possible. Moreover, when all the clones have
the same size, i.e., the DNA sequence has been fragmented in equal
parts, the resulting graph should be not only interval, but proper
interval.

It was shown in [ 23 , 36 , 18 , 19 ] that the minimum @xmath
-completion problem is NP-complete if @xmath is the family of chordal,
interval, or proper interval graphs.

In the following sections we give some basic definitions and state some
of the known structural characterizations for chordal, interval and
proper interval graphs, which will be useful in the next chapter.

#### 1.1 Basic definitions

A graph @xmath is chordal if every cycle of length greater or equal to
@xmath has a chord, which is an edge that is not part of the cycle but
connects two vertices of the cycle.

We say @xmath is an interval graph if @xmath admits an intersection
model consisting of intervals in the real line. It has one vertex for
each interval in the family and an edge between every pair of vertices
represented by intervals that intersect. In particular, @xmath is a unit
interval graph if there is a model in which every interval has length 1,
and @xmath is a proper interval graph if @xmath admits a model such that
no interval is properly included in any other. Interval, unit interval
and proper interval graphs are all subclasses of chordal graphs.

The neighbourhood of a vertex @xmath in @xmath is the set @xmath . If
@xmath , we define @xmath . When @xmath we will simply denote it @xmath
.

Three independent vertices form an asteroidal triple (AT) if, for each
two, there is a path @xmath from one to the other such that @xmath does
not pass through a neighbor of the third one.

Let @xmath and @xmath in @xmath be two nonadjacent vertices. A set
@xmath is a @xmath -minimal separator if @xmath and @xmath belong to
distinct connected components in @xmath , and @xmath is minimal with
this property. We say indistinctly that @xmath is a minimal separator if
such vertices @xmath and @xmath exist.

Let @xmath and @xmath be two graphs. We say that @xmath is @xmath -free
if there is no subgraph isomorphic to @xmath in @xmath .

#### 1.2 Known characterizations of interval and proper interval graphs

We now give a list of properties and characterization theorems that will
be strongly used in the following chapter.

###### Lemma 1.1.

[ 24 ] Let @xmath be a graph, and @xmath . Then, @xmath is a minimal
separator if and only if @xmath has at least two connected components
@xmath , @xmath such that @xmath .

###### Lemma 1.2.

[ 24 ] Let @xmath be a graph. If @xmath and @xmath are nonadjacent
vertices in @xmath , then there is a unique @xmath -minimal separator
@xmath such that @xmath .

###### Lemma 1.3.

[ 12 ] If @xmath is a chordal graph, then every minimal separator is a
clique.

###### Theorem 1.4.

[ 26 ] @xmath is an interval graph if and only if @xmath is chordal and
AT–free.

###### Theorem 1.5.

[ 22 ] The following properties are equivalent:

-   @xmath is a proper interval graph

-   @xmath is chordal and contains no claw, net or tent as induced
    subgraphs (See Figure 1.1 )

-   @xmath is an interval graph and contains no claws

###### Theorem 1.6.

[ 32 ] The class of unit interval graphs coincides with the class of
proper interval graphs.

### Completaciones minimales de grafos de intervalos propios

El resultado principal de este capítulo es el Teorema 1.10 . En la
primera sección se dan una serie de definiciones y propiedades básicas
sobre separadores minimales en un grafo de intervalos.

###### Definition 1.7.

Sea @xmath un grafo conexo, @xmath un separador minimal de @xmath , y
@xmath una componente conexa de @xmath . Definimos el núcleo @xmath como
el conjunto de vértices @xmath en @xmath tales que existe al menos un
vértice @xmath en el separador @xmath de modo tal que @xmath y @xmath
son adyacentes.

###### Proposition 1.8.

Sea @xmath un grafo de intervalos propios conexo y sea @xmath un
separador minimal de @xmath . Entonces, todo núcleo @xmath es una clique
para @xmath .

###### Definition 1.9.

Sea @xmath un grafo de intervalos, @xmath una completación de @xmath a
intervalos propios, y sea @xmath en @xmath una arista de relleno.

1.   Decimos que @xmath es tipo I , si existen un separador minimal
    @xmath de @xmath y un núcleo @xmath tales que @xmath y @xmath
    pertenecen ambos a @xmath .

2.   Decimos que @xmath es tipo II , si @xmath no es tipo I y existen al
    menos un separador minimal @xmath de @xmath y un núcleo @xmath para
    los cuales @xmath está en @xmath , @xmath está en @xmath , de forma
    tal que si se borra @xmath , entonces deja de haber un ordenamiento
    nuclear en @xmath .

3.   Decimos que @xmath es tipo III si @xmath no es tipo I, existen al
    menos un separador minimal @xmath de @xmath y un núcleo @xmath para
    los cuales @xmath está en @xmath , @xmath está en @xmath , y para
    los cuales cada separador minimal @xmath y núcleo @xmath , si @xmath
    se borra, entonces sigue existiendo un orden nuclear en @xmath .

4.   Decimos que @xmath es tipo IV , si @xmath no es tipo I y, para todo
    separador minimal @xmath , o bien ambos @xmath o bien ambos @xmath

Esta definición induce una partición de las aristas en @xmath . El
resultado principal de este capítulo es la siguiente condición necesaria
para que una completación a intervalos propios sea minimal cuando el
grafo de input es de intervalos.

###### Theorem 1.10.

Sea @xmath un grafo conexo de intervalos y sea @xmath una completación
de @xmath a intervalos propios. Si @xmath es minimal, entonces toda
arista @xmath en @xmath o bien es de tipo I, o es de tipo II.

### Chapter 2 Minimal completion of proper interval graphs

In this chapter, we study how to structurally characterize a minimal
completion of an interval graph to a proper interval graph. In Section
2.1 , we define and characterize some orderings for the vertices that
are strongly based in the minimal separators of an interval graph. In
Section 2.2 , we define the types of edges that can be found in any
completion of an interval graph. Afterwards, we state and prove a
necessary condition for a minimal completion in this particular case.

#### 2.1 Preliminaries

In this section, we will start giving some definitions and properties
that will allow us to describe in the next section all the types of
edges that can be found in a completion of an interval graph and state
Theorem 2.14 . These definitions and properties include a necessary
condition regarding the ordering of the vertices for any proper interval
graph.

The following property allows us to assume from now on that the graph
@xmath is connected.

###### Proposition 2.1.

[ 27 ] Let @xmath be a graph, let @xmath be the set of all connected
components of @xmath and let @xmath be a @xmath completion. Then, @xmath
is a minimal @xmath completion of @xmath if and only if @xmath is a
minimal @xmath -completion of @xmath for every connected component
@xmath .

###### Definition 2.2.

Let @xmath a connected graph, @xmath a minimal separator of @xmath , and
let @xmath be a connected component of @xmath . We define the nucleus
@xmath as the set of vertices @xmath in @xmath for which there is at
least one vertex @xmath in the separator @xmath such that @xmath and
@xmath are adjacent.

In this regard, @xmath will refer as needed in each case by abuse of
language both of the vertex set @xmath and the induced subgraph @xmath .
Moreover, we will use @xmath whenever it is clear which is the minimal
separator.

###### Proposition 2.3.

Let @xmath be a connected proper interval graph. Then, for every minimal
separator @xmath of @xmath , the subgraph @xmath has exactly two
connected components.

###### Proof.

By Lemma 1.1 , there are at least two distinct connected components
@xmath of @xmath such that @xmath . Toward a contradiction, let @xmath
be a nonempty connected component of @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath
.

Notice that, if we consider any three vertices @xmath in @xmath for each
@xmath , then these vertices are nonadjacent. Since @xmath is nonempty
and @xmath is connected, there are vertices @xmath in @xmath and @xmath
in @xmath such that @xmath is adjacent to @xmath . Similarly, let @xmath
in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath are both
adjacent to the vertex @xmath . Hence, the set @xmath induces a claw and
this contradicts the hypothesis of @xmath being a proper interval graph.
∎

By proposition 2.3 , we will assume from now on that, if @xmath is a
connected proper interval graph, then for every minimal separator @xmath
of @xmath , the subgraph @xmath has exactly two connected components.

###### Proposition 2.4.

Let @xmath be a connected proper interval graph, @xmath a minimal
separator of @xmath and let @xmath be a nucleus of the separator @xmath
, for @xmath . For every pair of vertices @xmath in @xmath with a common
neighbour @xmath in @xmath , then @xmath is an edge of @xmath .

###### Proof.

Suppose to the contrary that @xmath and @xmath in @xmath are both
adjacent to some vertex @xmath in @xmath , and that the edge @xmath is
not in @xmath .

Since @xmath is a minimal separator and @xmath is connected, then @xmath
is nonempty. Thus, let @xmath in @xmath such that @xmath is adjacent to
@xmath . Hence, the set @xmath induces a claw in @xmath and this results
in a contradiction. ∎

###### Corollary 2.5.

Under the previous hypothesis, if @xmath , then @xmath is a clique for
@xmath .

###### Proposition 2.6.

Let @xmath be an interval graph, @xmath a minimal separator of @xmath
such that @xmath , and let @xmath be a nucleus of the separator @xmath .

If @xmath and @xmath in @xmath , then @xmath is a nonempty set.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath and @xmath in @xmath . Suppose there are two nonadjacent
vertices @xmath and @xmath in @xmath such that @xmath is adjacent to
@xmath and nonadjacent to @xmath , and @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and
nonadjacent to @xmath . Since @xmath is connected, there is a simple
path @xmath in @xmath that joins @xmath and @xmath . If there is a
vertex in @xmath nonadjacent to either @xmath or @xmath , then we find a
cycle of length greater or equal than @xmath . In particular, the same
holds if @xmath is nonempty because @xmath and @xmath are adjacent.

Hence, suppose that @xmath and every vertex in @xmath is adjacent to
both @xmath and @xmath . Since @xmath is a minimal separator, there are
vertices @xmath and @xmath in @xmath such that @xmath is adjacent to
@xmath for @xmath . In particular, since @xmath and @xmath are both in
@xmath –which is a connected component of @xmath –, there is a path
@xmath joining @xmath and @xmath such that @xmath is entirely contained
in @xmath .

We claim that the set @xmath induces an @xmath . It is clear that @xmath
, @xmath and @xmath are three independent vertices. If @xmath is also
adjacent to @xmath , then we have the path @xmath connecting @xmath and
@xmath , and the following paths:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The proof is analogous if @xmath . If instead @xmath is nonadjacent to
@xmath , then we have @xmath joining @xmath and @xmath , @xmath defined
as above joining @xmath and @xmath , and the path:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and thus @xmath is not an interval graph, which results in a
contradiction. Hence, the vertices @xmath and @xmath are adjacent.
However, since @xmath is adjacent to @xmath , @xmath is adjacent to
@xmath , and @xmath is adjacent to @xmath for @xmath is a minimal
separator of a chordal graph, either @xmath is adjacent to @xmath , or
@xmath is adjacent to @xmath and therefore @xmath is nonempty. ∎

###### Corollary 2.7.

Under the hypothesis of Proposition 2.6 , if @xmath , then @xmath is
complete to @xmath .

###### Proposition 2.8.

Let @xmath be a connected proper interval graph. If @xmath is a minimal
separator of @xmath such that @xmath , then, for @xmath , every nucleus
@xmath is a clique.

###### Proof.

We will prove this result for @xmath . If @xmath , then the proposition
holds.

If @xmath , then by Propositions 2.4 and 2.6 , both vertices are
adjacent.

Suppose that @xmath , and let @xmath and @xmath in @xmath be two
nonadjacent vertices.

By definition of nucleus, there are vertices @xmath and @xmath in @xmath
such that @xmath is adjacent to @xmath , for each @xmath . Since @xmath
and @xmath are nonadjacent, by Proposition 2.4 , @xmath , @xmath is
nonadjacent to @xmath and @xmath is nonadjacent to @xmath .

By Proposition 2.6 , there are vertices @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in
@xmath such that @xmath and @xmath are adjacent to both @xmath and
@xmath . It is clear that @xmath and @xmath .

Since @xmath and @xmath are adjacent to @xmath , by Proposition 2.4 ,
@xmath is adjacent to @xmath , and the same holds for @xmath and @xmath
. Therefore, the set @xmath induces a tent and this results in a
contradiction, for the tent is a forbidden subgraph for proper interval
graphs. ∎

###### Definition 2.9.

Let @xmath be a graph, @xmath a minimal separator of @xmath and @xmath a
nucleus of @xmath . A nuclear ordering for @xmath is an ordering @xmath
of the vertices of @xmath such that for every pair of vertices @xmath
and @xmath , if @xmath , then @xmath .

Notation: If @xmath is a nuclear ordering for the nucleus @xmath , we
denote @xmath .

###### Proposition 2.10.

Let @xmath be a connected proper interval graph, @xmath a minimal
separator of @xmath and @xmath a nucleus of @xmath . If @xmath and
@xmath in @xmath , then @xmath is nonempty. Moreover, there is a nuclear
ordering @xmath for @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath and @xmath in @xmath . Let us see that either @xmath or
@xmath .

Toward a contradiction, suppose there is a vertex @xmath in @xmath such
that @xmath , and a vertex @xmath in @xmath such that @xmath .

Since @xmath and @xmath are cliques –by Propositions 2.4 and 2.8 – and
@xmath is chordal, @xmath and @xmath are adjacent and also @xmath is
adjacent to @xmath . Thus, the set @xmath induces a @xmath and this
results in a contradiction.

Therefore, either @xmath or @xmath , and since any two vertices in
@xmath are comparable, this induces a nuclear ordering in @xmath . ∎

###### Corollary 2.11.

For each nucleus @xmath , there is a vertex @xmath such that @xmath is
complete to @xmath .

###### Proposition 2.12.

Let @xmath be a proper interval graph and @xmath a minimal separator of
@xmath . Then, there is a vertex ordering @xmath for @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We call this a bi-ordering for @xmath , and we denote it regarding the
nucleus corresponding each direction. For example, the previous would be
denoted as @xmath and @xmath .

###### Proof.

Suppose to the contrary that there is a minimal separator @xmath of
@xmath such that every decreasing ordering of its vertices regarding
@xmath is not an increasing ordering regarding @xmath .

Let @xmath be a decreasing ordering of @xmath regarding @xmath . Suppose
without loss of generality @xmath , and @xmath .

Notice that, if @xmath , then the given ordering regarding @xmath holds
for @xmath , thus since the ordering is total between vertices in @xmath
, we may assume a strict ordering for @xmath .

Moreover, if @xmath , then we can swap @xmath and @xmath in the ordering
regarding @xmath and thus this new ordering results in a bi-ordering for
@xmath .

Suppose @xmath . Hence, there is a vertex @xmath in @xmath such that
@xmath is adjacent to @xmath and @xmath is nonadjacent to @xmath . Let
@xmath in @xmath such that @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and @xmath is
nonadjacent to @xmath . We can find such a vertex for we are assuming
@xmath . These four vertices induce a claw, and therefore this results
in a contradiction since @xmath is proper interval.

This argument holds for every pair of vertices in @xmath for which the
position given by the order in the other nucleus cannot be inverted. ∎

#### 2.2 A necessary condition

In this section, we will use the properties and definitions given in the
previous section to define all the types of edges that may arise in a
completion of an interval graph, and we will state and prove a necessary
condition for any minimal completion to proper interval graphs when the
input graphs is an interval graph, which is the main result of this
chapter.

###### Definition 2.13.

Let @xmath be an interval graph, @xmath a completion of @xmath to proper
interval, and let @xmath in @xmath be a fill edge.

1.   We say @xmath is type I , if there is a minimal separator @xmath of
    @xmath and a nucleus @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath are both
    vertices in @xmath .

2.   We say @xmath is type II , if @xmath is not type I and there is at
    least one minimal separator @xmath of @xmath and a nucleus @xmath
    for which @xmath in @xmath , @xmath in @xmath , such that if @xmath
    is deleted, then there is no nuclear ordering in @xmath .

3.   We say @xmath is type III if @xmath is not type I, there is at
    least one minimal separator @xmath of @xmath and nucleus @xmath for
    which @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath , and for each such
    minimal separator @xmath and nucleus @xmath , if @xmath is deleted,
    then there is still a nuclear ordering in @xmath .

4.   We say @xmath is type IV , if @xmath is not type I and, for every
    minimal separator @xmath , either both @xmath or both @xmath

Notice that this definition induces a partition of the edges in @xmath .
Moreover, the definition of type IV edge can be restated as follows:
@xmath is type IV if for every minimal separator @xmath such that @xmath
and @xmath intersect, then @xmath and @xmath are both vertices in @xmath
.

###### Theorem 2.14.

Let @xmath be a connected interval graph and let @xmath be a completion
of @xmath to proper interval. If @xmath is minimal, then every edge
@xmath in @xmath is either type I or type II.

###### Proof.

Suppose @xmath is minimal. We will see that every edge is either type I
or type II. Toward a contradiction, suppose there is an edge @xmath in
@xmath such that @xmath is either a type III or type IV edge. If @xmath
is removed, then we will find a subset @xmath of @xmath for which @xmath
is a completion of @xmath to proper interval.

Case (1 ) Suppose the edge @xmath is type III.

Since @xmath is type III, there is a minimal separator @xmath and a
nucleus @xmath such that @xmath , with @xmath in @xmath , @xmath in
@xmath . We denote @xmath .

If @xmath is minimal and @xmath in @xmath is deleted, then the resulting
graph @xmath is either not an interval graph, or @xmath contains an
induced claw. Hence, by Theorems 1.4 and 1.5 , we have three possible
subcases:

1.   The resulting subgraph @xmath contains an induced cycle @xmath ,
    with @xmath (thus, @xmath is not a chordal graph), or

2.  @xmath contains an AT (in this case, @xmath is chordal but @xmath is
    not an interval graph), or

3.  @xmath is an interval graph but contains an induced claw (thus,
    @xmath is an interval graph and @xmath is not a proper interval
    graph).

Let @xmath a vertex subset, and @xmath an edge subset. We denote by
@xmath to those neighbours of the vertex @xmath in @xmath that are
connected to @xmath by edges in @xmath .

###### Remark 2.15.

Let @xmath be a nuclear ordering for @xmath in @xmath given by
@xmath , such that @xmath for some @xmath in @xmath .

Let @xmath be the -partial- ordering induced by @xmath in the nucleus
@xmath once the edge @xmath is deleted, which we will refer to simply as
the induced ordering and which we denote by @xmath .

Since @xmath is type III, if @xmath is deleted, then we can find a
nuclear ordering for @xmath . However, we cannot assert that the induced
ordering is indeed a nuclear ordering.

A few observations:

-    The inclusion @xmath holds for every @xmath in @xmath , thus,
    considering the edge set @xmath we see that @xmath holds as for
    @xmath .

-    Suppose @xmath and @xmath for every @xmath . Then, the induced
    ordering @xmath does not change for @xmath .

-    Suppose instead that @xmath for some @xmath , then we set @xmath to
    be @xmath . Notice that @xmath . If @xmath is deleted, then @xmath .
    However, since @xmath and @xmath , then @xmath and hence we have
    that @xmath , since @xmath is the only element removed from the
    neighbourhood of @xmath .

    Therefore, the induced ordering @xmath must necessarily be

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

Case (1.1) Suppose that if @xmath is deleted, then we find a cycle.
Since @xmath and @xmath are cliques and @xmath is chordal, this cycle
must have length 4 at the most. Moreover, it is induced by a set @xmath
for some vertices @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath such that @xmath
is adjacent to @xmath and @xmath , and @xmath is adjacent to @xmath .

Since @xmath and @xmath , thus @xmath and the inequality is strict . By
Remark 2.15 , if @xmath is deleted, then the induced ordering @xmath
satisfies @xmath . However, @xmath which results in a contradiction.

###### Remark 2.16.

For each minimal separator @xmath , we can partition the vertices of the
graph into 5 disjoint sets: @xmath and @xmath (see Figure 2.1 ).

Since @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are cliques, the only way two
independent vertices may belong to the same set is if they both lie in
either @xmath or @xmath .

[]

Case (1.2) Suppose now that if @xmath is deleted, then there is an
@xmath in the subgraph @xmath induced by some independent vertices
@xmath and @xmath .

Since there are no @xmath ’s in @xmath (for @xmath is an interval
graph), there is a path @xmath in @xmath joining @xmath and @xmath ,
such that there is a vertex @xmath in @xmath adjacent to @xmath through
the edge @xmath . Hence, @xmath is nonadjacent to @xmath in @xmath .
Thus, either @xmath and @xmath , or @xmath and @xmath .

Let us suppose first that @xmath and @xmath .

###### Claim 2.17.

Under the previous hypothesis, @xmath and @xmath are both in @xmath .

To prove this, we divide in cases according to the 5 partitions
described in Remark 2.16 .

First of all, since @xmath is a clique and @xmath lies in @xmath , then
@xmath and @xmath . Furthermore, since @xmath and @xmath are cliques,
the vertices @xmath and @xmath cannot belong to the same nucleus.

On one hand, we may assert that @xmath , for if this is the case, since
@xmath lies in @xmath and @xmath is a vertex in @xmath , then the path
@xmath goes through the set @xmath and thus, the path contains at least
one neighbour of @xmath in @xmath , which results in a contradiction for
@xmath is, by hypothesis, the only vertex adjacent to @xmath in the path
@xmath .

In an analogous way, we may assert that it is not possible to have
@xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath , for we cannot find a path
joining @xmath and @xmath without going through neighbours of @xmath in
@xmath .

Therefore, the only remaining possibility is @xmath and @xmath in @xmath
. @xmath

Let us study now the relationship between @xmath and @xmath , @xmath . A
couple of observations:

1.   There is no path joining @xmath and @xmath entirely contained in
    @xmath , for if this was the case, then we can find an @xmath in
    @xmath , which results in a contradiction since @xmath is an
    interval graph.

2.   Since the set @xmath induces an @xmath in @xmath and @xmath is
    adjacent to @xmath through @xmath , the vertex @xmath is nonadjacent
    to either @xmath or @xmath for if not, then we find a claw in @xmath
    induced by @xmath . Notice that this implies that the set @xmath is
    empty, since by definition every vertex in a nucleus is adjacent to
    at least one vertex in the separator, and thus the same argument
    holds.

Summing up the results in ( 1 ), ( 2 ) and Claim 2.17 , @xmath is
nonadjacent to either @xmath or @xmath , and thus there are vertices
@xmath and @xmath in @xmath such that @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and
is nonadjacent to @xmath , and analogously @xmath is adjacent to @xmath
and is nonadjacent to @xmath . Notice that @xmath is adjacent to @xmath
since they both lie in the same nucleus.

Suppose first that @xmath and @xmath . Hence, the path @xmath joins
@xmath and @xmath in @xmath and contains no neighbour of @xmath ,
therefore @xmath is an @xmath in @xmath , which results in a
contradiction.

Suppose now that @xmath and @xmath . First of all, if @xmath is
nonempty, then we can find a @xmath -minimal separator such that @xmath
belongs to one of the nucleus as follows: Let @xmath . Since there is no
path connecting @xmath and @xmath entirely included in @xmath , @xmath
results in a minimal separator such that @xmath lies in one of the
nucleus, which is not possible since @xmath is type III.

Hence, @xmath is empty. Let @xmath be a vertex in @xmath such that
@xmath is nonadjacent to @xmath . Since @xmath in @xmath and using the
definition of nucleus, there is a vertex @xmath in @xmath such that
@xmath is adjacent to @xmath and @xmath . Since @xmath is adjacent to
@xmath in @xmath and @xmath is nonadjacent to @xmath , thus @xmath and
therefore @xmath is adjacent to @xmath for every @xmath in @xmath . In
particular, @xmath is a neighbour of @xmath (see Figure 2.2 ).

[]

Let @xmath in @xmath adjacent to @xmath . We have the following paths:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

None of these paths goes through neighbours of the excluded vertex in
each case, and @xmath for each @xmath . Therefore, @xmath induces an AT
in @xmath and this contradicts the hypothesis of completion.

Conversely, suppose that @xmath and @xmath . It is straightforward that
@xmath and @xmath do not belong to @xmath , for @xmath and @xmath is a
clique. Moreover, if @xmath lies in @xmath , then every path joining
@xmath and @xmath goes through neighbours of @xmath in @xmath , unless
such a path is entirely contained in @xmath , including both vertices
@xmath and @xmath . Moreover, notice that if there is a path joining
@xmath and @xmath entirely contained in @xmath , then we find an @xmath
in @xmath given by @xmath , for we have a path joining @xmath and @xmath
that does not contain the edge @xmath and the paths in @xmath joining
every other pair of vertices in the @xmath , which results in a
contradiction.

Hence, if there is a path joining @xmath and @xmath that goes through
@xmath to avoid every other neighbour of @xmath , then @xmath must lie
in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath , for they do not belong to the clique
@xmath and also they do not lie in @xmath . Furthermore, @xmath since
any path joining @xmath and @xmath goes through neighbours of @xmath in
@xmath , therefore this case is not possible either.

Case (1.3) Suppose that we delete @xmath and find an induced claw. Such
a claw is induced by @xmath , @xmath and two more vertices @xmath and
@xmath .

Since @xmath and @xmath are nonadjacent in @xmath , @xmath is
nonadjacent to @xmath and @xmath , and @xmath is adjacent to @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath . If @xmath in @xmath , then we can find a subset
@xmath of @xmath such that @xmath is a @xmath -minimal separator. Since
@xmath is adjacent to @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , then @xmath is
contained in one of the nucleus of @xmath , which results in a
contradiction since @xmath is not type I.

The other possibility, is having a vertex @xmath in @xmath adjacent to
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath , and @xmath in @xmath nonadjacent to @xmath
.

By Lemma 1.2 , there is exactly one @xmath minimal separator @xmath such
that @xmath . Applying the definition of @xmath minimal separator and
since @xmath , then @xmath lies in one of the nucleus @xmath and @xmath
. Furthermore, @xmath and @xmath in @xmath , thus @xmath is contained in
the nucleus @xmath , for @xmath is adjacent to both @xmath and @xmath ,
and this contradicts the hypothesis of @xmath not being a type I edge.

Therefore, since for every subcase 1 , 2 and 3 the hypothesis of
minimality does not hold, then the edge @xmath is not type III.

Case (2 ) Suppose that the edge @xmath is type IV.

Let @xmath be a minimal separator such that @xmath for @xmath and @xmath
in @xmath . Suppose first that @xmath is not universal in @xmath , thus
there is a vertex @xmath in @xmath nonadjacent to @xmath . By Lemma 1.2
, there is exactly one @xmath -minimal separator @xmath contained in
@xmath . Suppose without loss of generality that @xmath in @xmath and
@xmath in @xmath . Since @xmath in @xmath , hence @xmath in @xmath or
@xmath in @xmath , which results in a contradiction since @xmath is type
IV. Therefore, @xmath is a universal vertex and the proof is analogous
by symmetry for @xmath .

Notice that, since @xmath and @xmath are universal vertices in @xmath ,
for each minimal separator @xmath , the sets @xmath are empty for @xmath
.

If the edge @xmath is deleted, then the resulting graph @xmath is not
chordal and has two kinds of cycles: the ones induced by the vertices
@xmath , @xmath , any vertex @xmath in @xmath and any vertex @xmath in
@xmath , and, if @xmath , the cycles induced by the vertices @xmath ,
@xmath , any vertex @xmath in a nucleus @xmath and some other vertex
@xmath in @xmath .

In the sequel, we will find a subset @xmath of fill edges such that the
proper subset @xmath of @xmath results a completion of the original
graph @xmath to a proper interval graph, and thus contradicting the
minimality of @xmath .

Case (2.1) We will suppose first that @xmath has exactly three elements
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath , and once this is proved we will see the
case @xmath .

Let @xmath be a partition of the nucleus @xmath . Thus, @xmath for some
@xmath and @xmath .

For each partition @xmath , @xmath of the vertices in the nucleus @xmath
, we denote @xmath to the edge subset @xmath . Analogously, we define
@xmath for every partition @xmath , @xmath of the vertices in the
nucleus @xmath .

Let @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in @xmath . Both vertices are adjacent
to @xmath and @xmath . When @xmath is deleted, there is a @xmath in
@xmath induced by the set @xmath . Thus, there is either a partition
@xmath , @xmath of @xmath for some @xmath , @xmath , such that @xmath is
a subset of @xmath , or there is a partition @xmath , @xmath of @xmath
for some @xmath , @xmath , such that @xmath is a subset of @xmath . This
follows, for if not, @xmath would not be not chordal since @xmath and
@xmath are universal vertices and thus, in particular, @xmath and @xmath
are adjacent to every vertex in @xmath and @xmath .

Suppose without loss of generality that there is a partition @xmath ,
@xmath of @xmath such that @xmath is a subset of @xmath and @xmath .

Furthermore, let @xmath in @xmath , @xmath in @xmath and @xmath in
@xmath . Since @xmath is a clique, the subset @xmath induces a cycle in
@xmath . Hence, the edge subset @xmath is a subset of @xmath .

Let @xmath be a partition of the nucleus @xmath as stated above. For
each partition @xmath , @xmath , we denote @xmath to the subgraph of
@xmath resulting of deleting the edge @xmath , every edge in @xmath ,
and every edge in @xmath . We denote @xmath to the subgraph of @xmath
defined analogously by a partition @xmath , @xmath of the nucleus @xmath
.

For a graphic idea of this definition see Figure 2.3 .

[]

As a consequence of the previous paragraphs, we have the following
claim.

###### Claim 2.18.

Under the previous hypothesis, there is either a partition @xmath ,
@xmath of the nucleus @xmath or a partition @xmath , @xmath of the
nucleus @xmath such that @xmath is a subgraph of @xmath or @xmath .

Suppose without loss of generality that @xmath is a partition of @xmath
such that @xmath is a subgraph of @xmath , and let @xmath be the subset
of every fill edge in @xmath that was deleted to obtain @xmath .

###### Remark 2.19.

There is no independent set of size 3 or more in @xmath .

Toward a contradiction, suppose there are independent vertices. Hence,
the only possibility is @xmath in @xmath , @xmath in @xmath and @xmath
in @xmath . Remember that @xmath and @xmath are universal vertices,
@xmath is nonadjacent to both @xmath and @xmath . Thus, since the
vertices @xmath and @xmath are complete to @xmath in the subgraph @xmath
, then @xmath and @xmath . On the other hand, let @xmath in @xmath such
that @xmath and @xmath . If there are vertices @xmath in @xmath and
@xmath in @xmath such that @xmath is nonadjacent to both @xmath and
@xmath , then we find a claw in @xmath induced by @xmath . Hence, @xmath
is complete in @xmath to either @xmath or @xmath . Since @xmath does not
contain any edges for which @xmath is an endpoint, then @xmath is
complete in @xmath to either @xmath or @xmath . Therefore, it is not
possible to find three independent vertices in @xmath . Moreover, this
also proves that there are no @xmath ’s in @xmath .

If @xmath , then @xmath and it is easy to see by the previous remark
that @xmath is chordal, @xmath -free and claw-free. Since @xmath , then
@xmath is a completion of @xmath to proper interval graphs and this
contradicts the hypothesis of @xmath being minimal.

Suppose that @xmath and @xmath . By hypothesis, there are three vertices
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath in @xmath . If @xmath , since @xmath , then
we define the subset of fill edges

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Notice that @xmath in @xmath . Let @xmath . By Remark 2.19 , it is clear
that the subgraph @xmath is @xmath -free and claw-free. Moreover, @xmath
is chordal, for it is easy to see that either @xmath , or @xmath . Since
@xmath is a proper subset of @xmath , @xmath is not a minimal completion
of @xmath and this results in a contradiction.

Analogously, if neither @xmath and @xmath , then we define the subset of
edges

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We define the subgraph @xmath , and thus the same argument used for
@xmath holds for @xmath .

Case (2.2) If @xmath , then we claim that any graph @xmath is a proper
interval graph since it suffices to see that it is chordal and @xmath
-free, thus we contradict the minimality.

Case (2.3) Finally, suppose that @xmath . If @xmath and @xmath , then we
use the same argument as if @xmath . Suppose that @xmath and @xmath .

Let @xmath be the subset of @xmath defined as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath , then we define the subset of edges @xmath as in the previous
case.

Suppose that @xmath is nonempty. Let @xmath in @xmath be a vertex such
that @xmath , for every vertex @xmath in @xmath .

If @xmath and @xmath , then we define the subgraph @xmath as in the
previous case with the subset of edges @xmath .

If instead either @xmath or @xmath , then we define the subgraph @xmath
as in the previous case with the subset of edges @xmath .

In both cases, we find a proper subgraph @xmath of @xmath such that
@xmath is a completion of @xmath to proper interval, and this results in
a contradiction of the minimality.

Therefore, if the completion is minimal, then there are no type III or
type IV edges.

∎

### Conclusiones y trabajo futuro

Los resultados más importantes en esta tesis son el Teorema
LABEL:teo:circle_split_caract en el Capítulo 4 de la Parte I, y el
Teorema 2.14 en el Capítulo 2 de la Parte II. En el Teorema
LABEL:teo:circle_split_caract , damos una caracterización por subgrafos
miniamles prohibidos para aquellos grafos split que son circle, y en el
Teorema 2.14 enunciamos y demostramos una condición necesaria para que
la completación de un grafo de intervalos a un grafo de intervalos
propios sea minimal.

#### Parte I

Los capítulos 2 y 3 están dedicados a construir las bases y herramientas
necesarias para demostrar el Teorema LABEL:teo:circle_split_caract . Más
precisamente, definimos las matrices @xmath -nested, y enunciamos y
demostramos una caracterización de estas matrices por subconfiguraciones
prohibidas que nos permite representar y caracterizar las matrices de
adyacencia de aquellos grafos split estudiados en el Capítulo 4 .
Algunos de los resultados dados en el Capítulo 3 han sido publicados en
[ 30 ] , y el resto de los resultados del capítulo están siendo
preparados en un manuscrito para ser enviados para su publicación. En el
Capítulo 4 nos referimos al problema de caracterizar los grafos círculo
al restringirlos a la clase de grafos split. A su vez, este capítulo se
divide en 5 secciones: una introducción a los resultados estructurales
conocidos para la clase de grafos círculo, y una sección para cada caso
de la prueba del Teorema LABEL:teo:circle_split_caract . Este resultado
devino en una caracterización por subgrafos inducidos prohibidos para
aquellos grafos split que además son círculo. Por su parte, este
resultado será enviado pronto para su publicación.

Dejamos algunas posibles continuaciones de este trabajo.

-    Hallamos una lista de subgrafos inducidos prohibidos para aquellos
    grafos split que además son círculo. ¿Es cierto que esta lista de
    subgrafos es además minimal?

-    Recordemos que los grafos split son aquellos grafos cordales para
    los cuales su complemento también es cordal, y que el grafo @xmath
    con @xmath que aparece representado en la Figura 2.4 es un ejemplo
    de grafo cordal que no es ni círculo ni split. Se desprende de este
    ejemplo que el Teorema LABEL:teo:circle_split_caract no vale si
    consideramos un grafo cordal en vez de un grafo split, dado que hay
    más subgrafos prohibidos que no son considerados en la lista de
    subgrafos prohibidos dada. Sin embargo, el Teorema
    LABEL:teo:circle_split_caract es de hecho un buen primer paso para
    caracterizar a los grafos círculo por subgrafos inducidos prohibidos
    dentro de la clase de los grafos cordales, el cual aún permanece
    como problema abierto.

-    Los grafos split pueden ser reconocidos en tiempo lineal. ¿Cuál es
    la complejidad de reconocimiento de los grafos círculo dentri de la
    clase de los grafos split?

-    Otra continuación posible de este trabajo podría ser estudiar la
    caracterización de aquellos grafos círculo cuyo complemento también
    es un grafo círculo.

-    Caracterizar a los grafos Helly circle por subgrafos inducidos
    prohibidos. La clase de los grafos Helly circle fue caracterizada
    por subgrafos inducidos prohibidos dentro de la clase de los grafos
    círculo [ 10 ] . Más aún, sería interesante hallar una
    descomposición análoga a la descomposición split para los grafos
    círculo, es decir, de forma tal que los grafos Helly circle sean
    cerrados bajo esta descomposición.

#### Parte II

En el Capítulo 2, damos algunas propiedades referidas al ordenamiento de
los vértices de un grafo de intervalos basado en los separadores
minimales del grafo que vale tanto para grafos de intervalos como para
grafos de intervalos propios, y definimos una partición de las aristas
de relleno de acuerdo a su relación con los separadores minimales del
grafo. En la última parte de este capítulo, dada una completación @xmath
a intervalos propios de un grafo de intervalos @xmath , enunciamos y
demostramos una condición necesaria para que @xmath sea minimal.

Con respecto al problema de la completación minimal estudiado en el
Capítulo 2 de la Parte II, tenemos las siguientes conjeturas:

###### Conjecture 2.1.

Conjeturamos que la condición dada en el Teorema 2.14 también es una
condición suficiente. Además, en ese caso la complejidad de completar de
forma minimal a intervalos propios cuando el grafo de input es de
intervalos resulta polinomial.

###### Conjecture 2.2.

La completación mínima a intervalos propios cuando el grafo de input es
de intervalos es un problema NP-completo.

Queremos continuar trabajando en estas conjeturas para obtener
resultados más fuertes para publicar en un artículo.

Siguiendo una línea similar que la que nos llevó a estudiar el problema
del Capítulo 2 , permanece abierto el problema de caracterizar y
determinar la complejidad de la completación mínima y minimal de grafos
arco-circulares a grafos arco-circulares propios.

### Final remarks and future work

The main results in this thesis are Theorem
LABEL:teo:circle_split_caract in Chapter 4 of Part I, and Theorem 2.14
in Chapter 2 of Part II. In Theorem LABEL:teo:circle_split_caract , we
give a characterization by minimal forbidden subgraphs for those split
graphs that are circle, and in Theorem 2.14 we state and prove a
necessary condition for a completion to proper interval graphs to be
minimal when the input graph is an interval graph.

#### Part I

Chapters 2 and 3 , were devoted to build the foundations and necessary
tools to prove Theorem LABEL:teo:circle_split_caract . More precisely,
we define @xmath -nested matrices and then state and prove a
characterization of these matrices by forbidden subconfigurations that
allows us to represent and characterize the adjacency matrices of those
split graphs studied in Chapter 4 . Some of the results given in Chapter
@xmath have been published in [ 30 ] , and the remaining results are
being prepared in a manuscript to be submitted for publication. In
Chapter 4 we address the problem of characterizing circle graphs when
restricted to split graphs. In turn, this chapter is divided into 5
sections: an introduction to the known structural characterizations of
circle graphs, and one section for each case of Theorem
LABEL:teo:circle_split_caract . This work resulted in a characterization
by forbidden induced subgraphs for those split graphs that are also
circle. For its part, this result will be shortly submitted for
publication.

We leave some possible continuations of this work.

-    We have found a characterization by forbidden induced subgraphs for
    those split graphs that are also circle. Are all the subgraphs given
    in Theorem LABEL:teo:circle_split_caract also minimally non-circle?

-    Recall that split graphs are those chordal graphs for which its
    complement is also a chordal graph, and that the graph @xmath with
    @xmath depicted in Figure 2.4 is a chordal graph that is neither
    circle nor a split graph. It follows from this example that Theorem
    LABEL:teo:circle_split_caract does not hold if we consider chordal
    graphs instead of split graphs, for there are more forbidden
    subgraphs that are not considered in the given list. However,
    Theorem LABEL:teo:circle_split_caract is indeed a good first step to
    characterize circle graphs by forbidden induced subgraphs within the
    class of chordal graphs, which remains as an open problem.

-    Given that split graphs can be recognized in linear-time: is it
    possible to recognize a split circle graph in linear-time?

-    Another possible continuation of this work would be studying the
    characterization of those circle graphs whose complement is also a
    circle graph.

-    Characterize Helly circle graphs by forbidden induced subgraphs.
    The class of Helly circle graphs was characterized by forbidden
    induced subgraphs within circle graphs in [ 10 ] . Moreover, it
    would be interesting to find a decomposition analogous as the split
    decomposition is for circle graphs, this is, such that Helly circle
    graphs are closed under this decomposition.

#### Part II

In Chapter @xmath , we give some properties regarding the ordering of
the vertices of an interval graph using minimal separators which hold
both for interval and proper interval graphs, and we define a partition
of the fill edges according to their relationship with the minimal
separators of the graph. In the last part of this chapter, given a
completion @xmath to proper interval graphs of an interval graph @xmath
, we state and prove a necessary condition for @xmath to be minimal.

With regard to the minimal completion problem studied in Chapter 2 of
Part II, we have the following conjectures:

###### Conjecture 2.3.

We conjecture that the only if case of Theorem 2.14 holds. Furthermore,
in that case the complexity of completing minimally to proper interval
graphs when the input is an interval graph is polynomial.

###### Conjecture 2.4.

The minimum completion to proper interval graphs when the input graph is
interval is NP-complete.

We would like to continue working on these conjectures in order to
obtain a stronger result for an article.

Following a similar line as the one that led to the problem studied in
Chapter 2 , it remains as an open problem the characterization and
complexity of minimum and minimal completions to proper circular-arc
graphs, when the input graph is circular-arc.

### Appendix

###### Lemma 2.20.

The graphs depicted in Figures 2.5 and 2.6 are non-circle graphs.

###### Proof.

Let us first consider an odd @xmath -sun with center, where @xmath are
the vertices of the clique of size @xmath , @xmath are the petals (the
vertices of degree @xmath ) and @xmath is the center (the vertex
adjacent to every vertex of the clique of size @xmath ). If @xmath , we
consider the local complement with respect to the center and we obtain
@xmath . If @xmath or @xmath , we apply local complementation with
respect to @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , obtaining @xmath and
@xmath , respectively. If instead @xmath , we first apply local
complementation with respect to @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath and
we obtain @xmath . Once we have this wheel, we apply local complement
with respect to @xmath , @xmath and @xmath and obtain @xmath induced by
@xmath . If we now consider the local complement with respect to @xmath
, @xmath and @xmath (in that order), we find @xmath , which is not a
circle graph because it is locally equivalent to @xmath . More in
general, for every @xmath we can obtain a @xmath considering the
sequence described at the beginning of the paragraph. Once we have a
wheel, if we apply local complementation by @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ,
then we obtain @xmath . We can repeat this until @xmath , in which case
either @xmath , @xmath or @xmath and we reduce this to one of the
previous cases.

Let us consider now an even @xmath -sun, where @xmath are the vertices
of the clique of size @xmath and @xmath are the petals (the vertices of
degree @xmath ), where @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and @xmath . If
@xmath , then we apply local complementation with respect to the
sequence @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , and we obtain @xmath , which is
locally equivalent to @xmath . If @xmath and we apply local
complementation to the sequence @xmath , @xmath , then we obtain @xmath
. Let us consider an even @xmath , thus @xmath for some @xmath and let
@xmath . We apply local complementation with respect to the sequence
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and we find
@xmath or @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath or by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , depending on whether @xmath or @xmath , respectively.

Let us consider @xmath for some even @xmath , where @xmath are the
vertices of the complete induced subgraph of size @xmath , @xmath are
the petals, where @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and @xmath for each
@xmath , @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and @xmath is adjacent to @xmath .
If @xmath , then we apply local complementation by the sequence @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath and we obtain @xmath induced by @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . If instead @xmath , then we
apply local complementation by the sequence @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and
we obtain @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . The
proof follows analogously from here as the one given for the the odd
@xmath -sun with center case.

Let us consider @xmath for some odd @xmath , where @xmath are the
vertices of the complete induced subgraph of size @xmath , @xmath are
the petals, where @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and @xmath for each
@xmath , @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and @xmath is adjacent to @xmath .
If @xmath , then we apply local complementation by the sequence @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath and we obtain @xmath induced by
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . If instead @xmath
, then we apply local complementation by the sequence @xmath , @xmath
and we obtain @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . The proof
follows analogously as the one given for the the even @xmath -sun case.

Let us consider a tent @xmath given by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are all
adjacent, @xmath is the universal vertex and @xmath is adjacent to
@xmath and @xmath (subindexes are modulo @xmath ). If we apply local
complementation by the sequence @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ,
then we obtain @xmath , which is locally equivalent to @xmath .

Let us consider @xmath given by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath are
the vertices in the complete induced subgraph of size @xmath and @xmath
is adjacent to @xmath , @xmath and @xmath for each @xmath . If we apply
local complementation by @xmath , then we obtain an induced subgraph
isomorphic to @xmath , which contains an induced subgraph locally
equivalent to @xmath .

Let us consider @xmath for @xmath , where @xmath are the vertices of the
complete induced subgrpah of size @xmath , @xmath are the petals, where
@xmath is adjacent to @xmath and @xmath for each @xmath and @xmath is
adjacent to @xmath . If @xmath , then we apply local complementation by
@xmath and obtain a tent @xmath . If instead we consider any even @xmath
and we apply local complementation by the sequence @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath and we obtain @xmath , thus the proof from now on is analogous as
the one given for the the odd @xmath -sun with center case.

Let us consider @xmath for some odd @xmath , where @xmath are the
vertices of the complete induced subgraph of size @xmath , @xmath are
the petals, where @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and @xmath for each
@xmath and @xmath is adjacent to @xmath . If we apply local
complementation by the sequence @xmath , @xmath and we obtain @xmath and
thus the proof follows analogously from here as the one given for the
the even @xmath -sun case.

Let us consider @xmath given by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , where @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath are the vertices in the complete induced subgraph of size @xmath
, @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and @xmath , @xmath is adjacent to @xmath
and @xmath , @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and @xmath is adjacent to
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath . If we apply local complementation by the
sequence @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , then we obtain
an induced subgraph isomorphic to @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

Finally, let us consider @xmath given by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , where
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath are the vertices in the complete induced
subgraph of size @xmath , @xmath is adjacent to @xmath and @xmath ,
@xmath is adjacent to @xmath and @xmath , @xmath is adjacent to @xmath
and @xmath and @xmath is adjacent to @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . If we
apply local complementation by the sequence @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , then we obtain an induced subgraph
isomorphic to @xmath induced by @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath .

∎
