##### Acknowledgements. \OnePageChapter I am greatly indebted to
several people for their help and support in carrying out this work; it
would not have happened the way it did without them: First, I thank my
advisor, Anna Hasenfratz; if I have learned anything about the
renormalization group it has been due, in large part, to many lessons
and discussions with Anna (and a long time spent squinting and
ruminating over the numerous RG flow diagrams she drew up on the fly).
Next, I thank Ethan Neil, not only for instructing me in the fine art of
data analysis, but also for being willing to both listen to, and to
provide valuable feedback on, many of my dubious ideas. I would also
like to thank Tom DeGrand for his advice and support, and for the many
discussions we have had over the years; I have particularly enjoyed our
mutual interest in the history of physics. Next, I would like to thank
some of my peers. I thank Dan Hackett for innumerable conversations in
which wild speculations on physics were forwarded, and for always being
willing to help me with difficult debugging problems. I also thank Will
Jay and Oscar Henriksson, with whom a wealth of interesting physics and
mathematics has been pondered. And from the heart, lastly, I thank my
family and friends for their steadfast love and support, and for having
been there for me throughout my various waverings. \ToCisShort
\LoFisShort \LoTisShort

## Chapter 1 Lattice theory

  “I listened to K. Hepp (1963 - 64) and others describe their results
  in axiomatic field theory; I didn’t understand what they said in
  detail but I got the message that I should think in position space
  rather than momentum space.” – K. Wilson, Nobel Lecture, 1982 [ 6 ]

### 1.1 Introduction

What do we mean by a lattice theory? Suppose we wish to model a physical
system of fields, which may be strongly interacting, in order to render
the problem of solving it tractable by means of, say, a computer
simulation. ¹ ¹ 1 In many cases the theory being studied is not directly
realized in nature (as far as we know), but for the sake of exposition,
here we imagine it is — lattice QCD is an example of a realistic theory.
It is a virtue of lattice theory, however, to be able to study the
physics of (most) any model one wishes in a nonperturbative way. The
system possesses various physical properties, which we characterize by
mathematical quantities. One class of properties of particular
importance is the following. We imagine that there is a principle of
locality, such that the interactions of separate chunks of the field
weaken with increasing separation. By “interaction,” we choose to mean
correlation , that the values which characterize local properties of the
system become less correlated as we look at ever more distant pairs of
chunks. We characterize this locality by what is called the correlation
length @xmath , a number with units of distance.

Now, to construct our model, we consider a natural idea. Perhaps the
problem will become tractable by approximating the continuous spacetime
background by a discrete lattice of points, restricting the physical
entities (fields) to take values only on those points (or on the links
connecting them, in the case of gauge theory), and discretizing the
interactions in some way. We call this the “lattice model” of the
physical system. The separation between the points we denote by @xmath ,
the lattice spacing. The lattice model, if it’s a good model, should be
able to predict approximations to the properties of the real system.
That is, given some set of input parameters @xmath , the model should
ultimately produce numerical quantities in rough agreement with those of
the real system, including a correlation length @xmath , which we choose
to be dimensionless and such that @xmath should approximate the physical
value @xmath .

One might initially believe that all there is to do is choose a value
for @xmath and values for @xmath , plug it into our simulation and –
voilá! – obtain a description of the system in rough agreement with the
real system: @xmath . But @xmath is a function of the input parameters,
so picking random values for @xmath and @xmath will not generally yield
the correct @xmath ; they only match for certain combinations of @xmath
and @xmath . Furthermore, we know we’ll probably need to pick small
values of @xmath , that is, small with respect to @xmath , to approach
the true values, since we expect that modeling a field theory by only a
few lattice sites will generally produce terrible approximations (and of
course, the number of sites we simulate with must be finite). Suppose,
then, that we choose a value for @xmath , and then scan the space of
@xmath until @xmath is achieved with some desired degree of accuracy.
That’s perfectly fine. But notice that this statement is equivalent to
the following one. For any choice of @xmath , and given the empirical
value of @xmath , a value of @xmath follows: @xmath . We say that the
pair @xmath sets the scale of the simulation. This means we can
construct our model in terms of entirely dimensionless quantities,
measure @xmath , and determine @xmath by comparison with @xmath . This
latter approach is far more useful in practice. One reason is that,
ultimately, we expect the model to better approximate the physics as
@xmath becomes smaller and smaller, but simulations with small parameter
values can be less efficient than ones with @xmath parameters,
generally, and simulation with @xmath in all functions is certainly a
non-starter. Thus in our simulations, we define the fields and any other
quantities as dimensionless by scaling out the (to be determined)
spacing @xmath . Once we have determined @xmath , we can measure any
observable we wish and multiply it by appropriate powers of @xmath to
obtain dimensionful predictions which approximate the physical system’s
properties, to a precision determined by @xmath .

In many cases the real system is continuous, so we are often interested
in obtaining a limit @xmath , or at least @xmath so small that there is
no discernible difference between what we observe in experiment and what
we simulate. But this must therefore correspond to a particular limit
@xmath of the model parameters where @xmath . ² ² 2 Because there is
usually more than one parameter, there are usually many points in the
space of parameters that constitute a continuum limit, and one therefore
speaks of the critical surface in parameter space, as they often form a
submanifold. If such a limit exists, we call it the continuum limit of
the lattice theory. If there does not exist any such limit (i.e. point
in the space of @xmath parameters), then the lattice theory has no
continuum limit, and therefore cannot describe any physics that is known
to be continuous. In many cases, however, the system being simulated is
actually discrete, for example in condensed matter systems like
ferromagnets. In such cases, the existence of a continuum limit is
nevertheless an essential aspect in the explanation of its critical
properties, as we will come to understand throughout this chapter. It is
even possible that the quantum description of gravity will have a
fundamental discreteness about it, but whatever it is, it must possess a
nontrivial long-distance limit in which it reproduces General
Relativity; the existence of such a limit is related to the existence of
a continuum limit. But we shall not in this thesis concern ourselves
with theories of gravity.

We have determined that the spacing @xmath , the physical value @xmath ,
and the lattice parameters @xmath , are intimately related. The manner
in which they are related is therefore of paramount importance in
lattice theory. Their relation is, for historical reasons, called the
renormalization group . Often the relation is characterized by an
inversion of sorts, giving parameters as functions of the spacing:
@xmath . If the model has a continuum limit, and if this limit occurs
for small values @xmath , then we may use perturbation theory to study
the approach to the continuum. In the event that the limit occurs for
@xmath , the theory is called asymptotically free . The enterprise of
lattice QCD is based on the assumption of asymptotic freedom: @xmath as
@xmath . But continuum limits need not always occur for small @xmath .
When @xmath is large, a nonperturbative means of determining the
continuum limit is necessary. Assuming the physical @xmath is always
finite, then the continuum limit is characterized by the phenomenon of
@xmath . Thus, by simulating a lattice model at many @xmath values until
@xmath is observed to get ever larger in some region of parameter space,
one may nonperturbatively approaching continuum limits, in principle.
The problem in practice with this approach is that such an array of
simulations can become extremely costly computationally, so other
methods must be devised, not to mention the inherent limitation of
working in a finite volume, that @xmath where @xmath is the number of
lattice sites along each direction. One such method is based on the
notion of finite-size scaling , and we will explicitly see it in action
when we use the Binder cumulant to locate the continuum limit of a
particular scalar model.

### 1.2 Discretization and lattice models

We now give a description of how one typically constructs a lattice
theory. We mostly follow the presentation of Montvay and Münster [ 7 ] ,
except specifying to @xmath rather than 4 in the discussion of
renormalized quantities. As such, the material in this subsection is
largely just review, and many demonstrations are omitted.

#### 1.2.1 Lattice actions

In this work we will often focus on the infamous scalar field theory in
dimension @xmath with quartic interaction, denoted @xmath , and
determined by the continuum action

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.2.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

To discretize the theory, we define a square lattice @xmath where @xmath
is the lattice spacing, @xmath denotes the number of sites in each
direction, and @xmath is the integers mod @xmath . Sites of the lattice
with dimension of distance are written as @xmath for @xmath . The
dimensionful lattice field will be denoted @xmath . We also typically
will assume periodic boundary conditions for the fields, @xmath , for
@xmath the unit vector in the @xmath direction, @xmath . The
corresponding lattice action is obtained by choosing a discretization of
the spatial derivatives. The simplest choice is the forward-difference
operator @xmath , which yields the action

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.2.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This is not the only choice of discretization, however. Intuitively, any
terms differing from the continuum action by @xmath are valid lattice
actions, as they would then imply the same continuum limit. ³ ³ 3 A more
precise statement is that any action in the same universality class
constitutes a valid discretization. What is needed is that the
long-distance properties of both the continuum action and the lattice
discretization are identical. It will even become apparent that adding
higher-order terms like @xmath are valid as well!

The lattice action above is not yet dimensionless, as it depends
explicitly on the spacing @xmath , and as such is not convenient for
simulations. One option is to scale @xmath out of all quantities in the
action and simulate with that. Another option that is most popular is to
instead define the simulation action by ⁴ ⁴ 4 Most of the time we will
not bother with dimless site index labels @xmath for @xmath , where
@xmath , using @xmath as the argument for both dimless and dimful
fields. We also write @xmath to mean @xmath , where @xmath is a unit
vector along the @xmath direction.

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.2.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which is equivalent to the dimensionful lattice action by the relations

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.2.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the canonical mass dimension of the (position space)
field @xmath . The first term in the simulation action is of the form of
a nearest-neighbor interaction, the same kind which defines the Ising
model. The action furthermore possesses a @xmath symmetry @xmath . In
the limit @xmath , the partition function becomes that of the Ising
model, since for larger @xmath values, the contribution of
configurations with @xmath becomes vanishingly small, thereby
constraining the field to have unit size. Alternatively, one may go the
opposite direction, and starting from an Ising model derive a scalar
field theory by appropriately changing variables in the partition
function, see [ 3 ] . It turns out that they are related in an even more
general way, that of universality , which we will describe when we get
to RG.

For perturbative calculations, it is convenient to work in momentum
space. The continuum action in momentum space is obtained by Fourier
transformation and is given by

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (1.2.5)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

A continuum action needs to be regularized, for example, with a momentum
cutoff @xmath or by continuing @xmath onto the complex plane. This
becomes apparent if one does perturbation theory without a regulator,
where one encounters singular loop integrals (see eq. ( 1.2.39 )), but
it should be noted that such singularities occur even for free theories
in observables at zero distance. Although we will focus on lattice
regularization and sharp cutoffs in the rest of this chapter, we will
work with smooth cutoffs in the continuum in chapters 3 and 4. The
dimful ⁵ ⁵ 5 “Dimensionful” and “dimensionless” are sometimes shortened
to “dimful” and “dimless” in this work. lattice action in momentum space
is given by

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (1.2.6)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the lattice volume, @xmath is the Brillouin zone, @xmath
is the (dimless) Kronecker delta, and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.2.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

is the often-encountered lattice momentum function.

#### 1.2.2 Observables

All the observable quantities predicted by a quantum field theory have
expressions as expectation values of functions of the fundamental field.
Furthermore, these are the quantities directly measured in lattice
simulations.

The observables of the theory are the expectation values

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.2.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

is the partition function. From the statistical physics perspective, the
factor @xmath is a Boltzmann weight over the configuration space of
@xmath , and @xmath is the factor which normalizes the probability
distribution. The free energy of the system with respect to that of the
corresponding free theory is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.2.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the free theory partition function. The expression on
the r.h.s. is equal to a sum over all connected vacuum diagrams, a
result known as the linked cluster theorem [ 3 , 8 ] . By separating the
quadratic (gaussian) part of the action from the interaction @xmath ,
the observables admit a perturbative representation

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath denotes expectations of the free theory. The role of the
leading factor of @xmath is to divide out all the vacuum bubbles. The
observables can be considered as generated by a certain functional, the
sourced partition function

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where ⁶ ⁶ 6 This notation is sometimes used in the literature to reduce
clutter. It will be generalized to a functional tensor notation in
chapter 4.

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

On a lattice, the integral would be replaced by a summation. The @xmath
-point functions are given in terms of @xmath by ⁷ ⁷ 7 @xmath is used
rather than @xmath because the latter would lead to great confusion once
@xmath factors are introduced.

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Such observables do not typically decay as the separations @xmath , but
the connected observables do decay (under the assumptions of the cluster
decomposition principle [ 8 ] ):

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the generator of connected @xmath -point functions is defined by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The normalization by the free partition function guarantees that @xmath
.

The last generating functional we consider, for now, is the 1PI
generator @xmath defined as the Legendre transform of @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the vacuum expectation value (“vev”) of the field from
the sourced action. Notice that we may write @xmath as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

to compute

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We can interpret this equation as providing a quantum equation of
evolution of the vev @xmath , determined by the “quantum effective
action” @xmath . The derivatives of @xmath are the vertex functions
@xmath , which play a central role in renormalization theory. By
differentiating the previous equation by @xmath and using the chain
rule, we find

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.19)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the product @xmath makes sense as matrix multiplication. @xmath
are the components of the identity matrix in the position basis. It
follows that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.20)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The relation between the @xmath and @xmath follow from repeated
differentiation of this formula with respect to @xmath . The relation of
higher @xmath -point functions can be deduced by repeated
differentiation of eq. ( 1.2.19 ).

Denoting by @xmath the free propagator of the theory, @xmath has a
series of the form

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.21)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the self-energy matrix. Hence,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.22)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which is an essential quantity in any field theory. In momentum space,
the propagator is diagonal by translation invariance, meaning that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.23)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the notation @xmath is convenient for the non-delta part. ⁸ ⁸ 8
Similarly, in position space the components of the 2-point function are
often written as @xmath . An important observable in a @xmath theory is
the 4-point vertex function

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.24)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which determines the @xmath scattering amplitudes of particles, and
therefore characterizes the strength of the interaction of the particles
in the theory. It is proportional to a momentum-conserving delta
function.

#### 1.2.3 Renormalized couplings

When one carries out the computation of observables determined by eq. (
1.2.10 ), one often encounters cutoff sensitivity : subleading orders in
the perturbative series generally contain terms proportional to powers
of @xmath or @xmath for some mass scale @xmath , which diverge as @xmath
. Historically, this led to the development of the theory of
renormalization , which had roots in the first work on field theory by
the founders of quantum mechanics in the 1930’s, and which was given a
firm foundation by F. Dyson around 1950 [ 9 , 10 ] . Under
renormalization, one systematically “eliminates” the sensitivity to the
cutoff by defining renormalized parameters and reexpressing the
perturbation series in terms of these parameters. If, by defining a
finite number of such renormalized parameters, the resulting series has
no cutoff sensitivity, meaning that all @xmath -dependence is order
@xmath , then the theory is called perturbatively renormalizable . It
was thought for many years, up until the mid 1970’s, that quantum field
theories needed to be renormalizable in order to be serious candidates
for the description of real physics. The advent of Wilsonian RG and the
notion of effective field theory were to eventually undermine such
philosophies [ 11 , 12 ] . Nevertheless, renormalization is still
important in field theory: it is the procedure by which the parameters
used to define a theory are related to experimentally determined
parameters, which is a necessary step in any physical science.

Continuum conventions typically take the coefficient of @xmath in @xmath
to be 1, a procedure called wave function renormalization . Since the
measured propagator does not typically satisfy this condition, one
defines the @xmath factor of @xmath by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.25)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and then defines the renormalized field @xmath , so that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.26)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The renormalized connected functions and 1PI functions then satisfy

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.27)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where a 0-subscript has been put on the bare @xmath -point functions to
further distinguish them from renormalized @xmath -point functions.
Thus, the only difference in the values of these functions is a
proportionality factor by some power of @xmath .

In a euclidean theory, the correlation length @xmath is determined by
the inverse of the renormalized mass (the smallest eigenenergy above
zero in the spectrum of the theory), which is defined by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.28)
  -- -------- -- ----------

It is a physical quantity, as it sets the rate of exponential decay of
correlations among distant parts of the system. Another observable of
interest is the dimful renormalized coupling

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.29)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which characterizes the strength of the interactions between particles,
as mentioned in the last subsection. Both of the renormalized couplings
are long-distance quantities, since they are defined at zero momentum.
These couplings can be thought of as the observable counterparts to the
bare couplings @xmath , which are the input parameters of the lattice
model, since they agree at leading order in perturbation theory, as we
will soon observe.

The renormalized couplings of the theory are totally determined by the
bare couplings and the cutoff. As such, we can write them as functions
thereof:

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.2.30)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the 4-tuple of momenta. In the next section, we will
describe RG in somewhat general terms, but we shall follow along with
the example of @xmath . To that end, let us find expressions for the
renormalized couplings above.

In perturbation theory, observables are determined from eq. ( 1.2.10 )
with the lattice action @xmath and applying Wick’s theorem for gaussian
integrals. The bare connected 2-point function is found to be

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.31)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the free propagator is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.32)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The inverse of @xmath gives us @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.33)
  -- -------- -- ----------

By expanding the lattice momenta @xmath in @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.34)
  -- -------- -- ----------

we see that there is no change to the @xmath coefficient at 1-loop
order, which means that @xmath . The renormalized mass, however, has a
first order contribution like

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.35)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The connected 4-point function at 1-loop order is

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (1.2.36)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

Dividing by four factors of @xmath and expanding the denominator in
@xmath cancels the second term above, which is not 1PI. One then obtains
the 1PI function, and evaluation at zero external momenta then yields
(minus) the renormalized coupling, or

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.37)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We remark that corresponding to the dimful equations above are the
dimless relations

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.2.38)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

obtained by letting @xmath give dimension to all quantities, e.g. @xmath
. Up to factors of @xmath coming from @xmath , these couplings are
directly measured in lattice simulations. Notice that the dimless
renormalized couplings are therefore determined solely by the choice of
dimless simulation parameters (and the lattice size @xmath ).

The evaluation of lattice loop integrals is generally more difficult
than those of the continuum, and one resorts to expansion in @xmath and
numerical integrations for exact results, under the assumption that
small @xmath indeed is the interesting limit. The @xmath expansions are
typically asymptotic series, since the coefficients of the would-be
Taylor expansion are often singular at some order.

To make our lives easier, we evaluate these integrals in the naive
continuum limit, where deviations from the continuum result due to the
lattice arise from the expansion of @xmath in @xmath . The renormalized
mass with a sharp cutoff @xmath evaluates to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.39)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is a common factor arising in loop integrals; @xmath is the
@xmath -sphere surface area. For @xmath , @xmath . In perturbation
theory, one is ultimately interested in replacing @xmath by @xmath in
the series of other observables, so we expand the expression in powers
of @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.40)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Multiplying by @xmath leads to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.41)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The continuum limit @xmath of the lattice model occurs for @xmath with
@xmath . We see that the limit is equivalent to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.42)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In other words, we can approach the continuum limit of the model by
fixing @xmath and tuning @xmath to some particular value, which to first
order in perturbation theory is given as above. ⁹ ⁹ 9 Since a
perturbative estimate may not always be reliable, this way of choosing
simulation parameters is not taken, in practice.

The dimful renormalized coupling is similarly given by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.43)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which (asymptotically) expands to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.44)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and multiplying by @xmath we find

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.2.45)
  -- -------- -- ----------

I remark that a more useful dimensionless coupling to define is @xmath ,
as we will see at the end of the following section.

Once the series representation of the renormalized couplings has been
obtained, one can invert them to obtain the bare couplings as series in
renormalized ones. This allows all observables to be reexpressed in
terms of renormalized parameters. When such a reexpression leads to a
total elimination of cutoff-sensitivity, a theory is called
renormalizable , as mentioned before. In @xmath theory, there are in
fact only two primitive diagrams that are cutoff-sensitive, which are
renormalized by the mass @xmath and the wave function @xmath -factor.
This scenario is an instance of super-renormalizability . It will turn
out, however, that in order to talk about the infrared properties of
@xmath , it is nevertheless important to define the renormalized
coupling @xmath and to express the perturbation series in terms of
@xmath , or @xmath .

### 1.3 Perturbative renormalization group

The term “renormalization group” was first used in 1953 by Stueckelberg
and Petermann [ 13 ] to describe the transformations which relate
renormalized couplings defined at various scales in QED4. The next year,
Gell-Mann and Low introduced their analysis of the scale-dependent
coupling of QED [ 14 ] , which introduced the concept of the beta
function . The method of Gell-Mann and Low may be termed perturbative
renormalization group , as it concerns itself with equations derivable
only in a perturbative context. Perturbative RG was brought to its final
form by Callan [ 15 ] and Symanzik [ 16 ] in 1970, right as Wilson was
starting to put his theory of RG together. Wilson’s philosophy was
inherently nonperturbative, even though many of its instances involved
perturbation theory. On the lattice, nonetheless, it is useful to begin
with an understanding of perturbative RG, as it applies well in many
theories, including QCD.

By comparing the measured value of @xmath with the empirical correlation
length, we can determine the lattice spacing by @xmath , which again is
an example of setting the scale. At fixed empirical scale @xmath , a
change in the cutoff @xmath therefore amounts to a change in @xmath ,
which is itself a function of @xmath . Hence, a change in the cutoff is
tantamount to a change in the bare parameters; this relationship is
called the bare renormalization group , which we describe below.
Alternatively, we can consider the bare parameters to be fixed, and look
at the change in renormalized observables as the renormalized mass
@xmath is changed. This second perspective implies the Callan-Symanzik
equations. By studying these two faces of RG, we may form a picture of
the behavior of a theory in the space of bare or renormalized
parameters.

#### 1.3.1 Bare RG equations

In any lattice observable, we can in principle replace bare parameter
dependence by renormalized parameter dependence, by using the equations
which define them:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.3.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Comparison with the correlation length determines the spacing @xmath ,
and we can then define

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.3.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is minus the mass dimension of @xmath . If the theory is
perturbatively renormalizable , then these functions have the nontrivial
property of having a limit as @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.3.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is some positive integer determined perturbatively.
Renormalizability then implies (at fixed @xmath )

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.3.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The terms on the r.h.s. are called scaling violations . Since the
various @xmath -point functions above are numerically equal, @xmath , we
can write the differential renormalizability statement in terms of the
@xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.3.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the @xmath -dependence is implicit in @xmath ; we could therefore
write the arguments of @xmath as @xmath . Such functions describe the
family of bare parameters which all yield the same physics. It will be
convenient to replace @xmath by @xmath , which can be done in principle
by solving the equation defining @xmath for @xmath , to obtain functions
@xmath , yielding

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.3.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Writing @xmath , and then using the chain rule, while recalling that
@xmath , we find the bare RG equations

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.3.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the lattice beta function and anomalous field dimension are
defined by ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 The sign is chosen so that decreasing @xmath is
equivalent to increasing @xmath in the renormalized RG equations.

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.3.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The total derivatives here become partials when the bare parameters are
expressed in terms of @xmath via @xmath . A further consequence of
perturbative renormalizability is that @xmath is a pure function of
@xmath , up to scaling violations. If this function is known, the
equation may be integrated to obtain @xmath . Knowledge of the beta
function is essential to understanding the approach to the continuum
limit of a lattice theory, as we will soon see.

#### 1.3.2 Callan-Symanzik equations

A complimentary scenario is to consider the bare coupling @xmath as a
fixed parameter and to vary @xmath via @xmath . Varying @xmath is
equivalent to varying @xmath at fixed @xmath in a lattice simulation.
From the relation

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.3.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

the total derivative of the l.h.s. with respect to @xmath is

  -- -- -- ----------
           (1.3.10)
  -- -- -- ----------

while that of the r.h.s. is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.3.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.3.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Writing everything in terms of @xmath , we find the Callan-Symanzik
equations of @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.3.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The r.h.s. is an observable which involves an insertion of the
renormalized @xmath operator. A more thorough analysis of
renormalizability must also include such insertions, but here we just
report that the correlations of observables with arbitrary numbers of
insertions of @xmath are also perturbatively renormalizable in @xmath
theories [ 8 ] . ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 The CS equation in this form may look
different from the forms we’ve grown used to due to the presence of the
@xmath term. But this is a result of having used @xmath as the
subtraction scale in the renormalization conditions, rather than some
scale @xmath . See [ 8 ] for details.

To sum up the previous two subsections, we have seen that the existence
of a perturbatively renormalizable theory implies certain RG equations
which describe the variation of observables, whether they’re bare or
renormalized ones, as the dimless correlation length is varied via
@xmath . Being first order PDE’s, they may be solved by the method of
characteristics in the limit that we ignore scaling violations. These
solutions constitute the scaling forms of the observables in the
continuum limit, an observation of far-reaching explanatory power in
both field theory and critical phenomena.

#### 1.3.3 Continuum limits

For lattice simulations, the primary utility of beta functions is that
they tell us how to simulate closer to the continuum limit, as we now
describe. A general renormalized beta function will have the
perturbative form

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.3.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The sign of the beta function determines whether @xmath decreases or
increases as the cutoff is varied at fixed @xmath . As the continuum
limit @xmath is approached, we see that the behavior of @xmath is
determined by the zeros @xmath of @xmath . Such values are called fixed
points of the theory. Notice from the perturbative expression above that
@xmath is always a fixed point, at least when the expansion above is
valid. This is called the gaussian fixed point (GFP). If @xmath is
positive near the GFP, then as @xmath , the renormalized coupling
approaches zero, and we say the theory is trivial . In general, if the
slope near a fixed point @xmath is positive, then it attracts the
renormalized coupling in the continuum limit, and we call such a fixed
point an infrared fixed point (IRFP). If the slope is negative, on the
other hand, then @xmath repels away from @xmath in the continuum limit.
These are called ultraviolet fixed points (UVFP).

If we consider these cases from the bare RG perspective (where @xmath is
held fixed), then the bare coupling @xmath behaves in the “opposite”
way. This matches our intuition that @xmath , as a UV quantity, should
behave in an “opposite” way as @xmath , an IR quantity. Qualitatively,
an IRFP repels @xmath , whereas a UVFP attracts it, in the continuum
limit. If a renormalized beta function is monotonic and vanishes at
@xmath , then the behavior of the theory is relatively simple. If
positive, one would approach a trivial theory @xmath in the continuum,
and if negative, @xmath grows in the continuum limit.

As a concrete example, we consider @xmath , which has a nontrivial RG
diagram, exhibiting both kinds of fixed points. For the parallel
discussion of @xmath , see Montvay and Münster sections 1.7 and 2.4. To
compute the renormalized beta function, begin with the perturbative
expression for the renormalized coupling, eq. ( 1.2.45 ):

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.3.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

To study the variation as the continuum limit is approached, we replace
@xmath with @xmath in eq. ( 1.3.15 ), valid at this order in
perturbation theory. Since the renormalized coupling is a long-distance
quantity, it is natural to give @xmath dimension with the renormalized
mass, defining the dimensionless coupling by [ 17 , 8 ]

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.3.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The reason for this definition is also suggested in perturbation theory,
where this turns out to be the natural renormalized expansion parameter.
In three dimensions, some power-counting and graph theory imply that the
mass dimension of a Feynman diagram contributing to an @xmath -point
vertex function at order @xmath in @xmath will be

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.3.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This tells us two important facts. First, the asymptotic dependence on
the UV cutoff @xmath decreases with increasing external points ( @xmath
) and with increasing order in perturbation theory ( @xmath ). In fact,
there are only 2 primitive diagrams in the theory which diverge as
@xmath , the snail and the sunset diagrams that appear in @xmath ; this
fact makes @xmath an example of a superrenormalizable theory. The second
fact we learn from @xmath is that, if we factor out @xmath from every
loop integral and change momentum variables @xmath , then upper limits
of integrals become @xmath , and the dimensionless integral gets
multiplied by a factor of @xmath . Since the first two terms, @xmath ,
are independent of @xmath , they factor out of the entire perturbation
series. Meanwhile, the remaining expansion is in powers of @xmath . Thus
the generic observables will have a series that looks schematically like

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.3.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and all the coefficients @xmath are finite as @xmath except the snail
and sunset diagrams. Replacing the bare parameters by their renormalized
counterparts yields series in @xmath , apart from the over-all
multiplication by @xmath .

To compute the renormalized beta function @xmath , we compute from eq. (
1.3.16 )

  -- -- -- ----------
           (1.3.19)
  -- -- -- ----------

Solving for @xmath in terms of @xmath then yields

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.3.20)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The terms proportional to @xmath vanish in the continuum limit (they are
an example of scaling violations). To compute the bare beta function, we
need the derivative of @xmath at fixed @xmath . Using eq. ( 1.3.16 )
again, but being mindful of the @xmath part of the 1-loop term, and
using the chain rule, we compute

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.3.21)
  -- -------- -- ----------

From @xmath , we learn that an IRFP exists around @xmath , ¹² ¹² 12 This
parameter does not seem very small. However, its every occurrence in the
perturbation series above comes with a factor of @xmath , so the
effective expansion parameter is in fact @xmath , which is small [ 17 ]
. while the gaussian fixed point is a UVFP. Thus, at fixed bare
coupling, @xmath tends to @xmath in the continuum limit, whereas at
fixed @xmath , @xmath tends to zero in the continuum. The fact that
@xmath as one approaches the continuum, no matter what @xmath one begins
with, is an example of universality at the IRFP. Moreover, all critical
quantities, like exponents and amplitude ratios, are expressible as
functions of @xmath , and therefore are also universal [ 8 ] . In 4
dimensions, the parallel analysis leads one to the conclusion that
@xmath in the continuum limit, a result that has found further evidence
from much more systematic analytic calculations [ 18 , 19 , 20 , 21 , 22
] as well as lattice simulations [ 23 , 24 , 25 ] . This is an example
of triviality in a quantum field theory.

This has all been perturbative, and confined to a few couplings. One may
rightly wonder whether this picture holds nonperturbatively, or when
there are many couplings. Furthermore, the lingering question about how
this plays out for nonrenormalizable theories suggests itself: how
should we understand situations where operators are present in the
action for which perturbative renormalizability fails? In a sense, the
key to a deeper understanding of RG rests in finding an answer to these
questions. The insight of Wilson which led to an answer was to formulate
RG in an entirely nonperturbative way with the help of the concept of
block spins and theory space. It was also through his formulation that
the application of the Callan-Symanzik equations to critical phenomena
became apparent.

### 1.4 Block-spin RG

In the 1950’s and 60’s it became clear that the traditional approach to
critical phenomena, namely, Landau mean field theory [ 26 ] , was
inadequate to describe the long-established experimental fact of
nongaussian scaling of thermodynamic properties in statistical systems
near their critical points [ 6 , 27 ] . Progress was made with the
pursuit of high-temperature series expansions by Domb, Fisher, and
others. In 1965, Widom [ 28 ] proposed a scaling hypothesis for the
thermodynamic free energy which was able to reproduce some of the
observed scaling laws. But these hypotheses lacked any deep theoretical
basis. The concept of “block-spins” emerged in the late 60’s as a
promising avenue to theoretically understand such scaling, beginning
with a suggestion by Buckingham [ 27 ] , and separately (though more
fully) by Kadanoff in 1966 [ 29 ] . Kadanoff’s work then formed the
basis of Wilson’s theory of RG, which he introduced in 1971 [ 30 , 31 ,
32 ] , and which finally provided a compelling theoretical explanation
for the aforementioned critical properties. ¹³ ¹³ 13 The line of
progress hitherto described is, of course, a narrow view of a much
broader field of contributions and research in the late 60’s. As Wilson
notes in his Nobel lecture [ 6 ] , independent work on the relationship
between field theory and critical phenomena was carried out during the
same time period by Gribov, Migdal, Symanzik, Polyakov, Dyson, and
others. It should be noted that some of these parallel developments have
recently been exploited in the conformal bootstrap program [ 33 ] with
striking success. The numerical implementation of block-spin RG was
later carried out in the 1980’s by Swendsen, Wilson, and others, in a
framework known as Monte Carlo Renormalization Group (MCRG) [ 34 , 35 ]
. MCRG has since become a commonplace tool in the study of RG properties
of lattice systems.

#### 1.4.1 Block-spin transformations

Starting with a lattice of spins @xmath , a new set of blocked spins
@xmath is defined by local averages of the old ones,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.4.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a vector pointing to each neighbor of @xmath within a
distance @xmath , which is called the “scale factor,” and @xmath is
called the scaling dimension of @xmath , which we will discuss soon. The
index @xmath refers to the site of a blocked lattice superimposed on the
original one, located at some chosen site within the block of original
sites. Unless the initial system had an infinite volume, the blocked
spins must live on a smaller lattice. The blocking operator @xmath
defined by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.4.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

will be useful to keep in mind later in this work.

The blocking transformation on the fields induces a transformation of
the action on the level of the partition function by introducing a delta
function which sets new spins equal to blocked spins,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.4.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The last equality defines the blocked action. It generally does not
equal the original action; it will contain many terms which were not
present before, and the terms that were already present will have
different values of their couplings. Kadanoff’s approach was limited by
not considering these extra terms. For example, if @xmath had only a
nearest neighbor interaction

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.4.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

then the new action will have a different value @xmath as well as new
terms involving next-nearest neighbors, next-next-nearest neighbors,
etc., and even higher-powered interactions like ¹⁴ ¹⁴ 14 Technically, if
@xmath takes values in all of @xmath , then the higher order terms in
@xmath are only generated when there are interacting terms, like @xmath
or @xmath , in the initial action. If the spins are constrained to have
unit size, @xmath , as in the Ising model, then the nearest neighbor
term is sufficient to generate such higher order interactions. But the
blocking transformation is different in the Ising model; one must
project the blocked spin back to unit norm.

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.4.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

for every @xmath . In fact, it will typically contain all possible terms
consistent with the symmetries of the system. We will explicitly compute
a few such terms in chapter 3 when discussing functional RG. Part of
Wilson’s breakthrough was to recognize the relative importance of all
these extra terms in the effective action.

If the correlation length of the system being described is @xmath , then
the original lattice spacing is @xmath , with @xmath calculated in the
original theory. By definition, the blocked lattice has a spacing @xmath
, so the dimless correlation length of the blocked theory must be @xmath
. Thus the blocked theory will generally have a reduced dimless
correlation length, which means that fewer degrees of freedom are
strongly correlated across the lattice. The philosophy of both Kadanoff
and Wilson was that the blocking transformation therefore reduces the
complexity of many-body systems by systematically reducing the number of
degrees of freedom being taken into account, without changing the
physics [ 5 ] (because the partition function is invariant), a
philosophy which could be called the pragmatic view of RG. Because
critical phenomena are characterized by large correlation lengths,
block-spin RG proves to be a useful tool.

The blocking transformation on the spins induces a transformation of the
Boltzmann factor, or equivalently the action, as noted above. Thus, we
can regard it as a map on the space of actions, parameterized by the
number @xmath of iterations of the transformation determined by @xmath ,
which produces a sequence, or flow , ¹⁵ ¹⁵ 15 “Flow” may be misleading
here, since the transformations are discrete. Continuous RG
transformations will be described in the next three chapters. on action
space,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.4.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

If @xmath had couplings @xmath , then the couplings in @xmath are
denoted @xmath . Now, as @xmath , one eventually (for generic actions)
approaches @xmath , namely, a trivially decoupled lattice system. In the
vicinity of @xmath , the action no longer changes much after each
iteration. Actions which are exactly invariant under RG transformations
are called fixed points , denoted @xmath . From the relation @xmath , we
observe that the only actions which can be fixed points must have either
@xmath or @xmath . The former type are called zero-correlation length
fixed points while the latter are called critical fixed points, since
they are the ones of use in the account of critical phenomena.
Zero-correlation length fixed points act as sinks for RG trajectories,
since any initial theory with @xmath will eventually run into it, at
least in the generic case where there are no limit cycles or other
exotic behaviors. From @xmath , we also see that the critical fixed
points correspond to zero lattice spacing systems (if @xmath ), i.e. the
continuum limit, consistent with the analysis of perturbative RG in the
previous section.

#### 1.4.2 Correlator scaling laws

One of the striking experimental discoveries of modern physics is that
the correlation functions of statistical systems at criticality can
exhibit nontrivial power law behavior, rather than a (typical)
exponential decay, which is a manifestation of the long-distance
correlations of critical systems. For spin systems, the critical
spin-spin correlation function is observed to behave like ¹⁶ ¹⁶ 16 The
nontrivial part of the correlator may be understood intuitively as an
expression of scale-dependence of the interaction by writing @xmath ,
with @xmath , which modifies the free-field behavior [ 27 ] .

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.4.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the constant @xmath has mass dimension @xmath , since the
dimension of the spins is @xmath . The exponent @xmath is equal to zero
in mean field theory [ 3 ] . The empirical fact that @xmath for many
systems constituted a major theoretical problem in the 60’s. With the
advent of RG, however, it finally found an explanation [ 29 , 30 , 36 ]
.

Let us compute @xmath in the blocked theory with action @xmath , without
assuming any kind of @xmath -dependence. Since @xmath , the
dimensionless distance @xmath between blocked spins corresponds to a
distance @xmath between original spins,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.4.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

At large distances one expects the approximation @xmath to get better
and better, which leads to the asymptotic relation

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.4.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Now, if the action @xmath had couplings @xmath , then the blocked action
typically has different ones @xmath , but the function of these
couplings @xmath is the same in either case (assuming we include all
possible couplings in the set @xmath ), so

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.4.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This relation holds for any pair of successive blocking steps. Let us
now assume that we are in the vicinity of a fixed point of the RG
transformation, meaning that @xmath , implying

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.4.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

But this means @xmath is homogeneous of degree @xmath . Thus, at large
distances,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.4.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which produces the empirical result when @xmath . @xmath is the
canonical mass dimension of the field @xmath in position space, so
@xmath is called the anomalous dimension of @xmath . This anomalous
dimension coincides with the one defined in the previous section in the
context of field theory. ¹⁷ ¹⁷ 17 This may not be obvious. The bare RG
equations of the @xmath imply a nontrivial scaling behavior in @xmath as
@xmath that is power law-like with exponent @xmath , which for @xmath
leads to the identification of @xmath .

We remark that short-distance observables of the original theory are not
quite invariant under a blocking transformation, in the following sense.
The nearest-neighbor observable

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.4.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

with @xmath , has no direct counterpart in the blocked theory: those
neighbors have been integrated out; the nearest-neighbor on the blocked
lattice relates spins that are “farther apart.” By contrast, the
correlator analysis above implied that @xmath at large distances is
invariant, up to a proportionality with the previous blocking step. This
is why one says that RG transformations typically only preserve
long-distance observables. We note that if the RG transformation could
be made to be continuous, then one could meaningfully discuss
infinitesimal variations of the short-distance observables, at least in
the continuum. We will discuss this in chapter 4.

#### 1.4.3 Fixed points

For ease of notation let @xmath . The blocked couplings may be expressed
as functions of the previous ones:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.4.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Near a fixed-point, assuming analyticity of @xmath , we may linearize
the transformation,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.4.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is called the RG “stability matrix,” with components

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.4.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Let @xmath be the left-eigenvectors of @xmath , i.e.

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.4.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and define the scaling variables @xmath by @xmath , so that the
linearized transformation eq. ( 1.4.15 ) implies

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.4.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath depends on @xmath . Although the various couplings @xmath
will mix under the RG transformation, the scaling variables do not. A
practical requirement of block-spin transformations is the composition
property @xmath , which then implies that the eigenvalues satisfy @xmath
, which is solved for @xmath , for some @xmath -independent constants
@xmath [ 3 ] . The @xmath are referred to as the RG eigenvalues of the
fixed point @xmath .

We can write an arbitrary action as a scalar product of couplings @xmath
with action operators @xmath as @xmath . Denoting the fixed point action
by @xmath , an arbitrary deviation of an action from @xmath may then be
written as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.4.19)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the scaling operators have been defined, @xmath , and we have used
completeness of the left-eigenvectors. The fixed point values of the
scaling variables are therefore zero, @xmath . Performing an RG
transformation beginning with @xmath close to @xmath , we obtain

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.4.20)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In particular, if @xmath for some particular @xmath , then the blocked
action will again only involve @xmath . We then can distinguish three
scenarios for the behavior of a perturbation from the fixed point
action:

-   @xmath : the perturbation decays with blocking iterations, and is
    called irrelevant ,

-   @xmath : the perturbation is independent of iterations, and is
    called exactly marginal , ¹⁸ ¹⁸ 18 I include “exactly” because one
    often talks about “marginally” irrelevant and relevant operators to
    mean ones which are marginal at a gaussian fixed point but become
    either irrelevant or relevant at a nearby fixed point.

-   @xmath : the perturbation increases with iterations, and is called
    relevant .

The relative sizes of the @xmath present in any given action determine
how closely RG transformations will map it towards a fixed point. The
negative RG eigenvalues diminish with iterations, so they do not prevent
the approach to the fixed point. The exactly marginal operators,
interestingly, are invariant, and therefore a perturbation by a marginal
operator constitutes a new fixed point. Generally, then, we see that the
set of RG fixed points differing by marginal operators form a fixed
point submanifold in the space of actions. The positive eigenvalues, on
the other hand, will steer the flow away from the fixed point. Hence,
the distance of closest approach to the fixed point depends strongly on
what the values of the relevant scaling variables are; the smaller they
are, the longer it takes for those terms to “kick in.” For initial
actions that are “tuned” such that @xmath , RG will map the action
directly into the fixed point.

The region in parameter space that flows directly into the fixed point
under RG transformations is called the basin of attraction of the fixed
point, and is therefore the surface @xmath . On this surface, the
irrelevant variables are unconstrained, and theories defined by actions
which differ only by irrelevant variables have the same long-distance
properties. This is the phenomenon of universality . It explains the
empirical fact that many different physical systems can have the same
critical exponents (RG eigenvalues) near a second-order phase
transition. For example, the Ising universality class in three
dimensions describes not only the critical behavior of certain
ferromagnets, but also such diverse situations as the liquid-gas
transition in xenon, critical points of binary fluids, the atomic
arrangement transition in copper-zinc alloys, and superfluid helium
transitions [ 37 ] . Generally, one expects theories with exactly the
same symmetries, in the same dimension, to belong to the same
universality class. The defining symmetry of the Ising universality
class is @xmath transformations of the order parameter.

In the correlator analysis above, it was assumed that the RG
transformation had a fixed point to begin with. This will only be true
if @xmath is chosen carefully, and since we saw above that only @xmath
led to the empirical value, it comes as no surprise. This may seem like
an undesirable tuning of the blocking transformation, and from that
perspective it is. However, once @xmath is picked correctly, the scaling
dimensions of any other local operators may be determined, in principle,
by studying the scaling of correlation functions. If @xmath is a local
scaling operator with corresponding RG eigenvalue @xmath , then near the
fixed point one has [ 36 ]

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.4.21)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the scaling dimension of @xmath . A derivation of this
formula in the context of functional RG is given in chapter 3, eq. (
3.3.43 ). In practice, analytically, this formula is not in fact of much
use; perturbative RG methods are more typically used, and recently the
conformal bootstrap [ 33 ] has seen many successes. On the lattice,
scaling dimensions may be systematically computed using MCRG techniques,
as described below. In chapter 2, however, we will finally put eq. (
1.4.21 ) to use in lattice simulations, but not with a blocking
transformation, per se.

#### 1.4.4 Synthesis

Let us suppose we begin with an action which has been tuned in the
manner described above. Since the partition function is invariant under
the blocking, and since the blocking preserves the long-distance
observables, it follows that the correlations of the system will exhibit
the correlations of the fixed point theory, up to rescaling of the
fields. Since the fixed point theory displays possibly nontrivial
scaling behavior, as we saw with the correlator @xmath above, we finally
see how the block-spin RG formalism can explain critical phenomena.

For statistical systems that really do have a lattice spacing, due to a
microscopic cutoff such as an inter-atomic spacing in a ferromagnet, the
picture is the following. The relevant parameters correspond to
temperature @xmath and external magnetic field @xmath . For simplicity,
we imagine that @xmath vanishes identically. The critical surface of the
system then corresponds to @xmath . Thus, buy tuning the “temperature
knob” to @xmath , one induces critical behavior in the system. In terms
of the correlation length @xmath , the finite atomic spacing @xmath
means that one is tuning the renormalized mass to zero. The same
procedure is accomplished in lattice simulations of spin systems to
approach criticality.

In field theory, one typically speaks of criticality as being a
“continuum limit,” because the relevant situation is presumably @xmath
at @xmath , at least for a massive field theory. But the approach to
this limit is achieved in the same way: tune the bare parameters so as
to achieve @xmath . If the fixed point theory exists, then so do
theories all along the critical surface, since they are equivalent under
RG transformations. Now, the renormalized theory (with @xmath )
corresponds to a theory living on the critical surface, and therefore
exists if there is a fixed point. This is the statement of
nonperturbative renormalizability. Since the irrelevant variables near
the fixed point play a subleading role, it is permissible to consider
analyses involving only the variables with the largest RG eigenvalues,
to a first approximation. This accounts for the success of the
Callan-Symanzik-type of RG described in the previous section, so long as
perturbation theory is valid. In particular, the case which holds @xmath
fixed and sends @xmath allows one to describe critical statistical
systems using perturbative RG.

In @xmath theory with vanishing external field @xmath , the two most
relevant parameters are the mass and the quartic coupling. We saw that
the theory possesses an IRFP with nonzero coupling, the Wilson-Fisher
fixed point (WFFP), and a UVFP with vanishing coupling, the gaussian
fixed point (GFP). The critical surface of the GFP is the subspace
defined by @xmath (and all couplings @xmath of degree @xmath in @xmath
also vanishing), since those variables are relevant at the GFP. If
@xmath (or @xmath ), however, the IR behavior is dominated by the WFFP.
The critical surface is determined by @xmath ( @xmath is not sufficient
with nonzero @xmath ); all bare actions along this surface flow into the
WFFP under RG iterations, as depicted in figure 1.1 . Since all
higher-order interactions, such as @xmath etc., are irrelevant at the
WFFP, ¹⁹ ¹⁹ 19 This identification is somewhat loose; to each of these
operators corresponds a scaling operator that is irrelevant. we observe
that a large class of scalar field theories are governed by the same
fixed point. Since those irrelevant operators coincide with the
nonrenormalizable interactions in perturbation theory, we now know how
to think of them: they are ultimately unproblematic because they do not
significantly alter the long-distance properties of the theory. Putting
this knowledge to use is the program of effective field theory , which
we will briefly summarize in chapter 3. We close with a quote from
Wilson:

  “I go to graduate school in physics, and I take the first course in
  quantum field theory, and I’m totally disgusted with the way it’s
  related. They’re discussing something called renormalization group,
  and it’s a set of recipes, and I’m supposed to accept that these
  recipes work — no way. I made a resolution, I would learn to do the
  problems that they assigned, I would learn how to turn in answers that
  they would accept, holding my nose all the time, and someday I was
  going to understand what was really going on. And it took me ten
  years, but through the renormalization group work I finally convinced
  myself that there was a reasonable explanation for what was taught in
  that course.” – Reported in P. Ginsparg’s Renormalized After-Dinner
  Anecdotes at the “Celebrating the Science of Kenneth Geddes Wilson”
  symposium in 2013 [ 38 ] .

#### 1.4.5 Mcrg

The most systematic implementation of the block-spin RG transformation
is via Swendsen’s Monte Carlo Renormalization Group [ 34 , 35 ] , which
extracts estimates of critical exponents from a computation of the
discrete RG stability matrix introduced above. Consider the expectation
value of an action operator @xmath after a blocking step @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.4.22)
  -- -------- -- ----------

From the invariance of the partition function, @xmath , we can
differentiate with respect to the couplings @xmath at the previous
blocking step, to obtain

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.4.23)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath in an expectation value with respect to @xmath is
understood as evaluation of @xmath on the blocked field @xmath .
Alternatively, we can use the chain rule to differentiate with respect
to @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.4.24)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Putting it all together we obtain

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.4.25)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the RG stability matrix @xmath enters. Since the observables on
both sides may be explicitly computed in a simulation, one can compute
the matrix @xmath at blocking scale @xmath by numerically inverting the
matrix equation above.

If the bare action is sufficiently close to the critical surface, then
repeated blocking transformations carry one toward the RG fixed point.
In its vicinity, the stability matrix will approach its fixed point
value, and the diagonalization of @xmath will have eigenvalues @xmath .
Since @xmath is fixed by definition of the blocking, one can extract
estimates for the RG eigenvalues using MCRG. The method is limited in
practice by the number of iterations one can do given a finite
simulation volume. Choosing @xmath leads to a halving of the linear size
of the lattice with every iteration. Nonetheless, the MCRG method has
been applied in numerous systems and has been quite successful [ 39 , 35
, 40 , 41 ] .

### 1.5 Lattice gauge theory and fermions

In the next chapter we will see an example of a gauge theory in 4
dimensions, including fermions, so here we give a brief description of
such theories on the lattice.

#### 1.5.1 Gauge theory

On the lattice, gauge fields are group-valued variables (or “link
variables”) @xmath living on links connecting adjacent sites, where the
pair @xmath identifies the field on the link connecting site @xmath with
@xmath , and @xmath . Often @xmath is a Lie group, like U(1) or SU(
@xmath ), but discrete groups like @xmath or crystal groups are also
sometimes considered. We denote the Lie algebra of @xmath by @xmath .
Gauge transformations arise from the change of variables

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.5.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

so that traces of products of links which form a closed loop are gauge
invariant. The simplest such product is the plaquette around every
elementary square of the lattice,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.5.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

It is then sensible to construct an action as a positive definite sum
over all plaquettes. This is called the Wilson action after it was
introduced in 1974 [ 42 ] , ²⁰ ²⁰ 20 Although the corresponding action
for the discrete gauge group @xmath was written down 3 years earlier by
Wegner [ 43 ] . and is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.5.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath . To formally obtain the continuum theory, one defines the
Lie algebra-valued vector potentials @xmath by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.5.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and expands in @xmath . Using the Baker-Campbell-Hausdorff formula, one
finds the expansion

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.5.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.5.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

is the continuum field strength tensor, which takes values in @xmath .
²¹ ²¹ 21 We typically use the convention of anti-hermitian elements
@xmath . To obtain the hermitian gauge field one lets @xmath .
Furthermore, the presence of @xmath in the Wilson action is related to
the perturbative convention of having it in the fermion coupling term
@xmath by a rescaling @xmath . Such a rescaling makes the canonical
dimension of the gauge field @xmath in every dimension. The Wilson
action becomes

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.5.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

for @xmath . The leading term is the Yang-Mills action @xmath in the
naive continuum limit @xmath , that is,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.5.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which defines the pure-gluonic sector of QCD.

The correlation length of a lattice gauge theory is determined by the
lightest mass in its spectrum. For a pure gauge theory, this must refer
to the lightest glueball state; a “glueball” is a bound state of gluons.
To measure this one would have to compute the plaquette-plaquette
correlator, which is a difficult task as the measurement is strongly
affected by signal-to-noise problems [ 44 ] . Moreover, we do not even
know experimentally what the mass of this state would be, since the real
world includes fermions. The study of pure lattice gauge theory in 4
dimensions is therefore somewhat academic. However, several methods to
set the scale in a semi-realistic way (i.e., using experimental
measurements) have been put forth over the years.

A common method to set the scale is using the Sommer parameter [ 45 ] ,
which amounts to a measurement of the static quark potential @xmath . To
measure this, one first defines the Wilson loop operator by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (1.5.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a closed loop and @xmath are the link labels along
@xmath . For a rectangular loop @xmath of spatial size @xmath and
temporal extent @xmath , one can argue from a spectral decomposition
that the static quark potential is given by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.5.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The expected form of @xmath is that of a linearly confining theory,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.5.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the string tension . The force corresponding to this
potential is given by @xmath . From separate studies of the
nonrelativistic Schrödinger equation for heavy quarks, together with
input from experimental data, it has been determined that @xmath occurs
at a distance @xmath fm. Now, @xmath may be expressed in terms of the
dimensionless coefficients @xmath of @xmath . Since @xmath can be
measured on the lattice, one fits the measured potential to obtain an
estimate of @xmath . By plugging in @xmath fm, one then has an estimate
for @xmath in fm.

In practice, one is often simulating with dynamical fermions, the bound
states of which are hadrons. Another common way to set the scale is then
to input a well-known hadron mass in @xmath , e.g. the mass of the
@xmath meson or the @xmath baryon [ 46 , 47 ] . A more recent procedure
for setting the scale which utilizes Gradient Flow will be discussed in
the next chapter.

Perturbative calculations in Yang-Mills theory suggest that the theory
is asymptotically free [ 48 , 49 ] , meaning that the coupling @xmath
decreases as one probes higher energies. This result is confirmed in
lattice perturbation theory, where one expands the Wilson action in
powers of @xmath , which allows observables to be expressed as series in
@xmath . One defines a renormalized coupling @xmath , ²² ²² 22 There are
various ways to define a renormalized coupling in this theory. In
perturbation theory, one method is called momentum space subtraction
(MOM) [ 7 ] , which uses the gluon propagator and the 1PI @xmath vertex
@xmath . after which the renormalized and bare beta functions may be
calculated in a similar (though algebraically more complex) manner to
the scalar case. One finds [ 7 ]

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.5.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the first few coefficients are

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.5.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We see that @xmath is a UVFP, so as the continuum limit is approached at
fixed @xmath , the bare coupling approaches zero. In a sense, this
result is a consistency check on the perturbative expansion. Thus, in
simulations of pure gauge theory, one achieves the continuum limit by
extrapolating @xmath according to the perturbative results from lattice
perturbation theory. We stress that although the UV theory approaches a
gaussian fixed point, the IR physics (characterized by @xmath ) remains
strongly-interacting.

#### 1.5.2 Fermions

The naive discretization of fermion fields, following what was done for
scalars, leads to trouble. The euclidean continuum Dirac action in 4
dimensions is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.5.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is a Grassmann-valued Dirac spinor (with 4 components). Its
naive discretization with a symmetric difference operator is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.5.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In momentum space, one computes

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.5.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In the infinite volume limit, the naive fermion propagator @xmath is
then

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.5.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which may be written in integral form as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.5.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The continuum propagator @xmath should be obtained in the @xmath limit.
Although an expansion of the sine function appears to achieve this,
@xmath in fact has zeros at all @xmath corners of the Brillouin zone. As
@xmath , one then finds @xmath saddle points of the integrand above,
which means that in the continuum limit, @xmath is a sum of @xmath
copies of the desired propagator. This hiccup is called the doubling
problem for lattice fermions.

Various approaches to remedy the doubling problem have been forwarded
over the years. In one approach, called Wilson fermions , one adds a
laplacian term to the naive fermion action, which shifts the bare mass
in such a way as to guarantee that the doubler masses become infinitely
heavy as @xmath , thereby dropping out of the theory. But this solution
comes at a cost [ 50 ] : for a massless theory, the Wilson term breaks
chiral symmetry (invariance under @xmath ), making the simulation of
massless fermions a difficult task. Solutions to the doubling problem
which allow for the retention of chiral symmetry (in some capacity) have
therefore been sought over the years. One such approach is that of
staggered fermions .

Because we will report results of a lattice simulation using staggered
fermions in four dimensions in chapter 2, we give a brief introduction
to them here. The first step is to change variables from naive fermions
in a peculiar way, the staggered transformation :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.5.19)
  -- -------- -- ----------

By repeatedly using the gamma matrix property @xmath , one can
demonstrate that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.5.20)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This implies that the staggered transformation decouples the 4 Dirac
components in the naive fermion action, leaving an action for 4 copies
of the same kind of (1-component) fermion. One then defines the
staggered action by retaining only one of the copies. Introducing the
gauge field coupling to fermions in the standard way, one has

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (1.5.21)
  -- -------- -- ----------

because only one of the Dirac components was kept, one expects
intuitively that this action reduces the 16-fold degeneracy of the naive
action to 4. To check this intuition one must perform a more detailed
analysis [ 46 ] . What is found is that the staggered action describes 4
species, called “tastes,” of Dirac fermions, in terms of which the
action resembles the Wilson fermion action, which has no doublers in the
continuum limit. Furthermore, from eq. ( 1.5.21 ) we see that the action
possesses a remnant chiral symmetry given by invariance under @xmath
when @xmath .

The staggered transformation only reduces the doublers to 4, whereas
some simulations want as few as 2 fermions (for up and down quarks), or
3 (to include the strange). To accommodate this situation, a practical
but controversial procedure is adopted: take the square-root of the
staggered determinant, and for the strange quark, take the fourth-root.
There is some controversy in the literature about the validity of this
procedure, however. See [ 46 ] and references therein.

## Chapter 2 Gradient flow and RG

In this chapter we introduce the notion of gradient flow renormalization
group (GFRG) by comparing a type of diffusion known as gradient flow
with the block-spin transformations we saw in chapter 1. The comparison
naturally leads to correlator scaling laws involving gradient-flowed
observables that can be measured on the lattice. The comparison suggests
a method for extracting scaling dimensions of operators from lattice
simulations in a manner distinct from that of MCRG. In section 1, we
describe gradient flow in the case of Yang-Mills theory and its primary
application in lattice theory, namely, scale-setting. In section 2 we
apply the GFRG method to scalar field theories in 2 and 3 dimensions,
and in section 3 we apply it to a 4-dimensional gauge-fermion theory.

### 2.1 Gradient flow

The Yang-Mills gradient flow equation, in the context of lattice theory,
first appeared in an exploration of the large- @xmath behavior of
smeared Wilson loops in a paper by Narayanan and Neuberger in 2006 [ 51
] . ¹ ¹ 1 It appears that the authors were inspired to choose this form
by an analogy to the Langevin equation which generates quantum
Yang-Mills theory under stochastic quantization [ 52 ] , a development
of the 1980’s. It was not at that point thought of as a smoothing
transformation, although the concept of stochastic regularization was a
clue. I also remark that the Yang-Mills flow equation (perhaps for the
first time) appeared in the work of Atiyah and Bott in 1983 [ 53 ] . It
has since been used in the study of Ricci flow , having appeared, for
example, in [ 54 , 55 ] , where it is one of two equations defining
so-called Ricci-Yang-Mills flow. This flow refers to a smoothing
evolution of the metric and connection on a principle bundle over a
Riemannian manifold. Pure Ricci flow was proposed in 1982 in the works
of R. Hamilton [ 56 ] . Interestingly, however, the Ricci flow equations
arose even earlier in the study of generalized nonlinear sigma models by
D. Friedan in 1980 [ 57 ] , where it was demonstrated that the RG flow
of the model is a Ricci flow on the target space of the field theory, to
lowest order in perturbation theory. The lattice version of the equation
was proposed independently by Lüscher in 2009 [ 58 ] in the context of
so-called “trivializing maps” on field space. The idea behind these
trivializing maps was to perform a transformation of the field variables
@xmath on the lattice in such a way that the jacobian exactly cancels
the gauge field action, effectively mapping the theory to its
strong-coupling (or high-temperature) limit; the hope was to improve the
efficiency of the Hybrid Monte Carlo algorithm, which diminishes in the
continuum limit @xmath of lattice QCD. For our purposes, however, we
will focus on the smoothing property of gradient flow, which will be
demonstrated to provide an essential ingredient of a continuous RG
transformation on the lattice. It should be noted that Lüscher did
speculate on the possibility of using trivializing maps in the context
of RG [ 58 ] , and this suggestion was followed up analytically in the
works of Yamamura and others [ 59 , 60 , 61 ] .

The continuum formulation of gradient flow for gauge theories runs as
follows. Beginning with the initial gauge fields @xmath , one defines
their flow @xmath to be the solution of the diffusion-type equation

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.1.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath can be called the flow action . The parameter @xmath is
called the flow time , with dimensions of distance-squared. Typically,
@xmath is chosen to be the Yang-Mills action @xmath , in which case one
obtains the Yang-Mills gradient flow,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.1.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath , and the covariant derivative in the adjoint
representation is, for @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.1.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Lüscher and Weisz [ 62 ] demonstrated perturbatively that the
expectation values of observables at finite flow time required no
further renormalization above that of pure Yang-Mills theory, suggesting
that such quantities will have well-defined continuum limits on the
lattice.

A quantity of particular popularity is the Yang-Mills energy density at
finite flow time,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.1.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In [ 63 ] it was demonstrated that @xmath is renormalized if one
computes it in bare perturbation theory and replaces the bare coupling
@xmath by the @xmath coupling at scale @xmath , as expected from the
general renormalizability of flowed observables mentioned above. It was
then demonstrated that the lattice implementation of @xmath can be of
quite practical use in setting the scale. The “theory scale” @xmath
defined through

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.1.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

was demonstrated to scale to the continuum in roughly the same way as
the Sommer parameter @xmath . That is, by computing @xmath at several
bare couplings for which @xmath was known already from Sommer parameter
scale-setting (with @xmath ), it was demonstrated empirically that
@xmath is constant as @xmath under a simple (slightly-improved)
discretization of @xmath , the so-called “clover operator.” What all
this means is that one can approach the continuum by following the
behavior of observables computed at time @xmath for each of their bare
couplings, if the physical box size @xmath is constant. See [ 47 ] for
further discussion.

Perturbatively, the @xmath -renormalized @xmath is proportional to the
renormalized coupling at tree level, suggesting that one can define an
alternative renormalized coupling by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.1.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Since the jacobian relating the two couplings is nonsingular to known
orders in perturbation theory, this scheme change is expected to be
valid. The computation of this quantity in finite volume has even led to
a natural definition of a renormalized coupling that runs with the
lattice size [ 64 ] , and which may be used in step-scaling analyses of
the discrete beta function [ 64 , 65 ] . We note that this approach has
been fruitful for several theories in the family of SU( @xmath ) gauge
theories with @xmath fermions. Recently, arguments based on Wilsonian RG
have been offered in [ 66 ] which suggest that the time derivative of
@xmath can be used to estimate the renormalized beta function @xmath in
many gauge theories.

### 2.2 Block-spin analogy

In this section we will focus on scalar theories, so first we give a
brief review of GF for scalar fields [ 67 , 68 , 4 , 69 , 70 , 71 , 72 ]
. The flowed fields will be denoted by @xmath . The general gradient
flow equation for a one-component scalar field is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.2.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

If we choose a standard quartic action, for example,

  -- -- -- ---------
           (2.2.2)
  -- -- -- ---------

then the flow equation reads

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.2.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The utility of interacting flow for scalars was called into question by
Suzuki and Fujikawa [ 72 ] , who determined that the finite-flow time
observables are not entirely renormalized by a renormalization of the
parameters in the bare action. This is intuitively clear from the
presence of the cubic product @xmath on the r.h.s. above, together with
the lack of gauge symmetry which was crucial for the renormalizability
proof of GF in Yang-Mills theory [ 62 ] . The perturbative solution to
the scalar GF equation involves local products of fields, which when
self-contracted, lead to divergent tadpoles in flowed observables that
are not eliminated by the standard renormalization procedure of @xmath
theory. Fujikawa demonstrated, however, that suitably-modified
definitions of the interacting flow can lead to a finite theory, ones
involving derivative interactions in place of a point-vertex. We will
revisit the notion of interacting flow in chapter 4 in the discussion of
nonlinear RG’s. In the remainder of this section, however, we will stick
to noninteracting flows.

#### 2.2.1 GFRG transformation

If we specialize to the simplest kind of gradient flow, namely, massless
free flow ( @xmath in eq. ( 2.2.3 )),

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.2.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

then we have a simple heat equation. The solution is given by the action
of the heat kernel on the initial field,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.2.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In the last equality we have brought the solution to a suggestive form,
using @xmath . The (infinite-volume) heat kernel in @xmath dimensions is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.2.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which rapidly decays when @xmath . The solution is therefore reminiscent
of the blocking transformation

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.2.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

when we identify @xmath , except that the averaging by the heat kernel
depends continuously on its “blocking parameter” @xmath . Importantly,
we also do not have an analog of the rescaling factor @xmath . In this
sense, free GF cannot of itself constitute an RG transformation.

We wish to define a smooth RG transformation based on the resemblance
just noted. Since the field rescaling was an essential ingredient in
block-spin RG which allowed the transformation to exhibit a fixed point,
we propose that the analog of the blocked field @xmath should be defined
by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.2.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the exact form of @xmath is not yet determined, except that it
must approach 1 as @xmath and it must be proportional to @xmath for
large enough @xmath . This is because the mean-squared radius of the
heat kernel is determined by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.2.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which should correspond to the block-spin radius-squared (times @xmath
). In chapter 4 we will determine that, under Schwinger regularization
(see eq. ( 4.2.5 )) in the continuum, the rescaling factor is exactly

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the bare cutoff. The function @xmath is expected to be
regularization-dependent, however.

In the numerical implementation of GF, one must use the lattice heat
equation. The continuum laplacian is replaced by its discretization,
which we saw in chapter 1, so the GF equation is given by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath are the forward and backward difference operators,
respectively. In this case, the solution is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath . The lattice momenta are restricted to @xmath , so we
observe a monotonic increase in the suppression of high momentum modes,
in a qualitatively similar way to the continuum gradient flow solutions.
Thus we expect the lattice free flow equation to be equally capable of
defining a continuous blocking transformation, which approaches the
continuum formulation as @xmath .

We also see in eq. ( 2.2.8 ) the introduction of a rescaled position
@xmath : the blocked field is defined on a rescaled space. In MCRG this
leads to the necessity of considering lattices of different sizes when
applying the method. In our case, the rescaled field must be said to
live on a fictitious blocked lattice with non-integer spacing. We will
avoid this subtlety in our analysis by always relating blocked
observables to the bare observables and performing computations in the
bare theory, as described below.

#### 2.2.2 Correlator ratios

The GFRG transformation proposed above leads to scaling relations among
correlators which may be implemented in lattice simulations. Recall the
correlator scaling formula for block-spin RG which relates the blocked
and bare quantities,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

for @xmath . The scaling operators @xmath are generally polynomial in
the field @xmath . Assuming that GFRG defines a valid RG transformation,
the corresponding scaling formula reads

  -- -- -- ----------
           (2.2.14)
  -- -- -- ----------

@xmath is the effective action generated by the GFRG transformation. The
proper definition of this action will be described in chapter 4, but
here we avoid it by use of the MCRG principle, which as described in
chapter 1, allows one to compute observables in the blocked theory by
computing blocked observables in the bare theory.

Now we consider eq. ( 2.2.14 ) at two times @xmath with @xmath , and
take their ratio:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The quantities on the l.h.s. are defined on the lattice with points
@xmath . Using MCRG to write the expectations in the bare theory then
yields a ratio formula ,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where now the position arguments refer to sites on the original lattice.
Now, close to a fixed point, the correlator of any two operators @xmath
may be expanded in correlators of scaling operators [ 73 , 36 ] ,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

If it happens that one of the scaling operators, say @xmath , dominates
the sum, then one might expect that the ratio of correlators of @xmath
can be used to measure @xmath . (At large enough distances, the leading
operator always dominates the sum.) Letting @xmath be of order @xmath in
@xmath and @xmath in derivatives, we can factor out the rescalings
@xmath from each operator to obtain

  -- -- -- ----------
           (2.2.18)
  -- -- -- ----------

where @xmath . The factors of @xmath arise because derivatives in the
rescaled theory are related to those in the bare theory via @xmath . But
when do we expect these ratio formulas to be valid? First, we need
@xmath , so that the smeared operators do not overlap. Second, we need
that the @xmath correlator really is dominated by @xmath . Third, the
scaling operators are only defined with respect to a fixed point, so we
expect the formula above to be valid only in the vicinity of a fixed
point, which means the RG transformation must be repeated enough times
that proximity has been achieved; we interpret this as meaning that the
flow time @xmath is large enough that the effective action @xmath is
near the fixed point. Lastly, we remark that eq. ( 2.2.16 ) will be
deduced without recourse to a block-spin analogy in chapter 4 in the
framework of stochastic RG.

Notice that using @xmath in eq. ( 2.2.18 ) gives no information about
@xmath , since @xmath is the leading operator in the @xmath -odd
subspace. Generally, the ratios of the fundamental field cannot be used
to extract an estimate for @xmath , and other methods are needed; there
at least two options one may take.

-   Option 1: If there exists an operator @xmath which is known a priori
    to have zero anomalous dimension, with scaling dimension @xmath ,
    then its ratio formula implies

      -- -------- -- ----------
         @xmath      (2.2.19)
      -- -------- -- ----------

    An example is the stress-energy tensor of a theory, or a conserved
    current such as the vector or remnant axial vector currents in
    gauge-fermion theories.

-   Option 2: In any theory, the operators fall into symmetry subspaces,
    e.g. @xmath in @xmath theory. In the domain of applicability of eq.
    ( 2.2.18 ), then, the mixed correlation functions @xmath in that
    subspace of operators all have a leading scaling behavior of @xmath
    , and one can measure a family of exponents

      -- -------- -- ----------
         @xmath      (2.2.20)
      -- -------- -- ----------

    where @xmath is the total number of factors of @xmath on the l.h.s.
    and @xmath the total number of derivatives. From any pair @xmath one
    may then extract estimates of @xmath , so long as neither correlator
    is @xmath itself, of course. One must have empirical or theoretical
    evidence that one operator does dominate to make use of this method.

#### 2.2.3 Diagonalization method

In general, there will not be a dominant operator, and asymptotically
large distances may not be accessible. And even if there is, one might
instead want to extract the dimension of a subleading operator. One must
then use eq. ( 2.2.16 ) directly, which requires a more involved
approach. Expanding each @xmath in a basis of @xmath ’s, we obtain for
the correlator of @xmath ’s

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.21)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We could use eq. ( 2.2.16 ) therefore if we knew the coefficients @xmath
by forming appropriate linear combinations of the correlators on the
r.h.s, which are directly measured in lattice simulations. The @xmath
may be estimated numerically by recalling the consequence of conformal
invariance on mixed scaling operator correlations [ 73 , 36 ] ,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.22)
  -- -------- -- ----------

valid exactly at the fixed point. What is suggested is to choose a basis
of operators @xmath and compute the mixed correlations of the @xmath ,
then forming the quantities

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.23)
  -- -------- -- ----------

from an ansatz for @xmath . As the full scaling dimension @xmath is
required for the GFRG transformation, one must here input a value for
@xmath if it is known. One then numerically diagonalizes the matrix of
correlators at every distance @xmath and time @xmath to obtain estimates
for

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.2.24)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Finally, one applies the ratio formula eq. ( 2.2.16 ) and measures
@xmath directly. The estimate for @xmath obtained from this approach is
merely a consistency check, while all other dimensions constitute
genuine predictions.

### 2.3 Scalar field theory

We have applied the ratio formulas numerically in @xmath theory for
@xmath using the simulation action eq. ( 1.2.3 ), which reads

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.3.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where we drop hats for the lattice field out of convenience. We take the
volume of the lattice @xmath to be cubic. To minimize the distance of
the RG flow from the IRFP, the bare action must be tuned sufficiently
well, meaning that given a value for @xmath , the neighbor coupling
@xmath must be set as close to the critical value @xmath as possible,
where @xmath is a point on the system’s critical ( @xmath ) surface. A
popular method for determining @xmath in spin systems is via the Binder
cumulant.

#### 2.3.1 Tuning to the critical surface

The order parameter of @xmath symmetry breaking in any spin model is the
magnetization @xmath , which is defined on a particular configuration
@xmath by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.3.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and is equal to the zero mode of the field. In the ordered phase where
spins are aligned, @xmath , while in the disordered phase one has @xmath
. One can study the probability distribution of the magnetization
through an analysis of the finite volume zero mode effective action
obtained by integrating out all modes in the box with @xmath [ 8 ] . The
moments of the magnetization distribution exhibit universal properties
in the infinite volume limit. One such observable of particular
practicality is the Binder cumulant , which is defined by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.3.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In the lower temperature limit, @xmath , while in the high temperature
limit, @xmath . It was argued by Binder long ago [ 74 ] that, at the
critical value @xmath , the cumulant has a universal value @xmath as
@xmath , universal in the sense that it is independent of @xmath and
shared by all systems in the Ising universality class. The approach of
@xmath to @xmath is determined by corrections to scaling of the form [
73 , 36 , 8 ]

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.3.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the exponent corresponding to the leading irrelevant RG
eigenvalue of the system, and @xmath stands for the next-to-leading
irrelevant exponent. The universal values @xmath depend only on the
dimension of the system for spin systems with only 1 internal degree of
freedom. They are known to very high precision [ 75 , 1 , 2 ] : in 2d,
@xmath , while in 3d, @xmath .

In figure 2.1 we plot the behavior of the cumulant @xmath in 2d as a
function of @xmath on several lattices. We see that there exists a
region where the different volumes nearly intersect each other. The
cumulant is analytic in @xmath , and therefore this behavior is expected
to occur in the vicinity of @xmath according to eq. ( 2.3.4 ), up to
@xmath deviations. Furthermore, exactly at the critical point, an
infinite volume extrapolation of the cumulant should yield the universal
value @xmath . Very precise estimates exist in the literature for the
critical couplings @xmath at various interaction parameter values @xmath
. Using these values, we have checked that our system is well-tuned by
performing infinite volume extrapolations as suggested by eq. ( 2.3.4 )
at leading order. This is depicted for our simulation in @xmath in
figure 2.1 . In both dimensions we obtain good fits consistent with the
universal value at @xmath within @xmath ; the fit results are exhibited
in table 2.1 .

#### 2.3.2 Simulation details

We simulated @xmath theory using Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
methods. In what follows we report the details for 3 dimensions, for
simplicity. The MC chain of field configurations was generating using a
mixed update algorithm consisting of Metropolis updates for the size of
@xmath and Wolff cluster updates for the sign of @xmath [ 76 ] . One
Metropolis update involved picking @xmath random sites in sequence and
for each pick updating the spin length according to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.3.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a random number uniformly distributed in the interval
@xmath , with probability @xmath , with @xmath being the change in the
action due to the proposed spin update. The number @xmath is the maximum
radial update length, which was chosen to be @xmath in both dimensions.
One cluster update consisted of the attempted construction of a cluster,
which picks a site at random and adds neighboring spins to the cluster
with probability @xmath , where @xmath . Once built, the signs of all
spins in the cluster are flipped. The Twister PRNG was used to generate
all random variables [ 77 ] .

The ratio of radial updates to cluster updates was chosen to be that
which led to the best extrapolation of the Binder cumulant to infinite
volume for given sample size at criticality. In 3d, we chose 10 cluster
updates per radial update, yielding @xmath , with variations of order 1
between different observables. Measurements in the full simulation were
then carried out every 5 MC sweeps, where one sweep was defined to be 50
cluster updates and 5 radial updates. The autocorrelation was estimated
in two ways: (1) errors @xmath were computed on binned data for various
bin sizes, and the integrated time is estimated as @xmath , where @xmath
was the error on the binning plateau [ 73 ] , and (2) a direct
computation of the integrated autocorrelation time on sequential subsets
of the MC chain, repeated for every subset and averaged together. We
checked that @xmath for @xmath and @xmath at maximum distance @xmath
were comparable in both cases.

To multiply the statistics, the MC chain was split at 10k sweeps (the
thermalization cut) into 10 branches. After a few sweeps, the data from
separate chains was checked to be essentially uncorrelated. On each
branch, almost 1M sweeps were carried out (for every volume except the
two largest, 64 and 72, which had 150k sweeps per chain), yielding a
total of @xmath 10M MC sweeps, and thus 2M measurements. To saturate the
errors, the data was then binned with bin size @xmath , yielding about
20k independent statistical samples per branch. We simulated on volumes
@xmath . Lastly, the numerical integration of the gradient flow was
performed using a fourth order Runge-Kutta integration scheme.

#### 2.3.3 Ratios and exponents

The ratio formulas proposed above have been tested by measuring the
mixed correlation functions in the odd-operator subspace with basis
@xmath and even subspace with basis @xmath , each one containing the
leading two operators according to canonical dimension. Corresponding to
each of these operators is a scaling dimension @xmath , although those
are the dimensions of the scaling operators that are dominated by the
corresponding monomial operators @xmath . The most precise estimates we
know of from lattice simulations, except @xmath , are given in table 2.2
[ 2 ] . The @xmath dimension is predicted to be @xmath [ 78 ] . We are
unaware of any direct numerical determinations of @xmath apart from the
conformal bootstrap [ 33 ] , so we use the prediction just mentioned.
Preliminary results of this section were reported in [ 79 , 80 ] . In
what follows, we describe the analysis in the context of @xmath . At the
end, we briefly report preliminary results for @xmath .

At criticality, the point-point correlation functions are expected to
exhibit power law decay of the form @xmath in infinite volume. Since
@xmath are the leading dimensions in their respective subspaces, they
are expected to govern the leading power law behaviors. In figure 2.2 we
plot the @xmath and @xmath correlators together with their fits to a
periodic power-law @xmath with @xmath . We observed power laws that
clearly indicate the dominance of the leading operators in each
subspace, with exponents (reported in the plots) close to the expected
@xmath . For @xmath , the subleading power law has exponent @xmath ;
thus, for both correlators we observe a clear dominance by the leading
operator.

In figure 2.3 , we plot the ratios of correlators at several flow times
as functions of distance on the lattice. We observe the short-distance
region where the smeared spins overlap as dips in the ratios. At larger
distances, plateaus form where the ratios approach their asymptotic
forms, although there appears to be slight residual @xmath -dependence.
For the @xmath correlator, the plateau moves extremely little with flow
time, as predicted by eq. ( 2.2.18 ). For all other correlators there is
notable movement. The residual @xmath -dependence could come from a
number of sources. First, we expect that even with a dominant operator,
there will always be subleading corrections due to the leading
irrelevant operators. If we keep the first subleading term in eq. (
2.2.17 ) and compute the ratio in eq. ( 2.2.18 ), assuming power law
correlations, we can derive the expected form of these corrections (in
infinite volume). Denoting ratios by @xmath , we find

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.3.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In 3 dimensions, @xmath in both subspaces, so we expect these
corrections to be small at large distances. We were unable to extract
estimates for these subleading terms from fits. A second source of
@xmath -dependence is the fact that the finite volume heat kernel has
nontrivial behavior in @xmath . However, we expect such corrections to
be multiplied by factors of @xmath . See appendix A for details about
the finite volume heat kernel.

We therefore have attempted to extract @xmath from applying eqs. (
2.2.16 ), ( 2.2.20 ) in the odd subspace, and separately @xmath from the
even subspace, according to Option 2 outlined in section 2. In applying
the ratio formula, we compare flow times separated by @xmath and fit
using the form (inspired by eq. ( 2.2.10 ))

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.3.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is expected for the operators we use, @xmath being the
index of the dominant operator in the correlator @xmath . We remark that
this form allows one to attempt fitting at arbitrarily small @xmath
values, but that the scaling form is expected only for larger times. The
correlators at nearby flow times are statistically highly correlated due
to the smoothing effect of GF, making the estimation of errors by
classical means a risky task, much like the high correlation of
correlator values at successive distances in spectrum measurements. We
thus adopt a jackknifing procedure whereby a number of sub-ensembles are
generated from the whole ensemble by removing chunks of @xmath samples
in sequence, then the correlator ratios are computed and the fits
performed, and the best fit parameters are collected together into an
ensemble [ 44 ] . To account for the noise observed at large distances
we have included in our jackknife ensemble fits from every @xmath value
from regions where a stable plateau is identifiable in the ratio plots.
On each volume we chose a ratio @xmath , where @xmath is the total
number of samples. The final estimates on a given volume are then
obtained by computing the means and covariance of the ensemble of best
fit parameters.

The results show a notable dependence on volume. We therefore
extrapolate to infinite volume using a leading correction-to-scaling
ansatz,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.3.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In figure 2.4 , the examples of @xmath and @xmath are displayed. In the
odd subspace, one can extract @xmath from a single @xmath . In the even
subspace, one can extract @xmath from any pair of @xmath ’s. Best fit
parameters of the infinite volume extrapolations are reported in table
2.3 , and the corresponding scaling dimensions are reported in table 2.4
.

Next, we report the results of the diagonalization procedure based on
eq. ( 2.2.16 ). The leading diagonalized correlators with dimensions
@xmath and @xmath had a clean signal at all distances past @xmath on
every lattice, in the sense that their plateaus exhibited no notable
noise. The subleading correlators, however, tended to exhibit wild
fluctuations past certain distances ( @xmath ), where the signal from
the subleading operators becomes small. At shorter distances ( @xmath ),
there was a systematic tendency for exponents to be underestimated.
Repeating the same data analysis used to extract the @xmath and their
infinite volume extrapolations, but now extracting directly estimates of
@xmath , and using the first value of @xmath from table 2.2 as the
necessary input dimension in eq. ( 2.2.16 ), we obtained estimates for
@xmath and @xmath . The value for @xmath is slightly displaced from the
input value, but the value for @xmath is consistent with those extracted
in table 2.4 . For the @xmath scaling operator, distances beyond @xmath
were left out of our analysis because of a poor signal. In figure 2.6 ,
we plot the extrapolations for @xmath and @xmath using the same limited
@xmath -range @xmath . The value @xmath is consistent with the
prediction of @xmath from [ 78 , 2 ] . The signal for @xmath was
generally quite poor. The data was not clean enough to perform an
infinite volume extrapolation. The most reasonable estimates on each
volume were obtained from distances @xmath . A crude estimate obtained
from averaging results from every volume in the range @xmath , for
example, yields @xmath , while adding one more distance, so @xmath ,
yields @xmath . The expected value is @xmath . We take this as a good
sign, but without the infinite volume extrapolation the result is not as
precise as the lower dimensions @xmath .

In 2 dimensions, we have carried out a preliminary analysis to obtain
estimates of @xmath in an identical manner as above, although with about
a fifth of the statistics, so far. The results are reported in table 2.5
. In 2d, the canonical dimension of @xmath is zero, and therefore all
scaling dimensions are purely anomalous. Ratios for @xmath again
exhibited minimal variation with time, while higher operator ratios
exhibited significant movement. The plateaus were generally less flat
than they were in 3d, possibly due to larger contributions from
subleading operators. Nonetheless, suggestive estimates were obtained
for the @xmath . In the odd-subspace, the results deviate from the exact
values by many standard deviations, indicating perhaps the stronger
presence of the subleading operator and the necessity of a
diagonalization analysis. This has not yet been carried out.

Lastly, we note that the exponents we have measured above, of course,
are not as precisely determined as they are from finite-size scaling
(FSS) analyses, and neither method is nearly as precise as the conformal
bootstrap predictions [ 33 ] for scalar field theories. We note that the
FSS results from [ 2 ] , however, had roughly 10-100 times the
statistics we have. An advantage of GFRG methods is that they are
expected to be applicable in a much broader class of lattice field
theories, including gauge-fermion systems in 4 dimensions. In such
systems, the nonperturbative determination of anomalous dimensions is a
lively and ongoing research program, and the conformal bootstrap has
only recently made progress in these systems [ 33 , 81 ] . In the next
section, we describe an application of GFRG to one such system.

### 2.4 12-flavor SU(3) gauge theory

A model of central interest in the beyond Standard Model lattice
community is the nearly-conformal @xmath -flavor SU(3) gauge theory and
its generalizations. It is a candidate for explaining the electroweak
symmetry breaking which produces the Higgs boson, arising from new
strong interactions at a higher energy scale [ 82 ] . Its motivation
lies in the fact that for a range of @xmath values, called the
“conformal window,” the theory may contain a light scalar identified
with the Higgs. The perturbative beta function for SU( @xmath )
gauge-fermion systems is given to 2-loop order by [ 7 ]

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.4.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.4.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

As @xmath is increased from 0 the theory eventually develops an
interacting infrared fixed point (IRFP), whose coupling strength
decreases with @xmath : the Caswell-Banks-Zaks fixed point [ 83 , 84 ] .
Above @xmath , the IRFP merges with the gaussian fixed point and the
theory loses asymptotic freedom. In the conformal regime, the IRFP is
characterized by a set of scaling dimensions of local operators. The
values of these scaling dimensions are highly nontrivial, especially as
@xmath is lowered from @xmath and one begins to leave the class of
weakly-coupled IRFPs. Much work has been done to determine the anomalous
dimensions, both analytically [ 85 , 86 ] and on the lattice [ 87 , 88 ]
, and lattice simulations in particular have focused on the
determination of the fermion mass anomalous dimension for reasons of
phenomenology as well as practicality.

We expect that the ratio formula eq. ( 2.2.18 ) is applicable in generic
field theories, since blocking may be defined in any theory. In fact,
the first application of the correlator ratio method outlined in this
chapter was to a @xmath SU(3) lattice gauge theory using staggered
fermions [ 89 ] . We computed ratios of the pion, axial vector, vector,
and baryon correlators, and extracted estimates for the mass anomalous
dimension of the fermions and the leading baryon. Because staggered
fermions exhibit a conserved current from a remnant chiral symmetry, we
used its correlator ratio to estimate the fermion field anomalous
dimension, and to eliminate its contribution to other ratios. Before
reporting results, we will describe our prescription for the flow and
the method of measurement of flowed hadronic observables.

#### 2.4.1 Flow definitions

The first question to address is what type of gradient flow should be
used in a gauge theory. If we wish to keep the effective action in the
same universality class of the bare theory, the flow should preserve the
symmetries of the theory. In this case, the flow equation must maintain
gauge invariance. The simplest gauge-invariant action is the Yang-Mills
action, so we expect YM gradient flow to be sufficient in the continuum.
It is clear from a perturbative analysis of the equations that the
flowed fields have the desired damping of high-momentum modes of the
gauge field @xmath [ 63 ] . We also note that the requirement of gauge
invariance necessitates a nonlinear gradient flow, a feature we did not
see in the scalar case.

When translating to the lattice, one must decide on the discretization
of the gauge action. From a Wilsonian RG perspective, it is expected
that any discretization is fine, in principle, so long as it reduces to
the YM flow in the continuum limit. The simplest lattice discretization
of the Yang-Mills gradient flow is called Wilson flow . Beginning with
bare links @xmath , their flow @xmath is determined by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.4.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the Wilson action, eq. ( 1.5.3 ), and @xmath is a Lie
algebra-valued derivative. It is defined on functions @xmath on the
group @xmath , where @xmath is the set of gauge links on the lattice, by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.4.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In words, then, the derivative operation first replaces @xmath in @xmath
by @xmath , differentiates with respect to @xmath , and sets @xmath .
It’s then clear that @xmath . It is nothing but the definition of the
tangent vectors to the gauge group @xmath at element @xmath . As the
simplest discretization, the Wilson flow has significant lattice
artifacts, and therefore alternative flow definitions have been given [
90 ] , but we will not discuss these.

The flow of the fermions @xmath can be defined with a simple
gauge-covariant diffusion, i.e., gauged heat equation [ 91 ] . The
covariant derivative in the fundamental representation is @xmath . We
denote flowed fermion fields by @xmath . The diffusion equation in the
continuum is then

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.4.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The simplest discretization of this flow would be

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.4.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath , and the covariant difference operators are

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.4.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

But the choice of flow is to some extent arbitrary, so long as it serves
to damp high modes while preserving the symmetries of the field. Thus,
one could alternatively define the flow by the square of the Dirac
operator @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.4.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In fact, the two kinds of second derivative are related as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.4.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We can think of the difference between these flows as follows. The flow
generates an effective action which typically contains all possible
terms consistent with the symmetries of the theory, so terms like @xmath
would be present for both choices of flow. They would only differ in
their dependence on @xmath , on the precise form of the coefficient
@xmath . But since the dynamics of the theory is controlled by its IRFP,
differences in the exact details of @xmath will become less important as
@xmath increases and the effective action approaches the fixed point
action.

#### 2.4.2 Flowed observables

For gauge fields and scalar fields, the way to compute observables at
finite flow time is straight-forward. One simply evaluates the operators
within expectation values on the flowed fields. For fermions, however,
the problem is more subtle, because fermion fields are Grassmann-valued
and therefore they are not directly manipulated and measured in lattice
simulations. One therefore must do some work for any given observable to
understand how it should be measured.

The simplest fermionic observables are the mesonic operators. A flowed
meson operator has the general bilinear form

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

for some gamma matrix @xmath (or staggered equivalent thereof), as these
are the operators which can have the same quantum numbers as the mesons
out in nature. Their correlators are then defined by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

It is also convenient to define partially-flowed correlators by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

as these are simpler to measure and differ from the fully-flowed
correlators by terms of @xmath , as we argue in the next section. The
flowed baryon operators are similarly defined. For the simplest
staggered baryon, the flowed operator is given by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath are the color indices. Their correlations are given just as
in eqs. ( 2.4.11 , 2.4.12 ).

To understand how such correlators are measured, first we compute their
contractions. Letting @xmath be the inverse Dirac operator, one finds [
91 ]

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.4.14)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the gauge covariant Green function solution of the
fermion flow equation, and therefore depends on the gauge field in a
nontrivial way. One formally writes the solution as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath solves the flow equation ( 2.4.3 ). Using the contractions
above, one integrates over the fermions in the flowed expectation values
to obtain expressions in terms of the gauged heat kernel and the gauge
fields. For example, integrating over the fermions in eq. ( 2.4.12 )
gives

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.4.16)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

In the case of pions (for Wilson fermions, say), the gamma matrix is
@xmath , and from @xmath -hermiticity, @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Now, on the lattice, one computes @xmath by placing a point source
@xmath at site @xmath defined by @xmath , and numerically inverts the
Dirac operator on the source. For point-point correlators, then, the
quantity

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

is simply the solution of eq. ( 2.4.6 ) with @xmath and initial
condition @xmath , with @xmath held fixed. Denoting the inversion of
@xmath on the point source by @xmath , the pion correlator on a single
gauge configuration takes the form

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.19)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which is numerically implementable. Thus, to measure the
partially-flowed pion correlator, one inverts the Dirac operator on a
point source and integrates the gauged heat equation with initial
condition being the vector field @xmath .

Observables that are fully-flowed, such as eq. ( 2.4.11 ), are much
harder to measure, because one must integrate instead the adjoint heat
equation [ 91 ] , and the computational cost increases drastically. Even
some local observables, like the chiral condensate @xmath , require
adjoint flow. None of the observables used below required the
computation of adjoint flow, however.

#### 2.4.3 Super ratios

As we saw above, it is numerically advantageous to compute expectation
values with only a single flowed operator in the correlator. But the
original ratio formula eq. ( 2.2.18 ) requires both operators to be
flowed. If such partially-flowed correlators are approximately equal to
the full correlators at large distances, then we expect a modified ratio
formula (for @xmath )

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.20)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the dependence on @xmath is the square root of the dependence in
eq. ( 2.2.18 ), at large times. Intuitively, this should hold for
distances much larger than the smearing radius, @xmath . Notice also
that we switch to an emphasis on anomalous dimensions rather than full
scaling dimensions in this section, as is customary in four dimensions.

To motivate this form of the ratio formula, let us consider the case of
@xmath . From @xmath , where @xmath is the heat kernel, we obtain

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.21)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Now we expand @xmath about @xmath using

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.22)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath . The expansion of the correlator above is then

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.23)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Now, from the moments of the heat kernel @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath ,
we obtain

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.24)
  -- -------- -- ----------

At large distances @xmath , the partially flowed correlators are then
approximately equal to the fully-flowed correlators, and we expect eq. (
2.4.20 ) to be valid.

We can use eq. ( 2.4.20 ) to determine the field anomalous exponent
@xmath along the lines of Option 1 outlined above at eq. ( 2.2.19 ).
Once @xmath is determined, any other anomalous dimension can be
predicted. Alternatively, we may construct a super ratio of the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

which cancels the anomalous dimension @xmath directly, leaving only the
desired anomalous dimension @xmath and some possible residual dependence
on the canonical dimensions of @xmath and @xmath through @xmath . If the
operators contain no derivatives then @xmath ; this will be the case for
all operators we consider in our numerical study.

Eq. 2.4.3 is valid only on the critical @xmath surface and at
sufficiently large flow times such that the linear basin of attraction
of the IR-stable fixed point has been reached. Otherwise, we expect the
predicted @xmath from eq. 2.4.3 to show additional dependence on @xmath
coming from irrelevant operators. In practice, the flow time @xmath
which can be reached is limited by the finite lattice volume.

#### 2.4.4 Finite volume corrections

To correct for finite volume, a different approach was used in this
system than was later used in the scalar case.

The correlator scaling formula under a blocking transformation in a
finite volume reads

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.26)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the coupling of the blocked theory after blocking by
@xmath . Now consider the same formula on a larger volume @xmath at
distance @xmath , under a rescaling by @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.27)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where a possibly different coupling @xmath is used on the larger
lattice. The two scaling formulas above imply the two ratios

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.28)
  -- -------- -- ----------

from which it follows that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.29)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Repeating the argument above on a volume @xmath leads to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.30)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Letting @xmath and taking the difference of the previous two equations
implies

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.31)
  -- -------- -- ----------

If the blocking steps above are performed sufficiently close to the
IRFP, the effective couplings @xmath are close to their fixed point
values. Expanding each ratio about @xmath , we find

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.32)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Eq. ( 2.4.32 ) predicts the ratio @xmath on volume @xmath in terms of
ratios on smaller volumes, plus a correction term @xmath . We will
absorb the latter term as a @xmath dependent correction and assume that
the ratio on @xmath volumes approximates infinite volume. Assuming that
conformal symmetry is broken only by the finite number of spatial
lattice points @xmath , we expect finite volume corrections to depend
only on the dimensionless ratio @xmath , and thus on the flow time as
@xmath .

#### 2.4.5 Simulation details

We carried out a pilot study of SU(3) gauge theory with @xmath
degenerate fermions in the fundamental representation. We used a set of
gauge configurations that were originally generated for finite-size
study of this system [ 92 ] using a plaquette gauge action and
nHYP-smeared staggered fermions [ 93 , 94 ] . Further details on the
lattice action can be found in Refs. [ 95 , 96 , 87 , 92 ] . We
considered five values of the bare gauge coupling @xmath and @xmath ,
analyzing 46 and 31 configurations on lattice volumes of @xmath and
@xmath , respectively. The fermion mass was set to @xmath , small enough
that we expect the breaking of scale invariance to be dominated by the
finite spatial extent @xmath .

We considered only fermionic operators, and used the axial charge @xmath
for our conserved operator @xmath . Since staggered fermions have a
remnant U(1) symmetry, it is straightforward to construct a conserved
axial charge operator with @xmath [ 97 ] . We used on-site staggered
operators for the pseudoscalar, vector, and nucleon, and a 1-link
operator for the axial charge states. Our individual correlators were
consistent with simple exponential decay, although we cannot rule out a
functional dependence that includes a Yukawa-like power law correction [
98 ] .

We considered 10 flow time values between @xmath (note that the flow
range is @xmath in four dimensions.) The strong correlations in GF lead
to very small statistical errors in the flow-time dependence.

#### 2.4.6 Analysis

In the following, we work in lattice units. The ratio given in eq. (
2.4.3 ) should be independent of @xmath at large @xmath , as long as the
operator @xmath has well defined quantum numbers. At distances
comparable to the flow range, @xmath , the flowed operators overlap and
the ratios could have non-trivial and non-universal structure. Since we
used staggered fermions where the action has oscillating phase factors,
in the small @xmath region we observed significant oscillation, as shown
in figure 2.7 for the @xmath pseudoscalar operator that does not have a
partner in the channel. The width of the oscillation is about @xmath ,
after which a stable plateau develops. The decrease in the value of the
plateau as the flow time increases predicts the anomalous dimension of
the pseudoscalar operator.

We worked directly with the ratio @xmath of eq. ( 2.4.3 ), and did not
attempt to extrapolate the fermion field exponent @xmath (obtained from
using @xmath in eq. ( 2.2.19 )) to the infrared limit, as it showed much
stronger finite-volume and bare coupling dependence than the full
operator ratios. At fixed @xmath and @xmath we typically found @xmath .

As a consistency check we considered the vector operator, but found
large systematic effects due to oscillation; although we cannot quote a
precise extrapolated value, we generally found the associated anomalous
dimension consistent with zero as expected.

We predicted the anomalous dimension as a function of @xmath by
comparing the ratios at consecutive @xmath flow time values

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.33)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath . The mass anomalous dimension is predicted by considering
the pseudoscalar operator, recalling that @xmath . We estimated the
finite volume corrections by eq. ( 2.4.32 ), estimating @xmath
iteratively. We had numerical data on @xmath and @xmath volumes so
@xmath , and eq. ( 2.4.32 ) increased the effective volume to @xmath .

In figure 2.9 we show the infinite volume estimated @xmath as a function
of @xmath . There is significant dependence on the bare gauge coupling
@xmath and also on the flow time @xmath , as expected in a slowly
running system. We extrapolated to the @xmath limit as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.34)
  -- -------- -- ----------

motivated by the expectation that the correction terms should be due to
the slowly evolving irrelevant couplings, associated with
higher-dimensional operators that can mix with the operator of interest.
Based on Refs. [ 92 , 96 , 87 ] we expect the FP to be closest to the
@xmath range, so that the dependence on @xmath should be weakest in this
range.

We performed a combined fit versus @xmath and @xmath using common @xmath
, @xmath and @xmath , but allowing @xmath dependent coefficients @xmath
and @xmath . The central fit, as shown in figure 2.9 , omits @xmath and
discards the smallest and two largest @xmath values, predicting @xmath .
The other exponents obtained were @xmath and @xmath ; these likely
include some remaining finite-volume effects and thus should not
correspond directly to irrelevant operator dimensions.

We varied the analysis by dropping small/large @xmath values, and also
including or discarding @xmath and @xmath from the fit; from these
variations we estimated a systematic error of @xmath on @xmath . As an
additional cross-check on our finite volume correction procedure, we
performed an alternative analysis in which a global fit to @xmath were
carried out assuming power-law dependence on the dimensionless ratio
@xmath . This gave a central value of 0.27. We conservatively took the
difference in central values as an estimate of our finite-volume
extrapolation systematic, giving the final prediction

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.35)
  -- -------- -- ----------

combining the systematic errors in quadrature.

A significant advantage of this technique is that more complicated
composite operators can be dealt with in a straightforward way. To
demonstrate this, we considered the nucleon operator with our method.
The nucleon showed more significant oscillations in the ratio @xmath ,
continuing into the plateau region; we accounted for the oscillations by
averaging over adjacent pairs of @xmath values to obtain @xmath . The
oscillations at large @xmath may be due to the coupling of the staggered
nucleon operator to other wrong-parity states; numerically, the coupling
is small in the ratio. We defined the nucleon anomalous dimension with
an additional negative sign, @xmath , to match the convention of refs. [
99 , 85 ] . Repeating the full analysis as described yields figure 2.9
and predicts

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (2.4.36)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the finite-volume systematic error is estimated to be 0.03 and the
remaining combined systematic and statistical error is 0.04.

### 2.5 Afterword

We have demonstrated that gradient flow (GF) can be used to extract
estimates of scaling dimensions by testing the correlator ratio method
in both relatively well-understood theories, @xmath , and a relatively
complicated theory, the 12-flavor SU(3) gauge-fermion system. The method
is entirely nonperturbative. Furthermore, our method avoids the costly
procedure of ensemble matching that is required in most MCRG studies [
100 ] . Now, in the scalar theories we worked with a well-tuned system,
and in the gauge-fermion case, we worked effectively at zero fermion
mass. An important avenue for future work will be to consider the
effects of deviations from criticality in the scalar system. Another
question to address is whether the method may be extended to systems
without IRFP’s, such as QCD. We also expect the method should be fully
applicable to other conformal theories than those we have considered,
such as @xmath super-Yang-Mills [ 101 ] , and it has already been
applied by Bergner, et al. to adjoint QCD with 1, 3/2, and 2 flavors [
102 , 103 ] . Lastly, we plan to apply the method to compute anomalous
dimensions of electron bound states in 3-dimensional noncompact QED with
@xmath flavors, a system with interesting and controversial infrared
properties.

## Chapter 3 Functional RG

In this chapter we will introduce the functional or exact
renormalization group program (FRG), the goal of which is to
systematically define and solve functional PDE’s which describe the
evolution of field-theoretic quantities of interest under continuous RG
transformations. Examples of such quantities are the flowing effective
action or the flowing 1PI generator. The RG equations we encountered in
chapter 1 were differential equations in the couplings for the
observables of a theory, be they renormalized or bare ones. In contrast,
the functional RG equations are PDE’s in the field variables, which
track the evolution of the flowing action as a whole . By expanding
these functionals in powers of the field, one typically obtains an
infinite hierarchy of coupled (non-functional) PDE’s for the coefficient
functions multiplying the fields. An important difference between FRG
and the perturbative RG methods we encountered in chapter 1 is that FRG
allows for nonperturbative approaches to the study of RG, which do not
rely on Callan-Symanzik-type equations or perturbative
renormalizability. But of course, in practice, the method must implement
its own approximation strategies in order to solve the functional PDE’s,
which are often highly nonlinear. We will see that FRG can be thought of
as a continuous, or smoothed-out, implementation of block-spin RG

To get started, we introduce a functional tensor notation which proves
to be convenient when working with functional PDE’s. Then, as a warm-up
to the general program of FRG, we will describe in detail a version of
smooth high-mode elimination RG, to be compared with the typical
textbook example of sharp high mode elimination, in the framework of
perturbation theory, and we will derive the perturbative Wilson-Fisher
fixed point (for the second time in this thesis). Along the way, we will
introduce some new generating functionals, and we will develop an
understanding of what is meant by effective field theory . This
presentation will also mirror the one given later in the context of
stochastic RG. We then will describe the general derivation of FRG
equations, and the phenomena of RG fixed points in this formalism. We
will compute the gaussian fixed point action following the analysis of [
5 ] . To close the chapter, we will briefly survey various applications
of FRG which have emerged over the years.

### 3.1 Notation

In this subsection a functional (index-free) tensor notation is
introduced, to be used extensively in this chapter and the next. It is
based on that of [ 3 ] and certain conventions from differential
geometry. The notation often renders quite simple the expression of
otherwise cumbersome functional equations by avoiding explicit position
and momentum integrations and arguments, when it is appropriate to do
so. We will develop the notation by recasting the generating functionals
we defined in chapter 1 in a new form.

The first bit of notation was introduced back in chapter 1:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.1.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Sometimes this is written alternatively as @xmath . We can think of this
notation as expressing the contraction of two vectors @xmath and @xmath
whose components are @xmath and @xmath , since they have one “index.” On
a lattice, the integral would be replaced by a summation. Now, with the
notion of a functional vector comes the notion of functional tensor
products, and thus functional tensors. For example, @xmath is a rank-2
tensor, and the “dot product” above may be written in yet another way:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.1.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

@xmath -point functions may be written in terms of functional tensor
products. For example, the connected functions may be written as ¹ ¹ 1
For fermions one will need to be careful about ordering in this
notation. See [ 3 ] for one approach.

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.1.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and one can say @xmath is rank- @xmath . We can further introduce a
multilinear notation for contracting tensors against vectors, e.g. ² ² 2
This notation is commonly used in differential geometry as it allows for
the expression of tensorial quantities in a coordinate-free manner. See
[ 104 ] for examples.

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.1.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

so that the expansion of the generator in @xmath is simply written as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.1.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Whether the arguments of @xmath refer to position, momentum, or
functional vectors should be clear from context.

Another instance of multilinear notation is in the relationship between
the 1PI vertices @xmath and the @xmath . We noted in chapter 1 that
@xmath , that is, the 4-point vertex function is a
full-propagator-amputated connected 4-point function (for a @xmath
-symmetric theory). Such a relation can be expressed nicely in
multilinear notation as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.1.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

for an arbitrary functional vector @xmath . We leave the determination
of the corresponding relation for @xmath as an exercise for the curious
reader. Lastly, we remark that rank-2 tensors are functional matrices,
and we may speak of their inverses as usual. For example, the inverse
propagator and the 2-point vertex are related by @xmath , where the
functional identity has the Dirac delta as its components. With all this
new notation, we make our lives easier in many computations that come up
in functional RG, as we will observe below.

### 3.2 High-mode elimination

High-mode elimination refers to the quintessential form of RG, namely,
the systematic elimination of high-momentum (or short-distance) modes
@xmath from a field theory, while preserving its low-momentum (or
long-distance) structure. In a lattice system, this can be achieved
nonperturbatively with block-spin RG or the GFRG of chapter 2. The
former was a discrete transformation, while the latter was a continuous
transformation. If one wants to analyze the structure of the effective
action obtained by these transformations, it is usually simpler to work
in the continuum and to use a continuous RG transformation. The
framework of high-mode elimination enables one to study such effective
actions, and it is perhaps most straight-forward to use perturbation
theory, although the ultimate goal of functional RG is to apply
nonperturbative methods to study the same problem. Now, there are many
ways to carry out this program; we will adopt a method which combines
elements of the analyses of Zinn-Justin [ 8 ] , Peskin and Schroeder [
37 ] , Igarashi et al. [ 105 ] , and Kopietz et al. [ 3 ] , and which
utilizes perturbation theory.

#### 3.2.1 The bare theory

The initial motivation of high-mode elimination RG is to mimic the
discrete blocking transformations of real space RG in the context of
continuum field theory. One begins with a bare theory at cutoff @xmath
and with partition function and action, respectively,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

If one regularizes with a sharp cutoff on the momentum integrals in
@xmath , then one is working with a pseudo-lattice model of infinite
spatial volume and with non-lattice kinetic terms (e.g. @xmath vs @xmath
). Furthermore, the sharpness of the cutoff will lead to nonanalyticity
in position space, in general, and is therefore unfavorable for some
purposes. There are other means of implementing a cutoff in the
continuum, however. For a scalar field theory, a common choice is to
define a smooth cutoff function @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath for
@xmath , and implement it by a modified free propagator, ³ ³ 3 The
quantization of field theories with smooth cutoffs is described in [ 106
] under the name of “nonlocal QFT,” and has been achieved with
reasonable rigor. Here, we work in euclidean spacetime and concern
ourselves with statistical field theories. It would be interesting,
however, to attempt to apply the procedures below in quantum field
theory, proper. It seems possible, for example, to obtain effective
nonrelativistic field theories in such a manner.

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

for example. By implementing a cutoff this way, the theory may be
regularized in perturbation theory, since every internal line will
correspond to a factor of

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

A convenient choice we shall adopt for the rest of this work is
Schwinger regularization,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the inverse cutoff @xmath has been defined. Notice that such a
@xmath is nothing but a momentum space heat kernel @xmath at “time”
@xmath .

In general, the regulator should be chosen to preserve the symmetry of
the fields appearing in the theory. In this case, Schwinger
regularization suffices, but one must take greater care when dealing
with gauge theories, or theories with constraints like spin models.

#### 3.2.2 The low-mode action

We want to define a low-mode, or effective action, corresponding to the
bare theory in such a way that the cutoff of the effective theory is
lower, @xmath , and the low-momentum (or long-distance) observables
@xmath are unaffected. We begin by deriving a peculiar functional
identity:

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath               
              @xmath      (3.2.5)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath are invertible matrices, and @xmath is a
constant. To prove it, begin with the r.h.s., and redefine the @xmath
field via @xmath . The quadratic part of the action becomes

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The integral over @xmath is then gaussian (being an instance of Wick’s
theorem) evaluating to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which identifies the constant @xmath . The matrix in the quadratic part
of the @xmath action is therefore

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

(notice that the matrices need not commute, we just need @xmath
symmetric).

Next, we write the quadratic term @xmath in the bare action @xmath as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

thereby identifying @xmath and @xmath . We use the identity above and
afterward relabel @xmath , @xmath . The integral over @xmath we denote
by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the so-called high-mode propagator , because @xmath
rapidly for @xmath , while @xmath for @xmath . Complimentarily, we may
regard @xmath as a sliding infrared cutoff for the bare theory. We have
therefore avoided the nonanalytic division of sharp high-mode
elimination techniques @xmath . The @xmath field in the argument of
@xmath is sometimes called a background field with respect to the @xmath
action. For our purposes, however, we will show that the functional
@xmath is in fact the generating functional of free-propagator-amputated
connected @xmath -point functions.

To understand this, we derive another functional identity [ 3 ] . For
arbitrary action @xmath , define

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Let @xmath . By foiling out the quadratic term (for symmetric @xmath ),

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

we observe that the @xmath -integral is just the generating functional
of disconnected functions @xmath , and is therefore the exponential of
the connected generator @xmath . Hence

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Letting @xmath and taking two functional derivatives, we find

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The second term is the connected 2-point function with external free
propagators divided out, or “amputated.” Differentiating @xmath times,
one finds a relation best expressed in tensor notation,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We collect together all the information we have just uncovered, starting
with the bare theory on the l.h.s., in the form

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the low-mode effective action @xmath has been defined:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Thus, we have an exact functional expression for the low-mode effective
action. Because it is given in terms of the generator @xmath , we also
know how to systematically compute it in perturbation theory: compute
the amputated-connected @xmath -point functions determined by a theory
with (high-mode) action

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Furthermore, every transformation we performed was passive , and
therefore the observables @xmath are unchanged, except that @xmath are
not generally of the same functional form. If @xmath is some polynomial,
then @xmath will generally be a different polynomial. This is an
instance of what is referred to as operator mixing , a phenomenon we
have seen already in the context of scaling operators. Lastly, notice
that for any nontrivial theory (i.e. interacting, @xmath ), @xmath
contains nonvanishing “coefficients” @xmath , each of which has the same
symmetries as the bare action. It follows that the effective action
contains every possible term consistent with the symmetry of the bare
theory, indeed an infinite number of terms. This generic feature is an
integral aspect of the phenomenological approach to effective field
theory, which we will discuss below.

#### 3.2.3 Effective couplings

We now consider as an example the case of @xmath theory with bare action
in momentum space given by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.19)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Here we use for convenience the notations

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.20)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The value of @xmath should be clear from context; in the quartic term
above it is 4, for example. We write the functional expansion of @xmath
as usual,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.21)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The effective couplings at scale @xmath are determined by expanding the
functions @xmath about @xmath , and writing @xmath , @xmath for the
@xmath component of the direct sum @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.22)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Since the bare theory is rotationally invariant and @xmath -symmetric,
the only non-vanishing couplings have @xmath even. We will only focus on
a few of the most important couplings, out of simplicity.

The quadratic part of the low-mode action is given by the sum

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.23)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Now, the high mode action has a free propagator @xmath . In perturbation
theory in the bare coupling @xmath , the amputated 2-point function is
then, to first order,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.24)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the snail loop is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.25)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The leading behavior of @xmath in the momenta is just @xmath , and
therefore the kinetic term coefficient has no 1-loop contribution.
Denoting that coefficient by @xmath , we have @xmath . The
momentum-independent part of the function @xmath defines the effective
mass term in @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.26)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The next-most important coupling is the quartic coupling, which comes
from the amputated 4-point function at zero external momenta. A standard
perturbative calculation gives

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.27)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.28)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and where the @xmath are the sums @xmath for each distinct pairing
@xmath of external momenta, without overcounting by momentum
conservation @xmath . Other couplings, such as the sextic coupling
@xmath , may also be computed; if there is no such coupling in the bare
action, then the low-mode couplings will be a function only of the bare
mass and quartic couplings.

Momentum-dependent vertices may also be computed simply by expanding the
@xmath in @xmath near zero, which may be done for nonzero bare mass. To
get a feel for what these “higher” effective couplings look like, we
consider the example of @xmath . One finds

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.29)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the 1-loop integral is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.30)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Since the high-mode propagator vanishes as @xmath , the leading behavior
of the effective 6-point coupling is determined by the 1-loop term, and
power-counting implies it is of order @xmath .

We remark that in the low-momentum sector @xmath of the action, diagrams
that are not 1PI are suppressed by terms of order @xmath , which
explains why they do not contribute to the effective (zero-momentum)
couplings above. This is because every non-1PI diagram contains internal
propagators with no loop momenta, namely, the ones which connect 1PI
pieces. Such propagators are proportional to @xmath , which means that
they are highly suppressed. In sum,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.31)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We conclude that the low-momentum sector of the effective action
coincides with that of the quantum effective action, which in a sense
gives further justification to the name.

#### 3.2.4 Rg

A renormalization group analysis concerns itself with the scale
dependence of the theory and, if there be any, the fixed points in the
space of possible actions. Now, we like to compare actions by comparing
their coefficients. But the presence of a cutoff function in the action
makes the comparison of coefficients at different scales ambiguous. This
is most clearly understood by reverting back to the sharp cutoff
approach: comparing two actions @xmath would involve comparing integrals
with different limits, and worse, as @xmath , it would seem that all
momentum integrals vanish. But, for any @xmath , by rescaling @xmath ,
we can normalize the integration limits to @xmath . We can then compare
two actions at different scales (almost) unambiguously. In our smooth
cutoff approach, @xmath corresponds to conventionally using @xmath as
the cutoff function.

The second ambiguity relates to the field normalization. The kinetic
term in the effective action has coefficient @xmath , which is not equal
to the bare coefficient @xmath . For any field theory, the normalization
of the fields is to some extent arbitrary, however. This freedom is
reflected in the ability to always normalize one coupling in the action
to 1. The convention in field theory is to normalize the kinetic term.
Now, after performing the momentum redefinition @xmath described above,
the kinetic and mass terms in @xmath have the form

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.32)
  -- -------- -- ----------

One then defines the dimensionless rescaled effective field @xmath by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.33)
  -- -------- -- ----------

after which the quadratic terms take the form

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.34)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This suggests that the natural effective mass coupling to consider when
performing an RG transformation is the dimensionless rescaled parameter

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.35)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the scale change parameter @xmath has been introduced, and hats
denote removal of scale with @xmath , as we did in lattice theory.
Similarly, the momentum and field redefinition lead to a natural
redefinition of the effective quartic coupling,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.36)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The resulting terms in the effective action are then

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.37)
  -- -------- -- ----------

It is then unambiguous to compare this effective action at different
scales @xmath .

To study the possible fixed point behavior of this RG transformation, we
derive ODE’s for the flowing couplings @xmath perturbatively. One
differentiates the effective couplings, eqs. ( 3.2.26 , 3.2.27 ), with
respect to @xmath , replaces bare couplings by effective couplings using
their perturbative relationships, and looks for stationary points of the
resulting system of ODE’s. To begin, note that

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.2.38)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

Closed-form expressions for these integrals exist, but they are
algebraically cumbersome. It is simplest to first compute the
derivatives and then perform asymptotic expansions for @xmath large and
@xmath small. ⁴ ⁴ 4 Closed-form expressions for both integrals exist in
fact for any @xmath . See [ 105 ] for examples in 4 dimensions. We also
note that integrals that come up in smooth high-mode elimination allow
one to understand the relationship between dimensional regularization
and cutoff field theory. See [ 107 ] for some discussion of this. One
finds, keeping a few subleading terms,

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.2.39)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

and

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.2.40)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

The next step is to replace the bare couplings by their perturbation
series in @xmath , by inverting eqs. ( 3.2.26 , 3.2.27 ), and then write
@xmath in terms of @xmath . Noting that @xmath , we then compute the
flow of the rescaled couplings,

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath               
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.2.41)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

As @xmath , these equations asymptotically approach the system of ODE’s

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.2.42)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

where the coefficients @xmath are

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.43)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We immediately observe the existence of two fixed point solutions at
this order in perturbation theory. The first is the gaussian fixed point
@xmath , while the second is the famous Wilson-Fisher fixed point (WFFP)
⁵ ⁵ 5 The WFFP is usually found within the epsilon expansion, but here
we have worked explicitly in @xmath .

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.2.44)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The sign of the beta function @xmath is opposite that of the discussion
in the lattice theory chapter because increasing @xmath corresponds to
decreasing @xmath .

It is worthwhile to pause for a moment and summarize what has happened.
We began with the bare theory @xmath involving field modes up to @xmath
. We then performed a particular change of variables which yielded an
effective theory @xmath involving field modes up to @xmath . A passive
change of momenta and field variables, determined by removing canonical
mass dimensions with the scale @xmath , together with a further
rescaling for the field in order to normalize the kinetic term, led to a
dimensionless, rescaled effective theory. The flow of this theory as
@xmath decreased was analyzed by studying the leading effective
couplings, and it was found that as @xmath , the system of ODE’s for
these couplings had a fixed point. This is just the kind of IRFP
discussed in chapter 1 in the context of block-spin RG. We note that,
because the transformations involved were passive, the rescaled and
unrescaled effective actions are numerically equal, so a fixed point of
one is a fixed point of the other. The correlations of the rescaled
theory, for example @xmath , approach the correlations of the fixed
point theory as @xmath , whereas the correlations of the unrescaled
theory @xmath asymptotically approach a scaling determined by @xmath ,
the wave function renormalization. We emphasize the distinction between
rescaled and unrescaled variables because it is quite important in
lattice simulations, as we will see in chapter 4 (and as we already saw
in chapter 2 with GFRG).

#### 3.2.5 Effective field theory

The fundamental assumption of effective field theory (EFT) is that all
theories we currently work with and will continue to work with, up to
the possible exception of a quantum theory of gravity, have a limited
range of applicability, in terms of distance or energy scales . This is
certainly true of every real-world theory that has been tested to date.
This means that every theory we formulate should contain within it a
parameter which functions as a (possibly unknown) cutoff above which the
theory becomes invalid. The bare theory we considered above was not
intended to describe any physics above @xmath , for example. Now, for
condensed matter systems such as ferromagnets, the cutoff not only sets
the cutoff scale, but has a literal manifestation: the atomic spacing.
In quantum field theory, on the other hand, all or nearly all theories
under consideration take place in a continuum. But these theories
possess a cutoff, nevertheless, and therefore must correspond to some
kind of smooth cutoff, qualitatively similar to what was used above. In
practice, examples of such cutoffs are the masses of particularly heavy
particles, or symmetry-breaking scales like that of chiral perturbation
theory. ⁶ ⁶ 6 Another interesting example of how a natural smooth cutoff
can arise is in the interpretation of nonlocal quantization given in [
106 ] , where the cutoff function @xmath arises from an underlying
stochastic spacetime. The general question of how to formulate such
theories based on the data we have at low energies therefore becomes of
central interest in particle physics.

We noted above that the effective action @xmath contains all terms
consistent with the symmetries of the bare theory. The action therefore
contained all possible “nonrenormalizable” (NR) interactions once the
scale was lowered even slightly from @xmath . The action @xmath at scale
@xmath is an effective theory; it describes the same physics as @xmath ,
but with lowered cutoff @xmath . Now, in the real world, we might not
know what @xmath is, according to the fundamental assumption stated
above. The best we can do at first is to write down some effective
action with cutoff @xmath as its regularization, and go perform
scattering experiments, say, at energy @xmath ; some of these
measurements are used to set the renormalized couplings. But we know
that this action typically contains all sorts of interactions, including
the NR ones, so we have to also set those by experiment too. The reason
our effective theory remains predictive is the fact that, to any given
order in @xmath , only a finite number of NR interactions must be set
(see [ 108 ] for a detailed explanation). And once set, we can produce
predictions for all other processes to that order. As we approach
energies closer to @xmath , the number of NR interactions we must set
will proliferate, and the theory will break down. In many cases,
therefore, we can estimate the breakdown scale by measuring the strength
of the NR interactions.

In some cases we know the bare theory, in others we do not. We know that
QCD is the high-energy theory (or ‘‘UV completion’’) whose low-energy
interactions involve mesons and nucleons. We have to use the methods of
EFT to describe the low-energy processes of QCD, however, because
perturbation theory breaks down at low energies as the gauge coupling
becomes strong. ⁷ ⁷ 7 This “low-energy” scale corresponds to @xmath in
the discussion above; it arises from the dynamics of QCD. In this
context, @xmath refers instead to whatever the cutoff of QCD might be.
This EFT is called chiral perturbation theory . It is widely expected
that the Standard Model itself is an effective theory, and experimental
measurement of the NR-interactions allows for predictions of its
breakdown scale. Lastly, we remark that even quantum gravity can be
treated in an effective manner, because whatever its correct description
might be at very high energies (the Planck scale @xmath ), it is still
sensible to use the (nonrenormalizable) theory obtained by direct
quantization of General Relativity, expanded about a flat spacetime
metric, for processes at scales far, far below @xmath . For an
introduction to EFT in QED and the Standard Model, we refer the reader
to [ 108 ] , to [ 109 ] for a more systematic account (including
gravity, chiral perturbation theory, and non-relativistic EFT’s), and
for a rigorous exposition of the existence of effective scalar field
theory in 4 dimensions, to [ 110 ] .

### 3.3 Exact RG equations

We now turn to the derivation of the so-called exact RG equations which
are studied in the enterprise of functional RG (FRG). We will discuss
the nature of fixed points of such transformations, finding a close
parallel with the block-spin analysis of chapter 1, and a few examples
will be given along the way. Before plunging into these derivations, we
first describe some of the early history of FRG.

On 2 June 1971, Wilson’s paper [ 31 ] was received, in which his
approximate RG recursion formula for blocking transformations was
introduced. In October, his paper with Fisher [ 32 ] on the epsilon
expansion was submitted. In this paper they described the recursion
formula in @xmath dimensions. By 27 October of 1972, Wegner and Houghton
[ 111 ] derived a differential equation for the “blocked” Hamiltonian
using a sharp cutoff, which implied continuous versions of the recursion
formulas of Wilson and Fisher. The paper was published in July 1973, the
same month that Wilson and Kogut’s review [ 5 ] of the epsilon-expansion
was received. Deep in their grand review, on the @xmath page, was
presented a differential equation for the blocked Hamiltonian, which,
like Wegner’s, involved a sharp cutoff for the bare theory, but unlike
Wegner’s, utilized a smooth suppression of high modes, rather than a
sharp elimination, in a manner similar to what we saw under smooth
high-mode elimination above. They distinguished low modes from high
modes by referring to the former as “not terribly integrated,” and the
latter as “almost completely integrated”; see figure 3.1 .

In the review, Wilson notes that he presented the exact RG equations at
a conference at Irvine in 1970 [ 5 ] . It is possible to imagine Wilson
having put them away while pursuing the more tractable approach provided
by the epsilon-expansion, as he goes on to state that “these equations
are very complicated so they will not be discussed in great detail.”
Nevertheless, the works of Wilson, Kogut, Wegner, and Houghton
constituted the first instances of functional RG equations, which differ
in kind from the recursion formulas and epsilon-expansion by tracking
the evolution of the effective action, as a whole , rather than a small
number of couplings. Thus we see that FRG was developed essentially
simultaneously with modern RG theory. In the ensuing decade, the subject
was advanced somewhat slowly, as the Callan-Symanzik approach combined
with epsilon expansion (and/or dimensional regularization) proved its
worth, having been used to demonstrate the asymptotic freedom of
Yang-Mills theories and QCD [ 48 , 49 , 112 ] .

Although a small number of researchers continued to work on FRG during
this time, it is fair to say that FRG remained somewhat stagnant. Its
revival did not come until the late 80’s and early 90’s after the works
of Polchinski [ 113 ] , Hasenfratz and Hasenfratz [ 114 ] , and
Wetterich [ 115 , 116 ] recalled the work of the early days and proposed
new methods and applications of the FRG.

#### 3.3.1 Wegner’s approach

The following derivation is based on that of Wegner [ 117 ] and that of
Rosten [ 118 ] . We have seen that, because the RG transformations are
passive, the partition functions “at different scales” are equal. Let us
imagine we have transformed down to scale @xmath , and then perform a
small transformation such that the new scale is @xmath . Labeling the
partition functions with respect to the effective cutoffs in their
actions, we can characterize the invariance condition as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.3.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The second term in the limit definition is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.3.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We imagine that the effective action at @xmath was obtained by a
transformation of field variables @xmath , a continuous analog of a
blocking transformation,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.3.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath was the field at scale @xmath , and @xmath (obtained from
@xmath ), so that decreasing @xmath corresponds to increasing @xmath .
For example, the new fields might have been obtained from the old ones
by a local smoothing transformation which damps high modes, ⁸ ⁸ 8 We
will see that this transformation is in fact not sufficient as an RG
transformation. The form of the transformation corresponding to the
high-mode elimination RG we considered earlier is given in eq. ( 3.3.24
).

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.3.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The functional vector @xmath is sometimes called the ‘‘flow-vector.’’
Introducing a blackboard bold gradient symbol for the functional
derivative, the notation ⁹ ⁹ 9 The LaTeX  command for this symbol is
available upon request.

  -- -- -- ---------
           (3.3.5)
  -- -- -- ---------

will be used in what follows, often omitting the @xmath subscript when
it is not too confusing. The expansion of the action in @xmath is then

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.3.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In general, the measure will change as well:

  -- -- -- ---------
           (3.3.7)
  -- -- -- ---------

From the invariance of the partition function above, and because the
Boltzmann factor is positive definite, we equate the integrand to zero.
This yields the Wegner flow equation, dropping primes,

  -- -- -- ---------
           (3.3.8)
  -- -- -- ---------

Wegner suggested that the flow equation must be nonlinear in @xmath in
order to constitute an RG transformation, meaning that @xmath must
depend on @xmath . We will attempt to give an explanation for why in
what follows. We then choose the form (which can be called “diffusive”
for reasons discussed later on)

  -- -- -- ---------
           (3.3.9)
  -- -- -- ---------

where @xmath is some appropriately chosen (positive) cutoff function,
which is a functional matrix, and @xmath is a functional vector. In
Rosten’s analysis, @xmath where @xmath is the “seed action.” The
resulting flow equation is (abusing matrix notation slightly by
factoring out @xmath )

  -- -- -- ----------
           (3.3.10)
  -- -- -- ----------

This equation will generally be called the “exact RG equation” (ERGE).
Most of the ERGE’s for effective actions considered in the literature so
far have been of this form. The most common choices for scalar theories
are @xmath or @xmath . When @xmath is a polynomial of higher order in
@xmath , the RG transformation is called nonlinear . Wilson and Bell
considered an example of such a flow in 1974, but very few others have
been considered analytically (spin models with the constraint @xmath ,
however, induce a nonlinearity, which is implemented numerically by
projections). We shall look at nonlinear RG’s in chapter 4.

We can understand intuitively what the ERGE is doing by considering the
Euler approximation of the PDE,

  -- -- -- ----------
           (3.3.11)
  -- -- -- ----------

If the action @xmath is more than quadratic in @xmath , the @xmath term
generates higher-polynomial terms, the @xmath term generates
lower-polynomial terms, and depending on the choice of @xmath , the last
two terms can either generate new terms and/or modify existing terms.
For example, with a @xmath type action, the effective action after one
step would have modified quadratic and quartic couplings but also a
sextic term is generated. This kind of generation and mixing of terms in
the action is what one expects of generic RG transformations. If @xmath
had been chosen to be independent of @xmath , then this behavior would
not have occurred (at least for linear @xmath ); the effective action
might have terms generated by @xmath , but there would be no feedback of
@xmath on itself. We take this as justifying Wegner’s instinct.

In terms of the Boltzmann weight @xmath , the flow equation can be
written as

  -- -- -- ----------
           (3.3.12)
  -- -- -- ----------

The flow vector @xmath typically depends on @xmath , so this form is not
very useful. For the choice of diffusive @xmath above, it becomes

  -- -- -- ----------
           (3.3.13)
  -- -- -- ----------

This equation is of the form of a Fokker-Planck equation with diffusion
matrix @xmath and drift @xmath , an observation which forms the basis of
stochastic renormalization group, which we explore in the last chapter.
We also see the reason for calling the choice eq. ( 3.3.9 ) “diffusive”:
the Fokker-Planck equation describes the evolution of a diffusion
process.

In the section on high-mode elimination, we observed the importance of
considering rescaled effective degrees of freedom when searching for RG
fixed points. To implement the effect of rescaling on the level of the
flow equations, we can change variables in the ERGE above. From the
definitions @xmath and @xmath , we can replace functional derivatives
using

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The second-derivative term then becomes

  -- -- -- ----------
           (3.3.15)
  -- -- -- ----------

where @xmath . The seed term similarly becomes

  -- -- -- ----------
           (3.3.16)
  -- -- -- ----------

with @xmath . The distribution @xmath of the rescaled fields is equal to
@xmath up to an overall normalization, but because they have different
dependence on @xmath at fixed field argument, the @xmath -derivative on
the l.h.s. of the ERGE changes. Write the distribution as @xmath . Then
the relation of the two distributions is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and the derivative becomes

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.3.18)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

The operator

  -- -- -- ----------
           (3.3.19)
  -- -- -- ----------

is a representation of the dilatation generator on functionals. If the
field rescaling involves the full wave function renormalization, @xmath
, then

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.20)
  -- -------- -- ----------

in @xmath , while the cutoff function and drift terms become

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.21)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The rescaled flow equation for @xmath is then

  -- -- -- ----------
           (3.3.22)
  -- -- -- ----------

The dilatation generator can be thought of as a redefinition of @xmath ,
but we will keep them separate in our presentation. It has been
suggested that @xmath and @xmath should be chosen such that @xmath and
@xmath are independent of @xmath . I do not regard this as an essential
ingredient of RG transformations, but only one of practical benefit.
Solving this equation directly is generally difficult, but can be done
exactly in a few simple cases. However, it is interesting that the
equation obtained by setting @xmath , in principle, determines the RG
fixed point action. Apart from the approximations made in FRG (described
at the end of this chapter), we remark that one can attempt applying a
functional method of characteristics [ 119 ] ; we remark that this
approach can reproduce the solution to many linear RG’s.

By direct differentiation of the formula for the effective low-mode
action, eq. ( 3.2.10 ), we can obtain the ERGE for high-mode elimination
as performed in section 2. One finds that it has the form of eq. (
3.3.10 ) with diffusion and drift

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.23)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and therefore the flow vector is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.24)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which determines the appropriate type of change of variables eq. ( 3.3.3
) in this case, although we did not need to perform it in this way to
study the effective action.

#### 3.3.2 Constraint functionals

Wilson and Kogut (WK) did not follow the approach above to arrive at
their functional RG equation [ 5 ] . They began, rather, with an analogy
to the Green function solution of partial differential equations,
generalizing the notion to functional equations. They noted that the
functional ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 WK use an unconventional field @xmath with mass
dimension @xmath , i.e., their kinetic term coefficient is dimensionful.
But they work in units such that @xmath and integrals have a sharp
cutoff.

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.25)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath for some as-yet undetermined @xmath , is the Green
functional of the PDE

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.26)
  -- -------- -- ----------

subject to the initial condition @xmath , when the normalization @xmath
is chosen appropriately. For arbitrary initial condition @xmath , the
solution would then be

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.27)
  -- -------- -- ----------

In words, the distribution of fields @xmath is a gaussian-smearing of
the initial distribution @xmath , such that the mean value of the field
@xmath is @xmath , within a variance determined by the denominator in
the exponent. Thus, the Green function can be thought of as imposing a
statistical constraint which suppresses the high modes of @xmath in a
smooth fashion. ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 RG transformations which use a delta function
rather than @xmath are sometimes used. Traditional spin-blocking RG is
an example. But one must be careful if using delta functions in the
continuum, as we discuss in chapter 4. If the Green functional is such
that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.28)
  -- -------- -- ----------

then one can insert the r.h.s. into the partition function, integrate
over @xmath , and obtain @xmath as the new Boltzmann weight. Such a
procedure seems different from that of Wegner, on the face of it, but we
will see below that WK’s route is a special case of Wegner’s. From the
relation

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.29)
  -- -------- -- ----------

one obtains the ERGE

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.30)
  -- -------- -- ----------

By comparison with Wegner’s formalism in the previous section, we see
that WK’s exact RG is a special case of diffusive FRG with ¹² ¹² 12 The
“cutoff function” @xmath is not truly a cutoff function for Wilson and
Kogut. They use a sharp cutoff on all momentum integrals, @xmath .

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.31)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Inspection of @xmath suggests that the effective scale is @xmath , which
implies the rescaled variables

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.32)
  -- -------- -- ----------

WK insist that the rescaling factor @xmath should be determined by
demanding that the ERGE is independent of @xmath in rescaled variables.
Since @xmath , the rescaled ERGE is

  -- -- -- ----------
           (3.3.33)
  -- -- -- ----------

The function @xmath is determined by choosing a normalization condition
for the kinetic term for all @xmath . In the gaussian model, it will
turn out that @xmath is appropriate. We will describe the gaussian fixed
point of WK’s ERGE in the next section.

#### 3.3.3 Fixed points

In terms of @xmath , a fixed point solution is an action @xmath for
which @xmath , which typically must occur in the limit @xmath . Dropping
bars for dimless quantities, the ERGE eq. ( 3.3.10 ) implies that a
fixed point action satisfies

  -- -- -- ----------
           (3.3.34)
  -- -- -- ----------

assuming there is some limit of @xmath and @xmath as @xmath .

We are often interested in the behavior of actions that are slightly
deformed from the fixed point, in order to study the various asymptotic
behaviors of these deformations. We may perturb about the fixed point by
letting

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.35)
  -- -------- -- ----------

with @xmath small for large @xmath , and linearizing the flowing
equation:

  -- -- -- -- ----------
              (3.3.36)
              (3.3.37)
  -- -- -- -- ----------

Assuming @xmath decays with time, we drop the @xmath term in what
follows. Furthermore, we see that assuming @xmath is independent of
@xmath further simplifies the equation by dropping @xmath . It is then
clear how WK’s demand of a @xmath -independent ERGE can simplify
analyses. In this simplified (but typical) case, then, the linearized
flow equation becomes

  -- -- -- ----------
           (3.3.38)
  -- -- -- ----------

Variables separate, @xmath , and if we let @xmath , then we have an
eigenvalue equation for @xmath ,

  -- -- -- ----------
           (3.3.39)
  -- -- -- ----------

which generally will have a spectrum @xmath (which will be discrete
under certain assumptions [ 118 ] ). Therefore, the perturbed action
near a fixed point can be written as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.40)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The @xmath are called scaling operators , and the @xmath are their RG
eigenvalues. We observe three distinct types of behavior for such
perturbations. For the operator @xmath , we have

-   @xmath : the perturbation decays with time exponentially, and is
    called irrelevant ,

-   @xmath : the perturbation is independent of time, and is called
    exactly marginal ,

-   @xmath : the perturbation increases exponentially, and is called
    relevant .

Thus we recover the same kind of behavior for the perturbations about a
fixed point that were observed using the discrete block-spin theory of
chapter 1, except that the RG flow is parameterized by @xmath rather
than @xmath . It will be useful in what follows to use the continuous
analog of the scale factor, @xmath .

The expectation values of scaling operators behave in a simple way under
RG transformations in the vicinity of the fixed point. Suppose @xmath
close to @xmath under the RG flow. ¹³ ¹³ 13 The following derivation is
adapted to FRG from the approach described in [ 120 ] . Then deform the
initial action via the scaling operator @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.41)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is a smooth parameter. The flowing action @xmath may be
written as a linear combination of the scaling operators. Thus @xmath
can be viewed as a deformation of the associated coupling. This means
that, under an RG transformation @xmath , the coupling changes simply:
@xmath , where @xmath . Now, from the general relation

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.42)
  -- -------- -- ----------

we may derive @xmath . The scaling operators above are volume integrals
of local scaling operators @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath is a
dimensionless distance at the bare scale ( @xmath ). Hence

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.43)
  -- -------- -- ----------

being the scaling dimension of the operator. By letting @xmath in this
scaling formula, we can derive scaling laws for higher @xmath -point
functions of @xmath by further differentiation. Thus, when we say that a
scaling operator changes as @xmath , it is true either as a term in the
effective action (at constant coupling), or within expectation values at
different RG scales. In particular, it implies the correlator scaling
laws for scaling operators that we described in block-spin RG and which
formed the basis of the GFRG method of chapter 2.

The example of the GFP of Wilson and Kogut’s ERGE will now be discussed.
In terms of the action @xmath , their ERGE becomes

  -- -- -- ----------
           (3.3.44)
  -- -- -- ----------

If the bare action is gaussian, the effective action will also still be
gaussian. Writing

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.45)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath , and noting that integration by parts (discarding
boundaries) implies

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.46)
  -- -------- -- ----------

then determines a PDE for the 2-point term @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.47)
  -- -------- -- ----------

For @xmath , then @xmath . We solve the equation by the method of
characteristics. First we find the integral curves of the vector field
on @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.48)
  -- -------- -- ----------

namely, the curves @xmath parameterized by @xmath and determined by the
ODE’s

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.49)
  -- -------- -- ----------

with initial condition @xmath — hence we can just use @xmath as the
parameter along every curve. The first order PDE above then transports
@xmath along the integrals curves of @xmath via

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.50)
  -- -------- -- ----------

whose solution @xmath is the value of @xmath at a point along the curve
determined by @xmath and the initial conditions for @xmath . The
solution is then

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.51)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath , and

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.52)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The initial condition for @xmath is the quadratic part @xmath of bare
action. Geometrically, it is the value of @xmath along the @xmath axis.
If we want the solution at a point @xmath , we use the fact that @xmath
can be taken as the value of the momentum at parameter value @xmath
along a curve starting from the @xmath -axis, where the momenta are
@xmath . Writing @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.3.53)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

If the initial condition is the standard kinetic term, @xmath , we find

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.54)
  -- -------- -- ----------

To obtain a nonzero and nonuniform Boltzmann distribution as @xmath , we
see that we must choose @xmath in @xmath . The limit is then

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (3.3.55)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Thus, the ERGE of Wilson and Kogut indeed has a gaussian fixed point,
and in fact it possesses a line of fixed points parameterized by @xmath
such that the Boltzmann factor is bounded above. One may alternatively
solve the fixed point equation directly, in which case @xmath arises as
an integration constant.

### 3.4 Various implementations

I close this chapter with a brief summary of various methods and
applications of the formalism of functional RG that have arisen after
its initial formulation in the 1970’s. We will not give in-depth
accounts of them and refer instead to other sources and reviews for the
interested reader. Also note that the items below are, of course, not
necessarily mutually exclusive.

-    Polchinski equation. In 1983 Polchinski wrote down an RG equation
    inspired by that of Wilson and Kogut [ 113 ] . Rather than using his
    ERGE to study fixed points and RG flows in the abstract, he used it
    to prove perturbative renormalizability in a novel and simpler way
    than usual. It also laid the groundwork for precise formulations of
    effective field theory. His proof has since been made quite rigorous
    [ 121 , 110 ] , and versions of it have been carried out in other
    systems, like QED4 [ 122 ] .

-    Derivative expansion. The simplest truncation strategy in FRG is
    the local potential approximation (LPA) [ 114 , 123 , 124 ] . It
    proceeds by fixing the kinetic term as @xmath and ignoring all other
    momentum dependence in the effective action, yielding an ERGE for
    the potential @xmath . The LPA is a first-order approximation to the
    more general derivative expansion , in which the effective action is
    expanded in powers of momenta. A drawback to the most basic approach
    (the LPA) is that the @xmath exponent is zero, because there is no
    need to correct for would-be changes of the kinetic term, and
    therefore will only be expected to be accurate in systems like
    @xmath where @xmath is small, but this defect lessens with higher
    orders [ 124 ] .

-    Average effective action. The concept of a constraint functional
    was revived in the works of Wetterich in the early 1990’s. He
    introduced a quantity called the average effective action @xmath ,
    which corresponds to the high-mode action discussed above [ 116 ] .
    This action satisfies an ERGE that is often simpler in form than
    that of the flowing effective action @xmath , as it deals directly
    with 1PI functions [ 125 ] , whereas in general the contributions
    @xmath are merely connected. Wetterich’s original application of
    this formalism was to the evolution of the effective potential in
    the broken-symmetry phase of scalar field theories, but has since
    found numerous applications.

-    Condensed matter. Functional RG has been adapted to fermionic
    models in condensed matter theory since the early 2000’s in order to
    study long-distance properties of such systems. By “long distance,”
    one here means close to the Fermi surface . An important difference
    with respect to RG as presented in this thesis is that the rescaling
    step in the RG transformation should rescale momenta relative to the
    Fermi surface. See [ 3 ] for an exposition.

-    Asymptotic safety. In the realm of quantum gravity it was proposed
    by Weinberg long ago [ 126 ] that a possible solution to the puzzle
    of the high-energy limit of quantized General Relativity would be
    the existence of a UVFP for the gravitational interaction.
    Perturbative methods are typically assumed to be untrustworthy at
    high energies in this theory, so it is natural to attempt to apply
    the nonperturbative methods of FRG to quantum gravity in search of
    fixed points. See [ 127 , 128 ] for reviews.

## Chapter 4 Stochastic RG

In this chapter, we will demonstrate the equivalence of certain kinds of
FRG transformations with a class of stochastic (Markov) processes on
field space. ¹ ¹ 1 See [ 129 ] for a mathematician’s introduction to
stochastic processes, [ 8 ] for a physicist’s introduction, and [ 52 , 8
] for an introduction to their field-theoretical generalization in the
context of stochastic quantization. The essential aspects are reviewed
in Appendix B. It has been noted before [ 130 , 131 , 120 ] that the
functional RG equations for effective actions, when written in terms of
effective Boltzmann weights, are of the form of a Fokker-Planck (FP)
equation, whose solution is therefore a probability distribution over
effective fields. Taking this observation seriously, and recalling that
Fokker-Planck distributions can be thought of as being generated by a
Langevin equation on the degrees of freedom appearing in the FP
distribution, one may ask what kinds of Langevin equation generate the
FRG effective actions. In what follows, we will define an RG
transformation by a particularly simple (linear) choice of Langevin
equation, and show by direct calculation that the transition functions
resemble the constraint functionals found in the literature of FRG. The
effective action for the specific case of @xmath theory in three
dimensions will then be discussed, and the existence of a nontrivial IR
fixed point will be checked to 1-loop order in perturbation theory. It
will therefore become apparent that although the stationary distribution
of the FP equation would be expected to be gaussian, a simple rescaling
of variables allows for an interacting fixed point solution. ² ² 2 This
is not surprising from the FRG perspective, of course, but it may be
unexpected from the standpoint of stochastic processes, where the
stationary distributions of the Fokker-Planck equation are expected to
involve the potential whose gradient appears as the drift term in the
Langevin equation [ 129 ] .

In chapter 2 we described the relationship of gradient flow (GF) with
RG, and at various points mentioned that an alternative approach to the
theory, not based on a block-spin analogy, was possible. Before
describing the approach, we mention that other analytic work has been
done [ 59 , 60 , 61 , 132 , 133 ] connecting GF to the framework of
functional RG. In particular, it was noted by Abe and Fukuma that
certain definitions of a GF effective action lead to a kind of Langevin
equation [ 132 ] (though different from what we propose here), and later
by Sonoda, that the connected @xmath -point functions of a particular
FRG effective theory are equal to the GF observables up to
proportionality [ 133 ] . The relationship between stochastic processes
with “colored noise” and RG has also been explored recently in [ 134 ] .

The equivalence we discuss here is a formulation of the Monte Carlo
Renormalization Group (MCRG) principle for FRG. Recall that the kind of
MCRG discussed by Swendsen [ 34 ] in the 1980’s provided a prescription
for computing observables in an effective theory by computing blocked
observables in a bare theory, that is, without having to know the
effective action. A similar property will be found for the stochastic RG
transformation, namely, that effective observables may be computed from
the stochastic observables generated by the Langevin equation, whose
initial condition is the bare field. The MCRG property will be valid for
both lattice and continuum theories alike, thereby suggesting the
possibility of computing general observables in an effective theory on
the lattice by integrating a Langevin equation on top of the ensemble
generated in the MCMC simulation of the corresponding bare theory.

The relationship to gradient flow will then follow from an observation
made by Wilson and Kogut [ 5 ] , and recently connected to gradient flow
by Sonoda and Suzuki [ 133 ] . In the context of the stochastic RG
transformation, it follows from the MCRG equivalence that the connected
expectation values of an FRG effective theory are equal to
gradient-flowed expectations up to additive corrections that depend on
the choice of Langevin equation, and which decay exponentially at large
distances. This relationship implies that the measurement of
gradient-flowed quantities is sufficient for the determination of
long-distance critical properties of the theory, in much the same way as
spin-blocked observables at large distances. This avoids the necessity
of performing a full Langevin equation simulation if one only cares
about long-distance properties.

A virtue of the characterization of FRG in terms of stochastic processes
is that the observables of the effective theory satisfy differential
equations involving the generator of the Markov process, allowing one to
study the flow of the observables directly, without knowledge of the
effective action. An analysis of these equations for discrete, small
time steps leads to the stochastic RG instantiation of usual RG scaling
laws of correlations of the fundamental field, as well as of composite
operators built from it. In particular, by virtue of the stochastic MCRG
equivalence, one is led to correlator ratio formulas of the sort
described in chapter 2, implying a method for measuring scaling
dimensions of operators close to a critical fixed point. Thus, the
results of chapter 2 may be regarded as a consequence of the stochastic
RG idea.

What follows is an exposition of stochastic RG based on the contents of
[ 135 ] , but expanded upon in various places.

### 4.1 Stochastic processes and FRG

Here we discuss the general framework for stochastic RG. The RG
transformation will be defined by a Langevin equation on the degrees of
freedom of a field theory. The simplicity of the equation will allow for
an explicit calculation of the probability distribution which it
generates, and the functional form of the distribution will entail an
equivalence to conventional FRG transformations. A brief consideration
of the observables generated by the stochastic process will lead to the
MCRG equivalence between the effective theory and the stochastic
observables. Lastly, we will comment on the pitfalls of a seemingly
simpler definition of the effective theory.

#### 4.1.1 The Langevin equation

We will define an RG transformation by a stochastic process @xmath on
field space over @xmath , determined by a Langevin equation (LE) of the
form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.1.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is positive for @xmath and @xmath , e.g. @xmath , where
@xmath . ³ ³ 3 Of course, the realm of stochastic quantization [ 52 ]
deals with writing field theory expectation values as equilibrium limits
of a stochastic process on field space. Here, however, the bare theory
is kept as a traditional field theory, and the stochasticity applies to
the RG transformation only. See the end of Appendix B for the main ideas
of SQ. The “time” @xmath in this equation does not denote physical time,
but rather an “RG time” which we will call flow time , or simply time .
The noise @xmath is chosen to be gaussian-distributed according to the
measure

  -- -- -- ---------
           (4.1.2)
  -- -- -- ---------

where the notation @xmath denotes a quadratic form, written variously as
⁴ ⁴ 4 We abbreviate @xmath and @xmath when no confusion arises.

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.1.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The cutoff function @xmath suppresses noise momentum modes greater than
@xmath , e.g. @xmath under Schwinger regularization. ⁵ ⁵ 5 The LE and
measure @xmath can easily be written for a lattice theory, in which case
the cutoff function @xmath is not necessary, as the lattice naturally
regulates the noise at the bare scale. Expectation values with respect
to the noise distribution of functions @xmath are defined by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.1.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The first two moments of @xmath are then

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.1.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Later we will take the initial condition @xmath to be distributed
according to a measure @xmath corresponding to the bare theory of
interest, the cutoff of which is chosen to be @xmath . Hence, the cutoff
for the noise is chosen to match the cutoff of the bare theory.

Turning back to eq. ( 4.1.2 ), the constant @xmath is chosen to
normalize @xmath to unity, @xmath is the (dimensionless) variance of the
noise, and @xmath is an arbitrary time interval large enough to include
all desired times. In position space, the Langevin equation takes the
form of a stochastic heat equation

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.1.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

For the case @xmath , one has @xmath . In position space, therefore, we
see that the equation becomes a stochastic partial differential
equation.

The form of the momentum space equation above is a simple
field-theoretic generalization of the well-known Ornstein-Uhlenbeck (OU)
process (i.e. damped Brownian motion) @xmath with Langevin equation and
solution [ 8 ] , respectively,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.1.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is gaussian white noise, so it is quite simple to find the
solution. One treats the noise term like a non-homogeneous part of the
equation, finding

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.1.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is a generalized momentum space heat kernel of the form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.1.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In position space, one finds

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We will sometimes denote the solution’s dependence on initial condition
and noise by @xmath . The first term on the r.h.s. implies that the mean
of @xmath satisfies the free gradient flow equation, i.e. “heat”
equation, corresponding to the differential operator @xmath .

#### 4.1.2 The Fokker-Planck distribution

With the explicit solution in-hand, one can compute the probability
distribution of fields @xmath at time @xmath given @xmath at @xmath . We
say that the Langevin equation generates a Fokker-Planck (FP)
distribution @xmath defined by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

From the definition of noise expectations, we then find

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Substituting in the explicit solution for @xmath , the integrand becomes

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.1.13)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

the constant @xmath involving times @xmath , which divide out of any
noise averages and will now be dropped. The noise integral over relevant
@xmath ’s is a standard gaussian integral, which yields

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Next, note that the @xmath -integral (which does not care about @xmath
or @xmath ) produces a kernel

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which in momentum space is given by a diagonal matrix,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We will sometimes denote @xmath by @xmath ; the inverse exists by virtue
of the restrictions on @xmath . The remaining @xmath -integral is also
gaussian, and evaluates to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Here we recognize the similarity of this functional to the constraint
functional of Wilson and Kogut [ 5 ] that we worked with in chapter 3,
as well as those found in [ 116 , 105 ] . We will call such a functional
a gaussian constraint functional or a transition function (when
emphasizing its probabilistic interpretation). In momentum space, the
exponent is explicitly

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

One observes that the mean of the field @xmath is set to the flowed
field @xmath within a functional variance determined by @xmath . Thus
the effect of the stochastic RG transformation is to produce a low-mode
fluctuating field, in the sense that the mean value of modes of @xmath
with @xmath are exponentially suppressed. For @xmath , this suggests
that the effective cutoff of the resulting theory is roughly @xmath ; a
more precise identification will be made later.

For reasons explained in the next subsection, we may write the
transition function as @xmath rather than @xmath , and we will sometimes
suppress the initial condition by writing @xmath . The transition
function is a Green function for the Fokker-Planck equation

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath               
              @xmath      (4.1.19)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

where the drift vector @xmath and diffusion matrix @xmath are defined by
[ 129 ]

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.20)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.21)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

A derivation of the FP equation above is provided in Appendix B, where
it is demonstrated that such an equation follows from the LE

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.22)
  -- -------- -- ----------

With the explicit solution eq. ( 4.1.17 ), we compute

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.23)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.1.24)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

as expected. If the initial condition @xmath is distributed according to
a measure @xmath corresponding to a bare theory, then the effective
distribution

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.25)
  -- -------- -- ----------

also satisfies the FP equation, with initial condition @xmath . For the
specific choice eq. ( 4.1.1 ) of LE above, we find

  -- -- -- ----------
           (4.1.26)
  -- -- -- ----------

where we have set @xmath .

The drift term @xmath may be regarded as the functional derivative of
what we might call a “flow action”

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.27)
  -- -------- -- ----------

in which case one would have @xmath . For arbitrary choices of @xmath ,
the Langevin equation may become nonlinear and the (still linear) FP
equation generalizes to

  -- -- -- ----------
           (4.1.28)
  -- -- -- ----------

Thus we observe that the stochastic process generates ERGE’s of the form
described in chapter 3. Of course, by writing @xmath and letting @xmath
, one recovers functional PDE’s for the effective action @xmath given
some bare action @xmath , similar to the Polchinski equation.

There are many possibilities for how to generalize the scheme presented
above. First, one could choose a different distribution for the noise,
perhaps even a non-gaussian one. Second, one could generalize the flow
action to be arbitrarily complicated in @xmath , thereby making the
Langevin equation non-linear, but these will generate FP distributions
which are more difficult to calculate; we will discuss nonlinear RG’s at
the end of this chapter. For theories whose field variables are in
compact spaces, or theories with local symmetries, however, one must use
non-linear LEs to ensure that the flow preserves the symmetry; such
equations will likely resemble those found in the context of stochastic
quantization [ 52 , 136 ] .

I remark that the stochastic characterization of RG is a natural one to
take. In ordinary stochastic processes, such as Einstein’s theory of
Brownian motion in 1905, the random noise represents the influence of
small-scale degrees of freedom on the large-scale ones: the molecular
bath in which the dust particle is submerged imparts random kicks to the
particle. In the case of field theory, we see that the noise plays the
role of short-distance degrees of freedom randomly kicking the momentum
modes of the field. The drift term enforces the overall damping of high
modes, while the noise guarantees that the high modes are made to
interact (indirectly) with the low modes, as is apparent from the form
of the gaussian constraint functional and the influence of high-mode
loops in the effective action that we will describe below.

#### 4.1.3 Mcrg

Although the transition functional above has the same form as the
constraint functionals found in the FRG literature, a notable difference
here is that the kernel @xmath is determined by the associated Langevin
equation, having a fixed relation to @xmath , the choice of drift. Thus,
if one wants to change the details of the constraint functional, one
must find the appropriate LE.

The initial condition for the transition function, @xmath , is
guaranteed by the fact that it is generated by a LE with initial
condition @xmath . As a distribution, it is furthermore normalized such
that for all @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.29)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and in particular, the integral is independent of the field @xmath .
These conditions allow one to define the effective theory in a more
conventional way by inserting unity into the partition function @xmath
of the bare theory as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.30)
  -- -------- -- ----------

thereby defining a Boltzmann weight of effective (low-mode) fields

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.31)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and the partition function remains invariant.

The stochastic process generated by a Langevin equation is a Markov
process, so that future states depend only on the present state, so long
as the noise at different times are uncorrelated. This kind of feature
was desirable at least in Wilson’s philosophy of RG, where any
particular blocking step could be carried out by knowing only the
previous step. In terms of the abstract distribution @xmath this
implies, @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.32)
  -- -------- -- ----------

By considering time-homogeneous Langevin equations (i.e. no explicit
@xmath -dependence in the LE or the noise variance), the transition
function depends only on the difference @xmath , and we can write @xmath
. ⁶ ⁶ 6 The noise variance can be chosen to depend on time, but this
spoils the convenience of time-homogeneity. This property may also be
directly computed from the definition, eq. ( 4.1.11 ), suitably modified
to have the initial condition @xmath . It follows that the set @xmath
form an abelian semigroup of operators and may be written in terms of a
generator @xmath as @xmath [ 129 ] . We will discuss @xmath in the last
section. For now we simply note that @xmath is the adjoint of the
functional differential operator appearing in the FP equation.

Next, consider the usual definition of the expectation value of an
operator @xmath in the effective theory,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.33)
  -- -------- -- ----------

By inserting the definition eq. ( 4.1.31 ), and noting that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.34)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath denotes the solution of the LE, one readily obtains the
equality

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.35)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This formula states the equivalence of a low-mode FRG effective theory
and a double expectation value over the bare fields and the random
noise. Since the right-hand side may be calculated without knowledge of
the effective action, it further constitutes a generalization of MCRG to
FRG for all observables. Notice that there are just as many degrees of
freedom @xmath as there are @xmath (this is especially clear on the
lattice). A possible application of this formula to Swendsen-style MCRG
will be discussed at the end of the chapter.

In the next section, we will explore various properties of the effective
action @xmath defined above. First, however, one might wonder why the
noise average is necessary in eq. ( 4.1.35 ), when compared with the
corresponding statement for a spin-blocked theory [ 34 ] ,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.36)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath denotes the blocking operator. This is perhaps clarified by
the fact that when spin-blocking, there are fewer blocked spins than
bare spins, so the blocked expectation values really involve an
integration over “extra” degrees of freedom, from the perspective of the
effective theory; here the role is played by noise. If one were to
choose a blocked lattice of the same size as the original, so that the
bare Boltzmann factor were integrated against a delta functional over
the whole lattice, the resulting blocked action would be trivial,
namely, @xmath . Likewise in the continuum, it has long been assumed [
116 ] that a pure @xmath -function constraint functional is not
sufficient to define a non-trivial effective action for continuum FRG.
Let us elaborate on this. One might have wanted to define the effective
action through

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.37)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is the solution of a gradient flow equation such as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.38)
  -- -------- -- ----------

or some generalization thereof. The problem with this definition is that
it generates a trivial effective action, in the sense to be described.
In momentum space, the solution is simply @xmath , so one can do a
linear change of variables in eq. ( 4.1.37 ) and compute

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.39)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Hence, the couplings of the new action are exactly computable, and
because their dependence on @xmath is trivially determined by how many
powers of @xmath and @xmath appear in each term, without involving any
loop corrections, one verifies that the resulting “effective action” is
not acceptable.

We remark that the inadequacy of eq. ( 4.1.37 ) to define an effective
action does not mean that the observables computed from gradient-flowed
fields are not useful for studying certain RG properties of the system.
At the end of the next section, in particular, we will describe how
gradient-flowed observables are sufficient for studying the
long-distance properties of an effective theory that does have a
well-defined effective action.

### 4.2 The effective theory and fixed points

In what follows, the effective action determined by the stochastic RG
transformation will be discussed for the example cases of the gaussian
model and @xmath theory. We will show that by a rescaling of variables,
the existence of an IRFP of the transformation becomes possible. From
the point of view of stochastic processes, the result implies that, for
@xmath theory, the stationary solutions of the Fokker-Planck equation
may be non-gaussian even though the Langevin equation is linear. Lastly,
the correlation functions of the effective theory will be related to
gradient-flowed correlations.

#### 4.2.1 The effective action

That the EFT defined by a gaussian constraint functional for @xmath is
nontrivial can be understood as follows. One may insert the expression
eq. ( 4.1.17 ) for the transition function into the definition of the
effective action eq. ( 4.1.31 ), and then expand out the exponent of
@xmath ; the part proportional to @xmath modifies the bare theory
propagator, and the part linear in @xmath acts as a source term with
@xmath . The remaining @xmath term contributes to the @xmath propagator.
The result is a relation between effective and bare actions: ⁷ ⁷ 7 In a
sense, this constitutes an exact solution to the FP equation, giving the
finite- @xmath distribution @xmath in terms of the cumulants of @xmath .
It is the stochastic RG analog of eq. ( 3.2.17 ).

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.2.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is due to the normalization of @xmath , and @xmath is the
generator of connected Green functions for the bare theory @xmath with a
modified @xmath -dependent inverse propagator

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.2.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Expanding the generator term in @xmath yields a formula which allows for
the systematic computation of effective vertices,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.2.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

It is then apparent that the effective action for any finite @xmath is
indeed non-trivial, since the vertices of @xmath contain the dynamics of
the bare theory via the @xmath .

The scale @xmath of the effective theory may be determined by looking at
the effective 2-point function at tree level, after isolating the
quadratic part of @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.2.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the inverse cutoff @xmath has been used, and we recall that @xmath
is given by eq. ( 4.1.16 ). In position space, the first term decays
rapidly at large distances with respect to the first. The second term is
a Schwinger-regularized propagator; we therefore observe that the
effective cutoff induced by the stochastic RG transformation is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.2.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the dimensionless flow time @xmath has been introduced. The
continuous scale factor is therefore @xmath . We will take another look
at the effective correlation functions and the function @xmath in the
next section.

We can make sense of the odd-looking factors of @xmath and @xmath that
appear in the effective action as follows. First, the additive @xmath in
the propagator @xmath acts as a sliding IR cutoff for the bare theory,
since

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.2.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which means that as @xmath increases, more of the bare field modes get
integrated out. For example, in the case of @xmath theory (discussed in
more detail in the next subsection), the momentum-independent part of
the 1-loop contribution to the amputated effective 4-point vertex in
@xmath is proportional to ⁸ ⁸ 8 We choose to consider the mass term in
@xmath as part of the interaction @xmath from now on.

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.2.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We observe that the presence of @xmath in the denominator, combined with
the multiplicative bare cutoff function, effectively restricts the
domain of integration to @xmath , similarly to what one would have found
in a standard (sharp) high-mode elimination RG step @xmath , where the
domain of the integral would be @xmath (see [ 3 ] for details). Next,
note that the argument @xmath of @xmath in @xmath implies that the
@xmath vertices are multiplied by a factor of

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.2.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

for each factor of @xmath . Since the vertices @xmath are connected
@xmath -point functions, which have @xmath factors of external
propagators @xmath attached to them, we see that the effective vertices
decay like @xmath and therefore strongly suppress the @xmath
contribution of the @xmath -point functions. Moreover, the leading
momentum behavior of the products of @xmath with @xmath demonstrates
that they are, in a sense, amputated ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.2.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

in a manner similar to what was found under smooth high-mode
elimination. Thus, in sum, the effective vertices are amputated
connected @xmath -point functions to leading order in external momenta,
which are heavily damped in the UV @xmath , and whose loop corrections
effectively involve domains of integration @xmath . It is also
noteworthy that the external momentum dependence implied by the
amputation formula above goes like powers of @xmath , for @xmath , as
one expects from the general philosophy of effective field theory.

#### 4.2.2 Gaussian fixed point

I’ll begin the discussion of possible fixed points of the stochastic RG
transformation with the gaussian model, which is explicitly solvable in
a manner similar to the Wilson-Kogut ERGE. Here we consider the
existence of a gaussian fixed point in the case where

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

with drift @xmath in the LE. A straight-forward gaussian integration
yields the exact effective action at time @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This action has the expected OU process stationary limit as @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which is therefore independent of the choice of @xmath in the bare
action. The rescaled effective action, however, has a different limit.
Let @xmath , yielding

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.13)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Note that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The asymptotic limit @xmath then has leading behavior

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We see that in order to get a non-uniform distribution ( @xmath ) in the
limit, we must look at rescaled fields @xmath , leading to a stationary
action

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Observe that a fixed point exists for every choice of @xmath : the GFP
exists as a line of fixed points, parameterized by the bare coupling.
The canonical choice @xmath has fixed point (assuming @xmath )

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Notice that the rescaled effective action has a
regularization-independent (indeed, unregularized) fixed point, since
the @xmath factor disappears in the limit. However, the @xmath term,
which came from the heat kernel @xmath , exhibits the scheme-dependence
(i.e. choice of flow) of the fixed points thereby obtained.

For the sake of general applicability, we now discuss the parallel
derivation in the lattice gaussian model. On the lattice, there is sharp
cutoff @xmath and the drift is @xmath , with @xmath . The bare action is
taken to be

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.18)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Taking @xmath for simplicity, the effective action is then

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.19)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Again, we see that the infinite time limit of the unrescaled effective
theory is a simple gaussian model, the lattice OU stationary process.

We expect the effective spacing @xmath to behave qualitatively like
@xmath , for some constant @xmath , since by inspection of the effective
action, we see that the effective theory propagator, although it still
has sharp cutoff @xmath , further suppresses the high modes according to
@xmath . Now define the rescaled momenta by @xmath and @xmath . One
obtains

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.20)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Next, define the rescaled fields @xmath as usual and note that @xmath .
Expanding the lattice momenta @xmath in @xmath , we see that the @xmath
limit picks out only the leading, continuum-like term @xmath , and the
rest are suppressed by @xmath . No other rescaling will lead to a
propagating fixed point theory. It follows that the fixed point action
is described by the same action we found in the direct continuum
approach, eq. ( 4.2.17 ), which is an expression of universality.

We can compute the scaling operators at the GFP as follows. Let @xmath ,
and perturb the fixed point as @xmath , keeping only first orders in
@xmath . One finds

  -- -- -- ----------
           (4.2.21)
  -- -- -- ----------

which is separable for @xmath , leading to @xmath and the eigenvalue
equation

  -- -- -- ----------
           (4.2.22)
  -- -- -- ----------

We give as an example the solution for quadratic scaling operators.
Letting @xmath and @xmath , for @xmath to be determined, leads to
(recall @xmath )

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.23)
  -- -------- -- ----------

or in spherical coordinates, and using @xmath from eq. ( 4.2.17 ),

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.24)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The solution is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.25)
  -- -------- -- ----------

but how do we determine the permissible values of @xmath ? By demanding
analyticity as @xmath . In [ 5 ] , Wilson and Kogut argue that
non-analyticity would lead to unacceptable nonlocality in the perturbed
action. Hence, @xmath for @xmath . The eigenperturbations are then

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.26)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The general solution to the full perturbation from @xmath is then

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.27)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Hence @xmath gives the relevant mass deformation, @xmath gives the
marginal (redundantly so) kinetic term deformation, and @xmath gives
irrelevant operators.

The analysis above can be extended to higher operators as well. The
@xmath term implies that only polynomials in @xmath are nonzero
solutions, however. For the quartic scaling operators, one tries

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.28)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which leads to a coupled system of PDE’s for @xmath and @xmath . We
leave its solution as an exercise for the reader.

#### 4.2.3 Fixed point in @xmath

For the case of interacting @xmath theory, we cannot solve the problem
exactly, so we resort to perturbation theory for the sake of comparison
to the high-mode elimination RG in chapter 3, and we will find that the
two approaches are quite similar.

One might initially think that the effective action, written as an
integration against the bare density, eq. ( 4.1.31 ), has a gaussian
infinite flow time limit, as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.29)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath , due to the exponential decay of @xmath . Indeed, it is
well-known that the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process has a gaussian stationary
distribution. As we saw in the gaussian model, however, rescaling can
make a big difference. In this case we should expect that the fixed
point theory is generally interacting.

To understand qualitatively why the gaussian limit is not obtained, note
that the properties of the drift @xmath imply that the zero mode of the
bare field is not suppressed (see eq. ( 4.1.18 )); only its variance
changes. Since the zero-mode theory is not gaussian, in general, the
flowed distribution will also have a non-gaussian zero mode effective
action, implying that the long-distance physics is still non-trivial.
This would suggest, however, that the infinite-time degrees of freedom
do not propagate. To further clarify the situation, we will look at the
flow of the most relevant effective couplings as the RG time @xmath
increases, and then we will address the role of rescaling of degrees of
freedom, finding that the limit of the rescaled effective action differs
from the gaussian limit, eq. ( 4.2.29 ), obtained above.

We will treat the mass term also as a perturbation. Denoting the
coefficient of @xmath in the quadratic part of @xmath by @xmath , and
the momentum-independent parts of the quadratic and quartic terms,
respectively, by @xmath , we find

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.2.30)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.2.31)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.2.32)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

at 1-loop order, where the loop integrals are given by

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.2.33)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.2.34)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

and @xmath . The first integral is superficially divergent, but for
@xmath , it has a finite @xmath limit, and one may compute

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.35)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath for @xmath . The second integral @xmath exists even for
@xmath , and its time derivative is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.36)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath and @xmath for @xmath . ⁹ ⁹ 9 Recall that @xmath theory is
superrenormalizable, having only two superficially divergent diagrams:
the snail and the sunset diagrams. Hence, to 1-loop order, we find for
the derivatives of effective couplings

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.2.37)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.2.38)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

These expressions do not clearly indicate any nontrivial fixed-point
behavior at this order in perturbation theory. To proceed further, one
must cast the flow equations in terms of rescaled dimensionless
quantities, as one usually does to study RG flows. We will find below
that such quantities naturally arise after a passive momentum and field
redefinition.

Now we introduce dimensionless rescaled variables using the effective
scale @xmath to give dimension [ 137 ] . Dimensionless momenta @xmath
are defined as in chapter 3, by setting

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.39)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The kinetic term in the effective action therefore becomes

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.40)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This motivates a change of field variables @xmath , where @xmath is
dimensionless:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.41)
  -- -------- -- ----------

with @xmath being the canonical mass dimension of @xmath in momentum
space. After doing so, the kinetic term is of the canonical form

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.42)
  -- -------- -- ----------

at 1-loop order, while the mass and quartic terms pick up factors of
@xmath which define dimensionless couplings @xmath by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.43)
  -- -------- -- ----------

We note that these rescalings are all quite familiar when written in
terms of the scale factor

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.44)
  -- -------- -- ----------

reflecting that the mass and the 4-point coupling are relevant at the
gaussian fixed point (hats denote quantities rendered dimensionless with
@xmath ).

Next, we compute the RG flow equations which describe how the
dimensionless variables change with the flow time @xmath . In the
expression for the derivatives above, one replaces @xmath and @xmath by
@xmath and @xmath , valid at this order in perturbation theory. The
derivatives of the dimensionless couplings with respect to @xmath
(dropping @xmath -subscripts) are then

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.2.45)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.2.46)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

up to terms of order @xmath , since @xmath , and where @xmath in @xmath
. As @xmath , the second equation has a nontrivial stationary solution
@xmath , and implies a corresponding critical value @xmath , which for
@xmath are given, at 1-loop order, by @xmath . Linearizing about the
fixed point and computing the left-eigenvalues @xmath of the stability
matrix, one finds that @xmath , which are crude approximations to the
precisely-known values @xmath at the Wilson-Fisher fixed point [ 2 ] .
This is our third and final derivation of the WFFP.

The values at 1-loop order from sharp high-mode elimination combined
with epsilon expansion in [ 3 ] are @xmath , which, however, treats the
mass non-perturbatively. As a step in that direction, we can extend the
analysis above to include terms of order @xmath . This brings in several
more non-1PI diagrams, leading to a system of ODE’s given by

  -- -------- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.2.47)
  -- -------- -------- -- ----------

where the coefficients in 3d are

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.48)
  -- -------- -- ----------

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.49)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Setting the @xmath -derivatives to zero yields, of course, two fixed
points. One is gaussian, and the other is the WFFP, whose couplings are
determined from

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.50)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Expanding the couplings near the WFFP as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.51)
  -- -------- -- ----------

one can linearize the flow equations about the WFFP, finding

  -- -- -- ----------
           (4.2.52)
  -- -- -- ----------

By computing the left-eigenvalues, one finds modified exponents @xmath ;
we stress that our formalism is not expected to do any better than the
epsilon expansion.

Thus we observe the existence of an IR fixed point in perturbation
theory, as we expect in @xmath theory. If we worked to @xmath , we would
find, as usual, the necessity of including a wave function
renormalization factor @xmath to normalize the kinetic term coefficient,
so that eq. ( 4.2.41 ) is replaced by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.53)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which modifies the scaling dimension @xmath of @xmath to include an
anomalous dimension @xmath , which has a non-zero @xmath limit.

The existence of an IR fixed point for the dimensionless, rescaled
effective action implies that the expectation values of rescaled
effective observables

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.54)
  -- -------- -- ----------

can have nontrivial infinite flow time limits. In terms of the
stochastic RG transformation of section 2, this is written as

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.55)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Since the stochastic RG transformation was generated by a linear
Langevin equation, it may be surprising to find that by simply rescaling
the correlation functions, one can arrive at a non-gaussian stationary
distribution of the Fokker-Planck equation. We also note that the
quantities @xmath correspond directly to the dimensionless field
variables one would obtain by numerical integration of the LE on
lattice.

Lastly, the Fokker-Planck equation for the stochastic RG transformation
may be written in dimensionless form following the procedure outlined in
chapter 3. Using @xmath , one finds the rescaled equation ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 We
saw in chapter 3 that including the full wave function renormalization
@xmath modifies @xmath and the diffusion and drift terms. In this case,
@xmath cancels in the drift term, but survives in the diffusion as
@xmath . In conventional FRG, this is typically accounted for by a
redefinition @xmath . We see two options for accounting for it in SRG,
if we wish to have a simple rescaled FP equation. First, we can let
@xmath , rendering the noise variance time-dependent, which must be
input by hand in a simulation. A bolder solution may be to consider the
field-dependent diffusion matrix @xmath , which then implies a total
cancellation of @xmath factors upon rescaling. Amusingly, such a
stochastic process is the field-theoretical generalization of geometric
Brownian motion [ 129 ] , which is used in stock market modeling under
the name of Black-Scholes equation .

  -- -- -- ----------
           (4.2.56)
  -- -- -- ----------

where @xmath has been defined, and @xmath . In terms of the flowing
action,

  -- -- -- ----------
           (4.2.57)
  -- -- -- ----------

It can be checked that the GFP eq. ( 4.2.16 ) is a solution to this
equation. ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 By choosing @xmath to be a higher polynomial in
@xmath , we expect that the exotic fixed points discussed in [ 138 , 139
] may become accessible. We see that an explicit time-dependence enters
via @xmath , but in the limit @xmath , @xmath .

#### 4.2.4 Correlation functions

Wilson and Kogut demonstrated a relation between effective @xmath -point
functions and the bare @xmath -point functions in their FRG scheme [ 5 ]
. Recently, the authors of [ 133 ] have noted that this relation is an
equivalence between effective correlations and gradient-flowed
correlations. In the context of the stochastic approach here, the
corresponding relation is given in terms of generators @xmath of
connected Green functions by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.58)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where @xmath is given by (eq. 4.1.15 ). This relation is simply derived
by shifting @xmath in eq. ( 4.1.31 ) and using the definition of the
generator,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.59)
  -- -------- -- ----------

with @xmath being the free theory partition function [ 3 , 8 ] . It
follows that the 2-point functions of @xmath and @xmath are related by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.60)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and higher @xmath -points are related by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.61)
  -- -------- -- ----------

in multilinear notation. The function @xmath is determined by the choice
of Langevin equation. In the case @xmath , for example, one finds an
expression in terms of upper incomplete gamma functions

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.62)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the inverse effective cutoff @xmath was used. For large
separations @xmath , this quantity decays as a gaussian. The effective
propagator is therefore equal to the gradient-flowed propagator
asymptotically in @xmath (so long as the correlation length @xmath ):

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.63)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Note also that if no cutoff function were imposed on the gaussian noise
@xmath , there would be a short-distance singularity in @xmath ,
regardless of whether the bare theory was regulated.

The connected correlators of composite operators also are simply related
to their gradient flow counterparts, except we must be careful to define
the generators of their @xmath -point functions properly. For example,
in the case of @xmath , the generator of correlators @xmath is defined
by [ 8 , 73 ]

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.64)
  -- -------- -- ----------

By inserting the definition of @xmath , one may compute the relation
between effective and bare generators exactly, as the integrals involved
are gaussian. We note, however, that given the simplicity of the
Langevin equation, we can just as easily use the explicit solution
@xmath to compute expectations. For example, the 2-point correlator of
the @xmath composite operator is

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.65)
  -- -------- -- ----------

where the connected part of a correlator of local operators @xmath is
defined by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.66)
  -- -------- -- ----------

which again shows the asymptotic equivalence of effective and
gradient-flowed quantities.

In sum, what we have found is that the correlation functions of
composite operators in the effective theory are equal to the
gradient-flowed correlators, up to terms proportional to powers of
@xmath , which itself is determined by the drift term @xmath . Thus, so
long as the drift is chosen to imply an exponentially decaying @xmath ,
the flowed observables are sufficient to determine the long-distance
properties of the effective theory.

### 4.3 Ratio formulas

The fact that the transition functional @xmath satisfies the
Fokker-Planck equation implies that observables at finite @xmath satisfy

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.3.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the generator @xmath of the Markov process is a linear
differential operator given by

  -- -- -- ---------
           (4.3.2)
  -- -- -- ---------

For the flow we have been considering, the generator takes the form

  -- -- -- ---------
           (4.3.3)
  -- -- -- ---------

where @xmath is (minus) the laplacian operator. We remark that
corresponding equations for the rescaled observables may easily be
written.

After a small timestep @xmath , then, successive observables are related
by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.3.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Applied to @xmath -point functions, the formula reads ¹² ¹² 12 This
formula corresponds to the spin-blocking equation

@xmath (4.3.5)

where @xmath is the blocking operator, @xmath , and @xmath stands for
the differences @xmath . This follows from the usual correlator scaling
relations of rescaled spins @xmath ,

@xmath (4.3.6)

that one finds in textbooks, e.g. [ 36 , 73 ] . See chapter 1 for more
details.

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.3.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Writing both sides in terms of the rescaled theory variables, @xmath ,
where the dimless position @xmath is defined by @xmath , one finds

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.3.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Motivated by the definition of scale changes @xmath with respect to the
bare scale, we introduce the relative scale change @xmath . Since the
rescaled positions at different scales, @xmath and @xmath , refer to the
same dimensionful position @xmath defined at the bare scale (i.e. in
units of @xmath ), it follows that @xmath , and we may write the
previous formula as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.3.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

To the extent that we may neglect the @xmath terms (which we justify in
appendix C), we therefore find a familiar RG scaling relation,

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.3.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This formula is the stochastic RG analogue of a spin-blocked correlator
scaling relation.

The RG scaling property of correlations of scaling operators @xmath now
follows from an argument identical to that of chapter 3, but now we may
relate it to gradient flow. Writing the rescaled variables in eq. (
3.3.43 ) in terms of @xmath , and by using the MCRG equivalence between
expectations of @xmath and @xmath , one finds that the factors of @xmath
cancel, and the remaining gradient-flowed quantities satisfy a ratio
formula:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.3.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

To reiterate, the position arguments in the numerator and denominator
are the same physical positions in units of @xmath . We have therefore
produced an alternative derivation of correlator ratio formulas of the
sort used in chapter 2 in GFRG, making no use of spin-blocking
analogies.

### 4.4 Concluding remark

In Wilson and Kogut’s 1973 review, they express the hope that “a longer
range possibility is that one will be able to develop approximate forms
of the transformation which can be integrated numerically; if so, then
one may be able to solve problems which cannot be solved in any other
way.” One may consider the discrete spin-blocking MCRG of Swendsen and
the numerical integration of truncated ERGE’s as an actualization of
their wish. I believe that the framework of stochastic RG presented in
this chapter may provide another actualization, perhaps one even closer
to their wish, as it constitutes a direct discretization of the
“blocking” that leads to their constraint functional.

### 4.5 Future directions

To wrap up our discussion of stochastic RG, we will now speculate on a
few applications which will be pursued in future work.

#### 4.5.1 Nonlinear RG’s

In 1974, Wilson and Bell (WB) defined and studied the difference between
linear and nonlinear RG transformations [ 140 ] . A linear RG
transformation is one that relates blocked and bare spins linearly, an
example of which is the usual transformation

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.5.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

as well as the SRG transformation with drift @xmath presented in this
chapter. By contrast, a nonlinear RG transformation relates blocked and
bare spins in a nonlinear way. An example is the majority-rule
transformation in the Ising model, whereby one sets the block spins to
be @xmath determined by whichever type is the majority of the block.
Another example would be any transformation that involves a projection
of the transformed variables back to the original target space of the
theory, such as the blocking transformations defined on link variables
in gauge theories. An equivalent characterization is that the @xmath
-point functions of the blocked and bare theory are not linearly
related.

The motivation for systematically analyzing these two types of
transformation is the following. Linear RG’s require the fine-tuning of
some parameter, @xmath in the block-spin case, in order for the
transformation to have a fixed point, whereas the Ising majority-rule
and gauge theory blockings seem to automatically produce fixed points
without any such tuning. A blocking step @xmath of the nonlinear
transformation WB chose to analyze was implemented via constraint
functional:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.5.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

with sharp cutoffs on the momentum integrals and using the notation
@xmath . As opposed to the linear constraint functional, we see that the
mean of @xmath is set to @xmath rather than just @xmath . WB carried out
their analysis in perturbation theory, demonstrating that the nonlinear
transformation had a fixed point at first order in @xmath , which was
slightly displaced from the gaussian fixed point with @xmath . They also
reproduced the behavior of the majority-rule transformation: for a
certain region of @xmath parameter space, the transformation had a fixed
point with no requirement of tuning @xmath . By computing the stability
of the new fixed point to perturbations, they determined that the
(“nonphysical”) RG eigenvalue associated with field rescalings became
negative to first order in @xmath , whereas for the linear
transformation it was exactly marginal, at the gaussian fixed point,
thus explaining the non-necessity of tuning @xmath .

The framework of stochastic RG seems particularly well-suited to
studying nonlinear RG’s both analytically and numerically. This is
because, for a discrete time-step @xmath , one can show that the
transition functional produced by a LE

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.5.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

is given by [ 8 ]

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.5.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where we write @xmath . (This result also allows one to derive a path
integral representation of the stochastic process, a feature used
extensively in stochastic quantization [ 52 ] .) The choice @xmath
reproduces an SRG analogue of WB’s transformation. Moreover, we see that
such a transformation would be the stochastic generalization of the
nonlinear gradient flow equations that were studied by Fujikawa and
Suzuki [ 72 ] . Now, we remarked in chapter 2 that such flows were
typically not renormalized by a renormalization of the bare parameters
of the theory. It is not clear how to interpret their result in the
context of FRG; nonrenormalizability has been argued to not be a problem
in Wilsonian RG. What is clear is that the flow must be regularized in
any case. The noise is regularized by @xmath , but the product @xmath
can lead to @xmath singularities. A natural choice which guarantees a
Markov property is to replace @xmath , so that the interacting @xmath
flow equation is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.5.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This choice would replace

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.5.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

upon functional differentiations ( @xmath ) which arise in the
Fokker-Planck equation.

The existence of new fixed points can be analyzed by expanding the
flowing action to first order in @xmath in the ERGE for a nonlinear SRG,
which reads:

  -- -- -- ---------
           (4.5.7)
  -- -- -- ---------

After solving for the new fixed point, one can compute its stability as
in the analysis of scaling operator perturbations to the GFP under SRG.
A problem which arises for @xmath interacting flow is that, after
rescaling, the drift takes the form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.5.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

For @xmath , we see that the presence of @xmath prevents writing down an
equation for the fixed point action. Two options suggest themselves as
possible solutions: (1) Consider only canonically marginal flow actions
@xmath (where @xmath ), e.g., @xmath rather than @xmath in 3d, and (2)
Give time-dependence to @xmath by redefining @xmath , but this would
spoil the Markov property. However, it is not obvious that the Markov
property is a necessity in RG transformations, rather than merely a
convenience. The extension to an interacting bare @xmath theory presents
a further challenge to the analysis, but the possibility of numerical
implementation presents itself as a nonperturbative means of performing
the study. And of course, one could apply the derivative expansion of
FRG to study the problem analytically, as well. The viability of these
options is being pursued by the author.

#### 4.5.2 Stochastic MCRG

The continuity of SRG naturally suggests a method for implementing a
smooth counterpart to the Swendsen equations described in chapter 1. One
begins with the observation that, for any observable @xmath , the path
integral representation of its expectation value implies

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.5.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the effective action. Writing it as a linear combination
of (volume-averaged) operators, and assuming all time-dependence is
confined to the couplings, we have

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.5.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

This leads to

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.5.11)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Letting @xmath , we find a continuous cousin of the Swendsen equations,
eq. ( 1.4.25 ), ¹³ ¹³ 13 Actually, the derivation leading to the
Swendsen equation can be carried over line by line, by differentiating
with respect to couplings rather than @xmath . Both approaches would be
interesting to pursue

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.5.12)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The expectation values on either side can be measured in a lattice
simulation using the stochastic MCRG equivalence,

  -- -- -- ----------
           (4.5.13)
  -- -- -- ----------

The derivative @xmath can be measured either by discretization of the
@xmath -derivative, or using the Markov property and computing @xmath .
Thus, eq. ( 4.5.12 ) enables one to measure the beta functions @xmath of
couplings in the action by inverting the matrix of @xmath correlations
on the vector of derivatives @xmath . SRG would offer a serious
advantage over conventional MCRG, since the latter is necessarily
confined to a few blocking steps on any given lattice size, whereas only
the integrator step size @xmath limits the continuity of SRG.

One is generally more interested in the flow of the scaling variables
@xmath corresponding to scaling operators @xmath , however, since one
expects that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.5.14)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The derivatives of the @xmath may be constructed from knowledge of
@xmath and @xmath as follows. The scaling variables are linear
combinations of couplings @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.5.15)
  -- -------- -- ----------

The matrix @xmath can be computed numerically by diagonalization of the
mixed action operator correlations, since

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.5.16)
  -- -------- -- ----------

and @xmath is diagonal near the IRFP. A caveat is that these
expectations are true only of the rescaled effective theory, so that
@xmath , where @xmath is the number of factors of @xmath in @xmath , and
@xmath the number of derivatives. Thus, one must input a value of @xmath
, as was necessary in the diagonalization method in chapter 2. To
eliminate such a systematic, it is therefore desirable to have
determined if the nonlinear SRG can be achieved without needing to tune
the rescaling factor, as suggested by Wilson and Bell. Alternatively,
one could attempt to measure @xmath using the correlator method of
chapter 2.

One still needs values of the flowing couplings @xmath in order to make
use of eqs. ( 4.5.14 , 4.5.15 ). This can be done by numerically
integrating the coupling beta functions obtained from eq. ( 4.5.12 ) up
to the desired flow time:

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.5.17)
  -- -------- -- ----------

knowing that the @xmath couplings are the bare couplings one simulates
with. The implementation of this procedure is therefore somewhat
involved. One needs a fine discretization of the flow time to reduce
numerical integration errors in the @xmath , one needs to know the exact
functional form of @xmath on the lattice, and one needs to input a value
for @xmath (at least in the linear RG case). Further, a truncation error
is introduced by necessarily considering only a finite number of action
operators @xmath , although this would be systematically improvable.
Last, and certainly not least, one must perform a double-ensemble
average to compute the stochastic expectation values, coming from the
integration of a Langevin equation and the bare ensemble average,
thereby producing two separate sources of statistical error. On the
bright side, the elements of the ensemble of Langevin integrations would
be automatically uncorrelated, making those errors simple to calculate.

## Chapter 5 Summary

In this work we have developed new, continuous RG transformations, in
the continuum and on the lattice, based on gradient flow and the
Langevin equation, and explained their relationship with Wilsonian RG in
the form of block-spin RG and functional RG. In fact, RG methods based
on GF or LE’s essentially constitute the implementation of functional RG
on the lattice.

In chapter 2, we saw how to define the GFRG transformation, and
described how to measure scaling dimensions of local operators in
lattice simulations by virtue of the correlator scaling laws associated
with the RG transformation. We applied the method in two scalar field
theories, @xmath and a 12-flavor SU(3) gauge theory in four dimensions,
thereby displaying the general viability of GFRG not only across various
physical systems with different field content, but also across various
spacetime dimensions. In the 3d scalar model, we produced a numerical
determination of the leading four scaling dimensions of the theory,
including the @xmath scaling dimension @xmath . In the gauge theory, we
produced an estimate of the fermion mass anomalous dimension, as well as
a first lattice determination of the baryon anomalous dimension. We
noted that the method will be applied to 3-dimensional noncompact QED in
future work, and that it is already being applied in some interesting 4d
systems by other groups, as well.

In chapter 4, we demonstrated an equivalence between functional RG
transformations and stochastic processes, based on the observation that
functional RG equations for effective actions have the same form as
Fokker-Planck equations which govern stochastic processes. The viability
of the stochastic RG (SRG) transformation was checked in @xmath theory,
where the Wilson-Fisher fixed point was observed in perturbation theory.
This result furthermore implied that, from the perspective of stochastic
processes, the stationary distribution of the field theoretical
Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process (with @xmath theory initial condition) is
non-gaussian, up to a rescaling. An equivalence of long-distance
correlation functions of the SRG effective theory and gradient-flowed
correlators was found, which permitted a reinterpretation of the GFRG
transformation from chapter 2 as an implication of the SRG
transformation.

Lastly, we speculated on a few possibilities for future work. SRG seems
to provide a natural framework in which to study nonlinear RG
transformations, which may be practically more useful than the linear
RG’s we simulated in chapter 2 if it indeed eliminates the requirement
of a finely-tuned rescaling factor @xmath for the field variables being
transformed. The continuity of SRG furthermore suggests that a
continuous version of Swendsen’s MCRG can be carried out, which would
allow for the measurement of the RG eigenvalues @xmath in a manner
distinct from the correlator ratio method of chapter 2.