This thesis is, broadly speaking, on the subject of the Renormalization
Group (RG), that is, the systematic means by which we understand how the
physics of different energy or length scales interact with one another,
and the dependence of physical quantities on the scale of their
description. RG is of fundamental importance in the physical sciences;
applications of RG range from the problem of modeling turbulence all the
way to particle physics and quantum theories of gravity. RG grew out of
quantum field theory, where it provided the conceptual tools necessary
for a deeper understanding of renormalization, the apparent sensitivity
of low-energy processes to high-energy physics. In statistical physics,
RG played a central role in explaining the nontrivial phenomena
associated with systems living at their critical points. By introducing
the notion of fixed points in phase diagrams, RG was able to describe
the origin of critical behavior.

The thesis that follows is, in particular, about new methods of
achieving RG transformations, in both a continuum spacetime background
and on a lattice discretization thereof. The subject is explored from
the point of view of euclidean quantum field theory, or perhaps more
accurately, statistical field theory. As a thesis grounded on the
computational method of lattice simulation, I emphasize the role of
lattice formulations throughout the work, especially in the first two
chapters. In the first, I describe the essential aspects of lattice
theory and its symbiosis with RG. In the second, I present a new,
continuous approach to RG on the lattice, based on a numerical tool
called Gradient Flow (GF). Simulation results from quartic scalar field
theory in 2 and 3 dimensions ( @xmath ) and 4-dimensional 12-flavor
SU(3) gauge theory, will be presented. In the third and fourth chapters,
the focus becomes more analytic. Chapter 3 is an introductory review of
Functional Renormalization Group (FRG). In chapter 4, I introduce the
concept of Stochastic RG (SRG) by working out the relationship between
FRG and stochastic processes.

Carosso \otherdegrees B.S., B.A., University of Delaware, 2014
M.S., University of Colorado Boulder, 2017 \degree Doctor of Philosophy
Ph.D., Physics \dept Department of Physics \advisor Prof. Anna
Hasenfratz \reader Prof. Ethan Neil \dedication [Dedication] In memoria
di mia nonna, Teresita .
