Structural characterization of some problems on circle and interval
graphs

Given a family of nonempty sets @xmath , the intersection graph of the
family @xmath is the graph with one vertex for each set @xmath , such
that two vertices are adjacent if and only if the corresponding sets
have nonempty intersection. A graph is circle if there is a family of
chords in a circle @xmath such that two vertices are adjacent if the
corresponding chords cross each other. In other words, it is the
intersection graph of the chord family @xmath . There are diverse
characterizations of circle graphs, many of them using the notions of
local complementation or split decomposition. However, there are no
known structural characterization by minimal forbidden induced subgraphs
for circle graphs. In this thesis, we give a characterization by
forbidden induced subgraphs of those split graphs that are also circle
graphs. A @xmath -matrix has the consecutive-ones property (C1P) for the
rows if there is a permutation of its columns such that the @xmath â€™s in
each row appear consecutively. In this thesis, we develop
characterizations by forbidden subconfigurations of @xmath -matrices
with the C1P for which the rows are @xmath -colorable under a certain
adjacency relationship, and we characterize structurally some auxiliary
circle graph subclasses that arise from these special matrices.

Given a graph class @xmath , a @xmath -completion of a graph @xmath is a
graph @xmath such that @xmath belongs to @xmath . A @xmath -completion
@xmath of @xmath is minimal if @xmath does not belong to @xmath for
every proper subset @xmath of @xmath . A @xmath -completion @xmath of
@xmath is minimum if for every @xmath -completion @xmath of @xmath , the
cardinal of @xmath is less than or equal to the cardinal of @xmath . In
this thesis, we study the problem of completing minimally to obtain a
proper interval graph when the input is an interval graph. We find
necessary conditions that characterize a minimal completion in this
particular case, and we leave some conjectures for the future.

Keywords: graphs, circle, forbidden induced subgraphs, completion,
minimal.
