# Publications

This thesis is based on some of the author’s work during the period of
November 2016 - August 2020 as a Ph.D. student at Ludwig Maximilian
University in Munich and Max-Planck Institute for Gravitational Physics
(Albert Einstein Institute) in Golm, Potsdam. The corresponding
publications are:
[ Gunaydin:2016amv ] : Exceptional @xmath higher-spin theory in @xmath
at one-loop and other tests of duality.
Murat Günaydin, E.D. Skvortsov, Tung Tran.
Published in JHEP : JHEP 1611 (2016) 168
[ Skvortsov:2017ldz ] : AdS/CFT in Fractional Dimension and Higher Spin
Gravity at One Loop.
E.D. Skvortsov, Tung Tran.
Published in Universe : Universe 3 (2017) no.3, 61

[ Skvortsov:2018jea ] : Quantum Chiral Higher Spin Gravity
Evgeny D. Skvortsov, Tung Tran, Mirian Tsulaia
Published in Physical Review Letters : Phys.Rev.Lett. 121 (2018) no.3,
031601
[ Skvortsov:2020wtf ] : More on Quantum Chiral Higher Spin Gravity
Evgeny D. Skvortsov, Tung Tran, Mirian Tsulaia
Published in Physical Review D : Phys.Rev.D 101 (2020) 10, 106001
[ Skvortsov:2020gpn ] : One-loop Finiteness of Chiral Higher Spin
Gravity
Evgeny D. Skvortsov, Tung Tran
Published in JHEP : JHEP 07 (2020) 021

[ Sharapov:2019pdu ] : Towards Massless Sector of Tensionless Strings on
AdS @xmath
Alexey Sharapov, Evgeny Skvortsov, Tung Tran
Published in Physics Letter B : Phys.Lett. B800 (2020) 135094
The author also contributed to the following work:
[ Sachs:2019wrk ] : On Non-Perturbative Unitarity in Gravitational
Scattering
Ivo Sachs, Tung Tran
Published in European Physical Journal C : Eur.Phys.J. C79 (2019) no.11,
914

###### Contents

-    1 Introduction
    -    1.1 Motivations
    -    1.2 Overview
    -    1.3 Summary of this thesis
        -    1.3.1 Main results
        -    1.3.2 Outline
-    2 Review of Higher Spin Theories
    -    2.1 Metric-like Formalism for HSGRA
        -    2.1.1 Flat Space
        -    2.1.2 Anti-de Sitter Space
    -    2.2 Light-front Formalism for HSGRA
        -    2.2.1 Flat Space
        -    2.2.2 Anti-de Sitter Space
    -    2.3 Frame-like Formalism for HSGRA
    -    2.4 AdS/CFT and Higher Spin/Vector model duality
        -    2.4.1 Formulation of AdS/CFT
        -    2.4.2 HSGRA/Vector Model Duality
-    3 HSGRA at One-Loop in AdS
    -    3.1 Motivation
    -    3.2 Classes of Higher-Spin Theories
    -    3.3 Higher-Spin Theories at One-Loop
        -    3.3.1 Overview of The One-Loop Tests
    -    3.4 One-Loop Tests
        -    3.4.1 Casimir Energy Test
        -    3.4.2 Laplace Equation and Zeta Function
        -    3.4.3 Zeta Function Tests: Odd Dimensions
        -    3.4.4 Zeta Function Tests: Even Dimensions
    -    3.5 Toward HSGRAs/Vector Models Duality in Fractional
        Dimensions
    -    3.6 The One-loop Tests in Fractional Dimensions
    -    3.7 Higher-Spin Partition Function in Fractional Dimensions
        -    3.7.1 Volume of Hyperbolic Space
    -    3.8 Non-minimal Type-A in Fractional Dimensions
    -    3.9 Minimal Type-A in Fractional Dimensions
    -    3.10 Matching Free Vector Model
    -    3.11 Matching Critical Vector Model
    -    3.12 Discussion and Conclusions
-    4 Quantum Chiral Higher Spin Gravity
    -    4.1 Motivation
    -    4.2 Chiral Higher Spin Theories
        -    4.2.1 Flat space
    -    4.3 Feynman rules
    -    4.4 Tree Amplitudes
        -    4.4.1 Four Point
        -    4.4.2 Five Point
        -    4.4.3 Six Point
        -    4.4.4 Recursive Construction for All Point
    -    4.5 Vacuum Bubbles
        -    4.5.1 Determinants
        -    4.5.2 Higher Vacuum Loops
    -    4.6 Loops with Legs
        -    4.6.1 Tadpole
        -    4.6.2 Self-energy
        -    4.6.3 Vertex correction
        -    4.6.4 Box and triangle-like diagrams
        -    4.6.5 The bubbles
        -    4.6.6 Sunrise Diagrams and Multiloop Amplitudes
        -    4.6.7 One-loop Finiteness of Chiral HSGRA
    -    4.7 Conclusions and Discussion
-    5 Formal HSGRA in @xmath
    -    5.1 Motivation
    -    5.2 Algebraic Construction of HSGRA via Higher Spin Algebra
        -    5.2.1 Vertices from @xmath -algebra
        -    5.2.2 Formal Equations of Motion for HSGRA
        -    5.2.3 Consistency Criteria and Physical Implications
    -    5.3 Initial Data for @xmath
    -    5.4 Deformation of Higher Spin Algebra
        -    5.4.1 Deformation through The Universal Enveloping Algebra
        -    5.4.2 Deformation through QCR
        -    5.4.3 Einstein’s Equations
    -    5.5 Non-Locality Problem in HSGRAs
    -    5.6 Summary of Chapter 5
-    6 Summary and Discussion
    -    6.1 Summary of Results
    -    6.2 Discussion
-    A Appendix for One-loop Tests in Integer Dimensions
    -    A.1 Characters, Dimensions and all that
    -    A.2 Amusing Numbers
    -    A.3 Other Classes
        -    A.3.1 Higher-Spin Doubletons
        -    A.3.2 Partially-Massless Fields
    -    A.4 On the Computations in Even Dimensions
        -    A.4.1 Zeta Function in @xmath
        -    A.4.2 Non-minimal Type-B
        -    A.4.3 Minimal Type-B
    -    A.5 Summary of the Results in Other Even Dimensions
        -    A.5.1 Type-A
        -    A.5.2 HS Fermions
        -    A.5.3 Hook fields
        -    A.5.4 Type-B
-    B Appendix for One-loop Tests in Fractional Dimensions
    -    B.1 From Intermediate to Final Form
    -    B.2 Modified Zeta Function
        -    B.2.1 Zeta
        -    B.2.2 Deficit
-    C On Chiral HSGRA
    -    C.1 Kinematics
    -    C.2 Color Effects on Dynamical Constraints
    -    C.3 Worldsheet-Friendly Regularization
        -    C.3.1 Anti de-Sitter space
-    D Appendix for Formal Construction of HSGRA
    -    D.1 Important Concepts
    -    D.2 Q-Manifolds and Strong Homotopy Algberas

## Chapter 1 Introduction

### 1.1 Motivations

Unquestionably, Quantum Field Theory (QFT) and General Relativity (GR)
form the backbones of our theoretical frameworks to understand the
universe. The triumph of QFT is that it successfully describes the
dynamics of elementary particles with spin- @xmath within a small zoo of
particles maybe known as the Standard Model [ Glashow:1961tr ,
Weinberg:1967tq , ASalam ] , which has been verified to a remarkable
level of precision through experiments down to subatomic distances of
@xmath m (or energy scale @xmath GeV). The Standard Model consists of
matter fields and gauge bosons, which are the mediators of three out of
four known fundamental interactions (electromagnetic, weak, and strong
interactions) between visible matter. On the other hand, we have
Einstein’s gravity that describes the remaining force, gravity, which
governs large scale physics where the corresponding mediator is graviton
— a spin-2 gauge boson. The most recent detection of gravitational waves
by the LIGO collaboration [ Abbott:2016blz ] and the image of Black Hole
by the Event Horizon Telescopes [ Akiyama:2019cqa ] showed that GR still
endures as one of the most successful theories of all times, after one
hundred-years from the original formulation [ Einstein:1916 ] .

Despite these successes, the two pivotal realms of QFT and GR still
resist unification into an ultimate framework known as Quantum Gravity
(QG) that should describe Nature all at once. Roughly speaking, the
scale where features of Quantum Gravity becomes relevant is the Planck
scale @xmath @xmath m (or @xmath GeV), where gravity should become
strongly coupled. Therefore, GR should lose its predictive power the
moment we approach the Planck scale. The very first evidence of the
objection for unification was that the perturbative approach in QFT led
to non-renormalizable UV divergences of GR starting from two-loops [
Goroff:1985th , vandeVen:1991gw ] . Several notable attempts to soften
this UV behaviors are superstring/M-theory, supergravity (SUGRA), higher
spin gravity (HSGRA), etc. In these examples, the field content and
symmetries are extended by considering supersymmetry, extra dimensions
and higher spin states. Opposite to the general expectation that
supersymmetry should be the main factor to make a gravitational theory
UV-finite [ deWit:1977fk , Cremmer:1978ds , deWit:1982bul , Bern:2006kd
] , it turns out that it is higher spin fields that are indispensable
ingredients for UV divergence cancellations [ Veneziano:1968yb ,
Amati:1987wq ] . Therefore, if we want to formulate a UV-finite QG
perturbatively , it seems unavoidable to introduce higher-spin fields.

Seeking unification of the laws of physics has shown throughout the
history of modern physics to be a fruitful approach to gain a deeper
level of understanding of why things are the way they are. The intuition
is that a more elegant formulation for pre-existing theories can bring
new insights to the pathway toward a theory of everything. The prime
examples are the theory of electromagnetism [ Maxwell:1865 ] and the
unification of space and time into an entity spacetime in special
relativity [ Einstein:1905 ] . A more recent achievement was the
electro-weak theory [ Salam:1959zz , Weinberg:1967tq ] , a low-energy
effective theory of the Standard Model, that unified electromagnetism
and the weak force with the gauge group of @xmath at the energy of order
@xmath GeV. Under spontaneous symmetry breaking of the group @xmath , it
gives rise to the masses of the @xmath -bosons and the @xmath -boson in
the Standard Model. If we take unification as the guiding principle for
the search of the @xmath theory, one would naively expect that, by going
to higher and higher energy, we will reach the ultimate consistent
quantum theory. This theory has to contain the Standard Model and
Einstein’s theory as its low-energy effective field theories. At the
moment, it is still impossible to experimentally access the energy where
we can observe gravitational quantum effects, but it may be possible in
not so distant future with the help of CMB measurements and with the
dawn of the gravitational wave physics. Therefore the formulation of
Quantum Gravity is driven mainly by finding examples utilizing
unification, UV-completeness and symmetry as guiding principles.

String theory is a strong contender on the race towards the final theory
since it contains an infinite tower of massive higher spin-fields and is
UV-finite (at least up to two loops). Heuristically speaking, the
finiteness of string theory is because there is no @xmath - @xmath
interactions. In particular, the string length @xmath is a natural UV
cutoff that manifest in the theory and is related to the universal Regge
slope @xmath as @xmath . The @xmath is the @xmath free parameter in
string theory, which makes it aesthetically pleasing compared to the
Standard Model, where there are many free parameters that have to be
fixed by experiments. There are two typical limits of @xmath that are
usually considered: (i) the point-particle limit where @xmath in which
string theory reduces to SUGRA [ Schwarz:1982jn , Green:1982sw ] ; (ii)
the tensionless-limit proposed by Gross where @xmath [ Gross:1988ue ] .
The former case, i.e. the point-particle limit, corresponds to the low
energy limit of string theory and has been intensively studied in
various contexts, see e.g. [ Hewett:1988xc , Kaplunovsky:1993rd ,
Derendinger:1985kk ] . On the other hand, the tensionless-limit should
correspond to trans-Planckian energy limit of string theory. In this
limit, all the massive higher spin fields become effectively massless
and therefore the theory should acquire an infinite-dimensional @xmath
@xmath . This symmetry of a symmetry that is associated with massless
higher spin fields is precisely the starting point of higher spin
gravity theories even though they have little to do with string theories
at present. The first systematic attempts to construct higher spin
theories were undertaken by Fronsdal [ Fronsdal:1978rb ] ; Brink,
Bengtsson, Bengtsson [ Bengtsson:1983pd , Bengtsson:1983pg ] ; Fradkin
and Vasiliev [ Fradkin:1987ks , Fradkin:1986qy ] .

In this thesis, we will study various aspects of higher spin gravity
(HSGRA). HSGRA are expected to be one of the simplest models of Quantum
Gravity where the graviton becomes a part of the higher spin multiplet
of massless higher spin gauge fields. The infinite dimensional
symmetries should render higher spin gravities UV-finite. Therefore, the
study of HSGRAs should shed more light on the Quantum Gravity Problem
and can even lead to new insights into string theory. Indeed, HSGRA in
@xmath , is conjectured to describe the tensionless limit of type IIB
string theory [ Sundborg:2000wp , Sezgin:2002rt ] . Besides its relation
to string theory, HSGRA by itself is interesting because of the AdS/CFT
Correspondence. In this context, HSGRAs should be dual to many
interesting CFTs [ Klebanov:2002ja , Sezgin:2003pt , Giombi:2011kc ]
that describe real physics, with the most notable examples of
Wilson-Fisher O(N) Vector Model (Ising) and Chern-Simons Matter theories
[ Giombi:2011kc ] . The latter class of theories have been recently
conjectured to exhibit several remarkable dualities [ Maldacena:2012sf ,
Seiberg:2016gmd , Karch:2016sxi ] . HSGRA indicates that, for example,
the three-dimensional bosonization duality, at least in the large-N
limit, should be a consequence of higher spin symmetries.

### 1.2 Overview

In this thesis, we exclusively focus on the quantum aspect of HSGRA and
its elegant algebraic structure. In particular, we will study HSGRA in
the context of the AdS/CFT duality [ Maldacena:1997re , Gubser:1998bc ,
Witten:1998qj ] . AdS/CFT is a remarkable relation between @xmath
-dimensional non-gravitational conformal field theory (CFT) as an image
on the boundary of a quantum gravity theory that lives in @xmath
-dimensional asymptotically anti-de Sitter spacetime (AdS):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

In principle, given two independent definitions of a CFT and its
hypothetical AdS dual, the AdS/CFT correspondence can be proven by
matching the CFT’s correlation functions with the holographic S-matrix
in AdS to all orders in coupling constant(s), i.e.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are operators at the points @xmath on the boundary of AdS.
The duality ( 1.1 ) has shown its versatility by allowing us to study
quantum gravity via its dual CFT and vice versa. In the original
proposal by Maldacena [ Maldacena:1997re ] , Type-IIB Superstring theory
on @xmath is conjectured to be dual to @xmath superconformal Yang-Mill
(SYM) theory on the boundary of @xmath . Even though an outstanding
progress in computing correlators of strongly coupled SYM has been
achieved, see e.g. [ Aharony:2016dwx , Alday:2017xua , Alday:2017vkk ] ,
we still know very little about how to compute correlation functions of
(super-)string theories on AdS background. For this reason, the original
form of the AdS/CFT correspondence remains a conjecture since there is
no complete proof after two decades of efforts.

The above conjecture, however, can be relaxed if we take some particular
limits of the dimensionless ’t Hooft coupling @xmath where @xmath is the
number of degrees of freedom on the CFT side which are supposed to be
quantized. The relation between @xmath and the string length @xmath is
given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the AdS radius. This relation reveals the strong-weak
nature of AdS/CFT duality where there are two particularly interesting
limits:

1.  The strongly coupled limit of CFTs, which is also known as the
    particle limit in AdS, is the limit @xmath .

2.  The tensionless limit (high energy limit) of string theories [
    Sundborg:2000wp , Sezgin:2002rt ] in which @xmath .

In the latter limit, i.e., the tensionless limit, the dual CFT is
essentially free [ HaggiMani:2000ru , Sundborg:2000wp , Tseytlin:2002gz
, Aharony:2006th ] because the ’t Hooft coupling @xmath . Free CFTs have
higher-spin symmetry due to the emergence of an infinite tower of
conserved currents. As we will show later, higher-spin symmetry is a
global symmetry on the CFT side, and it defines a so-called higher-spin
algebra hs , which is a crucial ingredient of the construction of the
dual bulk theory. Moreover, the study of the bulk theory should be more
feasible due to the infinite-dimensional higher-spin symmetry. Up to
date, the tensionless limit of superstring theory is understood only in
@xmath [ Eberhardt:2018ouy ] , and there is no known description in
higher dimensions. Moreover, the tensionless limit by itself does not
have to lead to any weakly-coupled field theory description. Therefore,
the emergence of higher spin gravity on @xmath for @xmath remains a
mystery. On account of AdS/CFT correspondence, we can start from the
easier side, i.e., the CFT side, where the field theories are much
better understood instead of directly dealing with the bulk theory.

In any free CFT, we can construct conserved higher spin rank- @xmath
tensors, @xmath , @xmath , also called higher spin currents. These
conserved higher spin tensors are bilinear in matter fields (scalar,
fermion or massless spin-one field) that can take values in various
representation of a gauge group. Let us, for example, consider free
scalars in the fundamental representation, i.e. vector models. The
AdS/CFT correspondence then tells us that the same higher spin symmetry
should govern the dual gravitational theories in bulk. The bulk theory
should contain higher spin fields @xmath (with @xmath being the scalar
field that is dual to @xmath ), ¹ ¹ 1 The @xmath indices live in AdS
with one extra dimension compared to @xmath . which are massless. Based
on these observations, Klebanov and Polyakov conjectured that the
gravitation AdS-dual of vector models should be given by some HSGRA [
Klebanov:2002ja ] :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

This equation indicates that unbroken HSGRAs are expected to be dual to
free CFTs [ Sundborg:2000wp , Sezgin:2002rt , Klebanov:2002ja ,
Fernando:2015tiu ] . The fact that matter fields of vector models lie
inside the fundamental representation rather than the adjoint [
Klebanov:2002ja ] simplifies the spectrum of single-trace operators and
reduces the field content of the dual bulk theory as compared to string
theory. ² ² 2 The spectrum of String theory has a finite number of
massless states and an infinite set of massive states. In particular
there are infinite states with the same spin. On the contrary, the
spectrum of the simplest HSGRA can contain all integer spins, each in
one copy. In the case where the matter field transforms in the
fundamental representation, upon changing boundary conditions of the
bulk scalar field with @xmath , the HS theory is no longer dual to free
but to the critical vector model (weakly coupled CFT in the large-
@xmath ). Astonishingly, by studying HSGRA, we can, at the same time,
understand weakly coupled CFT’s that describe physics of critical
phenomena.

When matter fields are in the adjoint representation, i.e. matrix valued
fields, the spectrum of single-trace operators is much bigger. In
particular, Sundborg conjectured that HSGRA theory in @xmath should be
dual to free @xmath SYM [ Sundborg:2000wp ] .

The higher-spin theories in AdS are not quite conventional field
theories: (i) they usually contain infinitely-many fields; (ii) higher
spin fields require higher derivative interactions, as a result, the
number of derivatives is unbounded; (iii) their relation to the poorly
understood tensionless limit of string theory. This makes generic HSGRAs
hard to study and construct. In particular, the most canonical way of
constructing theories, the Noether procedure is not applicable [
Sleight:2017pcz ] . There are, however, three well-defined theories with
local enough interactions that luckily avoid and evade the numerous
no-go theorems that have been proven over the years:

1.  Three-dimensional higher spin theory [ Blencowe:1988gj ,
    Bergshoeff:1989ns , Campoleoni:2010zq , Henneaux:2010xg ] (a
    generalization of the Chern-Simons formulation of @xmath gravity);

2.  Four-dimensional Conformal higher spin gravity [ Segal:2002gd ,
    Tseytlin:2002gz , Bekaert:2010ky ] , which is an extension of
    conformal gravity. There is, in some sense, a combination of the
    previous two cases — conformal HSGRA in three dimensions [
    Pope:1989vj , Fradkin:1989xt , Grigoriev:2019xmp ] ;

3.  Four dimensional Chiral HSGRA [ Metsaev:1991mt , Metsaev:1991nb ,
    Ponomarev:2016lrm , Ponomarev:2017nrr , Metsaev:2018xip ,
    Skvortsov:2018uru ] .

Nevertheless, a general expectation is that the @xmath -dimensional
higher-spin symmetry should be substantial to fix any meaningful
physical observable. An essential set of such observables are encoded in
the (holographic) S-matrix, which should be equivalent to CFT
correlators. At least for the case of @xmath higher spin symmetries, the
symmetry itself can unambiguously fix all correlation functions [
Maldacena:2011jn , Boulanger:2013zza , Alba:2013yda , Alba:2015upa ] and
imply that they are those of the same free CFT that generated the higher
spin algebra. In fact, the free CFT’s correlation functions are the
simplest higher spin invariants [ Colombo:2012jx , Didenko:2013bj ,
Didenko:2012tv , Bonezzi:2017vha ] . Therefore, to a large extent, one
can avoid non-locality problems if one sticks to the higher spin
invariant observables rather than to the problems of its formulation as
a local field theory (see e.g. [ Sezgin:2011hq , Sharapov:2018kjz ,
Sharapov:2019vyd ] for a discussion).

The study of higher-spin theories with interactions has a long history
because there are first of all many No-Go theorems [ Weinberg:1964ew ,
Coleman:1967ad , Weinberg:1980kq ] that forbid higher-spin interaction
in flat space and AdS [ Bekaert:2015tva , Maldacena:2015iua ,
Sleight:2017pcz , Ponomarev:2017qab ] . While these theorems restrict
the @xmath -matrix of Minkowski HSGRA to be trivial, they have little to
say about local effects. Intriguingly, using the light-front approach [
Bengtsson:1983pd , Bengtsson:1983pg ] , one can show that local cubic
interaction for any triplet of spins does exist [ Metsaev:2005ar ] .
Moreover, the solution that respects Poincare (conformal) symmetries is
called chiral HSGRA, which exists both in flat and AdS spacetime [
Metsaev:1991mt , Metsaev:1991nb , Ponomarev:2016lrm , Metsaev:2018xip ,
Skvortsov:2018uru ] .

Just a few years after Fronsdal started the entire higher spin programme
and after the first light-front results were obtained, Fradkin and
Vasiliev showed that cubic vertices for higher spin fields could be
written covariantly on (A)dS backgrounds [ Fradkin:1987ks ,
Fradkin:1986qy ] , including the gravitational interactions. Later,
Vasiliev himself constructed the higher-spin system (or Vasiliev’s
equations) that has the form:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.5a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.5b)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The system has several important features. It is background-independent.
The fields here are the one-form connection of the higher spin algebra
@xmath and @xmath is a zero-form taking values in the same algebra. The
bilinear terms are fixed entirely by the higher spin algebra. The higher
order terms, interaction vertices, were fixed by requiring the equations
to be formally consistent , i.e. they are consistent with @xmath , where
@xmath is the exterior derivative. The price to pay is that there is an
infinite set of auxiliary fields which are economically packed inside
@xmath and @xmath . To date, there is no known action that can be used
to derive the above system, ³ ³ 3 In a metric-like formalism, a part of
the higher-spin action is known [ Bekaert:2015tva ] from holography. but
there is a somewhat non-standard action [ Boulanger:2011dd ] . This is
in contrast with the examples of HSGRAs above, where not only do the
theories exist, but they also have rather simple actions.

There is however a big difference between being formally consistent and
being actually consistent in the sense of giving concrete and
well-defined predictions for higher spin interactions [
Boulanger:2015ova ] . The problem is that @xmath encodes an unbounded
number of derivatives of the physical fields. Therefore, expressions
that are nonlinear in @xmath can easily form infinite sums over all
derivatives that are problematic and disagree with the known
interactions of higher spin fields. ⁴ ⁴ 4 The problem has little to do
with HSGRA. Any field theory’s equations, e.g. pure gravity, can be
written in a form similar to ( 1.5 ) and will lead to some zero-form
@xmath that encodes an unbounded number of derivatives of the physical
fields. Therefore, the vertices have to be constrained more than just by
the formal consistency. As a result, it is not known how to
systematically extract correct interactions out of ( 1.5 ).
Nevertheless, ( 1.5 ) captures certain algebraic structures of
interactions that are hardly accessible via perturbative methods like
the Noether procedure.

Let us summarize some of the proposals and methods to study higher-spin
theories. These include:

-   Noether procedure: a canonical perturbative method to introduce
    interactions with the requirement that the full action @xmath has to
    be gauge invariant, namely

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (1.6)
      -- -------- -- -------

    Here, @xmath is the free action and @xmath is a linearized gauge
    transformation. In addition, we also have @xmath — higher order
    interactions, and @xmath — the field-dependent deformation of the
    gauge transformations. Due to the conceptual difficulty of
    understanding locality in higher-spin theories, a complete example
    of HSGRA constructed via the Noether procedure is not known. It
    seems that higher spin theories can not be conventional field
    theories due to non-local interactions [ Sleight:2017pcz ] .

-   Light-cone approach: the main idea is to construct the charges of
    the Poincare (or any other spacetime symmetry) algebra directly in
    terms of physical degrees of freedom. Whenever a covariant
    formulation is available, one can simply impose the light-cone
    gauge. Then, all unphysical degrees of freedom are gone and the
    stress-tensor generates all the required charges. The power of the
    light-cone approach is that it helps to study the problem of
    interactions in full generality without having to use one or another
    covariant realization of a given set of physical degrees of freedom
    (there can be many such realizations that are not equivalent as far
    as the problem of interactions is concerned). More about the
    light-cone approach can be found in Chapter 4 .

-   Reconstruction: an approach that reconstructs the bulk theory
    through information obtained from a given conjectural CFT dual. For
    type-A HSGRA, the cubic action and some part of the quartic action
    were reconstructed in [ Sleight:2016dba , Bekaert:2015tva ] . In
    this approach, AdS/CFT is automatically being proved (or better say,
    trivialized) at classical level since the reconstructed interactions
    give exactly the correlation functions we started with. The main
    issues here are whether the reconstructed action is local enough for
    it to be taken seriously (for free CFT’s it is not and the
    non-localities are yet to be tamed) and what happens at the quantum
    level.

-   Collective dipole pushes the idea of reconstruction till the end. It
    was so far applied only for @xmath . The fields on the CFT side are
    bi-local fields @xmath . Here @xmath are spacetime scalars that are
    @xmath -vectors, @xmath . The idea is to take the free/critical
    vector model path integral and change the integration variables from
    @xmath to @xmath . The latter can be interpreted as higher spin
    fields in @xmath . Due to the change of variables, there is a
    non-trivial Jacobian @xmath in the partition function. It is
    conjectured that the action in terms of the bi-local fields @xmath
    is equivalent to the action of a higher spin theory in @xmath [
    Koch:2010cy ] . It reproduces all correlation functions by
    construction.

-   IKKT matrix model for the fuzzy sphere: an idea that treats
    space-time as a dynamical physical system with intrinsic quantum
    structure by studying the IKKT matrix model [ Steinacker:2019fcb ] .
    There is a specific solution whose internal structure leads to a
    consistent and ghost-free higher-spin gauge theory.

-   Formal HSGRA: this is essentially an approach suggested by
    Vasiliev’s equations ( 1.5 ), i.e. to try to understand the
    deformation of higher-spin symmetries caused by ( 1.5 )-like
    equations. It turns out that the interaction vertices can be derived
    from a strong homotopy algebra that can be constructed in a simple
    way for any given higher spin algebra [ Sharapov:2018kjz ,
    Sharapov:2019vyd ] . We will apply this in Chapter 5 to HSGRA in
    @xmath .

### 1.3 Summary of this thesis

We aim to unfold some of the key features of higher spin theories in
this thesis. In particular, we will focus on UV-finiteness and algebraic
structures of HSGRA both in flat and AdS spacetime.

#### 1.3.1 Main results

As is already mentioned, higher-spin theories share some features with
string theory like an infinite tower of fields with ever increasing
spin. In some cases the interactions in HSGRA are also known to be
non-local. Generically, the spectrum of non-minimal higher spin model
involves massless fields with spin- @xmath , and there exists a
truncation to @xmath model which has only infinitely many @xmath spins.
It is important to note that the minimal model is so far the only
consistent truncation from the non-minimal one. Any attempt to consider
a finite subset of higher spin fields (or drop some spins from the even
ones) will lead to an inconsistency. Higher spin fields are gauge fields
and they have linearized gauge symmetries of the form @xmath . Here
@xmath are the corresponding gauge parameters. Then, for any massless
gauge field, there will be a dual higher spin conserved tensors, @xmath
, on the CFT side and vice versa, i.e.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

We will assume the HS/vector model duality conjecture only at the level
of the basic dictionary ( 1.7 ), and audaciously try to construct the
bulk theory from the CFT side. This construction can be referred as a
reconstruction approach. Together with ( 1.7 ), if we further assume
that AdS/CFT holds at the classical level, the cubic action and part of
the quartic action can be completely determined [ Bekaert:2015tva ] .
For free CFTs, the computation of correlation functions is
straightforward by utilizing Wick’s contraction. We can then use the
knowledge gained from these correlators to infer the form of
interactions of the bulk theory since they should be equivalent to
Witten-diagrams in AdS. Schematically, the action for a spin- @xmath
field reads

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

In principle, to show that HSGRA is UV-finite, we should compute
loop-diagrams in AdS to see whether there is any divergence. However,
since we do not know the full action, it is not yet possible to compute
the full one-loop self-energy or the beta function that should provide
access to the quantitative quantum properties of HSGRA. Moreover, direct
loop calculation in AdS is very challenging, see, e.g. [ Giombi:2017hpr
, Bertan:2018khc , Ponomarev:2019ofr ] . Fortunately, knowledge of
kinetic terms is sufficient to calculate the one-loop determinant of
HSGRAs in AdS that, in turn, can tell us a little bit about UV behavior
of HSGRAs. This idea was first suggested and applied in [ Giombi:2013fka
] , where it was shown the one-loop determinant in Type-A HSGRA can be
regularized and computed. Moreover, the computation gives the results
that are consistent with @xmath under certain assumptions.

The essential ingredient for HSGRA UV-finiteness is precisely the
infinite-dimensional higher spin symmetries that alleviate
UV-divergence. For the case of chiral HSGRA in flat space, we show that
the theory is consistent at both classical and quantum levels. Moreover,
it is not in contradiction with the No-Go theorems since the full @xmath
-matrix is 1, thanks to higher spin symmetries [ Skvortsov:2018jea ,
Skvortsov:2020wtf ] . The theory is constructed in light-cone gauge [
Metsaev:2005ar , Ponomarev:2016lrm ] and has a complete action of the
following schematic form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Chiral HSGRA in flat space is the first known example of a quantum
HSGRA. We expect that the cousin of chiral HSGRA in AdS [
Metsaev:2018xip , Skvortsov:2018uru ] should also exhibit the same
features even though the loop computation in AdS can be a challenge.

Beside the ability of rendering HSGRA UV-finite, higher spin symmetry is
also useful to formally construct HSGRA via formally consistent
equations of motion [ Sharapov:2018kjz , Sharapov:2019vyd ] . Indeed,
using higher spin algebra (HSA) as the only input from the free CFT, we
show that the equations of motion ( 1.5 ) of bulk theory can be
constructed by deforming the (HSA) with an explicit example of higher
spin theory in AdS @xmath . Generically, the HSA is nothing but the
quotient of the universal enveloping algebra of @xmath (the conformal
algebra for AdS @xmath by the two-sided Joseph ideal @xmath . For the
case of AdS @xmath the seed that generates the universal enveloping
algebra is @xmath . Following the procedure in [ Sharapov:2018kjz ,
Sharapov:2019vyd ] , we can obtain the equations of motion of the
bosonic HSGRA by deforming the following commutation relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

by a formal deformation parameter @xmath , while keeping all other
relations of the conformal algebra intact to preserve local Lorentz
algebra and its action on tensors. In fact, beside being a seed that
drives the whole deformation, the above deformed @xmath -commutator
leads to the vacuum Einstein’s equations. Supersymmetric extension
should also be possible using the same procedure even though the algebra
may look a bit more sophisticated.

The main results in this thesis are :

1.  In [ Gunaydin:2016amv , Skvortsov:2017ldz ] , we computed the vacuum
    one-loop effect in the dual HSGRAs in integer dimensions and
    fractional dimensions which opened up possibilities to study AdS/CFT
    in non-integer dimension. The results for type-A HSGRA and fermionic
    higher fields match precisely with the AdS/CFT’s predictions. We
    discovered that the results of type-B HSGRA in even dimensions lead
    to a puzzle that calls for a better understanding of the duality.

2.  In [ Skvortsov:2018jea , Skvortsov:2020wtf ] , we explicitly showed
    how the cancellation of UV-divergences happens for the case of
    chiral HSGRA in flat space. The same pattern for UV-cancellation in
    chiral HSGRA should extend to any classes of higher spin theories.

3.  In [ Sharapov:2019pdu ] , we constructed formally consistent
    equations of motion of bosonic HSGRA in AdS @xmath . The
    supersymmetric version of this theory, with the gauge symmetry
    @xmath , should describe the tensionless limit of type-IIB
    superstring theory in @xmath .

#### 1.3.2 Outline

We outline the thesis in the following:
In chapter 2 , we review some standard knowledge for HSGRA in
metric-like, light-front and frame-like formalisms. Moreover, we also
provide some fundamental concepts of AdS/CFT that are relevant in this
thesis.

In chapter 3 , we prove the conjecture by Giombi, Klebanov et al. [
Giombi:2013fka , Giombi:2014iua , Giombi:2014yra ] that the free energy
of both free and critical Vector Models can be reproduced as a one-loop
effect in the dual HSGRAs. In particular, we perform many one-loop tests
for various HSGRAs on different backgrounds. Moreover, following an
earlier idea by Klebanov and Polyakov, that HSGRAs/Vector Models duality
[ Klebanov:2002ja ] may also be extended to fractional dimensions, we
recover the free energy of the @xmath Wilson-Fisher CFT [ Giombi:2014xxa
] from the dual HSGRA in @xmath , [ Skvortsov:2017ldz ] .

In chapter 4 , which is based on the original work [ Skvortsov:2018jea ]
, we show how UV divergences of HSGRAs get canceled due to interactions
fine-tuned by higher spin symmetries. This effect of cancellation of
UV-divergences is the most important feature of HSGRAs, which makes them
models of Quantum Gravity. We observe this phenomenon in the chiral
HSGRA, a class of HSGRAs [ Ponomarev:2016lrm ] that has an action in the
light-cone gauge and exists in flat and AdS backgrounds [
Metsaev:2018xip , Skvortsov:2018uru ] .

We dedicate chapter 5 to the discussion of the algebraic structure of
HSGRAs. Using the @xmath -algebra, which can be constructed from a
higher spin algebra [ Sharapov:2018kjz ] , we obtain formally consistent
equations of HSGRA on AdS @xmath [ Sharapov:2019pdu ] . Although HSGRAs
are self-contained models of Quantum Gravity, they may emerge in the
tensionless limit of string theories. Therefore, supersymmetric
extension of our result with the gauge symmetry @xmath should describe
the massless sector of tensionless type-IIB strings on @xmath [
Sundborg:2000wp , Sezgin:2002rt ] .

In chapter 6 , we summarize the main results of this thesis and discuss
HSGRA’s current state of the art.

We collect various technical details in the Appendices.

## Chapter 2 Review of Higher Spin Theories

The study of higher-spin fields has a long history (see [ Bekaert:2010hw
, Boulanger:2008tg ] for a summary). The most relevant starting point
for us is the work of Fronsdal [ Fronsdal:1978rb ] . In this chapter, we
review free HSGRA in the metric-like, light-front and frame-like
formalisms. We also discuss some basic concepts of AdS/CFT paying
attention to the case of HSGRA/Vector Model duality. The metric will
come with the convention of mostly plus components.

### 2.1 Metric-like Formalism for HSGRA

Since the birth of QFT, there have been many No-Go results, see e.g. [
Weinberg:1964ew , Coleman:1967ad , Weinberg:1980kq , Boulanger:2008tg ]
, that constrain interactions between massless higher-spin fields. In
other words, these theorems may rule out all QFTs with interactions
whenever there are gauge fields with spin- @xmath . However, the
equation and action for free higher spin fields are known thanks to
Fronsdal and Fang [ Fronsdal:1978rb , Fang:1978wz ] . The presentation
in this section follows [ Sorokin:2004ie , Didenko:2014dwa ,
Kessel:2016hld ] . For simplicity, we will discuss higher spin fields
with integer spins.

#### 2.1.1 Flat Space

We adopt the following convention: a totally symmetric rank- @xmath
tensor @xmath will be denoted as @xmath for short. When indices are on
the same level and denoted by the same letter, it means symmetrization
is already applied, e.g. @xmath . Then, the higher spin equation for a
free spin- @xmath field (this is also known as Fronsdal’s equation)
reads [ Fronsdal:1978rb ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

The above equation is invariant under the following gauge transformation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is not hard to see that the equation ( 2.1 ) is a generalization of
the free equation of motion for massless fields of spin- @xmath . The
trace constraint on the gauge parameter is crucial for gauge invariance
of the field @xmath . We also need a somewhat unusual constraint that
@xmath should be double-traceless , i.e.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note that the trace constraint of @xmath in ( 2.2 ) does not exist for
the case of lower spin. In order to see that the solutions to the
equation ( 2.1 ) is unique and carry a spin- @xmath representation of
the Poincare group, we can impose transverse-traceless (TT) gauge:
@xmath , @xmath , then the gauge-fixed equations and constraints read

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
                                            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.4a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.4b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.4c)
     @xmath   @xmath                        (2.4d)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In Fourier space, the gauge-fixed equation @xmath implies @xmath , i.e.
masslessness. To make the discussion transparent, we can go to
light-cone coordinates with the metric @xmath . We can take @xmath with
@xmath being some constant, where @xmath and @xmath . Then, the
constraint @xmath tells us that @xmath , i.e. all components of @xmath
that carry at least one @xmath -direction vanish. Next, the gauge
symmetry @xmath implements @xmath . Therefore, the non-vanishing
components for a totally symmetric spin- @xmath field are @xmath . One
can check that @xmath is @xmath traceless ( @xmath ) and therefore
describes a spin- @xmath particle according to Wigner’s classification
(see e.g. [ Bekaert:2006py , Didenko:2014dwa , QFTbookofWeinbergVolume1
] for detailed discussion). The gauge-fixed action has a simple form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

#### 2.1.2 Anti-de Sitter Space

Similarly, with flat space, we can analyze a free massless spin- @xmath
gauge field on AdS @xmath background with the metric @xmath — the
maximally symmetric solutions of Einstein equations with cosmological
constant @xmath . To do so, we replace partial derivatives, @xmath ,
with covariant derivatives, @xmath . The commutator in our convention
reads

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The double-traceless condition becomes

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

The gauge transformation is now

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The Fronsdal equation gets lifted to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.9)
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

The factor @xmath appears in the third term because of non-commutativity
of covariant derivatives ( 2.6 ). One needs @xmath terms to symmetrize
over @xmath in AdS, while in flat space it only needs @xmath terms. The
mass-like terms, the last two terms in ( 2.9 ), appear due to gauge
invariance requirement. Next, we impose TT gauge where fields are
traceless and are @xmath -transverse ( @xmath ) as in flat space. In
this gauge, the equations of motion reduce to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.11a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.11b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.11c)
     @xmath   @xmath                        (2.11d)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The gauge-fixed action in AdS reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

### 2.2 Light-front Formalism for HSGRA

It is sometimes more convenient to describe massless fields in the
light-cone gauge [ Bengtsson:1983pd , Bengtsson:1983pg , Metsaev:2005ar
] . The reason are that

-   We can work directly with physical degrees of freedom and this is
    the most general approach to local dynamics. Therefore, unitarity is
    manifest;

-   One avoids ambiguities that arise in manifestly covariant
    formulations, e.g. the same degrees of freedom can be embedded into
    different tensor fields;

-   Doing computation in light-cone gauge is rather simple compared to
    some other approaches.

For practical purposes, we will only review free massless higher spin
fields in four dimensional Minkowski and AdS.

#### 2.2.1 Flat Space

In four dimensions, the metric in light-cone gauge reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can make a Fourier transformation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Upon imposing the light-cone gauge @xmath , the components that describe
physical d.o.f of @xmath are @xmath , where @xmath . These are
irreducible rank- @xmath tensors that transform under the little group
@xmath . The number of independent components of a traceless symmetric
rank- @xmath tensor in two dimensions is two. Therefore, effectively, we
can present any massless spin- @xmath field by two scalar fields. In
particular

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the four momentum. Then, the free action for a massless
field simply reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 2.2.2 Anti-de Sitter Space

It is also possible to describe massless higher spin fields in AdS using
light-cone gauge [ Metsaev:2018xip ] . The metric of the Poincare patch
reads

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.18)
  -- -- -- --------

Once again, we can work directly in momentum space:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

The two scalar fields that describe a massless spin- @xmath gauge field
obey the conjugation rules as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally, the free action for a massless higher spin field in @xmath
takes the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

The simple form of the free action is due to masslessness and light-cone
gauge in @xmath . In particular, this is because massless HS fields are
conformally invariant in four dimensions. Those include the Maxwell
field strength @xmath , Weyl tensor @xmath and higher-spin
generalization thereof. Note that @xmath looks like a half Minkowski
space in the light-cone gauge.

### 2.3 Frame-like Formalism for HSGRA

Despite its clarity, the metric-like formalism can sometimes be
cumbersome in doing calculation. On the other hand, while light-front
formalism is handy, it does not have a manifestly covariant form. There
is a way to avoid all of this by adopting the frame-like formalism. That
is, we will introduce auxiliary variables in terms of vielbeins and
spin-connections that carry flat indices. The idea is to treat General
Relativity (GR) as a gauge theory in the new locally flat frame — the
tangent space. From here, a generalization to fields of all spins is
amenable. Another reason that the introduction of the vielbeins and
spin-connections is essential is to couple matter fields, e.g.,
fermions, nicely to gravity. Since spinors are irreducible
representation of @xmath , to couple spinors to gravity, we need some
objects with flat indices. For more details, interested readers are
referred to [ Didenko:2014dwa , Blagojevic:2002du , Ortin:2004ms ] and
references therein.

In practice, vielbeins are non-degenerate matrices that transfer indices
from one basis to another that we prefer more. If we prefer to work with
a flat metric, i.e., @xmath , then its connection to the original metric
@xmath reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

For this reason, @xmath are sometimes referred as flat (tangent space)
indices and @xmath are referred as the world (target space) indices. The
metric is preserved under the following local Lorentz transformation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

In general, the vielbein can have @xmath components while the metric has
only @xmath . The remaining @xmath components are accounted for by the
freedom of local Lorentz rotations, which act as gauge symmetries. The
corresponding gauge field @xmath is the spin-connection, and is
anti-symmetric in @xmath and @xmath . The spin-connection has the
following gauge transformations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Tangent space tensor fields are defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

The vielbein postulate @xmath leads to @xmath . Here, @xmath , is the
Christoffel symbol that is symmetric in @xmath . The anti-symmetrization
of the vielbein postulate in @xmath gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

From here, it is more convenient to work with differential forms by
hiding all the world indices. We introduce degree-one differential
forms, @xmath and @xmath . In terms of these two new variables, one can
write down the Cartan structure equations:

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.27a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.27b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where the two-form @xmath is called the torsion two-form, which follows
directly from ( 2.26 ). Moreover, we have @xmath which is the Riemann
two-form that has connection to the usual Riemann tensor as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath and @xmath are gauge fields, they should account for local
symmetries. The total dimension of the one-form @xmath when we try to
combine @xmath and @xmath together is @xmath . Hence, we may try to find
a Lie algebra with this dimension. The algebra should contain Lorentz
generators @xmath , which go hand in hand with @xmath . In addition, we
should have some generator that comes with @xmath , call it @xmath .
Both @xmath and @xmath must transform as vectors under Lorentz
rotations. This fixes commutation relations of @xmath with @xmath .
Therefore, the Lie algebra must have the following form

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.29a)
              @xmath      (2.29b)
              @xmath      (2.29c)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is cosmological constant. For @xmath , we have @xmath which
is de Sitter algebra while @xmath accounts for the anti-de Sitter
algebra @xmath . Finally, when @xmath , we return to @xmath which is
Poincare algebra. We can now interpret the generators @xmath as local
translations.

By defining, @xmath and @xmath , we can write the above Lie algebra as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath with @xmath being an additional direction, and @xmath . Let
us pack @xmath and @xmath into a single one-form @xmath which has the
following curvature (field strength)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

If we further demand that @xmath is a flat connection, i.e. @xmath , we
get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

The second equation corresponds to a maximally symmetric background

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

The one-form flat connection @xmath has the following gauge
transformations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
                                            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.34a)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath are the gauge parameters for @xmath and @xmath
respectively. One can check that these equations indeed reduce to the
diffeomorphism @xmath in the metric-like formalism. Now, we are ready to
see how to get higher spin fields using the frame-like approach where
the field equations are of first order as shown above. Let us denote the
background vielbein and spin-connection as @xmath and @xmath . Then, the
fluctuation of the vielbein, denoted @xmath , and spin-connection,
denoted @xmath , have the following gauge transformation

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . To linear order in the fluctuation of the vielbein, we
have ¹ ¹ 1 See [ Didenko:2014dwa ] for a nice introduction to Young
diagrams and their application in higher spin theories.

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.36)
  -- -- -- --------

We see that @xmath contains both symmetric and anti-symmetric
components. They transform as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, if we want to get rid of the anti-symmetric component, we can
make an appropriate choice for @xmath . The remaining symmetric
component transforms like a spin-2 Fronsdal field, hence we identify it
with @xmath .
To get higher-spin field in the frame-like approach, we introduce a
generalized vielbein that is traceless [ Aragone:1979hx , Aragone:1980rk
, Vasiliev:1980as ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

This generalized vielbein transforms as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

Repeat the same treatment above, we see that the fully symmetric part of
the generalized vielbein is nothing but the Fronsdal field

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.40)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Once again, we can gauge away other components of @xmath by appropriate
choice of @xmath . Therefore, a gauge field @xmath as a generalized
spin-connection should be introduced to host @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

It turns out that @xmath also has its own gauge redundancy [
Lopatin:1987hz ] and requires a new spin-connection @xmath , and so on.
As a consequence, in the frame-like formalism we need generalized
vielbein and a tower of generalized spin-connections

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (2.42)
     @xmath         (2.43)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

Eventually, we have the following set of generalized curvatures

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are certain terms that depend on the cosmological constant
@xmath , the background vielbein @xmath and the generalized
spin-connection @xmath [ Lopatin:1987hz , Skvortsov:2006at ] . They
start as @xmath , where @xmath denotes a number of terms that impose the
Young symmetry and tracelessness constraints. In Minkowski limit @xmath
we have @xmath . The @xmath are invariant under

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can further impose for the system above that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

These equations are torsion-like constraints that can be used to solve
for the generalized spin-connections. In the last equation, instead of
zero on the r.h.s we have the 0-form @xmath which is the HS
generalization of the Weyl tensor built out of order-s curl of the
Fronsdal field

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

Given a set of connections relevant for the description of free higher
spin fields, a natural question to ask is whether there is an algebra
whose connection contains all these frame-like fields. It turns out that
we can pack everything into a master one-form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.49)
     @xmath               (2.50)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Note that @xmath are the generators of HS algebra that can be written in
terms of polynomials in @xmath and @xmath (see discussion below). Then,
the generalized curvature 2-form can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the following natural gauge transformations for @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath are gauge parameters associated to @xmath gauge fields.

###### Going back to Fronsdal:

Note that to return to the Fronsdal equation from ( 2.46 ), we do not
need all the auxiliary fields @xmath with @xmath . For a Minkowski
background, the equations of motion for free higher-spin fields are
given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

In flat space, @xmath and @xmath and the curvatures can be written as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.55)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

From ( 2.55 ), we get

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.56a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.56b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

If we symmetrize ( 2.56 ) with respect to @xmath , then contract the
resulting equation of ( 2.56b ) with @xmath , we get

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.57a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.57b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

The Fronsdal equations of motion for free higher-spin fields can be
obtained by plugging ( 2.57a ) into ( 2.57b ) and making the
identification that @xmath . We simply get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is clear that to get Fronsdal equations we just need auxiliary fields
with depth- @xmath only. Therefore, one may wonder why we need other
extra fields. It turns out that those extra fields should be present for
the consistency of HSGRA’s system in the frame-like formulation.
Moreover, those extra auxiliary fields are the gauge fields associated
to elements of higher-spin algebra that will be explained below.

### 2.4 AdS/CFT and Higher Spin/Vector model duality

The AdS/CFT correspondence is one of the most celebrated discoveries of
string theory [ Maldacena:1997re , Witten:1998qj , Gubser:1998bc ] . In
the original proposal, @xmath super Yang-Mill theory in four dimensions
is conjectured to be dual to Type-IIB super string theory in @xmath . At
present, the conjecture is extended to more general cases. The idea is
the following. In the most general context, AdS/CFT correspondence
implies an (almost) one-to-one relation between conformal field
theories, CFT’s, in @xmath -dimensions, and theories of quantum gravity
in AdS space of one dimension higher. In principle, any CFT’s
correlation functions can be rewritten as Witten diagrams for a theory
in AdS. However, the resulting gravitational theory may be very
non-local. Therefore, the adverb ’almost’ above stands for the fact that
CFT’s that are dual to perturbatively local weakly-coupled theories of
quantum gravity have to have very special properties (for example, the
large- @xmath SYM theory has these properties at strong coupling, but
not at weak or intermediate coupling). In fact, CFT’s that are dual to
higher spin gravities do not share many of the required properties.
Nevertheless, they are simple and well-defined CFT’s, which gives us a
hope of better understanding higher spin gravities.

#### 2.4.1 Formulation of AdS/CFT

To visualize better, take @xmath to be the set of sources @xmath of the
bulk fields @xmath (the corresponding set of @xmath is @xmath ) when
@xmath , and @xmath to be some operators cooked up by the matter fields
@xmath that constitute the CFTs. The partion function on the CFT reads
(we use Euclidean signature)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

The duality is established whenever

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

In terms of CFT correlation functions and perturbative holographical
scattering amplitude, the following relation should hold

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 2.4.2 HSGRA/Vector Model Duality

The AdS/CFT opens up a possibility to study HSGRAs via their dual free
CFTs [ Sundborg:2000wp , Sezgin:2002rt , Klebanov:2002ja , Leigh:2003gk
] . Recall that the coupling constant on the CFT side is the number of
degrees of freedom @xmath . When @xmath is large, we can make the
following expansion

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

On the other hand, the weak coupling expansion in the dimensionless
coupling @xmath gives us

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

At least at large @xmath , we should have @xmath . Hence, to prove
Higher Spin/Vector Model duality perturbatively, we must show at each
order in the coupling constants (or better non-perturbatively) that
@xmath .
Higher-spin gauge fields are dual to conserved tensors of rank greater
than two, i.e higher-spin conserved tensors ² ² 2 We use @xmath to
denote @xmath Lorentz indices and @xmath for @xmath bulk Lorentz
indices. , @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

The above equation is essential in HSGRA/Vector Model duality. Since,
bulk theory and CFT are governed by the same symmetry group @xmath ,
fields and operators must live in the same representation of @xmath .
The presence of (at least one) higher-spin conserved tensors in a @xmath
, with @xmath , makes this CFT a free one (possibly in disguise in the
sense that the correlation functions of single-trace operators have to
be those of a free CFT, but we do not claim the existence of the
fundamental free fields). In particular, the moment a conserved tensor
with rank higher than two appears in a CFT, it follows that a tower of
infinitely many higher-spin conserved tensors must emerge to make the
CFT consistent [ Maldacena:2011jn , Boulanger:2013zza , Alba:2013yda ,
Stanev:2013qra , Alba:2015upa ] .

##### Higher-spin Symmetry from Free CFT

From conserved higher-spin rank- @xmath tensors, we can construct
higher-spin conserved currents @xmath and the corresponding charges
@xmath by contracting @xmath with conformal Killing tensors @xmath : ³ ³
3 Conformal Killing tensors @xmath obey: @xmath .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

These higher-spin Noether charges generate higher-spin symmetries which
defines higher-spin algebras, hs [ Fradkin:1986ka , Eastwood:2002su ] .
Note that higher-spin algebras contain the @xmath conformal algebra as a
subalgebra.

Being realized by the charges @xmath above, the action of @xmath on
various operators in the corresponding CFT should be constrained by the
Ward identities [ Maldacena:2012sf ] . Assuming that we have @xmath and
some other conserved higher-spin tensors with @xmath , we have at least
two charges @xmath and @xmath . By the CFT axioms, the algebra that
@xmath and @xmath form should contain some non-vanishing structure
constants, i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Ward/Jacobi identities then imply that there should be some other
non-vanishing structure constants as well in the above ellipses. As a
result one can prove that in order to satisfy the Ward identities we
need @xmath of all spins. In other words, the result in [
Maldacena:2012sf , Boulanger:2013zza , Alba:2013yda , Stanev:2013qra ,
Alba:2015upa ] implies that the presence of at least one @xmath with
@xmath leads to the presence of infinitely many of them. That is to say,
CFT with exact higher-spin symmetry is essentially a free theory.

To understand algebra hs , let us take the simplest example of a free
CFT constituted by a scalar field where @xmath . The conserved
higher-spin tensors take the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

According to Eastwood [ Eastwood:2002su ] , each element of the
higher-spin algebra is in one-to-one correspondence with conformal
Killing tensors @xmath . Consider the following linear differential
operators

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can show that @xmath . Therefore, @xmath is a symmetry of @xmath
since it maps solution to solution. Moreover, we can prove that @xmath
is also a symmetry of @xmath (keeping the order of @xmath ). As a
consequence, it is easy to see that hs is associative.
We can also define hs as a quotient of universal enveloping algebra
@xmath by a two-sided Joseph ideal @xmath . Recall that the generators
@xmath of @xmath are anti-symmetric in @xmath , which corresponds to the
adjoint representation and can be depicted by Young diagram @xmath .
From here, we can construct each elements of the universal enveloping
algebra @xmath as polynomials in @xmath ’s

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.70)
  -- -- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the symmetrized tensor product of the adjoint
representation of @xmath . The first bullet @xmath indicates the first
singlet of @xmath which is the unit of @xmath , while the second is the
quadratic Casimir operator

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

Consider the following two-sided Joseph ideal ⁴ ⁴ 4 To get non-trivial
quotient, one should be careful in choosing the elements from @xmath to
generate the ideal. Some choice can make the ideal coincides with the
full @xmath , which results in a trivial quotient.

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.72)
  -- -- -- --------

Then, one can show that

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.73)
  -- -- -- --------

Since @xmath is also associative, hs is associative. Note that the
generators with @xmath in hs are nothing but the @xmath in ( 2.50 ). The
spectrum of HS theories is then determined by hs . For more details see
e.g. [ Vasiliev:1990en , Vasiliev:2003ev , Konshtein:1988yg ,
Vasiliev:2004cm , Bekaert:2009fg , Bekaert:2013zya , Alkalaev:2014nsa ]
.

##### Higher-spin Symmetry as Gauge Symmetry in AdS

The higher-spin symmetry is a global symmetry of the dual CFT and
therefore it needs to be a gauge symmetry of the corresponding higher
spin gravity. A natural object that can take this task is the one-form
@xmath , which takes valued in the higher-spin algebra. The simplest
equation we can write down for the one-form is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the product in hs . Since @xmath , we can write any
elements of hs as polynomials in terms of @xmath and @xmath . Therefore,
it is easy to notice that the equation ( 2.74 ) is sets the previously
defined curvature ( 2.51 ) to zero and describes an empty space with
free higher-spin fields. The problem is now to add interactions to (
2.74 ), which, as will be shown later, requires 0-form @xmath . We will
discuss this matter in chapter 5 .

##### A Brief Summary of Chapter 2

We reviewed free higher spin fields in metric-like, light-front and
frame-like formalisms. We summarize the three approaches by the
following diagram.

We also briefly studied the AdS/CFT correspondence paying attention to
HSGRA/Vector Model duality.

##### Interactions and Quantum Aspect of HSGRAs

Constructing a consistent HS theory with interactions is one of the main
problems of the HS program. The second problem that we want to address
is that whether HSGRA can be a toy model for Quantum Gravity. The
criteria we are paying attention to are: (i) there should be a graviton
inside the spectrum of the theory; (ii) the theory should be UV-finite.

@xmath In flat space: The interaction vertices were found by studying
the consistency of the deformed Poincare algebra in the light-front
approach [ Bengtsson:1983pd , Bengtsson:1983pg , Metsaev:2005ar ] .
Using the light-front approach, a special class of HSGRA was found under
the name chiral HSGRA [ Ponomarev:2016lrm ] . In this theory we can show
that all quantum corrections vanish [ Skvortsov:2018jea ,
Skvortsov:2020wtf ] . Another class of theories that have flat space as
a background are conformal theories in @xmath and @xmath .

@xmath In AdS: The list of HSGRAs with interactions is quite short:
Chern-Simmons-type theories in @xmath ; conformal higher spin theories
in @xmath and @xmath ; chiral theory can also be extended to @xmath .
Another approach is to construct formally consistent classical equations
of motion, a program that was pioneered by Vasiliev [ Vasiliev:1990en ,
Vasiliev:1999ba ] . In the latter case there is an important conceptual
problem of how to extract meaningful interaction vertices [
Boulanger:2015ova ] . Fortunately, when HSGRA/Vector model duality
conjecture was formulated, it opened up the possibility to understand
the rather complicated bulk theory by studying free (or critical) Vector
Models [ Klebanov:2002ja ] . A number of non-trivial checks to test the
validity of the HSGRA/Vector model duality conjecture has been performed
at tree-level [ Giombi:2009wh , Giombi:2010vg , Didenko:2012tv ] , and
at one-loop see e.g. [ Giombi:2013fka , Giombi:2014iua , Giombi:2014yra
, Beccaria:2014xda , Beccaria:2015vaa , Bae:2016rgm , Giombi:2016pvg ,
Gunaydin:2016amv , Skvortsov:2017ldz , Pang:2016ofv , Basile:2018zoy ,
Basile:2018acb , Ponomarev:2019ltz ] . The general take is that since
the (holographic) S-matrix is fixed by higher-spin symmetry on the CFT
side [ Maldacena:2011jn , Maldacena:2012sf , Boulanger:2013zza ,
Sharapov:2018kjz ] , HSGRAs should be UV-finite.

## Chapter 3 HSGRA at One-Loop in AdS

The main message of this thesis to a large extent is that higher spin
theories should be UV finite theories due to the large amount of
symmetries and the simplicity of their dual partners, vector models, on
the boundary of AdS. This chapter is dedicated to the tests of several
types of higher spin theories at one-loop in AdS using the spectral zeta
function approach pioneered by Dowker and Hawking [ Dowker:1975tf ,
Hawking:1976ja ] . For self-contained overview purposes, we briefly
review some technicalities in the first few sections while the details
are covered in Appendices A and B .

### 3.1 Motivation

Computing loop diagrams in AdS to compare with results from CFT is the
next step to confirm the validity of AdS/CFT conjecture. Some progress
has been made in this direction, see for examples [ Giombi:2017hpr ,
Aprile:2017bgs , Alday:2017xua , Alday:2017vkk , Ponomarev:2019ltz ] . ¹
¹ 1 See also, [ Bertan:2018afl ] for a direct bulk computation for
@xmath theory. These results opened a direct access to the quantum
properties of the bulk theories and also a link to the anomalous
dimensions of some CFTs [ Aharony:2016dwx ] .

At present, we do not have the full action for type-A,B and SUSY HSGRAs
etc., which somewhat limits our access to quantum properties of HSGRAs
in AdS. ² ² 2 Some part of the action for type-A HS is now understood
via holographic reconstruction [ Sleight:2016dba , Bekaert:2014cea ,
Bekaert:2015tva ] and in @xmath the current interaction between the
matter sector and Chern-Simons sector was added in [ Kessel:2015kna ] .
Fortunately, with the knowledge of kinetic terms of various classes of
HSGRA’s that are discussed in the following section, it is sufficient to
perform many nontrivial consistency checks to confirm HSGRA/Vector Model
duality at the quantum level. Many one-loop tests have already been
performed in a series of papers [ Giombi:2013fka , Giombi:2014iua ,
Giombi:2014yra , Beccaria:2014xda , Beccaria:2014jxa , Beccaria:2014zma
, Beccaria:2014qea , Beccaria:2015vaa , Beccaria:2016tqy , Bae:2016rgm ,
Bae:2016hfy , Giombi:2016pvg ] , see also [ Gupta:2012he ,
Gaberdiel:2011zw ] for the @xmath case. The main lessons are as follows.
Each of the fields in the spectrum of HS theories contributes a certain
amount to one of the computable quantities: sphere free energy, Casimir
Energy, @xmath - and @xmath -anomaly coefficients. The sum over all
spins is formally divergent and requires a regularization. Refined in
this way the sum over spins becomes finite and matches the corresponding
quantity on the CFT side, which in many cases leads to nontrivial tests
rather than @xmath equalities.

Vacuum one-loop corrections in higher-spin (HS) theories in AdS require
one simple ingredient as an input data: a CFT with infinitely many
conserved higher-rank tensors conventionally called higher-spin currents
@xmath . These type of CFTs are free or behave like free theories in the
strict @xmath limit. The algebra of HS currents determines the field
content of the dual HS theory and allows one to perform many one-loop
tests. The simplest free CFTs provide the basic examples of HSGRA/Vector
Models dualities: the free scalar field is dual to Type-A HS theory with
spectrum made of totally-symmetric HS fields and the free fermion is
dual to Type-B whose spectrum contains specific mixed-symmetry fields
that include totally-symmetric HS fields too. There are also SUSY
extensions of HS, see for example [ Fernando:2009fq , Fernando:2010dp ,
Fernando:2014pya , Fernando:2015tiu , Sezgin:2012ag ] . This implies
that the HSGRA/Vector Model duality should be, in principle, extendable
to all unbroken higher-spin theories and their supersymmetric
extensions.

Then, our contributions are the following:

1.  We derive the spectral zeta-function for arbitrary mixed-symmetry
    bosonic and fermionic fields.

2.  We compute one-loop determinants for Type-A and Type-B theories.

3.  We study the contributions of fermionic HS fields in diverse
    dimensions, which is crucial for the consistency of SUSY HS
    theories.

4.  In @xmath we study Type-D,E,… HS theories that are supposed to be
    dual to higher-spin doubletons with spin greater than one and find
    that they do not pass the one-loop test.

5.  Partially-massless fields are also briefly discussed.

6.  A simple expression for the @xmath -anomaly of an arbitrary-spin
    free field is found.

7.  We also discovered that the Type-B theories in all even dimensions
    lead to puzzling results that require better understanding of the
    duality, the bulk result, however, still can be represented as a
    change of the @xmath -energy.

8.  We prove analytically and also extend to all dimensions including
    fractional one s the results for Type-A theory in section 3.6 which
    supports the conjecture of Klebanov and Polyakov [ Klebanov:2002ja ]
    that HSGRA/Vector Model duality may be extensible to fractional
    dimensions.

### 3.2 Classes of Higher-Spin Theories

In this section, we will classify some classes of HSGRAs via their CFT
duals. First of all, we select a number of distinct free fields @xmath
(and their conjugates @xmath ) that take values in some representation
of some group @xmath . Then, we impose the singlet constraint by
projecting onto the invariants of some subgroup @xmath . The spectrum of
the -dual theory is then generated by all single-trace quasi-primary
operators that are @xmath -singlets. Schematically, the single-trace
operators, which are dual to single-particle states in AdS, have the
form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

when @xmath sit in the fundamental representation, and the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

in the adjoint representation. The latter ( 3.2 ) corresponds to an
exponentially growing number of states in AdS. It is interesting to note
that the dual bulk theories of free CFT’s with matter in adjoint
representations look like the dual theories of CFT’s with fundamental
matter coupled to certain matter multiplets [ Sundborg:2000wp ,
Skvortsov:2015pea , Bae:2016rgm , Bae:2016hfy ] .

Below, we classify some of the free CFTs that have HS duals of type-A,
B, SUSY HSGRA’s and certain others, which are considered in this thesis.
To proceed, it is suggestive to use the language and pictures of Young
diagrams which refer to @xmath representations to describe HS
currents/fields. We denote the Young diagrams as @xmath where @xmath are
the length of each rows and @xmath .

  -- -- -- -------
           (3.3)
  -- -- -- -------

###### Type-A.

A free scalar field @xmath as a representation of the conformal algebra
is usually called @xmath . With one complex scalar one can construct
conserved higher-spin currents, which are totally-symmetric tensors:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.4)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Here, we add the ’spin-zero current’ @xmath . These currents can be
described by @xmath . If the scalar is real then the currents of odd
ranks vanish. According to Flato-Fronsdal theorem, [ Flato:1978qz ,
Craigie:1983fb , Vasiliev:2004cm , Dolan:2005wy ] :

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

We can, further, make @xmath take values in some fundamental
representation @xmath of some Lie group @xmath , so that @xmath belong
to the space @xmath . It is clear that the spectrum of @xmath will
correspond to the @xmath -invariant part of the tensor product @xmath .
For example, if @xmath is an @xmath -vector and @xmath is large, then
the relevant invariant tensor is @xmath , which is symmetric. By
swapping two scalar fields, we observe that all HS currents with odd
spins are projected out and the @xmath -invariant single-trace operators
belong to @xmath , i.e. have even spins,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Type-A HSGRA contains bosonic totally-symmetric HS fields that are duals
of @xmath , known as Fronsdal fields [ Fronsdal:1978rb ] , and an
additional scalar field @xmath that is dual to @xmath . At the free
level Fronsdal fields @xmath obey

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where we imposed the transverse traceless (TT) gauge as in Section 2.
HSGRA that has totally-symmetric HS fields, @xmath is called the
non-minimal Type-A, which is the @xmath -singlet projection, and the one
with even spins only, @xmath is the minimal Type-A, which is the @xmath
-singlet projection. One can also define the @xmath -singlet theory
whose spectrum is made of three copies of odd spins and one copy of even
spins [ Giombi:2013fka ] .

###### Type-B.

In this case, one can take a free fermion @xmath called @xmath . The
spectrum of single-trace operators is more complicated [ Flato:1978qz ,
Vasiliev:2004cm , Dolan:2005wy , Alkalaev:2012rg , Alkalaev:2012ic ] .
They have the symmetry of all hook Young diagrams @xmath : ³ ³ 3
Notation @xmath means @xmath rows of length one.

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The conserved currents @xmath , ⁴ ⁴ 4 Note that the conservation is not
simply @xmath due to the Young symmetry. One has to project onto the
right irreducible component, otherwise there are no solutions or
unitarity is lost. The projection is done by anti-symmetrizing over all
@xmath indices in the second line. which obey Young condition, have now
mixed-symmetry and vanishing traces. In particular, @xmath are symmetric
in @xmath and anti-symmetric in @xmath . In summary,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.10)
     @xmath               
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Conserved currents correspond to @xmath and we also have the usual usual
conserved current @xmath when @xmath . Note that the totally-symmetric
HS currents, i.e. when @xmath , are still there. In addition, there are
anti-symmetric tensors that are anomalous, i.e. not obeying any
conservation law, of the form:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

which are degenerate cases of the same expression ( 3.10 ). The spectrum
of single-trace operators can equivalently be read off from @xmath [
Flato:1978qz , Vasiliev:2004cm , Dolan:2005wy ] as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The corresponding spectrum of the Type-B theory is made of bosonic
mixed-symmetry gauge fields with spin @xmath , @xmath or @xmath : ⁵ ⁵ 5
The ellipses hide all @xmath -terms with different permutations due to
the requirement of Young symmetry.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We call such fields hooks due to the shape of Young diagrams @xmath .
The general formula for the mass-like term was found in [ Metsaev:1995re
, Metsaev:1997nj ] . Note that type-A HSGRA is not a sub-theory of
type-B’s due to the differences in the cubic couplings [ Bekaert:2014cea
, Skvortsov:2015pea ] . Even stronger, the Type-A HS algebra is not a
subalgebra of the Type-B algebra. However, in @xmath , there is an
exception where there are no mixed-symmetry fields ( @xmath has to be
@xmath in this case) and the HS algebras generated by free boson and
free fermion are the same. In other words, the currents have the same
form @xmath , but @xmath has weight @xmath while @xmath has @xmath ,
which corresponds to the same mass-like term @xmath in AdS.

###### Susy Hs.

We consider super-symmetric HSGRAs that are dual to CFT’s made of free
scalars and fermions. Together with pure bosonic currents, there are
also super-currents: ⁶ ⁶ 6 As primaries the currents must be traceless
in @xmath and @xmath -traceless in @xmath , the former being a
consequence of the latter.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The super-currents can be expressed via @xmath [ Flato:1978qz ,
Vasiliev:2004cm , Dolan:2005wy ] :

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The super-currents are dual to totally-symmetric fermionic HS fields in
AdS [ Fang:1978wz , Fang:1979hq ] :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

The square of the HS Dirac operators read

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where the mass-like terms were found in [ Metsaev:1998xg ] for fermionic
fields of any symmetry type. We can, therefore, present the simplest
SUSY HSGRA through the following super-matrices

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.18)
  -- -- -- --------

Again, one can take a number of @xmath ’s and @xmath ’s and impose the
singlet constraint with respect to some global symmetry group @xmath .

###### More general HS theories.

Given some dimensions @xmath there is a list @xmath of free conformal
fields that can be in @xmath . Generically, @xmath can contain free
scalar and free fermion and other fields which depend on the dimension
@xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The list @xmath does not exclude free conformal fields ⁷ ⁷ 7 For a
comprehensive list of conformally-invariant equations we refer to [
Shaynkman:2004vu ] . @xmath with any spin @xmath obeying @xmath
equations of motion, where @xmath . These theories, however, are usually
non-unitary. In even dimension, i.e. @xmath , beside the singletons (
@xmath and @xmath ), we can also have doubletons @xmath with spin-
@xmath [ Gunaydin:1984wc , Gunaydin:1984fk , Metsaev:1995jp ,
Bekaert:2009fg , Fernando:2015tiu ] , where @xmath are the usual @xmath
and @xmath . The @xmath case corresponds to @xmath -forms, e.g. the
Maxwell field-strength @xmath in @xmath .

For any given @xmath s, we can construct s that have higher-spin
conserved tensors. For example, consider @xmath , @xmath that take
values in the @xmath and @xmath dimensional representations of @xmath
and @xmath , respectively. By imposing @xmath -singlet, the spectrum has
HS fields of @xmath with values in @xmath , fields of @xmath with values
in @xmath and @xmath fermionic HS fields (see [ Konstein:1989ij ] for
@xmath ).

For the case of Type-C HSGRA as the dual of the spin- @xmath doubleton
@xmath in @xmath and @xmath , one finds that the spectrum of Type-C
HSGRA contains complicated mixed-symmetry fields [ Beccaria:2014zma ] .
Moreover, we can cook up some extended multiplets of type @xmath for
more interesting cases. One of the most notable example is @xmath with
@xmath tensor supermultiplet that contains @xmath and an @xmath rank-3
tensor.

For more details on how to define a general HSGRA via CFT’s content, we
refer the interested readers to [ Gunaydin:2016amv ] and references
therein.

### 3.3 Higher-Spin Theories at One-Loop

#### 3.3.1 Overview of The One-Loop Tests

The idea of the one-loop tests of HS AdS/CFT was explained in [
Giombi:2013fka , Giombi:2014iua ] . The AdS partition function

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

as a function of the bulk coupling @xmath should lead to the following
expansion of the free energy @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where the first term is the classical action evaluated at an extremum.
@xmath stands for one-loop corrections, etc. On the dual CFT side there
should be a similar expansion for the CFT free energy @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where the large- @xmath counting suggests that @xmath . The number of
dof. @xmath is expected to be quantized [ Maldacena:2011jn ] , which is
not yet seen in the bulk. In a free CFT’s, all but the first term are
zero, which should match @xmath . To compute @xmath is, however, still
an impossible task since the classical action is not known.
Nevertheless, with the knowledge from the kinetic term of the action, we
can check whether @xmath vanishes identically or produces a contribution
proportional to @xmath , which can be compensated by modifying the
simplest relation @xmath to @xmath [ Giombi:2013fka , Giombi:2014iua ] .
This basic idea allows to perform several non-trivial tests thanks to
the fact @xmath can be computed on different backgrounds. The simplest
ones include @xmath , @xmath and @xmath that are the boundaries of
Euclidean @xmath , global @xmath and thermal @xmath , respectively. ⁸ ⁸
8 Note that on more complicated backgrounds one encounters the problem
of light states [ Gaberdiel:2012uj , Banerjee:2012gh ] . In addition,
due to the appearance of @xmath -divergences on both sides of AdS/CFT
more numbers should agree.

###### CFT Side.

The free energy computed on @xmath of radius @xmath is a well-defined
number in odd @xmath provided the power divergences are regularized away
and is @xmath when @xmath , where @xmath is the Weyl anomaly
coefficient, see e.g. [ Casini:2010kt ] for conformal scalar.

The free energy on @xmath with the radius of the circle playing the role
of inverse temperature @xmath should have the form

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the anomaly and it vanishes for odd @xmath and also for
@xmath and @xmath on @xmath and @xmath . The last term @xmath goes to
zero when @xmath , i.e. for @xmath , and can be easily computed in a
free CFT:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath is the Hamiltonian of the free CFT and @xmath is
one-particle partition function

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are degeneracies and eigen values of @xmath .
The second term in ( 3.23 ), which is proportional to @xmath , is the
Casimir Energy. It is given by a formally divergent sum

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

which is usually regularized via @xmath -function. For free fields it
vanishes for odd @xmath . The Mellin transform maps @xmath into @xmath .
See Appendix A.2 for many explicit values.

It is crucial to impose the singlet constraint on the CFT side. In a
free CFT, e.g. free scalar, @xmath is constructed from the character
@xmath of @xmath . After the singlet constraint is imposed, one finds,
see e.g. [ Giombi:2014yra ] , that @xmath is built from the character
@xmath of the singlet sector instead of the @xmath -character @xmath ,
i.e. from the character of @xmath if the CFT is just @xmath . Also, the
Casimir Energy is @xmath , where @xmath is the total number of free
fields with the factor of @xmath removed by the singlet constraint.

###### Quadratic action.

Using the Transverse-Traceless (TT) gauge discussed in Chapter 2 , we
have the following free actions for that are building blocks of the
simplest bosonic and SUSY HSGRA’s that are cooked up from Rac’s and Di’s

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.27)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.28)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.29)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.30)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where the multiplicities @xmath , @xmath , @xmath depend on the
multiplet chosen.

###### AdS Side.

The one-loop free energy for a number of (massless) fields in @xmath is
given by determinant of the bulk kinetic terms

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where the sum is over all fields @xmath . The second term in ( 3.31 )
corresponds to the ghost contribution if @xmath is a gauge field and
needs to be subtracted. ⁹ ⁹ 9 See [ Buchbinder:1995ez ] for an earlier
discussion of quantization of higher-spin fields in @xmath . There is an
additional minus @xmath , if fields are fermions. It can be computed by
the standard zeta-function regularization [ Dowker:1975tf ,
Hawking:1976ja ] of one-loop determinants and leads to

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.32)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the radius, @xmath is a UV cutoff.

In Euclidean @xmath , which is also known as Lobachevsky space @xmath ,
the @xmath -function is proportional to the regularized volume of @xmath
space, which is a well-defined number for @xmath and contains @xmath for
@xmath . In @xmath , we have conformal anomaly whose appearance is
present by @xmath . The one-loop free energy on the thermal @xmath with
boundary @xmath is expected to be

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.33)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath vanishes in the high temperature @xmath limit. In odd
dimension, i.e @xmath , the @xmath -anomaly is zero, while in even
dimension it should be the same as in Euclidean [ Giombi:2014yra ] .
Therefore, it can be computed from the free energy in Euclidean @xmath
with boundary @xmath , i.e. @xmath . In the latter case only the total
anomaly coefficient can vanish, as was shown in [ Giombi:2013fka ,
Giombi:2014iua ] . Therefore, once @xmath , the rest of the one-loop
contribution should be feasible.

The @xmath part of the free energy, @xmath , counts the spectrum of
states and should be automatically the same on both sides of the
duality. Indeed, the spectrum of HS theories is determined by
higher-spin algebra hs , which are given by free CFTs. The spectrum of
single-trace operators is the same as the spectrum of HS fields and is
given by the tensor product of appropriate (multiplets of)
singletons/doubletons. Therefore, the @xmath part can be ignored on both
sides for a moment: it can be attributed to generalized Flato-Fronsdal
theorems, see e.g. [ Giombi:2014yra ] for some checks. While the
representation theory guarantees that the spectra should match, a direct
path-integral proof is needed.

As will be shown, the Casimir Energy @xmath does not vanish for the case
of minimal theories and Type-C theory [ Beccaria:2014zma ] , which
requires to modify @xmath . Moreover, the computation we perform below
depends heavily on the dimension @xmath .

###### @xmath cases.

The CFT partition function on a sphere is a number, while @xmath in
@xmath contains @xmath -divergences for individual fields. Therefore, in
other to cancel the log-divergence, we need to pick the right multiplet,
otherwise the finite part of @xmath is ill-defined. Then the finite
part, @xmath , should be compared to @xmath , which is zero in free
CFT’s. If @xmath is found to be non-zero, then one can try to adjust the
relation between @xmath and bulk coupling @xmath as to make the two
sides agree, assuming that @xmath and @xmath where @xmath . This
requirement is due to the quantization of the bulk coupling. It was
found [ Giombi:2013fka ] that this is the case for the minimal models
with even spins and @xmath is equal to @xmath for a free scalar field [
Klebanov:2011gs ] .

Another test is for Casimir Energy @xmath . It vanishes on the CFT side,
while every field contributes a finite amount on the -side. Therefore,
only appropriately regularized sum over spins can vanish.

###### @xmath cases.

The regularized volume of AdS-space contains @xmath , while the sphere
free energy @xmath is given by the @xmath -coefficient of the Weyl
anomaly ( @xmath -term vanishes for every field individually). Again,
@xmath either vanishes or should be equal to an integer multiple of the
@xmath -anomaly of the dual free CFT, @xmath , and can be compensated by
modifying @xmath . The same computation then gives the anomaly for the
conformal HS fields — Fradkin-Tseytlin fields, @xmath , [ Fradkin:1985am
, Tseytlin:2013jya , Giombi:2013yva , Giombi:2014iua ] .

Since the Casimir Energy does not have to vanish on the CFT side, we
expect AdS results to be some interesting numbers. @xmath corresponds to
the order- @xmath corrections in CFT, which are absent for free CFT’s.

For mutual consistency, if a modification of @xmath is needed, it must
be the same for all the tests in a given theory.

### 3.4 One-Loop Tests

In this section we perform the one-loop tests reviewed in Section 3.3 .
Our new results include: computations in even dimensions, spectral
zeta-function for fermionic and mixed-symmetry HS fields. Less
conventional cases of partially-massless fields and higher-spin
doubletons are discussed in Appendix A.3 .

The spectrum of SUSY HSGRA is made of bosonic and fermionic HS fields.
The simplest case is when the dual free CFT made of @xmath scalars and
@xmath fermions, so @xmath . By imposing different singlet constraints
the spectrum of bosonic HS fields can be truncated to minimal theories.
The spin of fermionic HS fields, if there are any, runs over all
half-integer values @xmath . In the minimal theories the order @xmath
one-loop corrections usually do not vanish. It is important for the
consistency of SUSY HS theories that the modifications of @xmath is
necessary for consistency of Type-A and Type-B are the same, which was
observed for @xmath , @xmath , @xmath in @xmath [ Beccaria:2014qea ,
Beccaria:2014xda ] and for @xmath in all @xmath [ Giombi:2014yra ] .

#### 3.4.1 Casimir Energy Test

The Casimir Energy tests are the simplest since the computation of
@xmath is not difficult and we refer to Appendix A.2 for technicalities.
Each field contributes some finite amount to the Casimir Energy. It is
important to use the same regularization that has been already applied
for Type-A and Type-B models.

We will discuss HS fermions only, since the pure Type-A and Type-B
contributions are discussed below. Vanishing of the Casimir energy can
be seen after summation over spins with the exponential regulator @xmath
. For example, in @xmath the summation of @xmath over all
totally-symmetric HS fermionic fields reads

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.34)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath means to take the finite @xmath -part of the sum evaluated
with the exponential regulator. From the character perspective, consider
@xmath in any dimension, we have

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.35)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

which is manifestly even in @xmath and therefore the Casimir Energy
vanishes. For the same reason @xmath vanishes for non-minimal Type-A,B
models and is equal to that of Rac and Di for minimal cases was also
applied in [ Giombi:2014yra ] . The Casimir Energy for the fermionic
subsector is bounded to always vanish, which is what we observed. The
tests for more complicated mixed-symmetry fields and partially-massless
fields are discussed in Appendix A.3 .

We have the following observation that makes the computation for
individual fields easier. First, the character of a conformal scalar
weight @xmath has the form @xmath . It is easy to see that the number of
physical d.o.f factorizes out in the character for any @xmath . Second,
the Casimir Energy/its first derivative can be shown to vanish for
@xmath for @xmath even/odd:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.36)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.37)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Moreover, the second derivative of @xmath with respect to the conformal
weight has a very simple form:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.38)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

#### 3.4.2 Laplace Equation and Zeta Function

The eigenvalue problem of the Laplace operator is closely related to
construction of zeta-function s . We first discuss how to compute the
eigenvalues and degeneracies for the Laplace operator on a sphere and
then proceed to zeta-function on @xmath (Euclidean AdS), which can be
obtained from that on a sphere, see [ Camporesi:1994ga ] .

##### Laplace Eigenvalue Problem

We are interested in the spectrum of the Laplacian on @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the mass-like term and @xmath is a transverse, traceless
field with Lorentz spin @xmath , where @xmath can be any representation
which we label by a Young diagram, @xmath . As is well-known, the
eigenvalues @xmath are given by the difference of two Casimir operators
with a trivial shift by @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.40)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.41)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Here the Young diagrams @xmath of representations that contribute are
obtained from @xmath by adding a row of extra length @xmath as the first
row: ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 In general, there are many more representations that
contain @xmath upon reduction to @xmath . The restriction to transverse
and traceless fields reduces this freedom to one number, which is @xmath
. The TT-fields result from imposing gauges on the off-shell fields.

  -- -------- -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath      @xmath         (3.42)
  -- -------- -- -------- -- -- --------

The degeneracy @xmath is just the dimension of @xmath . For example, for
the scalar Laplacian with @xmath we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.43)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the number of components of the totally-symmetric rank-
@xmath tensor of @xmath . Analogously, for totally-symmetric rank-
@xmath tensor fields we find

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.44)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.45)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

##### Spectral Zeta-function

Having eigenvalues @xmath and degeneracy @xmath , we can compute the
spectral @xmath -function on @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.46)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Extension to hyperbolic space @xmath requires some work, see e.g. [
Camporesi:1992wn , Camporesi:1992tm , Camporesi:1993mz , CAMPORESI199457
, Camporesi:1994ga , Camporesi:1995fb , Camporesi:1990wm , Lal:2012ax ,
Gupta:2012he , Gopakumar:2011qs ] . The cases of @xmath and @xmath are
very different. Here @xmath is the spectral @xmath -function, which is
the Mellin transform of the traced heat kernel at coincident points:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.47)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

In homogeneous spaces the heat kernel at coincident points @xmath does
not depend on coordinates and the volume of the space factorizes out.
The volume factor is a source of additional divergences and needs to be
regularized properly [ Diaz:2007an ] .

The eigenvalues can be computed in a rather simple way for any
irreducible representation of weight @xmath . The rule established on
many examples, see e.g. [ Camporesi:1993mz , CAMPORESI199457 ] is to
replace @xmath , which is the length of the first row, by @xmath where
@xmath is non-negative and real:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.48)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.49)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where we took the standard normalization of the mass-like term, see e.g.
[ Metsaev:1995re ] : for @xmath corresponding to gauge fields, both
unitary [ Metsaev:1995re ] and non-unitary [ Metsaev:1995re ,
Skvortsov:2009zu ] , we have @xmath .

The heat kernel contains only a contribution of the principal series in
the odd dimensional case @xmath . In the even dimensional case @xmath a
discrete series can contribute [ CAMPORESI199457 ] too, depending on the
type of representation. In what follows we will ignore the contribution
of discrete series, but it would be interesting to understand if they
play any role in HS AdS/CFT in @xmath .

Zeta-function naturally has several different factors and the general
expression is usually written in the following form:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.50)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the spectral density that is normalized to its
flat-space value:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.51)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

@xmath is the number of components of the irreducible transverse
traceless tensor that corresponds to the spin of the field. The volume
factors are self-evident. Lastly

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.52)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We discuss separately the cases of odd and even dimensions below.

###### Odd dimensions.

In the case of odd dimensions, @xmath , @xmath , the @xmath -function is
obtained by a simple replacement @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.53)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where the boldface @xmath contains all the factors from ( 3.50 ) except
for the ratio of volumes. We then extract @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
factors. For example, for any even @xmath we find for type-A with
totally-symmetric spin- @xmath bosonic fields, SUSY HS with spin @xmath
fermionic fields and type-B for bosonic hook fields @xmath :

  -- -- -------- -------- -- --------
        @xmath   @xmath      (3.54)
        @xmath   @xmath      (3.55)
        @xmath               (3.56)
  -- -- -------- -------- -- --------

where the spin factors are:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.57)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.58)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.59)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The @xmath case of hooks corresponds to @xmath -forms studied in [
CAMPORESI199457 ] ; spin- @xmath bosons were investigated in [
Camporesi:1994ga ] . The most general case in @xmath and @xmath was
studied in [ Beccaria:2014xda , Beccaria:2014qea ] .

###### Even dimensions.

In the case of even dimensions, @xmath , @xmath , there are two
complications: there can be additional discrete modes and the Plancherel
measure is not a polynomial. If we ignore the discrete modes, the
spectral density is a product of a formally continued dimension @xmath
and a hyperbolic function

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.60)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.61)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

For example, for any even @xmath we find for totally-symmetric spin-
@xmath bosonic fields, spin @xmath fermionic fields and for bosonic
fields with the shape of @xmath -hook:

  -- -- -------- -------- -- --------
        @xmath   @xmath      (3.62)
        @xmath   @xmath      (3.63)
        @xmath   @xmath      (3.64)
  -- -- -------- -------- -- --------

where the spin factors are the same. Degenerate hooks with @xmath again
correspond to @xmath -forms studied in [ CAMPORESI199457 ] . For
symmetric bosonic fields we refer to [ Camporesi:1994ga ] .

###### Mixed-Symmetry Fields.

As one more example of interest let us take a mixed-symmetry field of
shape @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.65)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.66)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.67)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.68)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The expression for the most general mixed-symmetry field with spin
defined by @xmath Young diagram @xmath with @xmath rows follows the same
pattern:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.69)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.70)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.71)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.72)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

For fermionic mixed-symmetry fields one has to correct @xmath factors
only:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.73)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.74)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Let us collect the relevant formulae with all factors now added to
@xmath , which we call @xmath . The complete spectral zeta-function is

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.75)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

It is worth stressing that these are the zeta-functions for transverse,
traceless tensors. Then, the ghosts that associated for each massless
fields always come with weight @xmath and spin @xmath as compared to
@xmath of the fields themselves and their contributions need to be
substracted. Schematically, the full zeta function of HS, @xmath , is
the result of the following infinity sum

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

Below, we collect some simplest formulae for @xmath in different
dimensions and for different types of HS.

###### Four Dimensions.

In four-dimensions there are no mixed-symmetry fields and bosons and
fermions are described by almost the same formulae [ Camporesi:1993mz ]

  -- -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
        @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.77)
  -- -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

###### Five Dimensions.

The explicit formulae in five dimensions, i.e. @xmath , are, see also [
Beccaria:2014xda ] :

  -- -- -------- -------- -------- --
        @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- -------- --

###### Six Dimensions.

For application to HS theory based on @xmath we are also interested in
six-dimensional anti-de Sitter space:

  -- -- -------- -------- -------- --
        @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- -------- --

Note that for fermions we use spin @xmath , rather than integer @xmath .
The only hooks in Type-B theory are of shape @xmath . Also, the bosonic
cases are all mutually consistent and follow from the two-row one. We
stress that fermions cannot be obtained as @xmath from bosons in this
case, contrary to @xmath .

#### 3.4.3 Zeta Function Tests: Odd Dimensions

Odd dimensions are easier since evaluation of @xmath and @xmath is of no
technical difficulty. In particular, @xmath for each field individually.
The new results are on mixed-symmetry fields that belong to Type-B
theories and fermionic HS fields, where all the tests are successfully
passed. Also, we found a general formula for the @xmath -anomaly. The
zeta-function for the whole multiplet of some HS theory is denoted as
@xmath .

##### Fermionic HS Fields

Firstly, @xmath for any @xmath and therefore the bulk result is
well-defined. It is proportional to @xmath due to the regularized volume
of @xmath . On the boundary it should be equal to the Weyl anomaly
coefficient, @xmath , but this has been already accounted for by the
contribution of bosonic HS fields. Therefore, we should check that
@xmath . To give few examples, in @xmath , see also [ Beccaria:2014xda ]
, we find that

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Using the same exponential cut-off @xmath we find the total @xmath
-coefficient to vanish

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.78)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

In @xmath we have a more complicated formulae, but fortunately with the
same result that @xmath , see also [ Beccaria:2014qea ] :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

In general dimension the computation can be simplified by introducing
@xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.79)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Then, with the help of the simple integration formula

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.80)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , one finds that @xmath and @xmath can be obtained from
(only even @xmath matters)

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.81)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Then, it can be effortlessly checked up to any given dimension that the
total @xmath vanishes identically. In fact, it also vanishes when
restricted to ’even half-integer’ spins @xmath .

##### Symmetric HS Fields

The case of Type-A was studied in [ Giombi:2014iua , Giombi:2013fka ,
Beccaria:2014qea , Beccaria:2014zma , Beccaria:2014xda ] . Let us quote
the results. As always in odd dimensions @xmath , while @xmath can be
computed the same way as we did for fermions. The final output is ¹¹ ¹¹
11 We note that non-min. stands for non minimal which corresponds for
all spins while min. stands for minimal that corresponds to even spins
only.

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.82)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.83)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Weyl-anomaly coefficient of the free scalar field in
@xmath , for which one finds, see e.g. [ Casini:2010kt ] ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.84)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

##### Mixed-Symmetry HS Fields

We will discuss various versions of the Type-B theory that contains
mixed-symmetry fields with Young diagrams of hook shape ( 3.10 ). The
contribution of certain mixed-symmetry fields has been already studied
in lower-dimensional cases of @xmath in [ Beccaria:2014xda ,
Beccaria:2014qea , Beccaria:2014zma ] . With the help of the general
formula for the zeta-function we can extend these results for the Type-B
theory to any dimension. Here we should find that @xmath is either zero
or is a multiple of the free fermion Weyl anomaly @xmath , see e.g. [
Aros:2011iz ] :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.85)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

First of all, the spectrum of the non-minimal theory is given by the
tensor product of Dirac free fermion @xmath that decomposes into a
direct sum @xmath of two Weyl fermions. With the help of Appendix A.1
one finds for @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.86)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where we indicate the spin of the fields only as the conformal
weight/AdS energy is obvious.
For example, in seven dimensions the contribution of the scalar field
and the total contributions of hooks of height @xmath are: ¹² ¹² 12 The
zeta-function for hooks with @xmath is the same as for the dual fields
with @xmath .

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.87)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

while in nine dimensions the contribution of the scalar field and the
total contributions of hooks of height @xmath are:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.88)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

the total sum being zero, as is expected.

As for the minimal theories, there are several surprises. First of all,
one can take just @xmath -singlet sector of @xmath . With the help of
Appendix A.1 the spectrum reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.89)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.90)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We see that for @xmath , i.e. @xmath , the spectrum does not contain
symmetric higher-spin fields at all. In particular, there is no
graviton. Nevertheless, the total @xmath can be found to vanish. For
example, consider @xmath , for which the results on the row-by-row basis
were quoted in ( 3.88 ). The spectrum of @xmath Weyl fermion @xmath is

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.91)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

and we see that @xmath . The same is of course true for the @xmath
sub-sector: @xmath . The latter sector contains symmetric HS fields,
including the graviton:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.92)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

For @xmath , i.e. @xmath , the @xmath Weyl fermion does include
totally-symmetric HS fields, so the theory looks healthy. The spectrum
of the two parts is

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.93)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.94)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Again, the two sub-sectors result in @xmath independently: @xmath and
@xmath .

As for the minimal Type-B theory there are several options. Firstly, one
can take the anti-symmetric part of @xmath , which would be the minimal
Type-B. Secondly, one can take the anti-symmetric part of only @xmath ,
which would be the minimalistic option. The spectrum of the minimalistic
Type-B theory is even more peculiar. We refer to Appendix A.1 for more
detail, while giving two examples here-below. In @xmath we find, see
also [ Beccaria:2014qea ] ,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.95)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The total @xmath is @xmath , which is in accordance with the @xmath
-anomaly of one Weyl fermion on @xmath , see also Appendix A.2 . In
@xmath the spectrum of the minimalistic Type-B is

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.96)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

and the contribution to @xmath is @xmath , which is again in accordance
with the @xmath -anomaly of the free fermion. The contribution of the
symmetric part of the tensor product

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.97)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

which would be relevant for the @xmath -singlet theory comes with the
opposite sign, @xmath . The latter is obvious, of course, without any
computation since the total anomaly was found to vanish.

The same pattern can be observed in other dimensions. According to the
quite general law [ Gubser:2002vv , Diaz:2007an , Tseytlin:2013jya ] ,
the @xmath -anomaly of conformal HS fields on the boundary can be
computed from the AdS side due to the fact that @xmath , which is
related to more general results on the ratio of determinants [
Barvinsky:2005ms ] . Therefore, vanishing of total @xmath for the
mixed-symmetry fields of Type-B implies the one-loop consistency of the
conformal higher-spin theory with spectrum of conformal HS fields given
by the sources to the single-trace operators built out of free fermion.
As in the case of Type-A conformal HS theory [ Fradkin:1985am ,
Segal:2002gd ] , the action is given by the @xmath -part of the
generating function of correlators of mixed-symmetry currents @xmath , (
3.10 ):

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.98)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the sources for @xmath .

##### Simplifying a-anomaly

We now understand that @xmath , which is related to the boundary @xmath
-anomaly, is a quite complicated expression. However, we can express
@xmath through @xmath by considering the formula [ Giombi:2013yva ,
Giombi:2014iua , Beccaria:2014qea , Beccaria:2014xda ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.99)
  -- -------- -- --------

for any @xmath and any irreducible representation @xmath defined by some
Young diagram @xmath with @xmath rows. Then we find that

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.100)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

@xmath does not have a nice factorized form, but it is always
proportional to @xmath , i.e. it vanishes at @xmath , which is a
boundary condition for the integral that allows to reconstruct @xmath
from @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.101)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

#### 3.4.4 Zeta Function Tests: Even Dimensions

For the case of @xmath , it is much harder to compute the zeta function
because of the complexity of spectral density. It is no longer a simple
polynomial, but contains the functions @xmath or @xmath . Moreover,
@xmath is generally non-zero for each field (which is due to the
conformal anomaly). Below we present the main results with the
technicalities devoted to Appendix A.4 . The most interesting case is
that of mixed-symmetry fields from the Type-B theory.

##### Fermionic HS Fields

Let us start with few examples. Computation of @xmath is not too
difficult thanks to a handful of papers [ Camporesi:1993mz ,
Camporesi:1991nw , Giombi:2013fka ] . For example, in @xmath and @xmath
the sum over all fermions is zero

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

As different from odd dimensional AdS, the sum over all ’even
half-integer’ spins does not vanish.

The computation of @xmath is an art, see Appendices for details, but it
can be shown on a dimension by dimension basis that for @xmath one finds
@xmath . Therefore, adding fermionic HS fields is consistent to a given
order, which is a necessary condition for the existence of SUSY HS
theories.

##### Symmetric HS Fields

The case of symmetric HS fields was already studied in [ Giombi:2013fka
, Giombi:2014iua ] . The summary is that @xmath both for minimal and
non-minimal Type-A theories while @xmath does not vanish for the minimal
Type-A and is equal to the sphere free energy of one free scalar:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.102)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.103)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

As before, the minimal Type-A requires @xmath .

##### Mixed-Symmetry HS Fields

This is the most interesting case. The Type-B theory in @xmath does not
differ much from the Type-A — the spectrum consists of totally-symmetric
HS fields. This is not the case in @xmath where the spectrum of Type-B
contains mixed-symmetry fields with Young diagrams of hook shape ( 3.10
) in accordance with the singlet spectrum of free fermion @xmath . Much
less is known about these theories ¹³ ¹³ 13 Some cubic interaction
vertices for mixed-symmetry fields in AdS were constructed in [
Boulanger:2012dx , Boulanger:2011se , Boulanger:2011qt ] . A part of the
Type-B cubic action that contains @xmath vertices was found in [
Skvortsov:2015pea , Grigoriev:2018wrx , Sharapov:2019vyd ] . except that
they should exist in any dimension since @xmath and @xmath do.

###### Zeta.

First of all, it is important to check that @xmath and thus the bulk
contribution is well-defined. It is convenient to present a contribution
of the @xmath operator and of the hooks for each height @xmath
separately. Here @xmath can run over @xmath with @xmath corresponding to
totally-symmetric HS fields. However, one can (and should) take into
account only half of the hooks since the rest can be dualized back to
@xmath and the zeta function is the same. The latter is in accordance
with the generalized Flato-Fronsdal theorem, which we now write for
@xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.104)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where there is one scalar and half of the hooks. For example, in @xmath
we find

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.105)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Here one can see the contribution of the type-A fields with @xmath ,
which is @xmath . In Type-A this is canceled by the @xmath scalar. Now,
the contribution of @xmath is different, but there is the @xmath sector
and @xmath . In @xmath we find

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.106)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

It can be checked for higher dimensions that the total @xmath . Now let
us have a look at the minimal theories. The @xmath -singlet version of
the Flato-Fronsdal theorem tells that

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.107)
              @xmath      (3.108)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where the scalar is present whenever @xmath or @xmath . Analogously to
odd dimensions, simply taking anti-symmetric part of @xmath can result
in somewhat strange spectra, which may not contain graviton.
Nevertheless, such spectra yield vanishing contribution to @xmath . For
example, in @xmath we find

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.109)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

and the contribution of all odd spin fields is zero, while hooks of even
spins give exactly @xmath to cancel that of the scalar. Similar pattern
is true in higher dimensions and both minimal and non-minimal Type-B
have @xmath .

###### Zeta Prime.

The most challenging problem of computing one-loop effect is to find
@xmath . Below we give the summary of our results in several dimensions,
with technicalities devoted to the Appendices. While doing the
calculation, we noticed that certain integrals cannot be evaluated
analytically but they cancel each other at the end, also all complicated
factors disappear from the final result. For the non-minimal theories
the total contribution to @xmath is: ¹⁴ ¹⁴ 14 We list here only those
results that fit one line. See also a closely related paper [
Giombi:2016pvg ] .

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.110)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.111)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.112)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.113)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.114)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

The case of @xmath was studied in [ Giombi:2013fka ] . The discrepancy
with the sphere free energy of free fermion, @xmath , is systematic, see
Appendix A.2 for some explicit values. However, these numbers are not
random. They can be reproduced as a difference in the free energy via
RG-flow induced by a double-trace operator @xmath . If the operator
@xmath is bosonic the general formula for @xmath can be found in [
Klebanov:2011gs ] : ¹⁵ ¹⁵ 15 Here we pass to generalized sphere free
energy @xmath that is defined as @xmath , see e.g. [ Giombi:2014xxa ] .

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.115)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

The values of the free scalar @xmath -energy can also be computed as
@xmath -difference:

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.116)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

The numbers that resulted from the tedious computations in @xmath
arrange themselves into the following sequence:

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.117)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

However, the dual of Type-B is supposed to be a fermionic theory, for
which a generalization of [ Klebanov:2011gs ] to fermionic @xmath in any
@xmath gives [ Giombi:2014xxa ] :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.118)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Again the free fermion @xmath -energy can be computed as @xmath
-difference:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.119)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We observe that for @xmath it will give @xmath up to a factor of @xmath
:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.120)
  -- -------- -- ---------

For the minimal theories the computations are even more involved, but
the unwanted constants do cancel and we find ¹⁶ ¹⁶ 16 A word of warning
is that the spectrum of the minimal Type-B is defined in ( 3.109 ).
Other projections, e.g. the @xmath -constraint or various Majorana-Weyl
projections, would result in a slightly different spectra, all of which
yield similar numbers, i.e. the unwanted constants go away. for the
total contribution to @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Again, these numbers do not look random. Curiously enough the @xmath
result equals @xmath .

### 3.5 Toward HSGRAs/Vector Models Duality in Fractional Dimensions

Inspired by the results in integer dimension, we extend the computation
above to fractional dimension for some classes of HS theories. As it was
mentioned already in [ Klebanov:2002ja ] , see also [ Giombi:2014xxa ] ,
the fact that the Wilson-Fisher critical point exists in @xmath
expansion should allow one to make sense both of the dual higher-spin
theory and of the duality itself in @xmath . While there are some
results in CFTs in fractional dimensions, see e.g. [ Giombi:2014xxa ] ,
the bulk side’s computation is difficult whenever we try to move away
from integer dimensions. In [ Skvortsov:2017ldz ] , we computed one-loop
determinant of Type-A HSGRA in fractional dimensions in Lobachevsky
space @xmath and compared it with the sphere free energy @xmath of free
and critical large- @xmath @xmath vector models. The results on both
sides of the AdS/CFT duality do match in all dimensions, which gives an
analytic proof of the results obtained for a number of fixed integer
dimensions in [ Giombi:2013fka , Giombi:2014iua ] and extends them to
fractional dimension. Upon changing the boundary conditions we reproduce
the difference between the sphere free energy under a double trace
deformation @xmath that drives the free model at UV to the critical
model in IR.

To understand how it works, first of all, let us start from the better
understood side, i.e. the CFT side. Here, there are different techniques
available that allow one to make sense of at least some of the
interacting CFTs in fractional dimensions. For example, the large-
@xmath expansion, see e.g. [ Vasiliev:1981yc , Lang:1992zw ,
Petkou:1994ad , Moshe:2003xn ] , and the @xmath -expansion [
Wilson:1973jj ] . Another technique that is useful is conformal
bootstrap which can set up some computations in fractional dimensions [
El-Showk:2013nia ] . One of the predictions that came from the conformal
bootstrap technique is to show that the @xmath Ising model smoothly
turns into the @xmath Ising model and ends up on the free theory in
@xmath . Using @xmath -expansion, we can access the free theory in
@xmath starting from @xmath and take the limit @xmath . The whole range
@xmath is covered by the @xmath -expansion whenever @xmath is large.
There are recent studies [ Fei:2014yja , Mati:2016wjn ] pointing out
that the critical vector model can be extended to a wider range of
dimension @xmath .
As noted, the observable on the CFT that we will try to match with the
bulk calculation is @xmath . This observable should decrease along RG
flow and be stationary at fixed points which are described by conformal
field theories. The @xmath case is solved by the @xmath -theorem [
Zamolodchikov:1986gt ] , while the @xmath case by the @xmath -theorem [
Cardy:1988cwa , Komargodski:2011vj ] . Both the central charge @xmath
and the @xmath anomaly can be extracted from the sphere free energy:
@xmath , where @xmath is the radius of the sphere and @xmath in @xmath .
In @xmath there is no conformal anomaly but it was first conjectured [
Myers:2010xs , Jafferis:2011zi , Klebanov:2011gs ] and then proved [
Casini:2011kv , Casini:2012ei ] that @xmath works in @xmath as well.
More generally, @xmath is expected [ Klebanov:2011gs ] to work in odd
@xmath , in particular in @xmath it gives the @xmath -theorem [
Affleck:1991tk ] . Following these results, the definition of @xmath is
then generalized to @xmath that works in all dimensions [ Giombi:2014xxa
] . This observable can interpolate smoothly between all dimensions but
even ones. At even dimensions, there are poles that are resolved in such
a way that the @xmath -anomaly is captured, @xmath . @xmath was computed
in [ Gubser:2002vv , Diaz:2007an , Allais:2010qq , Klebanov:2011gs ,
Aros:2011iz ] for the cases of free CFT’s and interaction ones that
induced by a double-trace deformation. For the free scalar field it is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.121)
  -- -------- -- ---------

while for the change @xmath induced by a double trace deformation due to
an operator @xmath of dimension @xmath it is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.122)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and we are interested in the case @xmath that corresponds to @xmath .

### 3.6 The One-loop Tests in Fractional Dimensions

In this section, we will restrict ourselves to (non)-minimal type-A
HSGRA. Whether the dual CFT is free or interacting depends on the
boundary conditions imposed on the scalar field, @xmath , of the
higher-spin multiplet: @xmath for the free dual and @xmath for the
(large- @xmath ) interacting one. Therefore, altogether we have four
different cases: ¹⁷ ¹⁷ 17 The second term in the brackets is to subtract
the ghosts.

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.123)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath can be either @xmath or @xmath . It was shown in a number
of integer dimensions [ Giombi:2013fka , Giombi:2014iua , Giombi:2014yra
] that:

1.  While each term in the sum may depend on the cutoff @xmath , the
    full one-loop vacuum energy does not depend on the cutoff @xmath ,
    i.e. @xmath for the (non)-minimal Type-A models.

2.  The finite part vanishes for the non-minimal Type-A, @xmath , and
    equals the sphere free energy @xmath or the @xmath -anomaly of the
    free scalar field, i.e. @xmath for @xmath even and @xmath for @xmath
    odd.

The one-loop effect we have calculated shows that there should be an
integer shift in the relation between the bulk coupling constant @xmath
and the number of fields @xmath on the CFT side, @xmath (provided that
@xmath does match @xmath ).

As discussed above, the one-loop vacuum energy in the bulk precisely
match with the @xmath -anomaly coefficient of the free scalar CFT in
even dimensions and the sphere free energy @xmath in odd dimensions.
Upon changing the boundary conditions for the scalar field it was also
shown that the difference @xmath matches the sphere free energy of the
large- @xmath interacting vector model in @xmath [ Giombi:2013fka ] and
@xmath [ Giombi:2014iua ] .

In [ Skvortsov:2017ldz ] , we showed that @xmath for the minimal Type-A
theory does reproduce the generalized sphere free energy ( 3.121 ) for
all @xmath . When we changed the weight of the scalar field to @xmath ,
the one-loop result matches the change in the sphere free energy ( 3.122
) due to the double-trace deformation induced by operator @xmath on the
CFT side [ Klebanov:2011gs , Giombi:2013fka , Giombi:2014iua ] .

Let us briefly discuss the main steps that led to our result. First of
all, thanks to Camporesi and Higuchi [ Camporesi:1994ga ] , there is a
representation of the spectral density that enters @xmath such that it
can be extended to non-integer dimensions. Next, we anchor the runaway
branch cut @xmath by applying the Laplace transform to the spectral
density [ Bae:2016rgm , Bae:2016hfy ] . ¹⁸ ¹⁸ 18 For increasing values
of @xmath , the branch point will move away from the origin.
Effectively, this transformation also disentangles the integral over the
spectral parameter and summation over spins. Then, we convert the
integral into a sum over the residues. In order to handle the sum we
change the regularization prescription, see also [ Bae:2016rgm ] , but
it can be checked that this does not affect the result. Finally, we
arrive at the expression, which we refer to as intermediate form, whose
regularized form gives ( 3.121 ). The intermediate form can also be
obtained directly on the CFT side from the determinant on the sphere.
The interacting large- @xmath vector model requires taking into account
the difference between the contributions of the scalar fields for @xmath
and @xmath .

We present the computation for the one-loop tests in fractional
dimension as follows. In section 3.7 , we explain how to extend the
computation of one-loop determinant for type-A theory to non-integer
dimensions and apply the main technical tools that allow us to handle
fractional dimensions: Laplace transform, contour integration and a
modified regularization. In section 3.7.1 we discuss the volume of the
anti-de Sitter space that enters as an overall, but important, factor.
The last steps on the AdS side — summation over spins and extraction of
@xmath and @xmath are done in sections 3.8 and 3.9 , where we arrive at
certain intermediate forms of the result that can be matched with the
CFT side. The intermediate form is directly related to the free and
critical vector models in Sections 3.10 and 3.11 , which completes the
proof.

### 3.7 Higher-Spin Partition Function in Fractional Dimensions

Coming to fractional dimensions we prefer to isolate all the factors,
including the volume of the hyperbolic space, and denote the leftover as
@xmath

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.124)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.125)
  -- -------- -- ---------

It is important to stress that the @xmath in this section is the
normalized constant not the number of supersymmetries. Also, the
appearance of @xmath signals conformal anomaly. There is a
representation of the spectral density that works in all dimensions [
Camporesi:1994ga ] :

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.126)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

This is our starting point. Note that we do not have to make an
assumption that @xmath is an integer in the above expression. In
general, the spectral density is not a polynomial in all dimensions,
including fractional ones, except for the case of even @xmath .
Therefore, we will treat the @xmath -function carefully whenever @xmath
approach an even number. The computation we perform below is valid for
all @xmath except even (which is of measure zero on the real line). The
result for even @xmath is then obtained as a continuation from
non-integer @xmath .

Let us begin with the expression for the zeta-function that is obtained
by collecting all the factors and expanding the gamma functions:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.127)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath . The integrand is an even function of @xmath and therefore
we can extend the range of integration to @xmath at the price of @xmath
. It is convenient to perform the Laplace transform, see also [
Bae:2016rgm , Bae:2016xmv ] , ¹⁹ ¹⁹ 19 One can represent the spectral
zeta-function as a differential operator acting on some seed function
that has enough parameters to produce @xmath . Character is an example
of such a function [ Bae:2016rgm , Bae:2016xmv ] , which is also
indispensable for taking tensor products. The characters are however
difficult to define in non-integer dimension.

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.128)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The main advantage is that the exponential @xmath times @xmath can be
summed over all spins in the spectrum directly. In other words, the sum
over spins and the @xmath integral are now decoupled. This is one of the
crucial steps that allows us to calculate the full zeta function @xmath
, ( 3.123 ), in arbitrary dimension. Notice that in applying the Laplace
transform we moved the branch point from @xmath in ( 3.127 ) to @xmath ,
which makes the computation feasible. Next, we split the Bessel function
into

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.129)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath are Hankel functions of the first kind and
second kind.

Similarly to Green functions we close the contour for the part of @xmath
upward and the contour for the part of @xmath downward. Let us show how
to compute the contour integral of the part with @xmath in ( 3.129 )
first. In order to evaluate the contribution coming from @xmath , we
choose the contour as on Fig. 3.1 .

One needs to make sure that the upper arc of the contour does not cross
any pole that comes from the @xmath . The residue theorem implies that

  -- -- -- ---------
           (3.130)
  -- -- -- ---------

where we prefer to omit @xmath for a moment:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.131)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We recall that the residues of @xmath -function are

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.132)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We, therefore, could change the integral over @xmath to an infinite sum
over @xmath . Before proceeding further, let us make sure that the upper
arc and the contour around the branch point do not contribute to the
whole contour integral. We make the change of variable @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.133)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Introducing @xmath as a regulator [ Camporesi:1994ga , Giombi:2013fka ,
Giombi:2014iua , Giombi:2014yra ] is useful in various ways. Let us
consider the @xmath contour first, if we set @xmath large enough then
there is no contribution from the small contour

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.134)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Therefore, ( 3.131 ) vanishes and the integral over the contour near the
branch point in ( 3.133 ) also vanishes. Next, consider the large arc
@xmath , assuming that the contour goes in between the poles of the
gamma function. The integrand ( 3.131 ) will also vanish as we make
@xmath large enough in the limit where the radius @xmath goes to
infinity. ²⁰ ²⁰ 20 For a more detailed discussion see [ Camporesi:1994ga
] Therefore, there is no contribution coming from @xmath and @xmath arcs
and ( 3.130 ) is equal to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.135)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We notice that @xmath and hence

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.136)
  -- -------- -- ---------

It is difficult to say anything about the sum in general, but eventually
we are interested only in few terms around @xmath . In [ Bae:2016rgm ] ,
it was argued that one can change the regularization prescription so
that the @xmath behaviour is not modified. Indeed, it is clear that to
the leading order in @xmath -expansion one can use

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.137)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This way we obtain the following contribution coming from the @xmath
function with the contour in the upper half-plane, Fig. 3.1 :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.138)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The presence of @xmath factor in ( 3.128 ) implies that in order to get
the right @xmath we can take only the constant term of ( 3.137 ) into
account. However, there should be a discrepancy between @xmath computed
rigorously and the one after we drop the term @xmath in ( 3.137 ). The
difference, which we call the deficit , originates from the term of
order @xmath in ( 3.137 ). As was noted in [ Bae:2016rgm ] the deficit
vanishes for representations that have even characters (even as a
function of @xmath , where @xmath counts the energy via insertion of
@xmath ). The deficit is discussed in Appendix B.2 , where it is shown
that it does not contribute to the full @xmath .

Next, we repeat the same steps for the contribution coming from @xmath
in ( 3.129 ) where we close the contour downwards. In this case, one has
to use @xmath when applying residue theorem ²¹ ²¹ 21 The contour is the
reflection image of Fig. 3.1 around the real axis. for the poles of
@xmath . We obtain the same structure as in ( 3.138 ) since

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.139)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Therefore, in order to compute the full one-loop free energy of the
Type-A theory, we can write the zeta-function in a modified form as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.140)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Note that all but the factor @xmath is usable in fractional dimensions.
Below, we will regularize @xmath in such a way that it allows us to work
in fractional dimensions.

#### 3.7.1 Volume of Hyperbolic Space

In integer dimensions, we can use the volume form of the sphere @xmath
and Hyperbolic space @xmath as in ( 3.125 ). This result arises [
Diaz:2007an ] from the expansion of the formal volume @xmath in @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.141)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath -pole signals the @xmath divergence in @xmath and @xmath is
the finite part that makes the leading contribution for @xmath . As it
was already noted in [ Diaz:2007an ] , regularization of the volume IR
divergences is not independent of regularization of the UV divergences
that arise in one-loop determinants. Below, we propose an extension for
the overall normalization factor which comes from the regularized volume
to non-integer dimension. Note that one can write the general volume for
Lobachevsky space as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.142)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which gives the right pole as in ( 3.141 ) and reduces to @xmath for
@xmath odd. The @xmath factor inside the modified zeta function ( 3.140
) will cancel with the one in ( 3.142 ) and gives us no poles for even
dimensions. Together with the factor @xmath in ( 3.124 ), one arrives at
the overall normalization factor in general dimensions

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.143)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This overall normalization factor is strikingly simple since we do not
need to treat the cases of odd and even dimensions separately. Moreover,
( 3.143 ) can also be used in fractional dimension.

### 3.8 Non-minimal Type-A in Fractional Dimensions

Using the regularized volume, we can now write the full modified
zeta-function for the Type-A as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.144)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We first show that the modified zeta-function leads to @xmath for the
non-minimal Type-A theory. The total @xmath -function for the
non-minimal Type-A is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.145)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the labels of the zeta functions correspond to @xmath as in (
3.127 ). Using ( 3.144 ) and the spin factor in ( 3.57 )

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we can perform the sum over all spins in ( 3.145 ) and get

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.146)
  -- -------- -- ---------

It is the sum over @xmath that makes the expression in ( 3.146 ) vanish.
Next, we need to compute @xmath using the modified zeta-function.
Remember that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.147)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In other words, the part of ( 3.146 ) without @xmath is @xmath . For the
non-minimal Type-A we see that @xmath vanishes. As a result we have
proved that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.148)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This extends the results of [ Giombi:2013fka , Giombi:2014iua ] to all
odd dimensions as well as to fractional ones.

### 3.9 Minimal Type-A in Fractional Dimensions

The case of the minimal Type-A model is more interesting as we will not
always find a @xmath -type of equality as in the non-minimal case. The
@xmath -function for the minimal Type-A is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.149)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The final result after the summation is done has a very simple form:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.150)
  -- -------- -- ---------

To obtain ( 3.150 ), it is suggestive to sum over the spin- @xmath in (
3.144 ) first. To do this we need to absorb all monomials in @xmath into
gamma functions. For example,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.151)
  -- -------- -- ---------

After some algebra what we obtain are several terms of the form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.152)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Here @xmath is of the form @xmath with different constants. The sums are
of the usual stastistical form. Following ( 3.149 ) one should sum (
3.152 ) according to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.153)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath correspond to the ghosts. We, then, arrive at the sum over
@xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Formula ( 3.150 ) is strikingly simple. Vanishing of @xmath is due to
the fact that @xmath . For @xmath , using ( 3.147 ), we arrive at

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.154)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The formula above is the intermediate form. ²² ²² 22 We refer to it as
intermediate as the integral is divergent and requires regularization.
After a suitable regularization it will give the correct answer for the
sphere free energy as we recall in the next Section. It is worth
mentioning that some of the intermediate, usually divergent, expressions
on the AdS side can be directly matched with their CFT cousins, see e.g.
[ Giombi:2014yra ] for the Casimir Energy example. These facts
accentuate the importance of careful adjustment of the regularization
prescriptions on both sides of the duality.

### 3.10 Matching Free Vector Model

Having arrived at the intermediate form ( 3.154 ), we would like to show
that exactly the same intermediate form emerges on the CFT side. It
contains all the important information and can be directly used to
derive the sphere free energy.

Let us review the main steps in [ Klebanov:2011gs , Giombi:2015haa ,
Giombi:2014xxa ] as to get the (generalized) sphere free energy @xmath .
The starting point is the expression for @xmath for a free scalar field,
which results from the sum over the eigen values of the Laplace operator
on the sphere @xmath [ Diaz:2007an , Gubser:2002vv ] :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.155)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.156)
  -- -------- -- ---------

is the degeneracy of eigen values. There is a clearly divergent part
proportional to the total number of ’degrees of freedom’, @xmath . This
sum can be shown to vanish in a number of ways. For example, inserting
cut-off @xmath we get

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.157)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In order to regularize this divergence one can make @xmath negative [
Diaz:2007an ] and then continue @xmath to the positive domain. In
practice, this is equivalent to saying that the total number of degrees
of freedom is zero:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.158)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Therefore, we successfully drop the first term in ( 3.155 ). In order to
pass from @xmath to the intermediate form one needs to apply the
integral representation of @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.159)
  -- -------- -- ---------

As a result, ( 3.155 ) simplifies to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.160)
  -- -------- -- ---------

By making a change of variable, @xmath , we get exactly the intermediate
form ( 3.154 ) obtained in @xmath up to a factor of @xmath . By
definition, the @xmath one-loop free energy is related to the sphere
free energy as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.161)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which explains the factor @xmath difference. We also note that ( 3.155 )
leads to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.162)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In Appendix B.1 we show that the same result can be obtained directly
from the intermediate form, i.e. the AdS result suffices to reproduce (
3.162 ) and there is no ’information loss’ in going to the intermediate
form. Then, the generalized sphere free energy @xmath is [
Giombi:2015haa , Giombi:2014xxa ] :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.163)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Finally, we have shown that the (generalized) sphere free energy of the
free scalar field results from the one-loop determinant in the minimal
Type-A higher-spin theory:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.164)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which completes the proof. Despite the fact that our proof requires
@xmath not to be an even integer, the final result smoothly extrapolates
to @xmath , where there are poles that correspond to the @xmath
-anomaly. This extends the proof to even dimensions as well.

### 3.11 Matching Critical Vector Model

Let us consider the case of the duality between the critical @xmath
vector model and the (non)-minimal Type-A theory where the scalar field
is quantized with @xmath ( @xmath ) boundary condition. It is clear the
we just need to add to @xmath or @xmath the difference that is due to
the change of boundary conditions for the scalar field. In this case, we
see that @xmath . As we consider the modified zeta function ( 3.144 ),
the exponential @xmath will change sign. Also, it is clear, see Appendix
B.2.2 , that the deficit that can be missing from @xmath due to the
modified zeta-function, is absent thanks to @xmath . Repeating the
procedure above, we obtain

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.165)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This is the intermediate form that after using the same regularization
as on the CFT side will give the difference between the values of the
generalized sphere free energy for the free and interacting @xmath
vector models:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.166)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Therefore, we come to the conclusion that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.167)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Indeed, we can get ( 3.167 ) from the CFT side through an intermediate
formula which is minus one half of ( 3.165 ). To be more explicit,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.168)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The same procedure as in Appendix B.1 allows one to relate the
intermediate form to ( 3.166 ).

### 3.12 Discussion and Conclusions

In this chapter, we presented the following results:

-   Derivation of the spectral zeta-functions for various HSGRAs where
    fields are totally symmetric or mixed-symmetric.

-   We added to the list of known one-loop results some new tests for
    fermions and specific mixed-symmetry fields that arise in Type-B
    theories. Fermionic HS fields passed both the Casimir Energy and the
    zeta-function tests quite easily since they are not expected to
    generate any one-loop corrections at all. However, it is still a
    non-trivial check since there is a summation over all spins which
    caused the cancellation at one-loop for fermionic HS fields. Type-B,
    which should be dual to a free fermion CFT, contains hook fields and
    has passed the zeta-function tests for the case of @xmath . One
    finds the @xmath -anomaly of free fermion in @xmath . The duality
    between Type-B/free fermion, however, failed naively for @xmath ,
    which was first observed for @xmath in [ Giombi:2013fka ] .
    Nonetheless, we showed that the bulk one-loop results can be
    computed as a change in @xmath -energy, ( 3.117 ) and ( 3.120 ).

-   After obtaining the zeta-function for a generic mixed-symmetry
    field, we find a very simple formula for the derivative @xmath ,
    which allows us to solve for @xmath by a simple integration. A
    similar feature was observed for the second derivative of the
    Casimir Energy @xmath .

-   We also tested dualities involving partially-massless fields and
    doubletons in the Appendices A.3.2 and A.3.1 . Partially-massless
    fields, which belong to the spectrum of the AdS duals of the
    non-unitary higher-order singletons @xmath , pass the tests [
    Basile:2014wua ] . On the other hand, higher-spin doubletons with
    @xmath , which are unitary as representations of conformal algebra
    but pathological from the CFT point of view in not having a local
    stress tensor, do not pass the Casimir Energy test in @xmath .

-   Inspired by the results in integer dimensions, we extended the test
    to the fractional case for (non)-minimal Type-A HS. Our results
    showed that the one-loop determinants in AdS perfectly match the
    generalized free energy @xmath of a scalar on a sphere @xmath . Upon
    changing boundary condition such that the scalar field is quantized
    with @xmath boundary conditions, we show also that the duality
    between critical @xmath vector model and (non)-minimal type-A theory
    holds for vacuum energy at one-loop.

Let us further comment on our results:

@xmath The puzzle of type-B/free fermion calls for better understanding
of the duality. ²³ ²³ 23 It has been already noted in [ Giombi:2013fka ]
that there is a discrepancy in @xmath Type-B duality Consistently with
the 3d bosonization conjecture that relates the large @xmath scalar and
fermion vector models coupled to Chern-Simons theory, the free spectrum
of single-trace operators built out of free fermion is identical to that
of the critical boson at @xmath [ Leigh:2003gk ] . Therefore, unless a
miracle happens the two theories — Type-A with @xmath scalar field and
Type-B — cannot pass the one-loop test simultaneously.

@xmath The proof of the (generalized) sphere free energy @xmath of a
free scalar field as a one-loop effect in the minimal Type-A higher-spin
theory indicates that AdS/CFT duality may work in fractional dimensions
at least for some of the models and some of the observables that are
well-defined in non-integer dimensions. It would be interesting to
extend the results to other models listed in Section 3.2 . For example,
it should be possible to show directly in @xmath that the generalized
sphere free energy of higher-spin duals of @xmath free CFT’s should
follow

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.169)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

which is in accordance with the values for integer @xmath computed in [
Brust:2016gjy , Brust:2016xif ] .

For more details, we refer the readers to [ Gunaydin:2016amv ,
Skvortsov:2017ldz ] and references therein.

## Chapter 4 Quantum Chiral Higher Spin Gravity

Chiral HSGRA is a special class of HSGRAs in the sense that it is the
smallest higher-spin extension of gravity. The theory possesses a simple
local action written in light-cone gauge in both flat and anti-de Sitter
spaces [ Ponomarev:2016lrm , Metsaev:2018xip , Skvortsov:2018uru ] ,
which makes it a benchmark for constructing a consistent theory of
HSGRA. Numerous No-Go theorems in flat space are avoided by what we call
coupling conspiracy which is described in [ Skvortsov:2018jea ] : local
interactions conspire as to cancel each other in physical amplitudes. In
this chapter, we will study quantum corrections in chiral HSGRA based on
the original works [ Skvortsov:2018jea , Skvortsov:2020wtf ,
Skvortsov:2020gpn ] . Due to higher-spin symmetry, we can show that the
theory does not have UV-divergences in n-point amplitudes at one loop
even though the interactions are naively non-renormalizable. The same
mechanism of coupling conspiracy applies to chiral HSGRA in AdS, which
will improve its UV-properties. We also study Yang-Mills gaugings with
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath groups. For @xmath , see [ Metsaev:1991nb ] ,
or the @xmath cases the representations that fields take values in
depend on whether the spin is even or odd, which is again similar to
string theory [ Marcus:1982fr ] . Our findings indicate that higher spin
fields are essential for quantization of gravity and replacing massive
fields with massless ones allows us to find toy models that are much
smaller and simpler than string theory, which should be helpful for
understanding the quantum gravity problem.

### 4.1 Motivation

HSGRAs are toy models of quantum gravity in the sense that the spin-2
graviton is a part of the spectrum that comprises massless fields of all
spins and they are expected to be UV-finite due to the
infinite-dimensional symmetry. This situation is very much like string
theory — a strong contender for a consistent theory of quantum gravity.
String theory contains an infinite number of massive higher spin fields,
which are crucial for making the theory UV-finite. Apart from having a
spectrum that consists of infinitely many higher spin fields, HSGRAs
also has other stringy features which make them closer to string theory
rather than to conventional field theories. For example, we can have
matrix-valued fields in chiral HSGRA [ Metsaev:1991nb ] , which is
reminiscent of the Chan-Paton approach [ Marcus:1982fr ] .

Up until now, we still do not completely understand the tensionless
limit of string theory, i.e. when @xmath , even in the simplest case of
the bosonic string theory, (see, however, [ Eberhardt:2018ouy ] for the
tensionless limit of strings on @xmath ). One possible approach is as
follows. We can first naively send @xmath in the free equations [
Sagnotti:2003qa ] , ¹ ¹ 1 See also [ Sorokin:2018djm ] for a recent work
in this direction and [ Bonelli:2003kh , Lindstrom:2003mg , Bakas:2004jq
, Bagchi:2016yyf ] for other works on the high energy limit of string
theory. thus obtaining a consistent gauge invariant formulation of
massless fields. Then, we may try to promote the original linear gauge
symmetries and field equations to nonlinear ones [ Fotopoulos:2007nm ,
Sagnotti:2010at , Fotopoulos:2010ay ] that result in nontrivial cubic
interaction vertices [ Metsaev:1993ap , Metsaev:2005ar , Metsaev:2007rn
, Manvelyan:2010je , Manvelyan:2010jr ] . Although there is no problem
at the level of cubic interactions, the quartic vertices do possess
nonlocal terms which lead to failure of various consistency checks of
four-point scattering amplitudes [ Bekaert:2010hp , Roiban:2017iqg ,
Bagchi:2016yyf , Dempster:2012vw ] . There is not yet any consistent
HSGRA that has been obtained this way.

The model we will discuss in this chapter is chiral HSGRA — the most
minimal extension of gravity with massless higher spin fields, which is
constructed based on the pioneering works by Metsaev [ Metsaev:1991mt ,
Metsaev:1991nb ] . At the moment, chiral HSGRA [ Ponomarev:2016lrm ] is
the only model with propagating massless higher spin fields where direct
computations of quantum corrections are possible. In [ Skvortsov:2018jea
, Skvortsov:2020wtf ] , we perform the calculations for chiral HSGRA in
flat space where Weinberg and Coleman-Mandula theorems dictate the
S-matrix to be trivial. We show that even though the theory can avoid
No-Go theorems, it does not defy the spirit of those theorems. The
results in flat space hint to the expectation that other HSGRAs in AdS
are UV-finite. Recall our assumption on HSGRA/Vector Model duality

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which means massless higher spin fields in AdS are the duals of
conserved higher spin tensors. The charges associated with the latter
then form higher-spin symmetry which is an extension of the conformal
symmetry. The AdS/CFT analog [ Maldacena:2011jn , Boulanger:2013zza ,
Alba:2013yda , Alba:2015upa ] of the Coleman-Mandula theorem states that
a CFT in @xmath with a higher spin current is a free one. An immediate
implication of this statement is that the holographic S-matrix (there
are unique higher spin invariant holographic correlation functions [
Colombo:2012jx , Didenko:2013bj , Didenko:2012tv , Bonezzi:2017vha ] )
is also fixed by higher-spin symmetry as in flat space.

Unlike the case of flat space where @xmath , the holographic S-matrix of
the @xmath chiral theory is shown to be nontrivial [ Skvortsov:2018uru ]
and is related to Chern-Simons Matter Theories, which should be
confronted with its triviality in flat space. The reason is, when
space-time is curved, higher derivative nature of the interactions
becomes important and there is no perfect cancellation coming from
coupling conspiracy [ Skvortsov:2018uru ] anymore. To understand quantum
consistency of AdS chiral theory, it is suggestive to first probe
UV-behaviour of chiral HSGRA in flat space. If we find any UV divergence
in the Minkowski space, the AdS version should suffer from the same
problem. Our preliminary anticipation is that chiral HSGRA in AdS does
not have UV-divergences.

One of the crucial ideas behind chiral HSGRA was to stick to the
light-cone or light-front approach, which was applied to the higher spin
problem in [ Bengtsson:1983pd , Bengtsson:1983pg ] for the first time.
The consistency of interactions is guaranteed by the closure of the
Poincare algebra,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

much like in the light-cone quantization of string theory [
Goddard:1973qh ] . Moreover, the light-front approach goes well with
understanding gauge symmetry as just redundancy of description. An
evidence for existence of higher spin theories was obtained already in
1983 [ Bengtsson:1983pd ] : ’ Our conclusion is that the higher-spin
theories are likely to exist, at least as classical field theories,
although they may not have a manifestly covariant form ’. Due to
Weinberg’s and Coleman-Mandula theorems the S-matrix approach is not
applicable in flat space and we stick to the light-cone approach.

The outline of chapter 4 is as follows. In section 2 we briefly review
the analysis of deformed Poincare algebra in light-cone gauge that
eventually led to the discovery of chiral HSGRA. In section 3 we give
the Feynman rules, which are used in the subsequent sections to compute
scattering amplitudes. In section 4 we recursively compute tree-level
amplitudes by utilizing the Berends-Giele off-shell current method and
show that the final amplitudes vanish on-shell. This is consistent with
the Weinberg theorem. In section 5 we compute the vacuum diagrams. We
shown that the vacuum loop diagrams vanish identically either due to the
coupling conspiracy or due to the fact that the total number of
effective degrees of freedom vanishes. In section 6 we compute the loop
diagrams with external legs and demonstrate that they do not have
UV-divergences and are also proportional to the total number of
effective degrees of freedom, hence, can be made to vanish. Moreover,
the one-loop S-matrix elements can be shown to coincide with all-plus
helicity one - loop amplitudes in pure QCD and SDYM, modulo a certain
higher spin dressing, which is an unusual relation between the
non-gravitational theories and a higher spin gravity. We conclude with
section 7 that contains a summary of our results and discussion of
possible future developments. We collect technicalities in Appendix C ,
where we study in detail the Chan-Paton gauging of the theory. In
particular, we show that the closure of the Poincare algebra in the
light-cone gauge allows for three types of gauge groups: @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath .

### 4.2 Chiral Higher Spin Theories

In this section, we briefly review a recent class of HSGRA known as
chiral HSGRA [ Ponomarev:2016lrm ] which was shown to be UV-finite up to
four-point amplitude at one-loop. The theory has an action and is
defined in light-cone gauge in four dimensional Minkowski and AdS spaces
[ Metsaev:2018xip , Skvortsov:2018uru ] . ² ² 2 We briefly discuss
chiral HSGRA in AdS in Appendix C .

As other theorems, the Weinberg and Coleman-Mandula theorems also have
their own caveats. While the theorems restrict the impact of
interactions at asymptotic region, they can not completely dictate local
effects or off-shell correlators. It was shown in the past that
consistent local cubic interactions of massless HS fields can exist [
Bengtsson:1983pd , Bengtsson:1983pg ] . Later, a simple solution that
ensures the closure of the Poincare algebra at the quartic order was
found under the name chiral HSGRA ³ ³ 3 As the name indicates, there are
more fields with positive helicities than fields with negative
helicities that enter the vertices. .

#### 4.2.1 Flat space

##### Basics

The Poincare algebra is

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.1a)
              @xmath      (4.1b)
              @xmath      (4.1c)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where the indices @xmath split further into @xmath in the light-cone
gauge. ⁴ ⁴ 4 Recall that the metric is @xmath . We will work with the
light-front approach by choosing a light-like quantization surface. The
canonical choice is @xmath which makes @xmath behave as time and @xmath
as the Hamiltonian. The dynamical generators are generators that will
receive correction when we consider interactions. There are three
dynamical generators out of ten generators of @xmath , they are

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the subscript ’int’ stands for interaction. For the closure of the
Poincare algebra ( 4.1 ), the equations that we need to solve are

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The remaining seven generators are known as kinematical generators which
are important in constraining the vertices. Since we work in four
dimensional flat space, all massless spinning fields have precisely two
degrees of freedom. This suggests us to consider them as two scalar
fields except for the case of spin-zero field — it is just one scalar
field. We can work directly in Fourier space where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The equal time Diract bracket reads:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here, @xmath are helicity labels. Denote the @xmath component of the
four momentum @xmath as @xmath from now, one finds the kinematical
generators in Fourier space as ⁵ ⁵ 5 We set @xmath from now on.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
                                                              
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.6a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.6b)
     @xmath   @xmath                                          (4.6c)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The dynamical generators at the free level are:

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.7)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.8)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The Poincare algebra is realized by charges of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the generator of the Poincare algebra associated with a
Killing vector @xmath . Due to the measure, which is @xmath , the
conjugate operators are defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here transpose of @xmath is defined via integration by parts.

##### Cubic Vertices in Flat Space

As mentioned, the problem of a consistent HSGRA in flat space is to find
@xmath and @xmath ( @xmath is refered to either @xmath or @xmath ) that
satisfy the Poincare algebra. The dynamical constraint ( 4.3 )
translates into

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

By making an appropriate ansatz:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.14)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.15)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

with the restriction to @xmath to the cubic order, i.e. we want to solve
first

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

The solution has the following form thanks to Metsaev [ Metsaev:1991mt ,
Metsaev:1991nb ] :

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.18)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.19)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.21)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.22)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Denote @xmath , one can further show that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

due to momentum conservation.

The form of the cubic vertex @xmath is remarkably simple and can be
mapped to the usual result of amplitudes with generic helicities by the
following identification

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, the Hamiltonian density @xmath can be cast into

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### Complete Solution of HSGRA in Flat Space

Consider the quartic level of @xmath we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

For definiteness, we consider the component of this equation with @xmath
. We note that the terms @xmath and @xmath , if non-vanishing, should be
at least linear in @xmath . Recall that @xmath contains holomorphic,
denoted as @xmath , and anti-holomorphic parts, denoted as @xmath . We
see clearly that @xmath is @xmath -independent and has to vanish by
itself. ⁶ ⁶ 6 One can repeat the same analysis for @xmath and see that
@xmath is @xmath -independent. Therefore, we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

Schematically, these brackets will involve the coupling constant @xmath
at the quadratic orders, i.e. @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . The complete
solution is found by setting one of the coupling constant to zero, hence
the name chiral HSGRA. Here, we will set @xmath , and the cubic vertex
becomes @xmath . Finally, we can prove that the coupling constant takes
the following form [ Metsaev:1991mt , Metsaev:1991nb , Ponomarev:2016lrm
]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, for dimensional reason, we naturally put in by hand the Planck
length @xmath . We can see clearly that if the sum of helicities
entering the vertex is less or equal to zero, the interaction will
vanish, while all positive sums are allowed. Therefore, the theory
violates parity. From here, one can easily write down the full
Hamiltonian as

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.29)
  -- -- -- --------

Now, if we assume that fields take values in some matrix algebra, to be
specified below, then the action reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, as suggested, a massless gauge field with spin- @xmath is
expressed by a pair of scalar fields that can carry color d.o.f, which
we call Chan-Paton factors — a terminology borrowed from string theory:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

There are only three options for the gauge groups:

1.  @xmath gauging where fields are (anti)-Hermitian matrices.

2.  @xmath gauging where fields are symmetric (anti-symmetric) matrices
    whenever they have even (odd) spins.

3.  @xmath gauging which is the opposite of @xmath gauging case.

### 4.3 Feynman rules

Using the result in Appendices C.2 and C.2 , one can easily write down
the Feynman rules for colored chiral HSGRAs. The propagator is found to
be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the part comes from the double line notation. For @xmath
gauging, which is the easiest case, we find that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

And, for @xmath gauging, one finds

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.34)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.35)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Note that the @xmath and @xmath terms corresponds to a Möbius twist .
This makes the computation for @xmath -valued fields a bit more subtle
compare to the @xmath case. Lastly, the vertex for all cases can be
presented in the ’t Hooft double lines notation as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the is the trace over implicit @xmath , @xmath indices,
respectively. One should, in principles, be able to compute scattering
amplitudes using all the ingredients listed here. In what follows we
will compute amplitudes for the @xmath -case.

### 4.4 Tree Amplitudes

In this section we compute all tree level amplitudes in chiral HSGRA. We
explicitly compute @xmath -, @xmath - and, just for fun, @xmath -point
amplitudes with one off-shell leg. These amplitudes turn out to have a
very simple form which leads us towards a guess for the complete @xmath
-point result. Then, we proceed by induction to find the @xmath -point
amplitude. Schematically, it can be obtained by taking one cubic vertex
and attaching to two of the legs to @xmath - and @xmath -point
amplitudes for all possible @xmath , this is known as Berend-Giele
off-shell current approach [ Berends:1987me ] . This trick allows us to
avoid explicit summation over all possible Feynman graph’s topologies.
It is crucial here to know lower order amplitudes with one off-shell
leg. The result of such recursion gives us an @xmath -point amplitude
with one off-shell leg. As a matter of fact we find that all amplitudes
are proportional to @xmath of the off-shell leg and therefore vanish
on-shell. We find that the S-matrix is trivial, namely @xmath , which
follows from the Weinberg soft theorem.

#### 4.4.1 Four Point

Three-point amplitudes for massless fields are identically zero dues to
kinematical reasons [ Benincasa:2007xk ] . Therefore, the simplest
amplitude that may not be zero is four point. We demonstrate our work
with @xmath colored theory ⁷ ⁷ 7 It should be similar if one works with
the case of @xmath and @xmath colors. Although, as mentioned, there
should be some complication due to the Möbius twists of internal
propagators. and take advantage of the usual trick in gauge theories: to
reduce everything to color-ordered amplitudes. An @xmath -point
amplitude can be represented as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.37)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

which is a sum over @xmath permutations and @xmath denote various
permutations of @xmath . The elementary blocks, sub-amplitudes @xmath ,
should be computed using color-ordered Feynman rules. In the case of
four-point the sub-amplitude consists of @xmath - and @xmath -channel:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The sum of these diagrams gives [ Ponomarev:2016lrm , Skvortsov:2018jea
] ,

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.38)
  -- -- -- --------

where @xmath . In what follows we drop the overall momentum conserving
@xmath -function.

It is important to note that the summation over helicities of the
exchanged states is bounded both from above and from below due to the
specific form of the magical coupling constants ( 4.28 ). If we set up
an 4-pt amplitude with chiral and anti-chiral vertices, the summation is
no longer bounded.

Next we use various kinematic identities from ( C.5 ) to ( C.9 ) for
@xmath that are collected in Appendix C.1 . It is easy to see that the
total amplitude vanishes when all momenta are on-shell. Let us assume
that the fourth momenta is off-shell, @xmath . Then,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is cyclic invariant.

#### 4.4.2 Five Point

In the case of five-point amplitude we have five diagrams, which are
cyclic permutations of the comb-like diagram:

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.40)
  -- -- -- --------

After double summation over helicities, the first diagram gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath . Again, it is relatively easy to see that the
full amplitude vanishes on-shell. We, however, would like to know a bit
more so that we keep the fifth leg off-shell. Using the kinematic
identities from Appendix C.1 we can write

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.42)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.43)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath is cyclic invariant. We can simplify the above expressions
further with the help of the identities

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

where leg-5 is off-shell. Next, we collect the remnants (the parts that
are not proportional to @xmath ) and combine with the remaining comb
diagram to get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

The final expression of the five-point amplitude with one off-shell leg
is remarkably simple:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is quite crucial that the factor raised to power @xmath is the same
for all amplitudes (even though it is not immediately obvious) and
therefore we have to deal only with rather simple prefactors.

#### 4.4.3 Six Point

Just for fun we can compute the six-point function directly. Here we
have four topologies plus permutations. We will denote the topologies by
the Roman numbers: @xmath .

The four topologies give:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Let us omit @xmath for a moment and focus on the prefactors. ⁸ ⁸ 8 Of
course, @xmath and @xmath is cyclic invariant. A short computation shows
that

  -- -------- -- --
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --

and similarly for other permutations. Together with the contribution
from diagrams of the second topology

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Grouping terms proportional to @xmath , one gets

  -- -------- -------- --
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Similarly, for terms proportional to @xmath , we get

  -- -------- -------- --
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The remaining terms combine into

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Summing all of the above partial resutls together and we get an concise
expression for @xmath -point amplitude:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

#### 4.4.4 Recursive Construction for All Point

Given the results above, it is relatively easy to guess the answer for
the @xmath -point amplitude with one off-shell leg:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . It is easy to see that this is indeed the right answer.
The @xmath -point amplitude can be obtained by gluing a cubic vertex to
two sub-amplitudes of @xmath -point and @xmath -point. It is important
to know all these lower order amplitudes with one off-shell leg as to be
able to attach them to the cubic vertex via propagator. The process is
illustrated below

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.50)
  -- -- -- --------

There are two position of the off-shell legs where we need to treat them
specially in ( 4.111 ). Note that we choose our color-ordering as
(12…n+1) with clock wise order. The first diagram we want to consider is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the subscript at the end of @xmath indicates the position of the
off-shell leg that we use to glue to the cubic vertex @xmath . And, the
pre-factor is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

It can be proven that the @xmath factor is indeed the same for every
sub-diagrams []. From leg-2 to leg- @xmath , the subamplitudes after
summing over helicities are

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here, the break @xmath between two position @xmath (also the subscript
@xmath ) in @xmath indicates that leg- @xmath are the off-shell legs
that will be glued to cubic vertex. The underlined notation means that
we omit @xmath in the above sub-amplitudes. The final piece is the
sub-amplitude where we glue leg- @xmath to the cubic vertex @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

Omitting @xmath for a moment, we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath and @xmath . Notice that by momentum conservation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

The proof is completed with the help of the kinematic identity:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

Consequently, we have proved that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

The final conclusion here is that all @xmath -point amplitudes with one
off-shell leg have a remarkably simple form and vanish on-shell. Hence,
at classical level, the chiral HSGRA is consistent with the No-Go
theorems that imply @xmath once at least one massless higher spin
particle is in the game. From the explicit calculations above it is
clear that it is important to have all spins in the spectrum without any
upper/lower bounds and gaps. Moreover, the coupling constants must have
a very particular dependence on spins, @xmath . This situation was
referred to as coupling conspiracy [ Skvortsov:2018jea ] . The fact that
the tree-level amplitudes vanish on-shell indicates that there should
not be any nontrivial cuts of the loop diagrams and, hence, the loop
corrections are expected to have a better UV-behaviour.

### 4.5 Vacuum Bubbles

Vacuum corrections stay a bit aside and could be ignored in the first
approximation. Luckily, it is easy to show that all of them vanish in
accordance with the naive expectation that vacuum partition function for
higher-spin gravities should be one, @xmath , which indicates that the
total regularized number of degrees of freedom is zero. This is in
accordance with similar findings both in flat and AdS spaces [
Gopakumar:2011qs , Tseytlin:2013jya , Giombi:2013fka , Giombi:2014yra ,
Beccaria:2014jxa , Beccaria:2014xda , Beccaria:2015vaa ,
Gunaydin:2016amv , Bae:2016rgm , Skvortsov:2017ldz ] .

#### 4.5.1 Determinants

The simplest vacuum corrections probe the spectrum of a theory via
determinants of the kinetic operators. First, let us consider the free
higher spin theory in four-dimensional flat space [ Beccaria:2015vaa ] .
The action is the sum over all spins of the kinetic terms of massless
fields:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have choose to work in the TT-gauge. The partition function
reads

  -- -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
        @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.59)
  -- -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where we went back to covariant description of free massless fields,
which is available [ Tseytlin:2013jya , Beccaria:2015vaa ] . The
numerator, the product of @xmath , in the formula corresponds to ghosts
while the denominator, the product of @xmath , corresponds to massless
fields with spin- @xmath . The determinant of a free scalar field,
@xmath stays aside since it is not a gauge field.

At first sight, ghosts determinants seem to cancel against the rest and
leave @xmath . However, this is the same problem as determining value of
the sum @xmath . Indeed, for theories with infinitely many fields a
prescription of how to sum over the spectrum has to be given by hand and
this is one of the instances where higher spin gravity reveals its
stringy nature. However unlike string theory, where summation goes over
relevant Riemann surfaces, we do not have any geometric understanding of
how the sum over spins needs to be done.

We come up with a plausible idea as follows. The prescription of [
Beccaria:2015vaa ] that gives @xmath instructs us to count degrees of
freedom as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

where 1 is the d.o.f for the scalar field and 2 is the total d.o.f for
each massless field. Although this regularization seems to be ad hoc,
the success of the zeta-function regularization in the study of
determinants of higher spin theories on AdS background in chapter 3
provides a strong support for ( 4.60 ).

Let us recall what we have learnt in Chapter 3. The kinetic operators of
massless spinning fields on AdS have the form @xmath and the kinetic
operators of the corresponding ghosts are @xmath . The presence of
spin-dependent mass-like terms does not give us naive cancellation as
discussed above. However, in AdS, the determinants can be computed via
spectral zeta-function [ Camporesi:1991nw , Camporesi:1992wn ,
Camporesi:1992tm , Camporesi:1993mz , Camporesi:1994ga ,
Camporesi:1995fb ] and the spin sums can be taken with the help of
zeta-function. The final result is consistent with the AdS/CFT
expectations. Therefore, the zeta-function regularization seems to be
well-tested, which justifies ( 4.60 ).

#### 4.5.2 Higher Vacuum Loops

The two-loop diagram vanishes due to the chirality of interactions:
assuming some helicities on the left vertex we have the opposite of
those entering the vertex on the right. However, @xmath and @xmath
factors coming from the product of two vertices cannot both be nonzero.
Hence,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The same arguments as above show that the three-loop diagrams also
vanish: there is no such helicity assignment that makes all @xmath
-factors nonzero.

  -- -- -------- -------- --
        @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

It is easy to see that this is true to all loops. Indeed, the total
helicity must be zero since there are no external legs and the
propagator connects helicities of opposite sign. For a vacuum diagram
not to vanish, the coupling constant should not be zero at each vertex.
However, this is impossible due to the fact that the total helicity has
to be zero. Therefore, we have to have a finite sum of positive numbers
that equals zero, which shows that all vacuum diagrams vanish
identically.

### 4.6 Loops with Legs

We shall discuss the behaviour of legged loop diagrams by examining the
tadpole, self-energy, vertex correction and 4-pt amplitude at one loop.
Then, we give a general argument for multi-loop amplitudes. An important
thing to remember is that vanishing of tree-level amplitudes should
eliminate all log-divergences that would lead to cuts otherwise.

#### 4.6.1 Tadpole

Light-cone approach is not suitable for the computation of one-point
functions, like tadpole. Nevertheless, tadpoles for the external lines
with non-zero helicity must vanish by Lorentz invariance. Indeed, at the
vertex we have @xmath factor which should be zero by definition. A
tadpole for the scalar field also vanishes due to the absence of the
relevant vertex in the action. Lastly, if the external helicity is zero
and the internal one is some @xmath , then at the vertex we still have
@xmath . Therefore,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

#### 4.6.2 Self-energy

Although we are studying @xmath -version of chiral HSGRA for
concreteness, all general conclusions below are also true for the other
cases ( @xmath and @xmath gauging). For a given @xmath we can first have
a look at the planar diagrams, which are simpler. For the self-energy
diagram, there are contributions from planar and non-planar diagrams:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here, @xmath are dual momenta and the external momentum is related to
@xmath as @xmath . The loop momentum is @xmath . The discussion about
dual momenta can be found in [ Brandhuber:2007vm , Thorn:2004ie ,
Chakrabarti:2005ny , Chakrabarti:2006mb ] (we also discuss this matter
in Appendix C.3 for completeness).

We start our analysis by considering the simplest self-energy diagram.
In order to avoid confusing and cumbersome notation, we introduce
sources @xmath that can be contracted with fields. As a result each
amplitude acquires factors @xmath which keeps track of the color
indices. We adopt the world-sheet friendly regularization [ Thorn:2004ie
, Chakrabarti:2005ny , Chakrabarti:2006mb ] which is used in a number of
theories in light-cone gauge. The one loop self-energy reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath . A very important observation is that the very
last sum over helicities factors out for all loop diagrams, i.e. after
we sum over all but one helicities running in the loop the resulting
expression does not depend on the very last helicity to be summed over.
Therefore, each loop diagram has an overall factor @xmath as in the case
of bubble diagrams. Let us evaluate leading contribution, namely the
first term,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

as an example. Here, we observe that the integrand is non-vanishing only
when @xmath . To regulate this integral, one can introduce a cut-off
@xmath , where @xmath is the transverse part of @xmath . Then, using
Schwinger parametrization and integrating out @xmath gives us @xmath .
Next, we replace ⁹ ⁹ 9 Note that whenever we write @xmath , it means we
consider the @xmath component of the dual 4-momentum @xmath .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the expression ( 4.62 ) reads (omitting the prefactor)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we integrate over @xmath and over @xmath that are the Schwinger’s
parameters and @xmath . It is now safe to send @xmath on-shell and
@xmath in the last two terms in the exponential in ( 4.64 ). Hence, we
are left with a Gaussian integral expression

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.65)
  -- -- -- --------

We can handle ( 4.65 ) with the note that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

then, after some manipulation we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we made a change of variables @xmath . Here, the @xmath -integral
in ( 4.67 ) is perfectly finite and @xmath is reminiscent of @xmath
amplitude in [ Thorn:2005ak , Chakrabarti:2005ny , Chakrabarti:2006mb ]
. The important feature of the computation above is that there is a
factorization of @xmath which guarantee the result above vanish without
the need of introducing a counter term. We note that the Lorentz
invariance forbids helicity flips for an isolated spinning particle.
Therefore, if we were to find a non-vanishing contribution to @xmath we
would have to introduce local counterterms to cancel it.

Let us also show the result of the sub-leading term for self-energy by
repeating the treatment above. The sub-leading contribution before
taking the @xmath -integral is

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.68)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

This result can be obtained using the holomorphic integral ( 4.66 ). We
now have a convergent integral and the result is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is easy to see that the dangerous non-local contribution with @xmath
is zero since @xmath . The kinematic part of @xmath is finite and,
hence, @xmath vanishes again due to the factorization of @xmath , which
takes place regardless of the value of @xmath . This implies that
self-energy correction of chiral HSGRA does not break Lorentz
invariance.

Finally let us mention that, we can use the original momentum @xmath and
the loop momentum @xmath together with the cut-off @xmath to work with
non-planar diagrams. In the case of self-energy it reads

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.70)
  -- -- -- --------

Therefore, the non-planar diagram for self-energy is also UV-finite.

#### 4.6.3 Vertex correction

The next simple quantum correction we consider is the vertex correction

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The dual momenta in this case are @xmath with @xmath . The loop momenta
can be chosen to be @xmath and the relation between the external momenta
and dual regional momenta are @xmath with @xmath . In other words, with
clockwise order, @xmath is the difference between the outgoing dual
momenta and the ingoing dual momenta as depicted in the above figures.
We keep leg-3 off-shell, i.e. @xmath , and find the leading contribution
to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

The sub-leading terms come with a twist at one of the three vertices,
they read

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.72)
  -- -- -- --------

where @xmath . Next, we show how to evaluate the integral from the
leading contribution. Proceeding with the same procedure in section
4.6.2 and appendix C.3 , we arrive at

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . It is important to note that the integral in ( 4.71 ) is
finite without the need of introducing the cut-off @xmath . In ( 4.73 ),
we identify @xmath and @xmath , also

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now, it is safe to take @xmath , we obtain

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.75)
  -- -- -- --------

To obtain the above result, instead of using dual momentum, one can also
start with the original momentums since the quantum corrections at one
loop with 3 legs attached (and beyond) are perfectly finite. In terms of
these variables, the vertex correction reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

Omitting the prefactor for a moment and proceed as before, we find the
integral in ( 4.76 ) as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is the same with ( 4.75 ). One can immediately recognize that the
final result is reminiscent of the @xmath amplitude for QCD [
Thorn:2005ak , Chakrabarti:2005ny , Chakrabarti:2006mb ] in the large
@xmath limit. It contains the part of self-dual Yang Mill dressed with
chiral HiSGRA’s factor. ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 It would be interesting if one can find
a direct relation between chiral HiSGRA and SDYM if there is any. The
overall factor @xmath makes the vertex correction vanish.

Although we did not compute the integral for sub-leading terms of the
vertex correction, they should be finite. To be more explicit, higher
power of @xmath entering the Gaussian integral of type ( 4.66 ) will
give zero and improve the behaviour of the cut-off @xmath . The only
place where things can diverge is at the @xmath -integral. The @xmath
-integral have the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

It will pick up poles of the form @xmath whenever @xmath . However, due
to power counting and the magic of the holomorphic integral ( 4.66 ), we
should have convergent integrals. The @xmath factor again will guarantee
all of the sub-leading terms to vanish due to our choice of zeta
regularization.

#### 4.6.4 Box and triangle-like diagrams

Next, we consider the one loop correction where we have four external
legs in the large @xmath limit. This is the limit where the contribution
from non-planar diagrams can be neglected since it is incomparable to
the planar’s contribution. Let us take a look at the box, triangle-like
diagrams. We show that they are also UV finite. Consider triangle-like
diagrams and take order (1234) for example:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

Similarly,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.80)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.81)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.82)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

As discussing in [ Chakrabarti:2005ny , Chakrabarti:2006mb ] , one can
reduce the box integral, which is in general complicated to integrate,
into the triangle-like integral. The box contribution reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.83)
  -- -------- -- --------

Notice that @xmath is off-shell and we can use the following identity:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

to arrive at

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

Effectively, we can reduce the box integral into triangle-like integral
by canceling out one propagator in the denominator using ( 4.84 ). Next,
we can multiply @xmath by two for manipulation reason, then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using Bianchi-like identity @xmath , we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then, after some straight forward algebra, the box integral becomes ¹¹
¹¹ 11 Using identities listed in Appendix C.1 , we can show that

@xmath

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.88)
  -- -- -- --------

where @xmath . Hence,

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.89)
  -- -- -- --------

The last term in ( 4.89 ) cancels with the triangle @xmath . In the end,
we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.90)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is similar to a well-know result for @xmath QCD amplitude [
Chakrabarti:2005ny ] (see also [ Brandhuber:2007vm ] ).

#### 4.6.5 The bubbles

As discussed in [ Chakrabarti:2005ny ] , the sum over bubbles, triangle
like and box diagrams should add up to zero in the case of all-plus 4pt
one-loop (pure gluon) amplitude. We would like to see whether chiral
HSGRA has a similar property. The last diagrams we need to compute are
bubble insertions into the internal propagator, which come in two
channels, @xmath and @xmath , for @xmath factors:

Here, we divided the space of dual momenta @xmath into four regions. The
external momenta @xmath can be read off by using two adjacent regional
dual momenta. For example, @xmath and @xmath etc. Whenever we have a
close loop, we can ’put’ the dual momentum @xmath inside it and the loop
momentum can be obtained as the difference between @xmath and the
nearest dual regional momentum. In the above figure, @xmath . Now, it is
a matter of computation to show the ’internal’ self-energy diagram with
the four external legs labeled in clockwise order to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.91)
  -- -------- -- --------

Similarly,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.92)
  -- -------- -- --------

Next, we move to the graphs where we have vacuum bubbles on the external
legs. In this case, we have in total eight diagrams. Take the following
diagram as an example

Here, the loop momentum is @xmath and external momenta remain to be the
same as @xmath . Then the bubble on leg- @xmath denoted as @xmath reads
(remember that we have two different channels for each due to color
ordering)

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.93)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.94)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.95)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.96)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Equivalently, we can write them as

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.97)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.98)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.99)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.100)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

Collecting numerator coefficients and remember that @xmath . All
together they provide

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.101)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Hence,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.102)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Therefore, the 4-point function at one loop does not have any
UV-divergences since it can be reduced to UV-convergent integrals we
have already analyzed. The complete 4-point amplitude vanishes due to
the same @xmath factor.

#### 4.6.6 Sunrise Diagrams and Multiloop Amplitudes

For multiloop amplitudes in the large @xmath limit, one can start with
the sunrise diagrams that have some of the legs off-shell and glue them
together.

The kinematic part of the sunrise diagrams can be simply written as (we
omit @xmath at the moment for simplicity)

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.103)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.104)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Putting the propagator and coupling constant together, one get the
general form of one loop correction with @xmath -external legs, some of
which can be off-shell

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.105)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The sum over helicities is crucial to make the contribution vanish even
though we do not evaluate the integral explicitly. The integral itself
has to be UV-convergent due to vanishing of the three-level amplitudes.
Consequently, all multiloop amplitudes vanish confirming that @xmath .

#### 4.6.7 One-loop Finiteness of Chiral HSGRA

In this subsection, we show that chiral HSGRA is one-loop finite. The
result is that the complete n-point one-loop S-matrix element consists
of three factors: the all-plus helicity one-loop amplitude in QCD (or
self-dual Yang-Mills), which can be anticipated from [ Ponomarev:2017nrr
] ; ¹² ¹² 12 As a side remark, the computation in the paper, after
erasing the higher spin modes, can give a simple way to compute one-loop
amplitudes in self-dual Yang-Mills. a certain higher spin dressing — an
overall kinematical factor that accounts for the helicities on the
external legs; a purely numerical factor of the total number of degrees
of freedom:

  -- -------- -------- -- ------------
     @xmath   @xmath      ( @xmath )
  -- -------- -------- -- ------------

The evaluation of one-loop integrals with @xmath -legs reveals the nuts
and bolts of how higher spin fields eliminate UV-divergences: the
specific structure of higher derivative interactions helps to factor
enough momenta out of the integrand to make the integral UV-convergent,
which is somewhat reminiscent of @xmath Yang-Mills Theory [
Mandelstam:1982cb , Brink:1982wv ] where one power of the momentum
suffice. The final one-loop scattering amplitude vanishes, due to the
total number of effective degrees of freedom @xmath [ Beccaria:2015vaa ]
, which is consistent with the Weinberg and Coleman-Mandula theorems. We
note that the tree-level holographic @xmath -matrix of Chiral Theory in
@xmath does not vanish and is related [ Skvortsov:2018uru ] to the
correlation functions in Chern-Simons Matter Theories, which supports
the dualities they were conjectured to exhibit [ Giombi:2011kc ,
Maldacena:2012sf , Aharony:2012nh , Aharony:2015mjs , Karch:2016sxi ,
Seiberg:2016gmd ] .

Let us now take a sum of integrands of all one-loop Feynman diagrams
with @xmath external on-shell momenta @xmath , @xmath . We denote this
sum @xmath . The loop momentum is @xmath . @xmath is a rational function
of momenta @xmath , @xmath . Note, that the vertices do not contain the
minus-component of the momenta. Therefore, @xmath , @xmath appear only
in the denominators, as a part of the propagator, @xmath . Now, @xmath ,
as a function of @xmath , vanishes at infinity and has only simple
poles. The poles correspond to some momenta along the loop going
on-shell in various diagrams that contribute to @xmath . Since the loop
momenta is to be integrated over, there is a an ambiguity in the momenta
assigned to the lines going around any loop. Indeed, we can simply add
any amount @xmath to all momenta of the loop. We would like to choose
the momenta around the loop in such a way that the residues of @xmath at
the poles in @xmath give the complete @xmath -point tree-level
amplitude:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The relation between the original momenta @xmath and the dual momenta
@xmath reads

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.106)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Note that for an @xmath -point amplitude there are @xmath independent
@xmath instead of @xmath independent @xmath (due to momentum
conservation). Therefore, there should be a translation symmetry in the
dual space to compensate for this redundancy in @xmath . The physical
amplitude must be translation invariant in @xmath . If this is so, then
it is possible to solve for all @xmath in terms of external momenta
@xmath . At this point we move to the dual space. Each term in @xmath
has a loop and now each segment of the loop has @xmath flowing through
it for a certain @xmath . The dual space automatically leads to the
correct routing of the momenta. Now, we consider @xmath to be a function
of @xmath , @xmath and are interested in the poles with respect to
@xmath . The residue at each pole gives the sum over all tree level
diagrams with the same momenta on the external lines. The latter is
crucial for getting the complete tree-level amplitude as the residue
(rather than just a random sum of tree-level diagrams with different
momenta on some of the external lines).

It turns out that the interactions fine-tuned by the higher spin
symmetry make all tree-level amplitudes vanish [ Skvortsov:2018jea ,
Skvortsov:2020wtf ] . Therefore, we have a meromorphic function @xmath ,
whose residues vanish. Therefore, @xmath . Note that @xmath is just the
total one-loop integrand. However, we do not need all terms of @xmath to
get the @xmath -matrix element. The self-energy corrections and the
tadpoles should be excluded. To this end, we represent @xmath as follows

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.107)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the complete integrand for the one-loop @xmath -matrix
element (that includes triangles, boxes and up to @xmath -gon diagrams)
and @xmath , @xmath are self-evident. The tadpoles and the cuts of
tadpoles vanish by themselves. Indeed, the tadpole has @xmath as a
vertex. It is important that the cubic self-interaction of the scalar
field is absent, i.e. @xmath .

There is a nontrivial, but finite, contribution from the self-energy
insertions into various external and internal lines, see below. As a
result we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.108)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Therefore, in order to get the full one-loop @xmath -matrix element we
need to sum over all bubble’s insertions. The summation will be done
with the help of the tree-level amplitudes that are available [
Skvortsov:2018jea , Skvortsov:2020wtf ] and we briefly summarize the
results.

To proceed, let us recall the recursion result for @xmath -point
treel-level amplitude

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.109)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath , and also the self-energy correction in the planar limit
of the @xmath -gauged Chiral Theory or for the @xmath theory [
Skvortsov:2018jea , Skvortsov:2020wtf ]

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.110)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath . It is important to note that the result is non-vanishing
only when @xmath . Below, we set Planck’s length @xmath for simplicity.
We note that @xmath counts the number of degrees of freedom in the
theory and has nothing to do with the UV-convergence. Moreover, the
amplitude is not translation invariant in the dual space, i.e. it is
anomalous. Therefore, it has to removed by a counterterm, which will be
important later.

Inserting bubbles into tree-level diagrams. As for the tree-level
amplitudes, the direct summation over all tree-level diagrams with the
bubble inserted is hardly feasible. Instead, in order to compute @xmath
we apply another recursive relation, which can be depicted as

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.111)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Here, the blue blobs are the tree-level sub-amplitudes that are being
glued to the bubble (the white blob). First, the white blob sits on the
leftmost external line. In the second term it is one vertex away from
the external lines on the left. In the third term it has passed three
external lines on the left and so on. The final @xmath also implies the
sum over the cyclic permutations. Inserting the self-energy integral (
4.110 ) will give a contribution of

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.112)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath are the regional dual momenta that are adjacent to the
inserted bubble. Note that once we insert the bubble into an internal
line, the two propagators get cancelled against the @xmath -factors of
the two tree-level diagrams ( 4.109 ) being glued. We also note that the
bubble is slightly off-diagonal in the helicity space since it has
@xmath instead of @xmath for the propagators.

One-loop amplitude. What remains is to massage the sum over the bubble’s
insertions and to put the minus sign in front. Let us write ( 4.111 ) in
terms of @xmath and @xmath components by using ( 4.109 ) and ( 4.112 ).
The diagrams in ( 4.111 ) correspond to gluing the bubble to the two
sub-amplitudes with the total number of external legs equal @xmath and
then taking the cyclic permutations. We arrive at

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.113)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.114)
  -- -------- -- ---------

As we have already stressed, all physical quantities must be translation
invariant in the dual space. Therefore, ( 4.113 ) should not change if
we replace @xmath by @xmath for any @xmath . One way to see it is to
solve for all @xmath except for @xmath via @xmath . In order to see that
the resulting expression @xmath does not depend on @xmath we can take
its derivative @xmath to get

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.115)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

This is nothing but ( 4.113 ) with all @xmath factors erased, times
@xmath . It is easy to show that this expression is indeed zero with the
help of the momentum conservation, see various identities in [
Skvortsov:2020wtf ] . Once ( 4.113 ) is shown to be translation
invariant, it can be expressed in terms of external momenta @xmath only.
This is quite remarkable since the self-energy diagram itself, ( 4.110
), is not translation invariant, it is anomalous.

Due to many kinematical identities involving @xmath and @xmath , there
is no unique way to write the final result, but the following form is
very suggestive

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.116)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.117)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

Clearly, the one-loop amplitude in Chiral Higher Spin Gravity consists
of (i) a factor that has a lower spin origin as it does not have enough
@xmath to account for @xmath ; (ii) kinematical higher spin dressing
factor @xmath that accounts for helicities @xmath on the external lines,
which the first factor cannot accomplish; (iii) the total number of
physical degrees of freedom @xmath .

The first factor is telling. Applying the light-cone vs. spinor-helicity
dictionary ( 4.24 ), we discover the all-plus helicity one-loop
amplitude in QCD or in self-dual Yang-Mills [ Bern:1993sx , Bern:1993qk
, Mahlon:1993fe ] :

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.118)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In other words, the one-loop amplitude in Chiral Higher Spin Gravity is
found to be

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.119)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Therefore, we get precisely the structure ( @xmath ‣ 4.6.7 ) that is
sketched in the introduction. Moreover, when we set @xmath , ( 4.119 )
reduces to just the SDYM/QCD amplitude times an overall numerical
factor, i.e. the higher spin dressing disappears. To conclude, both the
Weinberg, Coleman-Mandula theorems and the one-loop determinants
instruct us to set @xmath and get @xmath . This can safely be done since
the one-loop amplitude is shown to be UV-finite.

### 4.7 Conclusions and Discussion

Chiral Theory reveals a remarkable cancellation mechanism for
UV-divergences and should be an example of a consistent quantum HSGRA.
This is the only higher spin model with propagating massless higher spin
fields where quantum corrections can be computed.

We showed in this chapter that the tree-level amplitudes vanish
on-shell, which is a result of highly nontrivial cancellations after the
summation over Feynman diagrams. This is the requirement of the Weinberg
low energy theorem. Another interesting property of chiral theory is
that the spin sums are bounded from both above and below assuming the
external helicities are fixed. In generic higher spin theories we would
expect an infinite sum over all spins already for tree level diagrams.
¹³ ¹³ 13 This corresponds to gluing chiral and anti-chiral vertices
together. This does not happen for chiral HSGRA and infinite spin sums
show up only at the loop level as an overall factor as shown in the body
of this chapter.

The loop diagrams turn out to consist of two factors: the UV-convergent
integral and a purely numerical factor @xmath . The UV-convergence is a
very important property that again relies on the presence of higher spin
fields. This effect is reminiscent of @xmath Yang-Mills theory [
Mandelstam:1982cb , Brink:1982wv ] , in which the supersymmetry forces
one momentum to eventually factor out and makes the integrals
convergent. Higher spin symmetry amplifies this effect. Chiral HSGRA has
infinitely many non-renormalizable interactions, which include the
two-derivative graviton self-coupling. Higher spin symmetry forces
enough momenta to factor out in every loop integral and makes all loop
integrals free of UV-divergences. Overall factor @xmath is to be
expected in any theory with infinitely many fields and some value needs
to be assigned to the sum. Based on zeta-function regularization, it is
natural to set @xmath . Such an assignment is consistent both with the
Weinberg soft theorem and with a large bulk of results on one-loop
determinants in HSGRA/Vector Models duality context.

The result @xmath agrees with our expectation for any HSGRA in flat
space. It is, however, no longer true once the cosmological constant is
switched on. The holographic S-matrix turns out to be nontrivial [
Skvortsov:2018uru ] . Therefore, we consider chiral HSGRA in flat space
as a useful toy model to check the cancellation of UV-divergences thanks
to higher spin symmetry. It is exactly the effect that HSGRAs have long
been expected to have.

We also extend chiral HSGRA in such a way that it incorporates
Yang-Mills gaugings, see Appendix C . Even though we do not see any
immediate relation to string theory, it is quite surprising that higher
spin fields can be made matrix-valued fields via the method that is very
similar to the Chan-Paton approach. Higher spin symmetry seems to be
restrictive enough to make theories with a graviton in the spectrum to
be quantum consistent. It was recently shown that one can extend chiral
HSGRA to supersymmetric chiral HSGRAs [ Metsaev:2019aig ] . However, the
mechanism that cancels UV-divergences should be the same with the pure
bosonic case we investigated in this chapter.

Chiral HSGRA is the only class of HSGRAs at present with propagating
massless higher spin fields and an action. Nevertheless, there is a
handful of other higher spin models with an action that are of great
interest. There are topological theories, which are free of
UV-divergences, in three dimension: purely massless [ Blencowe:1988gj ,
Bergshoeff:1989ns , Campoleoni:2010zq , Henneaux:2010xg ] and conformal
[ Pope:1989vj , Grigoriev:2019xmp ] . Another class is @xmath conformal
higher spin gravity [ Segal:2002gd , Tseytlin:2002gz ,
Bastianelli:2012bn ] , which is an extension of conformal gravity. There
also has been some progress in two dimensions [ Alkalaev:2020kut ] .
There are encouraging results on quantum checks for conformal higher
spin gravity [ Beccaria:2016syk , Joung:2015eny ] that indicate that the
conformal higher spin symmetry also makes the S-matrix trivial in flat
space. The 2d-models of [ Alkalaev:2020kut ] involve propagating matter
fields with interactions mediated via topological higher spin fields,
thereby providing interesting toy models for quantum checks. Lastly, it
would be very important to directly verify that @xmath chiral HSGRA is
free of UV-divergences.

## Chapter 5 Formal HSGRA in @xmath

In this chapter, we construct a formal bosonic HSGRA in @xmath in terms
of formally consistent classical equations of motion. Finding the
equations of motion was shown to be equivalent to a certain deformation
of a given higher-spin algebra [ Sharapov:2019vyd , Sharapov:2018kjz ] .
There are two different realization of the deformed higher-spin algebra:
(i) through the universal enveloping algebra of @xmath ; (ii) through
oscillator variables. Both of the new realizations admit supersymmetric
extensions and the @xmath extension should describe the massless sector
of tensionless Type-IIB strings on @xmath .

### 5.1 Motivation

In the previous chapters we have seen how higher-spin symmetry can
render HSGRA renormalizable and even finite in both AdS and flat spaces.
We also understood that the (holographic) S-matrix is fixed by this rich
symmetry [ Maldacena:2011jn , Boulanger:2013zza ] , which eventually led
us to the conjecture that HSGRA is UV-finite. Therefore, if we believe
the symmetry arguments, i.e. that the higher spin symmetry alone forbids
all relevant counterterms, our task of finding a quantum consistent
theory downgrades to a task of constructing a purely classical HSGRA.
The AdS/CFT correspondence is a crucial reference point for the
construction of the bulk theory since the holographic S-matrix should
precisely match the free/weakly coupled CFT’s correlation functions.

However, free (or weakly coupled) CFT’s do not have a large gap in the
dimensions of single-trace operators and hence the existence of the
gravitational dual requires justification [ Heemskerk:2009pn ] . Due to
severe nonlocalities required by the higher spin symmetry [
Bekaert:2015tva , Sleight:2017pcz , Ponomarev:2017qab ] , we can
understand that HSGRAs are not conventional field theories. Yet, the
existence of CFT dual descriptions should in principle allow one to
reconstruct the bulk theory from the CFT correlation functions [
Das:2003vw , deMelloKoch:2018ivk ] , i.e. to write down certain
interaction vertices in that, via Witten diagrams, compute exactly the
correlation functions of the required CFT. There are at least two issues
here: (i) reconstruction does not give a definition of the bulk theory
that would be independent of its CFT dual, thereby trivializing AdS/CFT
duality; ¹ ¹ 1 An important question is what are the bulk questions that
cannot be immediately answered from the reconstruction vantage point.
One such question is about quantum corrections in the bulk. Given that
the reconstruction gives a classical action that computes the required
CFT correlation functions at tree-level in the bulk, it is still a
challenge to prove that the quantum corrections come out right. See, for
example, [ Ponomarev:2019ltz ] for the analysis of the one-loop
corrections in holographic HSGRA. (ii) still, the interactions that are
required to get the free (weakly-coupled) CFT’s correlation functions
are too non-local to treat them as local field theories and there are
ambiguities that do not even allow one to compute tree-level amplitudes
without further prescriptions [ Bekaert:2015tva , Sleight:2017pcz ,
Ponomarev:2017qab ] . The latter calls for a better understanding of the
bulk locality in HSGRA.

It is worth stressing that conformal HSGRA and chiral HSGRA avoid the
aforementioned problems. Nevertheless, it is important to understand how
to stretch the axioms of local field theory as to be able to define
holographic HSGRA’s, e.g. those that are dual to free and critical
vector models.

In this chapter, we will construct the bulk theory by studying the
deformation of higher-spin algebra — an extension of conformal algebra
@xmath in generic dimensions and @xmath in @xmath . Our starting point
is any free CFT. As a known fact, free CFTs come with higher-spin
algebra hs — the symmetry algebra of the free equations of motion [
Eastwood:2002su ] . Higher-spin algebra is associative and is the
quotient of @xmath (or its supersymmetric extension) by the two sided
Joseph ideal @xmath .

Being identified with a global symmetry on the CFT side, hs carries
complete information about the spectrum of single-trace operators and
their correlators. ² ² 2 The correlation functions are just the simplest
hs invariants [ Colombo:2012jx , Didenko:2013bj , Didenko:2012tv ,
Bonezzi:2017vha ] . It has to be gauged in the gravitational dual
producing thus inevitable non-localities. If we sacrifice locality, then
there is a formal way to make the problem of finding vertices for HSGRA
well-defined mathematically. It involves writing down formally
consistent classical equations of motion which take the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is some field. ³ ³ 3 The equations above look similar to
those of String Field Theory, see e.g. [ Gaberdiel:1997ia ,
Erler:2013xta ] . The construction of @xmath are heavily based on strong
homotopy algebras a.k.a. @xmath -algebras (see e.g. [ Lada:1992wc ,
Kajiura:2003ax ] ) and the quantization deformation [ Kontsevich:1997vb
] .

The formal HSGRA approach was initiated by Vasiliev, who constructed the
first example of such a system [ Vasiliev:1990en ] . At present there
are several examples of formally consistent equations of motion [
Prokushkin:1998bq , Vasiliev:2003ev , Bonezzi:2016ttk , Bekaert:2017bpy
, Arias:2017bvi , Grigoriev:2018wrx , Sharapov:2019vyd ] that deal with
different higher spin algebras or provide a different realization of the
same system. The general problem of how to construct a formal HSGRA,
i.e. the vertices, starting from any higher spin algebra was solved in [
Sharapov:2018kjz , Sharapov:2019vyd ] , where it was shown that
constructing @xmath is equivalent to deforming a certain extension of hs
as an associative algebra. ⁴ ⁴ 4 See also [ Sharapov:2018ioy ,
Sharapov:2018hnl , Sharapov:2017lxr ] for various closely related
mathematical aspects, in particular, [ Sharapov:2017yde ] for a relation
to the Kontsevich–Shoikhet–Tsygan formality theorem.

In this chapter, we will construct a formal HSGRA in five dimensions,
which has been an open problem since the late 1990s. The relevant hs had
been known [ Fradkin:1989yd ] . Free fields that comprise the spectrum
of HSGRA’s in @xmath , including the mixed-symmetry ones, were studied
in [ Metsaev:2002vr , Metsaev:2004ee , Metsaev:2014sfa ] . Certain cubic
vertices for the @xmath cases were constructed in [ Vasiliev:2001wa ,
Alkalaev:2002rq , Alkalaev:2010af ] . The free equations of type ( 5.1 )
were analyzed in [ Sezgin:2001zs ] . However, when it comes to classical
equations the previously known methods do not work. Our solution heavily
relies on the work [ Sharapov:2019vyd ] .

In a few words, [ Sharapov:2019vyd ] allows to construct all the
vertices once we are able to deform an extension of a higher-spin
algebra hs . There are two different ways to deform it. The first one is
to deform relations coming from the Joseph Ideal together with the
commutator of the translation generators. This leads to an interesting
way to deform (quotients of) universal enveloping algebras. The second
one is to utilize the quasi-conformal realizations [ Gunaydin:2000xr ,
Fernando:2009fq , Govil:2013uta ] that were previously underrated in the
higher spin context. The main feature is that they resolve all of the
Joseph relations and give the minimal oscillator realization of the free
field and of the corresponding higher spin algebra. We found a way to
deform the quasi-conformal realization so that the deformed Joseph’s
relations are satisfied.

The study of five-dimensional HSGRA is also well motivated by the
relation to string theory. In particular, @xmath HSGRA is believed to
describe a massless subsector of tensionless type-IIB superstring theory
on @xmath , see e.g. [ Sezgin:2002rt , Sezgin:2001yf ] for the important
development towards this theory. One can start with a purely bosonic
model in @xmath and, then, try to construct its supersymmetric
extension.

If we take AdS/CFT as the guiding compass then the free limit of @xmath
SYM is anticipated to be dual to the tensionless limit of the Type-IIB
string theory on @xmath [ Sundborg:2000wp , HaggiMani:2000ru ] . The
tensionless limit corresponds to very long strings @xmath ( @xmath is
AdS radius), see e.g. [ Bonelli:2003zu , Tseytlin:2002ny ] for
discussion. ⁵ ⁵ 5 There is a worldsheet description of the tensionless
strings on @xmath [ Eberhardt:2018ouy ] , which comes as a surprise
since the limit is somewhat singular and not well-understood in higher
dimensions, e.g. for @xmath that we are discussing.

The outline of chapter 5 is as follows. In Section 2, we review the
algebraic construction of HSGRA via a deformation of the extended higher
spin algebra. In particular, we show how to construct @xmath . In
section 3, we discuss the input that is needed in @xmath case paying
attention to the quasi-conformal realization. In section 4, we deform
the algebra by either deforming the extension of hs in terms of Joseph
relations or the quasi-conformal realization, which eventually leads to
the equations of motion. In section 5, we briefly review the
non-locality problem in HSGRA and discuss how this construction may
bypass it. We summarize the results in section 6 and discuss possible
future developments.

### 5.2 Algebraic Construction of HSGRA via Higher Spin Algebra

In chapter 4, we have completely determined the interaction vertices for
chiral HSGRA in four dimensional Minkowski and AdS spacetime. In this
section, we would like to return to the question posed in chapter 2 on
how to determine vertices for holographic HSGRAs in @xmath , i.e. for
those theories that have a free CFT dual. To begin with, let us recall
that the equation that describes higher-spin background in is @xmath ,
where @xmath is the product in the higher spin algebra hs . The
appearance of the 0-form @xmath — the generalized Weyl tensors which are
built out of @xmath -derivatives of the Fronsdal fields, suggests that
we can introduce a master 0-form field, call it @xmath , to capture
every @xmath . ⁶ ⁶ 6 It is easy to notice that for @xmath , we have a
0-form field @xmath , which have the same properties of the usual
Weyl-tensor in GR. Then, the free equations of motion for higher-spin
fields are ⁷ ⁷ 7 See [ Vasiliev:1986td ] for the very first equations of
this form in the context of the @xmath HSGRA.

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.2a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.2b)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

As noted in Chapter 2, all elements of hs can be written in terms of
@xmath , the generators of @xmath . Moreover, @xmath is an automorphism
that flips the sign of translation generator @xmath and preserves the
sign of the Lorentz generator @xmath , i.e. @xmath . In components,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.3)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

It is easy to see that @xmath carries gauge degree of freedom in terms
of the spin-1 gauge potential @xmath , the vielbein @xmath , spin
connection @xmath and their higher spin generalizations. On the other
hand, the 0-form @xmath describes physical d.o.f. in terms of the scalar
field @xmath , the Maxwell field-strength @xmath , the Weyl tensor
@xmath and other higher spin generalizations thereof.

The system ( 5.2 ) describes free fields, and this is the starting point
for deformation. A useful observation is that the automorphism @xmath
can be completely absorbed if we consider an extended associative
algebra @xmath , that is a smash product algebra of hs and its finite
group of automorphism @xmath that contains @xmath [ Sharapov:2018kjz ] .
For the bosonic HSGRA, e.g. type-A, @xmath with @xmath . The generator
@xmath acts on @xmath and @xmath as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then, any elements of @xmath can be written as @xmath for @xmath and the
@xmath -product in @xmath reads

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . By making the substitution @xmath and @xmath we can
always go back to the fields taking values in the higher spin algebra.
At this point it is useful to work with the extended algebra so as to
eliminate @xmath out of the formal equations of motion for HSGRA.

After eliminating @xmath , it is easy to see based on form-degree
counting that the most general non-linear equations read:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.7a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.7b)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath is an expansion parameter and the interaction vertices
@xmath should satisfy the Frobenius integrability condition, i.e. they
should be compatible with @xmath . The relevant framework for us to
construct @xmath turns out to be strong homotopy algebras which are also
known as @xmath -algebras [ Kajiura:2003ax , Kajiura:2004xu ] .

#### 5.2.1 Vertices from @xmath-algebra

The derivation of @xmath is based on the assumption that @xmath can be
deformed into a one-parameter family of associative algebras @xmath with
a formal deformation parameter @xmath . We assume the product in @xmath
to be

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are some bilinear maps that satisfy consistency conditions
coming from associativity, i.e. @xmath . Note that the @xmath in ( 5.8 )
is the product in @xmath . At first order in @xmath , we get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

This equation is a Hochschild two-cocycle that induces a deformation of
@xmath . One can then construct @xmath from bi-linear maps @xmath via
@xmath -algebras. ⁸ ⁸ 8 We dedicate Appendix D to all the related
technicalities in this chapter. In what follows we will see how this is
done.

###### @xmath-algebra interlude.

Consider a graded vector space @xmath and a space @xmath of all
multilinear maps on @xmath . Here, @xmath is the tensor algebra on
@xmath . Then, an @xmath -algebra on @xmath is realized by a master
degree-one map @xmath that obeys the Maurer-Cartan equation:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

The above double-bracket is the Gerstenhabar bracket defined as ⁹ ⁹ 9 We
follow the convention in [ Kajiura:2003ax , Sharapov:2018kjz ] .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is graded skew-symmetric and obeys the graded Jacobi identity:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.12)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.13)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The non-associative @xmath product is the Gerstenhaber product:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . Here @xmath and @xmath denotes the grading of the map
@xmath and the vector @xmath . Pictorially, we can treat @xmath as
leaves (they have green color in the figure below, and @xmath as @xmath
-tree without any internal branches. By grafting @xmath and @xmath
together, we are effectively making the root of @xmath become one of the
branches of @xmath and the total number of leaves we have is @xmath .
The sum over all possible insertions of @xmath into @xmath is taken. As
an example, let us consider @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is, then, natural to generalize the Gerstenhaber product to a braces
operation [ Kadeishvili:1998a , Gerstenhaber:1995a ] that has the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the total sign factor is a product of the sign factors for each
@xmath , which schematically are @xmath (the sum is performed for all
@xmath ’s that are to the left of @xmath ). Pictorially, this brace
operation is the grafting of more @xmath -trees together to make a
bigger tree with more leaves on top.

The first few relations coming from @xmath -algebras are, e.g.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.17)
     @xmath      (5.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

The first equation simply tells us that @xmath is nilpotent, i.e. @xmath
is a differential. The second equation implies @xmath satisfies graded
Leibniz rule for a bi-linear product @xmath . At the next level, we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

meaning @xmath is associative up to a coboundary that includes @xmath .
In what follows, we will consider minimal @xmath -algebras, i.e. the
@xmath -algebras without @xmath . The reason is that we will match
@xmath with @xmath — the vertices of the HSGRA, and the lowest order
vertex of the HSGRA is of second order, e.g. @xmath . Then, the first
non-trivial equation is just ( 5.19 ) without @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

From here, we can perturbatively construct higher order maps @xmath via
the following system

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a differential of degree one in @xmath that is
nilpotent. Indeed,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is then easy to construct @xmath order by order by solving ( 5.21 )
recursively.

###### Back to the construction of @xmath.

Recall that @xmath is an associative algebra (understood as @xmath
algebra it concentrates in degree @xmath ). Due to the restrictions
imposed by the grading, there cannot be any interesting @xmath
-structure on it. We can, however, deform @xmath as an associative
algebra. We define the @xmath -structure perturbatively and the first
step is to extend @xmath by its adjoint bimodule @xmath , note that
@xmath has degree @xmath . Then, the @xmath -structure contains only
@xmath at its lowest order, where @xmath . ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 Here, @xmath is
defined for various pairs @xmath (the @xmath -product), @xmath (the left
action of @xmath on @xmath ), @xmath (the right action of @xmath on
@xmath ) Based on ( 5.7 ), we can make the following assumption:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath . Now we try to deform this trivial @xmath
-structure where the first-order deformations can be described in terms
of the Hochschild cohomology of @xmath . From ( 5.21 ), the first-order
deformation should be @xmath with arguments from @xmath and @xmath . We
have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

If @xmath admits a deformation to one-parameter family @xmath , then the
second Hochschild cohomology group is nonzero, i.e. @xmath . Any element
@xmath can be represented by a cocycle @xmath . Given these initial
data, @xmath yields [ Sharapov:2018kjz ] : ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 We place the
expansion parameter @xmath on the right as a convention.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then, as a consequence of the associativity of the @xmath -product in
@xmath , see ( 5.8 ), we can identify @xmath where @xmath . We obtain,
for instance

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

The associativity of the @xmath -product also give us relations between
@xmath . The next order, which is @xmath , is solved by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

The last step of the construction is to replace

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

The above approach, however, possesses difficulty when we try to get
higher-order interaction vertices. There is another way to get all
@xmath at once.

###### Generating function of @xmath

So far, we only use @xmath to obtain relation between @xmath , the
cocycle in @xmath , to determine @xmath order by order. Let us now
consider an auxiliary family @xmath of @xmath algebras [
Sharapov:2018kjz , Sharapov:2019vyd ] where the master degree-one map
becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

These data can be used to solve the evolution

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath is a degree minus one map that maps @xmath (that has degree
0) to @xmath and annihilates @xmath . We assume that the flow in @xmath
start from the surface @xmath . Choosing the initial condition at @xmath
and @xmath as ( 5.23 ), we can solve for examples

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.32)
     @xmath      (5.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

At the last step, we set @xmath and use the replacement rule ( 5.28 ).
We get for instance

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.34)
     @xmath      (5.35)
     @xmath      (5.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

We note that the vertices @xmath of HSGRA cannot be removed by field
redefinitions. Thus, we see that the vertices are completely determined
by the associative @xmath -product ( 5.8 ). For more details, we refer
the interested readers to [ Sharapov:2018kjz , Sharapov:2019vyd ] .

#### 5.2.2 Formal Equations of Motion for HSGRA

The system that describes HSGRAs in @xmath is almost identical with (
5.7 ) up to a twist @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.37a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.37b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where for example

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath takes values in the twisted adjoint representation and is a
nontrivial solution of

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

If we remove @xmath from the above equation, we get the usual Hochschild
two-cocycle that induces a deformation of the associative structure.
With the twist @xmath in ( 5.39 ), @xmath is not a deformation of hs .
In fact, higher spin algebras are usually rigid and do not have
deformations. Note, however, that @xmath induces a deformation of the
extended algebra @xmath since the twisted representation is a part of it
by construction. Therefore, while hs is rigid and can not be deformed,
the extended algebra @xmath is soft and can be deformed. Since the
physical zero-form @xmath takes values in the representation twisted by
@xmath , it is not surprising that the deformation that leads to
interaction vertices @xmath has something to do with deforming @xmath
along @xmath . The problem now reduces to the problem of deforming
@xmath to all orders so as to find @xmath , which we already know how to
do.

#### 5.2.3 Consistency Criteria and Physical Implications

Let us recall some of the information for the undeformed higher spin
algebra. The @xmath contains all the higher-spin generators @xmath
described by rectangular, two-row, Young diagrams:

  -- -- -- --------
           (5.40)
  -- -- -- --------

This algebra is obtained as a quotient of the universal enveloping
algebra @xmath by the two sided Joseph ideal @xmath that is generated by

  -- -- -- --------
           (5.41)
  -- -- -- --------

More explicitly,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.42)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.43)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.44)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

We can write the above relations in terms of @xmath and @xmath by
identifying @xmath and @xmath , we simply get: ¹² ¹² 12 We set the
cosmological constant to 1. The @xmath index @xmath with @xmath being
the extra direction of @xmath -vector as compared to the vector of the
Lorentz algebra @xmath .

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.45)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.46)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.47)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.48)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The commutation relations of @xmath in terms of @xmath and @xmath are:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

The remaining task is to show that we can deform the
infinite-dimensional @xmath consistently. This might be a very
complicated problem because there are infinitely many structure
constants that will receive correction. However, as the matter of fact,
we can deform very few relations by hand and all of the structure
constants can be derived easily.

For Type-A HSGRA in generic @xmath , the simplest relation that needs to
be deformed is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that we want to keep @xmath and @xmath intact to preserve local
Lorentz algebra and its action on tensorial objects. @xmath -bracket
plays the role of the seed that drives the whole deformation making
@xmath . To see the physical implication of this deformation, let us for
the moment turn off all the HS fields (but we will not truncate them)
and look at the gravitational sector of the cubic vertex where @xmath ,
then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, because @xmath is anti-symmetric the appropriate substitution to
@xmath is nothing but the first order deformation of the @xmath
-bracket. The appearance of the @xmath allows us to get the correct
Einstein equations in the frame-like formalism. Indeed, the coefficient
of @xmath from @xmath should lead to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is achieved iff the @xmath -bracket reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, the physical interpretation of the deformed @xmath -bracket
is that it leads to the Einstein equations. Together with other higher
spin fields, we have obtained consistency bosonic HSGRAs in generic
@xmath via the above construction.

### 5.3 Initial Data for @xmath

Above we have reviewed how to construct type-A HSGRA starting from free
scalar CFT. This construction indeed can work with any free CFT and
therefore the only input we need to construct HSGRAs is hs . For the
case of type-A HSGRA in @xmath , the higher-spin algebra comes from the
universal enveloping algebra of @xmath , whose generators @xmath obey

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, the indices @xmath are the indices of the (anti)-fundamental
representation of @xmath . The ideal is generated by the quadratic
relations

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.55a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.55b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.55c)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

Elements of the higher spin algebra hs are polynomials @xmath in @xmath
modulo the Joseph relations. Therefore, following the definition in
subsection 2.4.2 , it is easy to see that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the coefficients are traceless and symmetric in upper and lower
indices, i.e., define an irreducible representation of weight @xmath .

Although one can take relations ( 5.54 ) and ( 5.55 ) as an initial
definition of hs . In practice, it is sometimes convenient to resolve
(some of) the Joseph relations by passing to an appropriate realization.
We will introduce two quartets of oscillator variables @xmath and @xmath
in the fundamental and anti-fundamental representations of @xmath (they
generate the Weyl algebra @xmath ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then the @xmath generators are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the @xmath generator @xmath commutes with @xmath . We can then
define hs as a subquotient of the oscillator algebra:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

The first relation demands @xmath to have an equal number of @xmath and
@xmath oscillators. The quotient with respect to @xmath makes the Taylor
coefficients effectively traceless, as in ( 5.56 ). It is this
realization that was used in [62] to study the spectrum and free higher
spin equations. ¹³ ¹³ 13 Note that we need to gauge @xmath generator
@xmath in order to have the right algebra. This is because the first two
relations of ( 5.55 ) do not satisfy the trace conditions.

Another way to resolve all Joseph’s relations is to utilize
quasi-conformal realization (QCR) [54,55,63]. The idea is to represent
hs by a minimal possible number of oscillators. We have the following of
canonical pairs of oscillators

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

In QCR approach, it can be shown that the following two composite
operators

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

can be used to define the generators of hs . Indeed,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

obey the commutation relations ( 5.54 ) as well as ( 5.55 ).

Recall that the Lorentz subalgebra @xmath — the maximally symmetric
subalgebra of @xmath that remains undeformed. It allows one to split the
@xmath generators into the Lorentz generators @xmath and translations
@xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here and after, we will raise and lower @xmath -indices with the help of
@xmath -invariant tensor @xmath . Then, the @xmath commutation relations
( 5.54 ) read

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.64)
              @xmath      (5.65)
              @xmath      (5.66)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

In order to write the equations of motion, we need the automorphism
@xmath as explained above. Here, @xmath acts on @xmath and @xmath
generators as @xmath . The spin-two subsector of the master one-form
@xmath reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath is the background fünfbein and @xmath is the background
spin-connection. It is worth stressing that @xmath are @xmath -indices.

### 5.4 Deformation of Higher Spin Algebra

As explained in section 2, the problem of constructing the interaction
vertices @xmath is equivalent to finding the deformation of @xmath . In
what follows, we will show how to deform the algebra to obtain bosonic
HSGRA in @xmath .

The usual oscillator realization of ( 5.62 ) does not allow us to deform
the algebra since the @xmath -map gives us the smash-product algebra
@xmath . This algebra does not admit any non-trivial deformations [
Sharapov:2017lxr , Sharapov:2018a ] since its second Hochschild
cohomology group vanishes. Therefore, we should deform the hs through
@xmath or QCR [ Gunaydin:2000xr , Fernando:2009fq , Govil:2013uta ] .

#### 5.4.1 Deformation through The Universal Enveloping Algebra

We learnt in section 2 that it is useful to introduce the @xmath
operator ¹⁴ ¹⁴ 14 This operator is also known as the Klein operator, see
e.g. [ Vasiliev:1999ba , Didenko:2014dwa ] . to expand the algebra, and
to absorb @xmath . The universal enveloping algebra is now expanded to
@xmath . The set of Joseph relations ( 5.55 ) split into the triple of
finite-dimensional irreducible modules of @xmath : the first module
corresponds to the Casimir operator and is a trivial one; the second
module is the 15-dimensional adjoint representation @xmath , and the
last module is the 20-dimensional representation of @xmath . Since the
modules are irreducible, we can take the following components as the
lowest weight vector

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

and commute these with @xmath to generate other relations. The
consistency of the ideal fixes @xmath (in which we set the cosmological
constant to one). Then, following the discussion in section 2, the only
commutation relation that we need to deform from @xmath algebra is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

This commutation relation acts as a seed that drives the whole
deformation of the @xmath . We also know that it will lead to Einstein’s
equations. Starting from ( 5.68 ), we act on them with @xmath to
generate the other components of the deformed Joseph’s ideal. We obtain

  -- -- -- --------
           (5.70)
  -- -- -- --------

For the consistency of the deformed Joseph’s ideal we find @xmath . It
is easy to see that by setting @xmath , we return to the original
Joseph’s relations. The above relations ( 5.70 ) together with @xmath ,
@xmath and the deformed @xmath -brackets determine the deformation of
@xmath . The deformation is smooth in the sense that we can construct
the product of @xmath from any @xmath and decompose it into irreducible
Lorentz tensors. Therefore, the deformation is well-defined which
eventually leads us to the equations of motion ( 5.37 ) of HSGRA.
To read off the spectrum of the algebra from ( 5.70 ), we first notice
that there are no singlets except for the unit element itself because
@xmath are @xmath -dependent numbers. It easy to see that all single
contractions, namely @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath , can be transformed
into @xmath and @xmath . Moreover, relations with un-contracted indices
implies that it is equivalent to get @xmath of @xmath from either @xmath
or @xmath projections. Therefore, the spectrum of the algebra consists
of @xmath -tensors of weight @xmath

  -- -- -- --------
           (5.71)
  -- -- -- --------

which can be thought of as coefficients of the appropriately symmetrized
monomials @xmath .

#### 5.4.2 Deformation through QCR

In [ Sharapov:2019pdu ] , we show that QCR also admit a deformation and
it is a minimal one. The automorphism @xmath acts as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

meaning @xmath flips the sign of @xmath while leaving other oscillators,
denoted as @xmath , intact. Therefore

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

The desired deformation can be obtained by redefining the momentum
@xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

The deformation of QCR is realized through [75]: ¹⁵ ¹⁵ 15 This deformed
oscillators have a long history and were discovered by Wigner, 70 years
ago, who asked the question whether it is possible to modify the
canonical commutation relations in such a way that basic commutation
relations still remain valid. The answer is yes, and it is precisely the
deformed @xmath that allows us to have one-parameter deformation.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then, the composite operators @xmath changes accordingly as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

while @xmath stay the same. It can be shown that from the deformed QCR,
we will obtain precisely the deformed @xmath algebra and the deformed
Joseph’s relations. This gives an explicit QCR of @xmath . Thus, ( 5.70
) provide the complete solution of HSGRA in @xmath .

#### 5.4.3 Einstein’s Equations

For completeness, let us show once again that the deformed @xmath
-bracket does lead to Einstein’s equations and therefore well-motivated.
If we look at the spin-two sector from HSGRA equations of motion, we see
that ¹⁶ ¹⁶ 16 Note that @xmath in the extended algebra.

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where we used the fact that @xmath and therefore @xmath .The Einstein
equations are realized as the coefficients in front of @xmath and @xmath
, they are

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Note that the potentially dangerous @xmath and @xmath terms vanish since
the deformation preserves both @xmath and @xmath commutators.
We will end this section with general discussion using @xmath language.
The Einstein equations is a part ¹⁷ ¹⁷ 17 We would like to stress that
there is not consistent truncation of a HSGRA that eliminates higher
spin fields: graviton sources higher spin fields and higher spin fields
backreact onto the graviton. of numerous HSGRAs which is the result of
formal deformation of the @xmath -bracket. The deformation ( 5.50 ) is a
small part of the Hochschild cocycle @xmath of hs which eventually leads
to the @xmath -algebra [ Sharapov:2018kjz , Sharapov:2019vyd ] . For
more details, we refer the interested readers to [ Sharapov:2019pdu ,
Sharapov:2019vyd ] .

### 5.5 Non-Locality Problem in HSGRAs

In the body of the thesis we have already mentioned that besides chiral
HSGRA, three-dimensional HSGRA and conformal HSGRA, other (holographic)
higher-spin theories turn out to be non-local. To understand how to make
sense out of these non-localities is one of the main challenges in
HSGRA. Let us recall that the formally consistent equations of motion
for HSGRAs read as

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.77a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.77b)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

We will translate vertices to the Fronsdal (field theory) language to
understand why non-locality appears. First of all, the 1-form @xmath
contains the Fronsdal field @xmath for @xmath and other components that
are derivatives of the Fronsdal field up to order- @xmath . Therefore,
@xmath contains a finite number of derivatives of every @xmath . On the
other hand, the 0-form @xmath starts with the generalized Weyl tensor
@xmath — that are the order- @xmath curl of the Fronsdal field, and
there is an infinite tower of fields that are @xmath -derivatives of
@xmath , where @xmath . The spectrum can simply be presented as the
following Young diagrams

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (5.78)
     @xmath         (5.79)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

or pictorially as

Naively, the system is non-local in the field theory context since there
is an unbounded number of derivatives. It is known, see e.g. [
Boulanger:2015ova ] , that the only dynamical equations contained in (
5.77 ) are the Fronsdal equations with sources that take the following
schematic form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

The sources above correspond to @xmath and @xmath vertices in the
frame-like formalism. For simplicity, we omit the spin labels on the
right hand side (for example, we can think that only the backreaction of
the scalar field is taken into account). Moreover, the sum over
derivatives can in principle be infinite. This certainly can happen when
at least two @xmath ’s are found in a vertex, e.g. it is so for @xmath ,
see [ Boulanger:2015ova , Skvortsov:2015lja ] . ¹⁸ ¹⁸ 18 See also, [
Giombi:2009wh ] for the early discussion about non-local behaviour of
@xmath .

Now we need to distinguish between cubic and higher order terms from the
action point of view (or bilinear and higher from the equations of
motion vantage point). HSGRA’s (and any other theory in ) are local at
the cubic level: given any three spins there is a finite number of
independent cubic vertices each of which contains a finite number of
derivatives. Starting for the quartic order there are infinitely many
independent quartic structures that can contribute and, more
importantly, the number of derivatives is unbounded, i.e. each such
quartic interaction contain a finite number of derivatives, but there
exist interactions with any given number of derivatives.

As was shown in [ Bekaert:2015tva ] (see also [ Sleight:2017pcz ,
Ponomarev:2019ltz ] ) the quartic vertex in the Type-A HSGRA is
non-local. Moreover, it is proportional to the contribution of exchanges
to the quartic amplitude. This means that: (i) the complete quartic
interaction in the Type-A HSGRA has an unbounded number of derivatives;
(ii) the coefficients do not decay fast enough with the number of
derivatives. Therefore, there is no difference between the contribution
of the contact vertex and of the exchanges to the quartic amplitude.
This invalidates the Noether procedure [ Sleight:2017pcz ,
Ponomarev:2019ltz ] : one cannot construct the Type-A HSGRA by writing
the most general ansatz for interactions and fixing it by the
requirement of gauge invariance.

The situation with ( 5.77 ) and ( 5.80 ) is more subtle. The vertices
@xmath are fixed by the formal consistency, which is equivalent to a
formal gauge invariance. The formal consistency by itself does not
constrain the number of derivatives. Therefore, unless one controls the
number of derivatives by hand one can easily get formally consistent
equations that contain too many derivatives for them to make sense as a
field theory. This issue has nothing to do with HSGRA and will be faced
even for low spin theories once trying to write them as ( 5.77 ). This
is exactly what happens with the original proposal [ Vasiliev:1990cm ] ,
as was shown in [ Boulanger:2015ova , Skvortsov:2015lja ] , based on the
earlier observation [ Giombi:2009wh ] that certain holographic
correlation functions, as computed from ( 5.77 ), are infinite and/or
inconsistent. While the issue can clearly be resolved at the cubic
level, it is an open question if the non-locality can be tamed at higher
orders.

As an example, we can consider @xmath theory. Then, @xmath consists only
of @xmath that encode derivatives of @xmath . Let’s us also go flat
space to simplify the algebra

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

This what one generically gets unless no locality constraints are
imposed on the vertices — general infinite series corresponding to terms
@xmath in @xmath for @xmath being the background vielbein. Suppose we
would like to compute the cubic amplitude @xmath in this theory. It is
easy to do that in momentum space where @xmath turns into @xmath ,
@xmath and, hence, @xmath . Therefore, all derivatives disappear and the
cubic amplitude will get a contribution proportional to ¹⁹ ¹⁹ 19 We
should have started with an action where the derivatives are effectively
symmetrized over the three fields. We will ignore this complication.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is easy to anticipate that @xmath gets a contribution from every term
on the r.h.s. of ( 5.81 ) since there exists only one independent cubic
amplitude in the scalar theory, the one arising simply from the @xmath
coupling in the action. All the other terms, which involve higher
derivatives, are not independent from this one and can be reduced to
@xmath , one by one, via field redefinitions.

Now we make a worrisome observation: (i) Eq. ( 5.81 ), and hence ( 5.77
), are certainly formally consistent for any choice of @xmath ; (ii) for
most @xmath the cubic amplitude is infinite and does not make any sense.
This gives a simple example to illustrate the fact that formal
consistency does not imply actual consistency. The observation has
nothing to do with HSGRA. It is just the fact that field redefinitions
can generate infinitely many higher derivative avatars of the same basic
interaction and all such avatars will contribute to the physical
observables. In reality one would like @xmath to be the actual coupling
and constrain @xmath in such a way that @xmath . Therefore, one has to
keep by hand under control various terms in vertices @xmath that are
related via field redefinitions. This issue is present for all vertices
@xmath that have at least two @xmath fields.

Another way to understand the non-locality problem in HSGRA is to look
at the higher spin gauge transformations: higher-spin symmetry mixes not
only fields together, it intertwines also derivatives. Indeed, the gauge
transformation for @xmath reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.83)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is clear that with the help of @xmath , which is a generating
function of infinite number of derivatives, one easily change the number
of derivatives in vertices. Therefore, even though higher-spin symmetry
demands the present of all vertices @xmath for consistency, it is
unclear how to give them physical interpretation at present.

There are several observations that help to tame the non-localities and
may eventually solve the problem. One can argue that if the observables,
e.g. (holographical) S-matrix is well-defined, then non-locality is just
an artifact of HSGRA. One can directly focus on the constraints imposed
by the higher spin symmetry on physical observables. For example, the
holographic correlation functions are the simplest invariants of the
higher spin algebra [ Colombo:2012jx , Didenko:2013bj , Didenko:2012tv ,
Bonezzi:2017vha ] .

If we are only interested in the solutions coming out of formal HSGRAs,
we can then solve explicitly the equations of motion for HSGRA in terms
of Lax pair system [ Sharapov:2019pdu , Sharapov:2019vyd ]

  -- -------- -- ---------
                 
     @xmath      (5.84a)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath and @xmath take values in the deform algebra @xmath . The
system ( 5.84 ) can be solved in a pure gauge form, namely

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is important to stress that even though the solutions ( 5.85 ) look
like ones from a free system they are not. The reason is that the fields
@xmath are sources of the following system [ Sharapov:2019vyd ] :

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.86)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.87)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.88)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.89)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

By setting @xmath , we will return to the formal equations of motion for
HSGRA. In other words, one can obtain well-defined solutions of the
formally consistent equations that are not by themselves well-defined in
being too non-local. From here, one can construct observables in terms
of traces a.k.a invariants. There are scalar invariants, for example,
which given by the on-shell closed 0-forms

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.90)
  -- -------- -- --------

Indeed, at @xmath , they reduce to correlation functions of higher spin
currents in the dual free CFT [ Colombo:2012jx , Didenko:2013bj ,
Didenko:2012tv , Bonezzi:2017vha ] . Therefore, we conclude that while
the equations of motion exhibit problematic non-locality that needs to
be understood, the solution space seems to be well-defined. We summarize
the whole procedure in this chapter as follows:

### 5.6 Summary of Chapter 5

In this chapter, we reviewed the construction that leads to formally
consistent equations of motion for HSGRAs starting from the higher-spin
algebra. The construction captures certain algebraic aspects of the
higher spin problems that survives even in the presence of
non-localities. It is also hard, if not impossible, to detect these
algebraic structures in any perturbative approach like the Noether
procedure. We also showed that we only need to deform the @xmath
-bracket to drive the whole deformation of the algebra. Moreover this
deformed @xmath -bracket leads to Einstein’s equation and therefore is
well-motivated.

We constructed the Type-A HSGRA in @xmath at the level of formally
consistent equations. There, we employ two approach to deform the
algebra: (i) we deform the universal enveloping algebra via the deformed
Joseph’s relations and the deformed @xmath -bracket of @xmath ; (ii)
utilizing QCR, we found a minimal set of canonical pairs of oscillators
that generate the deformation.

It is worth mentioning, that there are not so many ways to deform
enveloping algebras. A well-known approach is to deform the Hopf algebra
structure. In this chapter, we presented another way: enveloping
algebras evaluated in certain irreducible representations turn out to
admit a deformation as associative algebras once they are extended with
a group of automorphism s @xmath . This is closely related to the
Deformation quantization of Poisson manifolds [ Kontsevich:1997vb ] .

##### Outlook

We can extend the results of this chapter to the case of supersymmetric
HSGRAs. Some interesting examples include the @xmath -dimensional
supersymmetric theories [ Sezgin:2001yf , Sezgin:2001ij ] , and the
6-dimensional exceptional HSGRA based on @xmath superalgebra [
Gunaydin:2016amv ] . We also expect that the massless sector of
tensionless strings should be described by a theory based on the higher
spin extension of the gauge symmetry @xmath . The approaches we used in
this chapter should, in principle, admit a straightforward
supersymmetric extension.

## Chapter 6 Summary and Discussion

### 6.1 Summary of Results

In this thesis, we studied three different approaches to HSGRAs that
including the metric-like formalism, light-front formalism and
frame-like formalism. Each of them has their own advantages and
drawbacks when we tackle a specific problem in HSGRA. However, the main
messages and results of this thesis indicate that HSGRAs are UV-finite
thanks to higher-spin symmetry. Therefore, HSGRAs can be thought of as
toy models for Quantum Gravity. We summarise our results as follows:

One loop Tests of HSGRAs/Vector Models Duality
We derive the spectral zeta-functions for various HSGRAs where fields
are totally symmetric or mixed-symmetric. Using zeta-regularization, we
computed the one-loop vacuum contributions for several HS theories and
most of them precicely match the predictions from the CFT duals. The
test failed naively for type-B theory in even dimension and calls for
better understanding of the duality.

We computed the vacuum one-loop energy in Type-A HSGRA in all (including
fractional) dimensions and showed that it gives exactly the generalized
sphere free energy of a scalar field. Upon changing the boundary
condition, the Type-A theory gives a change in the generalized sphere
free energy of the critical @xmath vector model as compared to the free
one to the leading order in @xmath expansion.

UV-finiteness of Quantum Chiral HSGRA
Chiral HSGRA is a local quantum higher-spin theory that has a simple
action in light-cone gauge. Due to the specific form of the coupling
constant @xmath , the interactions conspire as to make the S-matrix
trivial at the tree level. We also showed that there are no UV
divergences at one-loop order in all diagrams we have analyzed.
Therefore, our results showed that chiral HSGRA is a consistent quantum
theory in flat space.

It is important to stress that our results confirm the expectation that
higher-spin symmetry is rich enough to forbid all counterterms that can
spoil renormalizability of the model.

Formal HSGRA in @xmath
We constructed formally consistent HSGRA in @xmath . We found two
solutions. The first is to deform Joseph relations and @xmath -algebra,
which ultimately deforms the whole higher-spin algebra. The second
solution is via the quasi-conformal realization (QCR) which is built
from the minimal number of canonical pairs of oscillators. We deform
some of the commutation relations, and as the result, the deformed (QCR)
also gives us the deformed higher-spin algebra which allows us to
construct interaction vertices. Our construction should admit a simple
supersymmetric extension. The most interesting case is a HSGRA based on
universal enveloping algebra of the gauge symmetry @xmath that should
describe massless sector of tensionless strings in @xmath .

### 6.2 Discussion

Inspired by the original work of Fronsdal and Fang [ Fronsdal:1978rb ,
Fang:1978wz ] on free higher-spin fields, there has been a lot of
development to uplift the free theories to interacting ones. They
include the frame-like formalism and its extensions [ Vasiliev:1999ba ,
Vasiliev:2004qz , Bekaert:2005vh ] , the Noether procedure [
Berends:1984rq , Barnich:1993vg , Joung:2011ww , Fredenhagen:2019hvb ] ,
the holographic reconstruction of higher-spin theories [ Das:2003vw ,
Bekaert:2015tva , Skvortsov:2015pea , Sleight:2016dba ,
deMelloKoch:2018ivk ] and the light-front formalism [ Bengtsson:1983pd ,
Bengtsson:1983pg , Metsaev:1991mt , Metsaev:1991nb , Ponomarev:2016lrm ,
Metsaev:2018xip , Skvortsov:2018uru ] .

There are very few higher spin theories that are local enough as to be
treated by the field theory methods: chiral HSGRA, conformal HSGRA and
purely massless HSGRA in @xmath . Generic holographic HSGRA’s that are
dual to free or weakly-coupled CFT’s like vector models were shown to be
too non-local. This is not an end of the story and calls for a better
understanding of locality in HSGRA. It is also clear at present that
there is not much difference between the problems of HSGRA in flat space
and in (anti)-de Sitter space. Indeed, (i) the main no-go theorems, e.g.
Weinberg and Coleman-Mandula theorems, have a direct counterpart in
anti-de Sitter space: the (holographic) S-matrix is fixed by the higher
spin symmetry to be @xmath in flat space and @xmath free CFT in @xmath [
Maldacena:2011jn , Boulanger:2013zza ] ; (ii) the obstructions for HSGRA
in flat space that arise at the quartic order [ Fotopoulos:2010ay ,
Bekaert:2010hp , Roiban:2017iqg ] indicate that the theory becomes badly
non-local, which is exactly what has been established recently in @xmath
[ Bekaert:2015tva , Maldacena:2015iua , Sleight:2017pcz ,
Ponomarev:2017qab ] . The only difference between flat space and @xmath
is that, thanks to the existence of simple CFT duals, we expect to tame
holographic HSGRA’s one way or another.

At very high energies all particles should effectively become massless.
Therefore, HSGRA can be good probes of the quantum gravity problem since
many purely quantum issues seem to find their counterparts already at
the classical level. For example, if higher spin symmetry is powerful
enough as to forbid the relevant counterterms, then constructing a
classical HSGRA is equivalent to having a consistent quantum gravity
model (in the sense that there is nothing to be analyzed at the quantum
level, at least perturbatively). Not to forget that HSGRA’s exhibit
certain features that make them closer to string theory than to a field
theory (e.g. infinite number of states, Chan-Paton factors, …). Due to
these stringy features, one should not expect to look at HSGRAs as
conventional field theories. There are, however, some classes of HSGRAs
that are very close to field theories.

The study of HSGRAs should help to better understand some aspects of the
Quantum Gravity Problem. HSGRAs are also useful in view of their
relation to the weakly coupled CFTs that describe the critical
phenomena. It would be interesting to further investigate the
tensionless limit of string theory in order to understand the bizarre
behaviour of HSGRA’s. Indeed, a world-sheet model should resolve the
non-locality problem of HSGRAs.

## Appendix A Appendix for One-loop Tests in Integer Dimensions

### a.1 Characters, Dimensions and all that

Below are some useful formulas for the dimensions of various irreducible
representations. The general formulae for the dimensions of irreducible
representations for the case of @xmath and @xmath read:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.1a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.1b)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where the representation is defined by Young diagram @xmath with the
@xmath -th row having length @xmath or @xmath if all @xmath are
half-integer. For some of the particular cases of use we find for @xmath
:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
                                   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.2a)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.2b)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.2c)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.2d)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.2e)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.2f)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where we use @xmath to denote spinorial representations. For example,
@xmath is a symmetric rank- @xmath spin-tensor @xmath , i.e. it has spin
@xmath . Similar formula for @xmath yields:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

which allows to compute the dimension of any representation of @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.4)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath can be half-integers. Analogously, for special
linear algebra @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The isomorphism @xmath gives for @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Note that the dimension ( A.1 ) in the even case @xmath is the dimension
of irreducible representation, while ( A.2 ) formulas pack
(anti)-selfdual representations together, so that ( A.2 ) sometimes
gives twice that of ( A.1 ).

###### Characters.

We will discuss only one-particle partition-functions without extra
chemical potentials. Character of a generic representation with spin
@xmath is obtained by counting @xmath -descendants assuming there are no
relations among them:

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.7)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The following short exact sequence is the simplest representations that
correspond to partially-massless HS fields:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath denotes generalized Verma module, which can be reducible,
and @xmath is the irreducible module. Here, @xmath and @xmath is the
spin of the gauge parameter in @xmath or, equivalently, the symmetry
type of the conservation law for a higher-spin current. ¹ ¹ 1 In the
case of massless totally-symmetric fields we have

@xmath (A.9)

An additional parameter @xmath is the depth of partially-masslessness [
Deser:2001us ] and @xmath for massless fields.
In the case of free scalar, @xmath , and free fermion, @xmath , the
sequence is short but different. The singular vectors are associated
with @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.10)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.11)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Below we collect some of the blind characters of @xmath . The dimensions
of irreducible @xmath representations can be found above

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath            
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The simplest instance of the Flato-Fronsdal theorem then follows from

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Given a character @xmath , the (anti)-symmetric parts of the tensor
product can be extracted in a standard way:

  -- -- -------- -------- -- --------
        @xmath   @xmath      (A.13)
        @xmath   @xmath      (A.14)
  -- -- -------- -------- -- --------

The character of the weight- @xmath spin- @xmath operator and the
associated conserved current are:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.15)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.16)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Fermionic spin-tensor conformal quasi-primary operator @xmath obeys
@xmath , which allows to compute its character and the character of the
conserved higher-spin super-current:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

###### Tensor Products of Spinors.

To derive the decomposition of @xmath together with its (anti)-symmetric
projections we need to know how to take tensor product of two @xmath
spinors. For @xmath odd we have Dirac spinors, which we denote @xmath .
For @xmath even there are two Weyl spinors, which we denote @xmath and
@xmath . ² ² 2 Various other possibilities like symplectic Majorana-Weyl
spinors in some dimensions will be ignored. There are three distinct
cases: @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Consulting math literature we can
find out that:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath               (A.17)
     @xmath   @xmath               (A.18)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.19)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where the sums are from @xmath to the maximal value it can take in each
of the cases. Defining in even dimensions @xmath we observe:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.20)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.21)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The decomposition of @xmath of the @xmath -singlet is known and is
quoted in the main text. We simply present the result for other cases:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.22)
     @xmath   @xmath               (A.23)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.24)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where we indicated the @xmath -spin of the singlet quasi-primary
operators, the conformal weight being obvious from @xmath . The above
formulae generalize the Flato-Fronsdal theorem to the @xmath -singlet
sector of free fermion theory in any dimension. Other versions of the
singlet constraint follow from the above results.

### a.2 Amusing Numbers

We collect below various numbers associated to the fields discussed in
the main text: Casimir Energy, sphere free energy, Weyl @xmath -anomaly
coefficients.

###### Casimir Energy.

Casimir Energy, @xmath , is given by a formally divergent sum

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.25)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

for which the standard regularization is to use the @xmath as a cut-off
and then remove all poles in @xmath . All the data can be extracted from
the characters. We see that the spin degrees of freedom factor out for
massive fields and the Casimir energy is given by

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Casimir Energy for a massive scalar field of weight @xmath :

  @xmath   @xmath
  -------- --------
  @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath

allows one to get the Casimir Energy for any massive representation by
multiplying it by @xmath . Formulas for massless representations are
obtained as differences of the massive ones according to exact
sequences. Some of the formulae below can be found in [ Gibbons:2006ij ,
Ozcan:2006jn ] . The Casimir Energies for higher-spin bosonic fields in
lower dimensions are:

  @xmath   @xmath
  -------- --------
  @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath

Note that @xmath and @xmath case is special in that the fake ghost
contribution does not vanish automatically and the right value is @xmath
. Casimir Energies for higher-spin fermionic fields in lower dimensions
are:

  @xmath   @xmath
  -------- --------
  @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath

Note that @xmath and @xmath the general formula does not oversubtract
the fake descendants and the right value is still @xmath . Casimir
Energies for @xmath ’s and @xmath ’s in lower dimensions @xmath are: ³ ³
3 The fermion is always a Dirac one. @xmath for the Weyl fermion is half
of the value in the table.

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.26)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.27)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Casimir Energies for massive @xmath anti-symmetric tensors @xmath ,
@xmath : ⁴ ⁴ 4 When self-duality applies it is the Casimir energy of the
two fields.

  @xmath   @xmath
  -------- --------
  @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath

The Casimir Energies for massless hooks @xmath :

  @xmath   @xmath
  -------- --------
  @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath

###### Sphere Free Energy.

Also, we will need the free energy on a sphere for free scalar and
fermion, see e.g. [ Klebanov:2011gs ] ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.28)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.29)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

###### Weyl Anomaly.

The general formula for Weyl anomaly @xmath for real conformal scalar [
Casini:2010kt ] and fermion [ Aros:2011iz ] gives for @xmath : ⁵ ⁵ 5 We
changed normalization as compared to [ Aros:2011iz ] .

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.30)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.31)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

###### Volumes.

The volume of @xmath -sphere and the regularized volume of the
hyperbolic space, which is Euclidean anti-de Sitter space, are [
Diaz:2007an ] :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.32)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

### a.3 Other Classes

In this section we discuss higher-spin doubletons that result in more
general mixed-symmetry fields and higher-order singletons that lead to
partially-massless fields and mixed-symmetry fields.

#### a.3.1 Higher-Spin Doubletons

In any @xmath , @xmath , we have higher-spin doubletons [
Gunaydin:1984fk , Gunaydin:1984wc , Metsaev:1995jp , Bekaert:2009fg ,
Fernando:2015tiu ] as conformal fields in @xmath . These are
parametrized by (half)-integer spin @xmath , with @xmath being the usual
@xmath and @xmath . ⁶ ⁶ 6 The Young diagram of @xmath that determines
the spin of the field has a form of a rectangular block of length @xmath
and height @xmath , i.e. the labels are @xmath . One can also consider
higher-spin representations of more complicated symmetry type, however
they may be non-unitary. The @xmath is free massless spin-one field,
i.e. Maxwell. For @xmath the HS doubletons are unusual CFT’s in not
having a local stress-tensor, while they still are unitary
representations of the conformal algebra.

In [ Beccaria:2014zma , Beccaria:2014xda ] it was conjectured that there
should exist an AdS HS theory that is dual to @xmath free Maxwell
fields, called Type-C in analogy with Type-A, @xmath , and Type-B,
@xmath . It was found that one-loop tests are successfully passed, but
already the non-minimal theory requires to modify the bulk coupling as
@xmath . Similar conclusions were arrived at in [ Beccaria:2014qea ] for
the @xmath doubleton in @xmath [ Gunaydin:1984wc ] .

Let us show that all Type-D,E,… theories, i.e. those with @xmath , do
not pass the one-loop test. The Casimir Energy of the spin- @xmath
doubleton is easy to find: ⁷ ⁷ 7 For @xmath it gives the Casimir Energy
of two real scalars. For lower spins @xmath we therefore find @xmath .

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.33)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The spectrum of Type-X theory can be found by evaluating the tensor
product of two spin- @xmath doubletons [ Dolan:2005wy , Boulanger:2011se
, Beccaria:2014zma ] :

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.34)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.35)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where in the first line we see massive and massless mixed-symmetry
tensors and massless symmetric HS fields in the second line. The absence
of the stress-tensor reveals itself in that the spectrum of massless HS
fields is bounded from below by @xmath . In particular, there is no
dynamical graviton for @xmath .

The Casimir Energies for the three parts of the spectrum: massive,
mixed-symmetry massless, and symmetric massless, can be computed with
the net result:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.36)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

We see that the total Casimir energy vanishes for @xmath in accordance
with [ Giombi:2014yra ] . It does not vanish for @xmath [
Beccaria:2014zma , Beccaria:2014xda ] , rather it equals that of the two
Maxwell fields, which still can be compensated by shifting the bulk
coupling. However, for @xmath there does not seem to be any natural way
of compensating the excess of the Casimir energy.

The same problem can be understood at the level of characters, which is
a simpler approach. The blind character of the spin- @xmath doubleton
is, see e.g. [ Beccaria:2014zma ] :

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.37)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The singlet partition function is @xmath . It is symmetric in @xmath ,
@xmath , for @xmath . For @xmath it is not symmetric but the
anti-symmetric part can be expressed as a multiple of @xmath , which can
be compensated by modifying @xmath [ Beccaria:2014zma ] . However, for
@xmath the anti-symmetric part cannot be compensated this way, but can
be expanded in terms of @xmath .

Therefore, we see that the duals of HS doubletons @xmath should have
pathologies as quantum theories. Assuming AdS/CFT holds at classical
level, by reconstruction, we can manufacture some interaction vertices
in AdS [ Costa:2011mg , Metsaev:1993ap , Metsaev:2005ar ] such that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.38)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The generating function of three-point correlators was constructed in [
Zhiboedov:2012bm ] . The number that counts independent structures is
@xmath and is given by the minimal spin, which is related to the fact
that the currents that one can construct from a spin- @xmath doubleton
must have @xmath , see [ Gelfond:2006be ] for the explicit form in
@xmath . Indeed, only those doubletons can give a contribution to @xmath
that have @xmath . This fact certainly causes a puzzle in the sense that
@xmath obtained by reconstruction cannot be a part of any consistent
unitary HSGRA. ⁸ ⁸ 8 Although HS doubletons can only exist for even
boundary dimension, the number of independent correlators @xmath seems
to be indifferent to this fact, as if one could formally define HS
doubletons in odd dimensions as well.

#### a.3.2 Partially-Massless Fields

If we sacrifice unitarity, the list of free CFT’s becomes infinitely
richer. The simplest one-parameter family corresponds to higher-order
singletons is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.39)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The spectrum of single-trace operators contains partially-conserved
currents [ Dolan:2001ih ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.40)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The spectrum is encoded in the tensor product of two @xmath [
Bekaert:2013zya ] :

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.41)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The fields that are dual to partially-conserved currents are
partially-massless fields [ Deser:2001us , Skvortsov:2006at ] :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.42)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the depth of partially-masslessness. Massless fields
occur at @xmath . Therefore, the spectrum of a theory that is dual to
@xmath is a nested tower of (partially)-massless fields with the @xmath
tower contained in the @xmath one. In particular, usual massless HS
fields are present. Note that the depth @xmath is an odd number in
@xmath . We can call the dual theory of @xmath (which has weight- @xmath
) as Type- @xmath [ Alkalaev:2014nsa ] . In the irreducible module
@xmath , the operators with @xmath are not conserved tensors and are
dual to massive fields, which for @xmath also contain massive HS fields.
Therefore, duals of @xmath provide an example of HS theories that
contain HS gauges fields and HS massive fields with a spin bounded from
above.

To test AdS/CFT duality we can check the vanishing of Casimir Energy in
the non-minimal Type- @xmath theory, see also [ Basile:2014wua ] . It is
important to stress that the Casimir Energy of @xmath should vanish in
odd dimensions. We find in @xmath that:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The Casimir Energy of a depth- @xmath partially-massless spin- @xmath
field can be computed in a standard way. For example, in the @xmath case
we find ( @xmath ):

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.43)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Consider the simplest case of @xmath . The spectrum contains that of
Type-A and massive fields @xmath , @xmath , @xmath plus depth- @xmath
partially-massless fields @xmath . The sum over the Type-A spectrum was
already found to vanish [ Basile:2014wua ] . At least for odd @xmath we
have to ensure that the sum over the rest vanishes as well. Using the
standard exponential cut-off @xmath we find that this is the case for
@xmath . Therefore, different parts of the spectrum should be summed
with different regulators.

The dual of @xmath contains the spectrum of Type- @xmath =Type- @xmath ,
the fields we have just studied plus massive fields @xmath , @xmath and
depth- @xmath partially-massless fields. The sum of the Casimir Energies
of this last part gives zero for @xmath .

Let us turn to the minimal Type- @xmath theory. It is useful to recall
that the Casimir Energy can also be computed as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.44)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The non-zero contribution to @xmath comes from the @xmath pole, which is
absent if @xmath is an even function of @xmath [ Giombi:2014yra ] . This
is typically the case for the tensor product of two singletons, but is
not for the (anti)-symmetric projections, which results in

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.45)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where the first term is an even function of @xmath in most cases. The
contribution to the Casimir Energy is equal to that of the free field
due to the last term. A slight generalization of [ Basile:2014wua ,
Bekaert:2013zya ] implies that the minimal type- @xmath contains fields
of even spins only. The excess of the Casimir Energy can be reduced to a
linear combination of @xmath by expressing the @xmath -odd part of
@xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.46)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the character of @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.47)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

This identity directly implies that the Casimir energy of the minimal
type- @xmath theory is equal to that of one @xmath , @xmath . If instead
we sum over spins with @xmath cut-off we will have to use @xmath for
depth- @xmath fields, @xmath for depth- @xmath fields etc. In
particular, for type- @xmath the sum over its type- @xmath sub-sector
gives @xmath of @xmath , while the sum over the depth- @xmath fields
gives @xmath with the total result @xmath , as before.

Also, it can be checked that the tensor product @xmath with @xmath gives
zero contribution to the Casimir Energy. Such products should arise in a
theory built of several different higher-order singletons.

With the help of the zeta-function we can also check that @xmath matches
the @xmath -anomaly of @xmath free field. The latter can be extracted
from the same zeta-function according to @xmath where the conformal
field dual to the order- @xmath singleton has weight @xmath . The
summation over spins can be done as before given that the depth- @xmath
partially-massless field of spin- @xmath has weight @xmath and the spin-
@xmath ghost has weight @xmath . Lastly, the contribution of the massive
fields that appear in the tensor product of two higher-order singletons
need to be separated. For example, let us consider @xmath and set @xmath
as above. We find:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.48)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

so that the total contribution is zero. For the minimal Type- @xmath
model, i.e. the one above truncated to even spins only, we have:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.49)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

the total contribution being @xmath , which is exactly the value of the
zeta-function

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

at @xmath and @xmath . Using the explicit form of @xmath for @xmath it
is easy to extract the @xmath -anomaly of higher-order singletons.

Therefore, despite non-unitarity, higher-order singletons that lead to
partially-massless fields seem to be consistent at one-loop.

### a.4 On the Computations in Even Dimensions

Let us briefly summary the steps for computing @xmath and @xmath in even
dimensions. Recall the full zeta-function that is given in the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.1)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath is either @xmath or @xmath as in ( 3.60 ). The
computation of @xmath can be done by using

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

which leads to

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.3)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The first integral can be done for large enough @xmath and then
continued to @xmath . The second one is perfectly convergent and we can
set @xmath and use

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.4)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.5)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

To compute @xmath we first differentiate @xmath with respect to @xmath .
This can be directly done for the first part @xmath , with two
contributions produced:

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.6)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are polynomials. In the second part @xmath we find no
problem with convergence, but a quite complicated integral

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.7)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Using @xmath we can split it into two parts:

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.8)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.9)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Now we introduce two types of auxiliary integrals

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The first one we will not attempt to evaluate since all @xmath will
cancel in the final expressions. The second one can be done iteratively
by first finding

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where in [3.415, Table of integral],

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Together with a useful formula in [ Camporesi:1991nw ] , @xmath , one
can get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Consider the following equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Taking the derivative at @xmath on both sides, we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, @xmath will contain two types of contributions:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.16)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.17)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The second terms in each equation can be easily integrated over @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Importantly, all @xmath now cancel because @xmath is the same as the one
at @xmath . The purely polynomial leftovers @xmath and @xmath from
@xmath and @xmath can be added up. We also need to add @xmath to them.
Then @xmath is replaced with @xmath and we can sum over all spins as
usual. This contribution we call @xmath . Importantly, all coefficients
@xmath will be gone and we do not need to deal with their real form,
both for Type-A and Type-B.

Now we are left with the contribution that we call @xmath , which
consists of either @xmath or @xmath times a polynomial in @xmath , where

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.19)
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.20)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

It can be simplified by using the integral representation for @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.21)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Next, the integral over @xmath can be done and the sum over the spectrum
is taken. As a result we are left with

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (A.22)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The summands can be expressed as derivatives at @xmath and @xmath of
Hurwitz-Lerch function [ Giombi:2013fka , Giombi:2014iua ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

which in return, can be analytically continued into Hurwitz zeta
function @xmath . It is worth noting that only in the minimal
higher-spin theories there will be @xmath in the denominator. Using this
zeta regularization scheme, we will display the results of for HS
theories in different even dimensions, which are subdivided into four
categories in the following appendices: Type-A (non-minimal and
minimal), HS fermions, Hook fields and the result for Hooks and Type-A
can be added up to get Type-B theories (non-minimal and minimal). The
case of @xmath is presented in more detail while for other dimensions we
only show the main intermediate steps.

#### a.4.1 Zeta Function in @xmath

Following the previous steps, let us show explicitly how to calculate
the zeta function in @xmath for Type-A, fermionic HS theory, hook fields
and Type-B.

##### Type-A

###### Zeta.

Starting with Vasiliev type A theory, we recall the zeta-function in the
main text

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

With @xmath , we can write the spectral zeta function as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using ( A.4 ), one can obtain easily the zeta function for the Type-A HS
theory [ Giombi:2014iua ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The total contribution from HS fields and ghosts is

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (A.4)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath . We use the exponential cut-off @xmath to take
the summation with @xmath . A straightforward calculation shows that
@xmath . The vanishing of zeta function is also true for the minimal
Type-A theory, where @xmath .

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

###### Zeta-prime.

After making sure that the conformal anomaly does not contribute to the
free energy, we now can take the @xmath -derivative of @xmath at @xmath
to calculate @xmath . One can easily obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Following Appendix A.4 , the first integral is therefore

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The second integral is just

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
                       
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

It is easy to see that the @xmath constribution in (E.7) and (E.9)
cancel each other. In the end, we are left with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using the cut-off method, the evaluation of @xmath in the case of all
spins and in the case of even spins only leads to the same result of
zero, i.e the contribution of @xmath to @xmath vanishes for both cases.
The evaluation of @xmath is a little bit harder if one wishes to obtain
an analytical result. We write the di-gamma function in its integral
representation ( A.21 ) and obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

here, @xmath is the Glaisher-Kinkelin constant. Above, we used the
exponential cut-off @xmath to evaluate the sum over all spins. For
minimal Type-A theory, a straightforward calculation shows that the
@xmath is just

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

##### Fermionic HS fields

###### Zeta.

Above, we showed explicitly how to evaluate the zeta-function for the
Type-A case. For fermionic HS fields, the computation is similar with
the change of variable @xmath . We recall the spectral function for
fermions from the main text

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

We write @xmath , so that we can take the sum from @xmath to @xmath .
The degeneracy becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

As we shall see the overall normalization factor does not affect the
final result for fermions. Using ( A.5 ), we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Zeta-prime.

To find @xmath , the integral that one needs to evaluate is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

We ignore @xmath at the moment for simplicity. The first integral equals
with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

The second integral is just @xmath , where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Repeating the same algorithm as in the case of bosonic theory, we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where, we have returned the degeneracy into the calculation.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath is just

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence, @xmath , which guarantees that the consistency of SUSY HS
theories relies on the bosonic part thereof.

##### Height-one Hook HS fields

###### Zeta.

To get to the Type-B theory we need to calculate the contribution of
hook fields in @xmath . The zeta-function is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath with @xmath and @xmath , we can repeat the same calculation
as for bosonic HS fields. The zeta function is therefore

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

While the result of zeta-function for even spin case is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is easy to see that the zeta function for hook fields is not zero,
which is not a problem since they make only a part of the Type-B
spectrum.

###### Zeta-prime.

The @xmath can be obtained by using the same treatment for bosonic
theory, where we find that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

Summing over all spins, the result of @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

while for the minimal case of Type-B, one needs to have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

Next, we evaluate the @xmath for the non-minimal and minimal Type-B. We
find for all spins:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

and for even spins only:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we utilized,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

Having these results at hand, we are now able to compute the @xmath for
the non-minimal and minimal Type-B theories.

#### a.4.2 Non-minimal Type-B

In order to calculate the zeta function for Type-B, we need to collect
all the information from Type-A, scalar field with @xmath and the above
hook fields. From (E.4), one can easily obtain the @xmath for
non-minimal which is @xmath . For the scalar with @xmath , we simply get
from ( A.3 ) that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

The spectrum of non-minimal Type-B involves the spectrum of Type-A
theory with @xmath , a scalar with @xmath and the hook fields with
@xmath .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

Below, we will list all the components in terms of their @xmath and
@xmath to calculate the @xmath

  -- -- -- --------
           (A.37)
  -- -- -- --------

It is easy to recognize that @xmath , i.e there is no contribution from
@xmath in the Type-B theory. The relevant @xmath -terms are

  -- -- -- --------
           (A.38)
  -- -- -- --------

Bringing everything together, we obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

As explaining in the main text, this number is not random.

#### a.4.3 Minimal Type-B

From ( A.4 ), the zeta-function of Type-A with odd spins only is 0. One
can read off the minimal Type-B @xmath by considering the symmetric
traceless fields with odd spins only, the hook fields with even spin and
a scalar with @xmath .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, the zeta function for Type-B is vanishing in both non-minimal
and minimal cases. Next, we list the result for the minimal Type-B in
terms of @xmath and @xmath

  -- -- -- --------
           (A.41)
  -- -- -- --------

  -- -- -- --------
           (A.42)
  -- -- -- --------

The @xmath for the minimal Type-B theory is just that:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the following appendices, we list the result of zeta function of
Type-A, fermions, hook fields and Type-B in various dimensions, which
can be used for later work.

### a.5 Summary of the Results in Other Even Dimensions

#### a.5.1 Type-A

We first evaluate the zeta function in term of spin- @xmath . Following
the algorithm in the Appendix D, the results are listed below

  -- -- -- --------
           (A.44)
  -- -- -- --------

The sum over spins will make @xmath vanish in both non-minimal and
minimal cases. ⁹ ⁹ 9 We used the cut-off exponential @xmath . The case
with @xmath is special since one should start the sum from @xmath and
then add the scalar to have vanishing zeta function. Next, we compute
@xmath and @xmath
Table for @xmath : ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 From here, it is very easy to evaluate
@xmath by the exponential cut-off.
@xmath
@xmath
@xmath
Table of @xmath :

  -- -- -- --------
           (A.45)
  -- -- -- --------

###### Non-minimal Type-A.

The result for @xmath in both non-minimal and minimal theory are zero,
i.e @xmath vanishes. Hence, one only needs to deal with @xmath . The sum
is evaluated with @xmath for @xmath and with @xmath for @xmath .
Analytical computation in the non-minimal Type-A shows that @xmath also
vanishes.

###### Minimal Type-A.

In minimal theory, the story is a little bit different. Using the method
of analytical continuation of Appendix D, we get

  -- -- -- --------
           (A.46)
  -- -- -- --------

These results can also be found in [ Giombi:2014iua , Klebanov:2011gs ]
.

#### a.5.2 HS Fermions

Above, we showed that @xmath and @xmath is zero for @xmath . In this
Appendix, let us rewrite the result in @xmath and then make a general
statement about higher dimensional cases. First of all, one needs to
make the change of variable @xmath . The zeta-functions with the ghost
subtracted are

  -- -- -- --------
           (A.47)
  -- -- -- --------

Summing over all spin starting from @xmath with the cut-off @xmath , we
see that the total zeta-functions in @xmath vanished. As a simple check,
one can confirm that for higher dimensions this statement is also true.
Next, to calculate the @xmath -function, we again split it into @xmath
and @xmath .

###### Table for @xmath:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (A.48)
     @xmath   @xmath               (A.49)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Summing over all spins leads to

  @xmath   @xmath
  -------- --------
  @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath

One can see that for fermions @xmath is non-zero which is different from
Type-A theories. For @xmath we get

  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  -------- -------- --------
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath

It is easy to see that @xmath and @xmath always cancel each other. A
further check confirms that @xmath is zero in higher dimensions.

#### a.5.3 Hook fields

The hook fields only appear in dimensions higher than four. For the
computation of the spectral density function @xmath of hooks with
different @xmath , the reader can refer to Section 3.2.2.

##### Zeta

In @xmath , we only have @xmath , while in @xmath , @xmath can be one or
two. ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 Due to the length of the final results, we only list the
zeta function for @xmath here.

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We will list the result of @xmath -function in both the non-minimal and
minimal theory for hook fields below since it is important for our
computation of Type-B theory ¹² ¹² 12 The hook fields of minimal theory
in @xmath come with even spins while the hook fields with @xmath in
@xmath come with odd spins and @xmath come with even spins.

  -- -- -- --------
           (A.50)
  -- -- -- --------

It is interesting that the zeta function for hook fields alone is not
zero as in bosonic and fermionic theory. However, when one considers the
whole spectrum of Type-B theory, the zeta function will again vanish.

##### Zeta-prime

Below are the tables for @xmath and @xmath of hook fields.

###### Table for @xmath:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Summing over spins leads to

  -- -- -- --------
           (A.51)
  -- -- -- --------

###### Table for @xmath:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

###### Non-minimal Type-B.

Following the method in appendix D, we list the results of @xmath in
@xmath .

  -- -- -- --------
           (A.52)
  -- -- -- --------

###### Minimal Type-B.

In the minimal theory, the computations are much longer since there are
more derivatives involved when one calculates the Hurwitz-Lersch
functions.

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

#### a.5.4 Type-B

We can now combine the results above to get the results for Type-B
models. The spectrum of such models is given in Section 3.4.4 .

##### Non-minimal

###### Scalar Field.

The scalar in Type-B has @xmath , where @xmath is the conformal weight
of the scalar in Type-A theory. One can use this to compute @xmath using
all the formulas in Type-A:

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

###### Summary.

In non-minimal Type-B theory, we have one scalar with @xmath , Type-A
with @xmath , and the hook fields with @xmath . The total contribution
to the zeta-function gives zero

  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  -------- -------- --------
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  @xmath   @xmath   @xmath

For higher dimensions, this is also true and we can confirm that the
zeta-function for non-minimal Type-B is always zero by combining all the
component fields. Next, we need @xmath :

  -- -- -- --------
           (A.53)
  -- -- -- --------

In the main text, our results were generated up to @xmath or @xmath ,
but we checked up to @xmath that they agree with the change of @xmath
-energy.

##### Minimal

We need to combine the scalar field from the previous sub-section with
the results for odd/even spins that can be found above. The final
results can be found in the main text.

## Appendix B Appendix for One-loop Tests in Fractional Dimensions

### b.1 From Intermediate to Final Form

As a result of the computation we arrived at the intermediate form (
3.160 ), which can easily be seen to arise in the computation of the
determinant on the CFT side. Let us now show how to reach the
(generalized) sphere free energy @xmath in its final form. In order to
compute the @xmath -integral we use

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

This allows for an analytic evaluation of the @xmath integral. One
obtains

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

After some straightforward algebra ( B.2 ) can be shown to split in two
parts, the first one we can bring to the form of (for @xmath ) [
Diaz:2007an , Giombi:2014xxa ] :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the result for the free scalar field corresponds to @xmath . The
second part has the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

However, this extra term vanishes due to the anti-symmetry of the
integrand around @xmath . This shows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

### b.2 Modified Zeta Function

In this Appendix we elaborate on the properties of the modified
zeta-function we introduced in Section 3.7 . It follows from the
definition that the value of @xmath is unaffected, which is illustrated
in B.2.1 . The value of @xmath differs in general from its true value.
Fortunately, @xmath is still the same for for the spectrum of
(non)-minimal Type-A, which is studied in B.2.2 . It is also shown there
that there is no deficit for the difference between the scalars with
@xmath and @xmath boundary conditions.

#### b.2.1 Zeta

From ( 3.144 ), one can easily obtain the full zeta in various odd
dimensions with the help of analytical continuation to the Lerch
transcendent and then set @xmath . For example,

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

It is easy to see that these polynomials in @xmath and @xmath are
exactly the zeta function for Type-A in [ Giombi:2014iua ] , see also [
Gunaydin:2016amv ] . Therefore, there is no deficit at @xmath order, i.e

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

This explains how we can get all the correct @xmath for individual spins
in general odd dimensions. There are many results on zeta-function at
@xmath , see e.g. [ Camporesi:1993mz , Giombi:2013fka , Giombi:2014iua ]
. Let us illustrate that the modified zeta-function is solid enough to
obtain these results. The spin factor in @xmath is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Together with @xmath , ( 3.144 ) becomes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now we can sum over @xmath and obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In order to get to the actual numbers one needs to plug @xmath then use
the trick of analytical continuation via the Hurwitz-Lerch zeta function
[ Giombi:2013fka , Giombi:2014iua ] . For example,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note that, after the continuation to the Hurwitz-Lerch transcendent,
there will be another @xmath function in the nominator. This will cancel
@xmath factor in the modified zeta function. Therefore, the modified
zeta-function reproduces the correct result, which is expected.

#### b.2.2 Deficit

As we already explained in Section 3.7 , we changed the regularization
prescription. As a result the values of @xmath might be different from
the correct ones for individual fields. It was noted in [ Bae:2016rgm ]
that the deficit vanishes for certain representations (with even
character). In particular, the deficit is absent for (non)-minimal
Type-A theory. The purpose of this Section is to quantify the deficit
for a number of cases.

For example, let us take the scalar field in @xmath . The zeta-prime can
be derived by calculating @xmath at @xmath order:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

One can already notice that there is a deficit between the value of
@xmath that is evaluated by the standard zeta function and ( B.8 ). This
was also discussed in Appendix (B.1) of [ Bae:2016rgm ] , when the
authors use characters to evaluate @xmath for different fields. Let us
have a look at the deficit in @xmath and @xmath as to observe the
general pattern.

##### d=3

The result before sending @xmath to @xmath for the modified zeta
function is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

In order to compute the zeta-prime, one just needs to take the @xmath
derivative and set @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

We then follow the procedure in [ Bae:2016rgm ] to find the deficit.
First, we set @xmath and obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Recall that for the standard zeta-prime in @xmath , see [ Giombi:2013fka
, Giombi:2014iua ] , we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

We note that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, @xmath and @xmath do match. Then, we consider the @xmath
derivatives for each of the zetas:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Next, using the identities for Hurwitz zeta function

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

we can reduce the @xmath derivative of the modified zeta-prime to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

Subtracting ( B.17 ) and ( B.15 ) together, then integrating over @xmath
, one obtains the deficit for individual fields at order @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since the deficit is an even function of @xmath , we can compute the
difference between the scalars with @xmath boundary conditions using the
modified zeta function thanks to @xmath . Using the cut-off @xmath , one
can sum over either all spins or even spins and observe that the deficit
does vanish:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, the deficit is absent both for the non-minimal and minimal
Type-A theories at order @xmath , which is what we need for @xmath .

##### d=5

In higher dimensions, there is another useful identity that we
illustrate on the example of @xmath . Following the procedure outlined
above, we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Setting @xmath we arrive at

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We massage the formula above as to be able to compare @xmath with @xmath
, which can be done with the help of

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

We arrive at

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

which can be compared with the standard zeta-prime:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the identity ( B.13 ), it is easy to realize that ( B.21 ) and (
B.22 ) are the same. Next, one can proceed as in the previous Section
and get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

The sum over all (even) spins can be found to vanish, which guarantees
that the deficit does not contribute to the zeta-prime of the
(non)-minimal Type-A. Also the deficit is an even function of @xmath and
therefore the difference due to @xmath boundary conditions for the
scalar field is also free of any deficit.

Let us note that the deficit has already appeared in implicit form in
the literature. It is the leftover of @xmath in [ Gunaydin:2016amv ]
without the part including @xmath , see also [ Giombi:2014iua ] where
the same structures are present but in different notation.

## Appendix C On Chiral HSGRA

### c.1 Kinematics

The four-dimensional Poincare algebra in light-cone gauge introduced in
chapter 4 implies that momenta should only enter the game as the
following combinations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.1)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Also, it can be shown that only @xmath out of @xmath @xmath are
independent, likewise for @xmath . In particular, for the three-point
case there is just one independent transverse momenta (and its
conjugate). In particular, all @xmath are anti-symmetric under
permutations:

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.2)
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.3)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where conservation of the total momenta has been used. Also, for three
points we have

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.4)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

We have a number of useful identities (we use @xmath -dimensional
notation sometimes, @xmath in @xmath ). Bianchi-like identities:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (C.5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Other kinematic identities include

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.6)
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.7)
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.8)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

and one of the most important for dealing with one off-shell leg is (
@xmath ):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

### c.2 Color Effects on Dynamical Constraints

As pointed out in chapter 4 and also [ Metsaev:1991mt , Metsaev:1991nb ,
Ponomarev:2016lrm ] , the dynamical constraint that allows for closure
of Poincare algebra at cubic vertices is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, we simply give the Hamiltonian @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

The dynamical boost generator @xmath reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

While the authors in [ Ponomarev:2016lrm ] work with colorless minimal
chiral HiSGRA ¹ ¹ 1 There are only even spins in the spectrum. , most of
the technical details therein can be directly generalized to colorful
non-minimal cases. For a generic case, the constraint ( C.10 ) reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

There are two type of contributions in ( C.14 ). The first contribution
comes without derivatives, namely

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the second contribution comes with derivatives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . Note that the derivatives @xmath in @xmath also act on
@xmath . To make the fields only interact with themselves through
Poisson brackets, we will integrate by part the operator @xmath . So,
@xmath becomes

  -- -- -- --------
           (C.17)
  -- -- -- --------

Now, since both @xmath and @xmath are cyclic invariant, the associated
fields can be reorganized with the same ordering. Hence, the Poisson
bracket in ( C.14 ) can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we choose the ”contract” the last fields @xmath and @xmath in
@xmath and @xmath , respectively. Below, we present solutions of ( C.10
) in various colorful cases.

##### @xmath gauging

We now assume that the fields take values in some algebra and the
generators of these algebra are labelled as @xmath . We first look at
the case where fields take @xmath -valued

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that the trace in ( 4.30 ) is over @xmath indices. The Poisson
bracket in this case can be defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is some phase factor that can be used to rescaling fields
in order to obtain ( 4.28 ). Explicitly solving the commutator in ( C.10
) by using ( C.15 ), ( C.17 ) and ( C.18 ) gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Next, we let @xmath to be an arbitrary phase factor and determine the
value of @xmath so that the coupling constant ( 4.28 ) is the solution
of ( C.21 ). Note that the symmetried sum in ( C.21 ) appears from the
contraction between fields [ Ponomarev:2016lrm ] that preserve the all
possible color-orderings. If we denote @xmath as @xmath where @xmath are
the kinematic parts, then we have in total six partial color-ordered
contribution (or @xmath - @xmath for short) of the constraint ( C.10 )
in terms of @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Each of the terms in ( C.22 ) need to vanish in order to make ( C.21 )
satisfied since there is no way to make different partial contributions
canceling each others. We can take @xmath as an example. It is a
combination of the following permutations that preserve the
color-ordering of @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the curly brackets @xmath notation is for permutations with @xmath
are indices of left-over external sources. First of all, the combination
when we consider the permutation @xmath with @xmath , two of them
combine to be

  -- -- -- --------
           (C.24)
  -- -- -- --------

Secondly, for the combination of @xmath , we get

  -- -- -- --------
           (C.25)
  -- -- -- --------

Taking the sum over @xmath in ( C.24 ) for example, we introduce @xmath
and obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

The sum over @xmath in ( C.25 ) gives somewhat similar result with (
C.26 ) by relabelling @xmath and @xmath . Now, as we noted, @xmath
should vanish by itself. This is only possible if @xmath or @xmath . In
this case, the computation above get simplified and it reads

  -- -- -- --------
           (C.27)
  -- -- -- --------

In order to obtain the above result we used momentum conservation and
noticed that @xmath . Without having the common factor @xmath , one can
not make another choice for @xmath to have ( 4.28 ) as the solution of
@xmath . For other partial contribution in ( C.22 ), we also see that
they are vanishing if @xmath . Hence, @xmath is the unique solution of (
C.10 ) for @xmath color chiral HSGRA that has ( 4.28 ) as the coupling
constants.

##### @xmath gauging

In the case where fields have @xmath color, the trace is understood as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

For the @xmath case where the Poisson brackets is defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are invariant symmetric tensor. Note that @xmath is a phase
factor that enter the Poisson bracket. Next, we solve the constraints (
C.10 ) and get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now, we repeat the same treatment with the above analysis for @xmath
-case to determine the phase factor @xmath . However, unlike the @xmath
-case, @xmath -case contains an extra trace that comes from the Möbius
twist in the Poisson brackets ( C.29 ). As a consequence, there will be
mixing between @xmath partial contributions. First, let us look at
@xmath in @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we denote @xmath for simplicity. Similarly, the permutation @xmath
in @xmath reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

One can notice that there are additional contributions (compared to the
@xmath -case) in the equation ( C.32 ) that combine two traces inside
@xmath : namely @xmath and an exotic one @xmath . Hence, @xmath can not
vanish by itself and we need to borrow some contributions from others
@xmath in order to satisfy ( C.30 ). Take a look at the permutation
@xmath in @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then, we have in total 6 different color-ordered terms. For the
combination of permutation @xmath and @xmath to get ( C.27 ) for the
color-ordering @xmath we need to set @xmath or @xmath . Next, it is easy
to see that the contribution coming from @xmath and @xmath also cancel
each others with this choice of the phase factors in ( C.29 ). Similar
argument works for @xmath and @xmath . Hence, even though @xmath can not
vanish by themselves in the case of @xmath -gauging, the total
contribution vanish by combining all the partial contributions together.
This indicates that @xmath is the right choice for the phase factors of
Poisson bracket ( C.29 ).
Finally, in the case of @xmath , the Poisson bracket reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are anti-symmetric matrices invariant tensor

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can use the @xmath -tensors to raise and lower indices as @xmath ,
@xmath . Finally, the trace for @xmath case can be understood as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

One then solves ( C.10 ) and get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

Repeating the same treatment as in the @xmath -case with the requirement
that ( 4.28 ) is the solution of ( C.37 ), one obtains @xmath . To
summarize the @xmath -valued fields have the following properties under
interchanging @xmath indices,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.38)
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.39)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Here, fields with odd-spin in @xmath case have odd/even parity, while
fields with even-spin have even/odd parity. Fields with odd spins always
take values in the adjoint representation.
It is important to stress that, the constraint ( C.10 ) with the
coupling constants ( 4.28 ) can only be satisfied with the above choices
of @xmath for @xmath and @xmath -colored chiral HSGRAs. Interestingly
enough the allowed gauge groups as well as the allowed representations
coincide with the allowed Chan-Paton symmetry groups and the
representations in open string theory [ Marcus:1982fr ] .

### c.3 Worldsheet-Friendly Regularization

In practice we face integrals of the following type:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the polynomial prefactor @xmath depends on external momenta (not
shown here), and the loop momentum @xmath . Importantly, the @xmath
-component does not enter the vertex. The regularization proposed in [
Thorn:2004ie ] is to introduce the Gaussian cutoff in the transverse
part of the loop momentum @xmath , i.e. @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The integral can be performed by first using the Schwinger trick with
parameters @xmath , then doing the @xmath Gaussian integral. Integration
over @xmath gives a delta function:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

If there are no IR divergences, we can safely solve for @xmath . It is
also convenient to change variables as @xmath , @xmath , which gives
Jacobian @xmath . This way we get

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.4)
              @xmath      (C.5)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

In a lucky case when the integral is not divergent at all, we simply
find

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Next, to understand how to work with dual momenta is also simple. We
choose the direction of the dual loop momentum @xmath to be clock wise
and consider the self-energy diagram as an example.

The dual momentum is related with original momentum as follows. Take the
external leg-1, one can define @xmath . We can continue with this
pattern for other external momenta as @xmath at each vertices. The loop
momentum is defined as the different of @xmath with its nearest dual
regional momentum @xmath , where @xmath is the dual momentum that is
bounded by a loop. In our example, @xmath . With these rules of labeling
dual momenta, one can easily compute the quantum correction at one-loop
with arbitrary legs like in section 4.6 .

#### c.3.1 Anti de-Sitter space

We can lift the above analysis of chiral HSGRA in flat space to @xmath
as well [ Metsaev:2018xip , Skvortsov:2018uru ] . The Poincare algebra
@xmath now becomes the conformal algebra @xmath which contains two new
generators that are: dilatation @xmath , and conformal boost generator
@xmath . The conformal algebra reads

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (C.7a)
              @xmath      (C.7b)
              @xmath      (C.7c)
              @xmath      (C.7d)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The metric of the Poincare patch in light-cone gauge reads

  -- -- -- -------
           (C.8)
  -- -- -- -------

Once again, we can work directly with in momentum space paying attention
to the fact that the @xmath coordinate does not admit
Fourier-transformation:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

The two scalar fields that describe a massless spin- @xmath gauge field
obey the conjugation rules as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

The action up to cubic level was found in [ Metsaev:2018xip ,
Skvortsov:2018uru ] :

  -- -- -- --------
           (C.11)
  -- -- -- --------

where

  -- -- -- --------
           (C.12)
  -- -- -- --------

The kernel @xmath takes the following form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

The holomorphic and anti-holomorphic momenta of flat space get lifted to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

The main differences with flat space are the following:

1.  The space we are integrating over looks like a half four dimensional
    Minkowski space, meaning @xmath . These @xmath -factor accounts for
    the Planck length in flat space with exactly the same power @xmath .
    Therefore, our coupling constant @xmath in @xmath is dimensionless .

2.  There are @xmath -maps (unitary-like operators) which address the
    tails (sub-leading terms with lower derivatives) of cubic
    interactions. They are [ Metsaev:2018xip ]

      -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                              
         @xmath   @xmath      (C.16a)
         @xmath   @xmath      (C.16b)
         @xmath   @xmath      (C.16c)
         @xmath   @xmath      (C.16d)
      -- -------- -------- -- ---------

    where

      -- -------- -------- -- --------
         @xmath   @xmath      (C.17)
         @xmath   @xmath      (C.18)
      -- -------- -------- -- --------

    Aesthetically speaking, the vertices do not look pleasing at first,
    they are, however, describe the complete cubic interactions in
    @xmath of higher spin fields in light-cone gauge. In the covariant
    formulation the gauge invariance requires these sub-leading terms as
    well.

To fix the coupling constants @xmath , one can repeat the same
computation as in flat space paying attention to integration by parts.
The leading terms (highest power in @xmath ) yield exactly the same
equations to solve for @xmath (see chapter 4 ), we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a dimensionless coupling constant which, in principle,
can be set to one. For more details, see [ Metsaev:2018xip ,
Skvortsov:2018uru ] .

##### Correlation Functions

As shown in [ Skvortsov:2018uru ] , the bulk-to-boundary propagators of
the scalar fields with conformal weight @xmath in @xmath read

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then, one gets the two-point function by sending @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is not hard to work out the three-point function

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that the new @xmath -map reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.24)
     @xmath      (C.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

We also employ the Pochhammer symbol notation that @xmath with @xmath ,
and lastly @xmath . These results look remarkably simple when we compare
them to the answers in covariant gauge [ Maldacena:2011nz ,
Bzowski:2013sza ] . Notice that there is no appearance of the coupling
constant @xmath after we carrying out the integration.

##### Flat Limit

If we look at the three-point function at its most singular pole when
@xmath , then, according to the prescription in [ Raju:2012zr ] , the
flat limit reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

The rhs. of (3.72) can be interpreted as three-point scattering
amplitude in flat space. The basic argument for this limit is that
@xmath will play the role of the fourth delta functions.

## Appendix D Appendix for Formal Construction of HSGRA

### d.1 Important Concepts

###### Associative Algebra

is a vector space with bilinear map @xmath that satisfies associativity

  -- -- -- -------
           (D.1)
  -- -- -- -------

We shall assume that @xmath is also unital

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

###### Two-sided ideal

is a sub-algebra of @xmath denoted as @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

In other words, @xmath absorbs multiplication from the left and from the
right by elements of the associative algebra @xmath .

###### Quotient algebra

is defined by equivalent classes @xmath with equivalence relation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

We denote the quotient algebra as @xmath .

###### Lie algebra

is a vector space @xmath equipped with a Lie bracket @xmath such that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (D.5)
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (D.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

for all @xmath . Moreover, the Lie bracket satisfies the Jacobi identity

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

An associative algebra @xmath can be turned into a Lie algebra @xmath by
equipping @xmath with the Lie bracket via the commutator @xmath where
@xmath .

###### Universal enveloping algebra

of a Lie algebra @xmath , denoted as @xmath , is an associative algebra.
Define @xmath to be the two-sided ideal of the tensor algebra @xmath
generated by all elements of the form @xmath where @xmath . The
universal enveloping algbera is defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

###### Tensor algebra

is the algebra of tensors on a vector space @xmath and denoted as @xmath
. For @xmath , we can define

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then, @xmath is just a direct sum of @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

In general, the vector space @xmath can also carry some grading.

###### Module homomorphism

is a space of all maps between modules @xmath that preserves the module
structures

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (D.11)
     @xmath   @xmath      (D.12)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

We denote the module homomorphism as @xmath . In general, @xmath can
also be algebras.

### d.2 Q-Manifolds and Strong Homotopy Algberas

###### Q-Manifold

is a supermanifold @xmath equipped with a differential @xmath that is
nilpotent [ Alexandrov:1995kv ] , i.e. @xmath . Consider some local
coordinates @xmath on @xmath , then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (D.14)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The coefficients @xmath obey

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath stands for the degree of coordinate @xmath . For nilpotency
of @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the sign depends on the particular permutation. Assuming @xmath ,
the first few relations read

  -- -------- -------- -- ---------
                          
     @xmath   @xmath      (D.17a)
     @xmath   @xmath      (D.17b)
     @xmath   @xmath      (D.17c)
  -- -------- -------- -- ---------

where the ellipses contain terms with @xmath and @xmath . We can
identify @xmath with a differential @xmath since it squares to zero.
Moreover, we can say that the coefficients @xmath determine an odd
linear map of n-th tensor power of @xmath into @xmath , where @xmath is
the tangent space of @xmath at the stationary point @xmath . This map
induces a map @xmath , where @xmath (the space of tangent bundle to
@xmath ) is some graded vector space. The map @xmath then determines a
differential in @xmath and @xmath determines a binary operation and so
on.

###### Strong Homotopy Algebra

A linear space equipped with multilinear maps @xmath satisfying

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (D.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

is called a @xmath -algebra or strong homotopy Lie algebra. If we remove
the condition ( D.15 ), then we have @xmath -algbera or strong homotopy
associative algebra. It is easy to see that at any stationary point
@xmath on a @xmath -manifold we have strong homotopy algebras as local
structures.

## Acknowledgement

This PhD thesis would not have been possible without my supervisor Prof.
Ivo Sachs who gave me the opportunity to do my PhD in his group. I am
really thankful and blessed for his support and guidance during my time
in Munich. It was always a pleasure to discuss physics with Ivo in his
office where conversation goes endlessly.

I would like to specially address Dr. Evgeny Skvortsov for taking me up
as a student and teaching me most of what I know about higher-spin
theory. Under his wise guidance and advice either through conversation
or emails, I have become a true higher-spin comrade . I am deeply
grateful for his continuous support during my PhD time.

I am also very much indebted to Prof. Stefan Theisen for being my second
official supervisor and letting me complete the second half of my PhD. I
enjoyed Stefan’s kindness and humour whenever we chat in the corridor or
his office. Thank you also for refereeing this thesis. I further want to
thank Prof. Herman Nicolai for kindly accepting me to AEI and for his
generosity.

My extended gratitude goes to Tomáš Procházka, Sebastian Konopka and Jan
Gerken for many fruitful and enlightening discussions. I am grateful to
Maor Ben-Shahar for spending his time to correct the English in this
thesis. Special thanks also go to all the members of the ’Theoretical
Astroparticle Physics and Cosmology’ chair and beyond in Munich and to
all the members or the ’Quantum Gravity and Unified Theories’ division
in Potsdam. In particular, I would like to thank Ottavia Balducci, Igor
Bertan, Federico Gnesotto, Katrin Hammer, Till Heckelbacher, Frederik
Lauf, Adiel Meyer, Luca Mattiello, Allison Pinto; Matteo Broccoli,
Lorenzo Casarin, Hugo Camargo, Franz Ciceri, Caroline Jonas, Johannes
Knaute, Lars Kreutzer and Hannes Malcha for making each day at the
office entertaining and fun.

I have also benefited from discussions and correspondence with: Antal
Jevicki, Per Sundell, Igor Klebanov, Simone Giombi, Murat Gunaydin,
Roberto Bonezzi, Gleb Arutyunov, Karapet Mkrtchyan, Livia Ferro, Xavier
Bekaert, Maxim Grigoriev, Arthur Lipstein, Lionel Mason, Tristan
McLaughlin, Mirian Tsulaia, Axel Kleinschmidt, Oliver Schlotterer, Matin
Mojaza, Rakibur Rahman, Hadi Godazgar, André Coimbra, Alexey Sharapov,
Ergin Sezgin, Thomas Basile, Lorenz Eberhardt, Olaf Hohm, Lance Dixon,
Kostas Skenderis, Paolo Benincasa, Claudio Corianò, Maor Ben-Shahar,
Francesco Serra, Justin Vines, Oleg Evnin, Euihun Joung, Jarah Evslin,
Andrea Campoleoni and Nicolas Boulanger.

I thank the Max Planck Institut für Physik, the Ludwigs
Maximilians-Universität München and the IMPRS program for providing me a
stimulating scientific environment. I am particularly grateful to Mrs.
Herta Wiesbeck-Yonis, Ms Darya Niakhaichyk for helping me go through all
administrative and bureaucratic tangle.

I am greatly indebted to my wife Iroda Sodikova for her love, patience
and support during all these years. I also thankful to my family for
their endless support and unconditional love. I would never make it
without them. This thesis is dedicated to them.

Finally, I would like to thank all of my other teachers, colleagues and
friends in Japan, America, Germany and somewhere around the world, who
have helped me along the way.