This dissertation is dedicated to the quantum aspects of higher spin
gravities (HSGRAs) and to their underlining algebraic structures.
Higher-spin theories are governed by infinite-dimensional symmetries
called higher-spin symmetries. Higher-spin symmetry should be powerful
enough to leave no room for any relevant counterterms. Therefore, higher
spin gravities have long been expected to be finite or at least
renormalizable. This feature, once shown to be realized, makes
higher-spin theories interesting toy models of Quantum Gravity.
Remarkably, if the no-counterterm argument works, the problem of
constructing a quantum consistent higher-spin theory downgrades to a
problem of finding a consistent classical model of higher-spin gravity.

One of the most interesting classes of HSGRAs is chiral HSGRA, which
exists both in Minkowski and AdS spacetime. It is the only theory at
present with propagating massless higher spin fields and a rather simple
action. The theory is perturbatively local. The action of the chiral
theory is known in the light-cone gauge and and avoids all No-Go
theorems that forbid the existence of higher-spin theories in flat
space. We study in detail the structure of quantum corrections in the
Minkowski Chiral HSGRA. We show that all tree-level amplitudes vanish,
which is due to a nontrivial cancellation among all Feynman diagrams
thanks to the specific form of the interactions (coupling conspiracy
mechanism); we analyze in detail two-, three- and four-point one-loop
amplitudes and show that they are UV-convergent. Using unitarity cuts we
compute the complete one-loop @xmath -point amplitude and show that it
consists of three factors: (i) all-plus helicity one-loop amplitude in
QCD or SDYM; (ii) a certain kinematical higher spin dressing factor;
(iii) a purely numerical factor of the total number of degrees of
freedom.

In the context of AdS/CFT, HSGRAs are conjectured to be dual to rather
simple conformal field theories (CFT): free and critical vector models
(Type-A), free fermion and Gross-Neveu models (Type-B) and, more
generally, to Chern-Simons Matter theories. We study in detail vacuum
one-loop corrections in various higher-spin theories in anti-de Sitter
(AdS) spacetime. For the Type-A theory in @xmath we prove the conjecture
that the free energy vanishes for all integer spins and is equal to the
sphere free energy of one free scalar field for all even spins. We
extend this result to non-integer dimension and, in particular,
reproduce the free energy correction to the @xmath Wilson-Fisher CFT as
a one-loop effect in the Type-A theory on @xmath . We also compute the
contribution of fermionic higher spin fields that are relevant for
supersymmetric HSGRA. These are shown to match precisely with the
prediction of the CFT. The contribution of certain mixed-symmetry fields
that appear in Type-B HSGRA is also computed. The latter leads to a
puzzle (in even spacetime dimension) that remains to be resolved.

Free CFTs have infinite-dimensional global symmetries manifested in
higher spin algebras. The holographic dual HSGRAs should, in principle,
be completely determined by this higher spin symmetry. Therefore, to
construct a higher-spin theory in AdS, the only initial data we need is
a higher spin algebra extracted from its free CFT dual. In this thesis,
we reconstructed the Type-A HSGRA in @xmath at the level of formally
consistent classical equations of motion (Formal HSGRA).
