# Chapter 1 Introduction

Measurement of any observable in a quantum mechanical system yields a
histogram of the state of the system in the basis of that observable.
Measurements of a judiciously chosen quorum of appropriate observables
of a system that are informationally complete, yield a set of histograms
called a tomogram. In the context of atoms interacting with radiation
fields, both the optical tomogram and the tomogram pertaining to atomic
observables would yield, in principle, information about the full system
and its subsystems. Quantum state reconstruction seeks to obtain the
density matrix from the tomogram. However, even in the simple case of a
bipartite system comprising two @xmath -level atoms (two qubits), state
reconstruction from relevant tomograms typically employs statistical
tools that are inherently error-prone [ 1 ] . The reconstruction
procedure is significantly more difficult in the case of entangled
multipartite qubit states [ 2 ] . Attempts at scalable reconstruction
programs for systems with a large number of qubits, and the challenges
faced in this context, have been reported in the literature (see, for
instance, [ 3 , 4 ] ). It is therefore desirable to extract information
about the state directly from the tomogram , avoiding the reconstruction
procedure. This has been demonstrated in bipartite qubit systems by
estimating state fidelity with respect to a specific target state
directly from the tomogram, and comparing the errors that arise with the
corresponding errors in procedures involving detailed state
reconstruction [ 5 ] . Further, efficient methods have been proposed to
estimate entanglement entropies directly from experimental data in the
context of qubit systems [ 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 ] .

Reconstruction of the state of a radiation field from optical tomograms
is more challenging. Even in the case of a single-mode radiation field,
the Hilbert space is infinite-dimensional. Thus, for optical tomography,
the infinite set of rotated quadrature operators [ 10 , 11 ] given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

constitutes the quorum of observables that carries complete information
about the state. Here @xmath are the photon annihilation and creation
operators satisfying the commutation relation @xmath . We note that
@xmath corresponds to the @xmath -quadrature and @xmath corresponds to
the conjugate @xmath -quadrature. The eigenvalue equation for @xmath is
given by @xmath , and the optical tomogram [ 10 , 12 ] is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the field density matrix. It is worth noting that even
in the simple case of a two-level atom interacting with a radiation
field, the state of the field subsystem was experimentally reconstructed
from the corresponding tomogram at various instants of temporal
evolution only as recently as 2017 [ 13 ] . With an increase in the
number of field modes interacting with an atomic system, the inevitable
entanglement that arises during dynamical evolution makes state
reconstruction a more formidable task. The problem posed by the size of
the Hilbert space holds for other continuous-variable (CV) systems, such
as a Bose-Einstein condensate (BEC) in a double-well potential and
hybrid quantum (HQ) systems such as an atomic array interacting with
many radiation fields. It would therefore be efficient to read off
information about a state, wherever possible, directly from the
tomogram. In particular, identifying signatures of nonclassical effects
through simple manipulations of the relevant tomograms alone becomes an
interesting and important exercise. Investigations carried out in this
regard employ the ‘inverse procedure’ of starting with a known state,
and obtaining the corresponding tomogram with the purpose of
understanding how tomographic patterns carry signatures of nonclassical
effects such as revivals, squeezing and entanglement. Such as exercise
also helps to build a dictionary of signatures that can be captured in
tomograms corresponding to known states. This would be the first step in
applying the tomographic approach in experiments where the state is not
known a priori . The programme just described is essentially the central
theme of this thesis. We have identified and quantified nonclassical
effects in both CV and HQ systems for known states, and applied the
lessons learnt to extract information from experimental data when the
state is not initially known. We now give a brief outline of the
nonclassical effects examined in this thesis.

We first consider the revival phenomena. An initial wave packet @xmath
governed by a nonlinear Hamiltonian is said to revive fully at an
instant @xmath during its dynamical evolution if the wave packet @xmath
differs from @xmath only by an overall phase. The state revives due to
very specific quantum interference between the basis states that
comprise the wave packet. In certain systems, revivals occur
periodically at integer multiples of @xmath . Under certain
circumstances, @xmath -subpacket fractional revivals of the wave packet
(where @xmath is a positive integer) can occur at specific instants
between two successive revivals [ 14 , 15 ] . At these instants the
initial wave packet becomes @xmath superposed copies of itself, each
with an amplitude less than that of the initial state. For instance, a
radiation field governed by the Kerr Hamiltonian @xmath can exhibit
periodic revivals and fractional revivals, with @xmath . (Here @xmath is
the third-order nonlinear susceptibility of the medium). For an initial
coherent state (CS) @xmath ( @xmath ), expressed in the photon number
basis @xmath as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

the time evolved state is a superposition of @xmath coherent states [ 16
] at instants @xmath (where @xmath ). The optical tomogram corresponding
to an @xmath -subpacket fractional revival of the CS is an @xmath
-strand pattern [ 17 ] . With the addition of higher-order
nonlinearities (and hence more than one time scale) to the Hamiltonian,
this simple picture gets modified. Super-revivals then occur in the
system, when a delicate balance is struck between two or more time
scales [ 18 , 19 ] . Straightforward correlations between tomograms and
fractional revivals are therefore not to be expected. Investigations on
these lines gain impetus because super-revivals have been experimentally
detected in systems of alkali atoms subject to an external field (see,
for instance, [ 20 ] ). In this thesis, we have examined tomograms of CV
systems subject to Hamiltonians with more than one time scale both in
the case of a single-mode field and the double-well BEC system.

We now turn to the squeezing properties of the states considered in this
thesis. We have used the tomographic approach to examine quadrature,
higher-order and entropic squeezing in CV systems, and spin squeezing
from experimental data obtained by employing NMR techniques on a @xmath
-qubit system. Quadrature squeezing is quantified by the numerical value
of the variance of the corresponding observable. For instance, the state
of the field is squeezed in @xmath if the corresponding variance @xmath
is less than the variance of @xmath in a CS @xmath . Generalisation of
this definition to include higher-order squeezing allows for two
possibilities, namely, Hong-Mandel [ 21 ] and Hillery-type [ 22 ]
higher-order squeezing. Hong-Mandel squeezing of order @xmath in @xmath
requires that the @xmath central moment of @xmath in the given state be
less than the corresponding moment for the CS. Hillery-type squeezing of
order @xmath refers to squeezing in either @xmath or @xmath ( @xmath ).
We note that the tomogram slice corresponding to a specific value of
@xmath gives the probability distribution in that quadrature basis. Thus
the central moments calculated from appropriate slices of the tomogram
can be used to estimate quadrature and Hong-Mandel higher-order
squeezing of the state. An elegant method has been proposed [ 23 ] for
estimating Hillery-type higher-order squeezing in single-mode systems.
In this thesis, we have extended this procedure to two-mode squeezing.

Further, the information entropy @xmath corresponding to a given value
of @xmath can be computed readily from the tomogram. The information
entropies in conjugate quadrature bases, such as @xmath and @xmath (
@xmath and @xmath , respectively), satisfy an entropic uncertainty
relation [ 24 ] @xmath . If the entropy in either quadrature is less
than @xmath , entropic squeezing occurs in that quadrature. We have
examined entropic squeezing in the double-well BEC system.

A major part of this thesis is devoted to finding an efficient
entanglement indicator directly from relevant tomograms in CV, HQ and
spin systems. Entanglement is an essential resource in quantum
information processing. Interesting phenomena such as sudden death and
birth of entanglement [ 25 ] , and its collapse to a constant non-zero
value over a significant interval of time [ 26 ] have been found in
model systems. A standard measure of entanglement between the two
subsystems A and B of a bipartite system is the subsystem von Neumann
entropy @xmath where @xmath ( @xmath ) is the reduced density matrix of
the subsystem concerned. Computation of this measure, however, requires
a knowledge of the density matrix. Qualitative signatures of
entanglement in the output state of a quantum beamsplitter have been
identified solely from tomograms, and reported in the literature [ 27 ]
. We have carried out detailed quantitative analysis of entanglement,
using indicators obtained directly from tomograms in a variety of
multipartite systems of experimental interest. We have assessed their
efficacy by comparing them with @xmath and other standard measures of
entanglement. In particular, we have undertaken this study on two
experimentally viable bipartite CV systems, namely, the double-well BEC
and a multi-level atom modelled as an oscillator interacting with the
radiation field. We have examined the performance of these entanglement
indicators in multipartite HQ systems of two-level atoms interacting
with radiation fields.

We have also examined how the entanglement indicator can be used to
distinguish between two @xmath -photon states produced in a recent
experiment [ 28 ] using ultrashort light pulses. In this experiment,
photon coincidence count measurements were used to distinguish between
the two states, and further, a quantum logic operation was implemented.
The relevant tomogram in this experiment is a chronocyclic tomogram [ 29
] (i.e., where time and frequency are the relevant observables analogous
to the @xmath and @xmath quadratures in an optical tomogram). We have
demonstrated that entanglement indicators computed from the chronocyclic
tomograms corresponding to these two states distinguish unambiguously
between them. The purpose of this investigation was to provide an
alternative method for distinguishing between two optical states.

Of particular interest and relevance is the performance of the
tomographic entanglement indicators computed directly from experimental
data. In this context, we have examined HQ systems using the IBM quantum
computer and also the spin system mentioned earlier. In the former case,
equivalent circuits that mimic the atomic subsystem of the multipartite
HQ system considered, were provided to the IBM quantum computer for
generation of the tomogram. The purpose of this investigation was to
assess the extent to which experimental losses affected entanglement
indicators. In the latter case, the NMR-QIP group in IISER Pune, India,
provided us with experimentally reconstructed density matrices from an
NMR spectroscopy experiment [ 30 ] . We have computed the corresponding
tomograms and from these, the entanglement indicators. The purpose of
this investigation was to assess, using a simple experimentally viable
entangled system, the limitations that could possibly arise by
neglecting the off-diagonal elements of the density matrix. A
significant outcome of this thesis is the identification of useful and
reliable entanglement indicators directly from tomograms in generic
quantum systems. The thesis showcases the advantages of extracting
information from the tomogram. These outweigh the limitations that this
approach entails in certain contexts.

A variety of initial states of the radiation field have been considered
in our investigation. This facilitates understanding of the sensitivity
of the nonclassical effects to the specific initial state considered.
Apart from the standard CS (Eq. ( 1.3 )), states such as the
photon-added coherent states, which exhibit quantifiable departure from
coherence, have been used. The @xmath -photon-added coherent state
@xmath ( @xmath -PACS) is given by [ 31 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the Laguerre polynomial of order @xmath . In bipartite
systems comprising two field modes, we have considered both unentangled
and entangled initial states. The former are factored products of
combinations of coherent and photon-added coherent states. The latter
are the binomial state @xmath and the two-mode squeezed state @xmath .
For a non-negative integer @xmath , the binomial state @xmath is given
by [ 32 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . The two-mode squeezed state is given by [ 33 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , @xmath is its complex conjugate, and @xmath is the
product state corresponding to @xmath .

The contents of the rest of this thesis are as follows:

In Chapter 2 , we summarise the salient features of the tomograms
corresponding to single-mode radiation fields and bipartite CV systems
that are relevant for our purpose. This is followed by an illustration
of how full, fractional and super-revivals are identified from tomograms
corresponding to the state of a single-mode radiation field governed by
a Hamiltonian with more than one time scale, at appropriate instants of
temporal evolution. We comment on the decoherence properties of states
at the instant @xmath . We have investigated the (quadrature and
higher-order) squeezing properties of states of the radiation field
directly from their tomograms. We have extended our investigations on
the revival and squeezing phenomena to the double-well BEC system. The
results have been published in Ref. [ 34 ] .

In Chapter 3 , we propose several entanglement indicators that can be
obtained directly from tomograms. We compare the performance of these
indicators and assess them quantitatively in bipartite CV systems (the
double-well BEC, and the radiation field interacting with a multi-level
atom modelled as an oscillator) and in a multipartite HQ system
(two-level atoms interacting with a radiation field). The contents of
this chapter are based on Ref. [ 35 ] .

In Chapter 4 , we assess the performance of the tomographic entanglement
indicators in comparison with standard measures of entanglement during
temporal evolution in CV systems, using tools of nonlinear time-series
analysis. These results have been published in Ref. [ 36 ] . We also
give details pertaining to the manner in which we have used tomograms to
distinguish between the two optical states reported in the experiment [
28 ] mentioned earlier.

In Chapter 5 , we have examined entanglement indicators in the context
of the double Jaynes-Cummings and the double Tavis-Cummings models. The
IBM quantum computing platform has been used to simulate and execute
equivalent circuits of these HQ models. Quantitative comparison of the
extent of entanglement obtained from experimental runs, simulation, and
direct calculation from the HQ models, has been carried out. These
results have been published in Ref. [ 37 ] . We have also assessed the
performance of the entanglement indicator in the spin system studied in
[ 30 ] .

Finally in Chapter 6 , the results of the thesis are summarised,
emphasising the novel aspects, and indicating avenues for future
research. Appendices A to F augment the material presented in the main
text.

## Chapter 2 Signatures of wave packet revivals and squeezing in optical
tomograms

### 2.1 Introduction

In this chapter, we examine the revival phenomena and the squeezing
properties of quantum wave packets corresponding to both single-mode and
bipartite systems. Our investigations are carried out by examining
tomograms obtained at specific instants during temporal evolution of the
system of interest. The effect of decoherence on the system state is
also examined. Full, fractional and super-revivals are investigated in
the case of a single-mode radiation field propagating through a
nonlinear medium. Quantitative estimates of quadrature and higher-order
squeezing of the field state have been obtained using procedures to
compute the central moments and expectation values of appropriate
observables directly from tomograms. The bipartite continuous-variable
system that we have examined is a Bose-Einstein condensate (BEC) trapped
in a double-well with nonlinear interactions. We identify and assess the
manner in which the revival phenomena and two-mode amplitude squeezing
properties manifest in this case, choosing initial states which are
factored products of the subsystem states. We have determined the extent
of entropic squeezing of the condensate in one of the wells from the
corresponding tomogram.

To facilitate the discussion, we first review relevant properties of
tomograms of single-mode and bipartite systems in Section 2.2 . In
Section 2.3 , we consider single-mode systems governed by Hamiltonians
with one or more time scales, and we identify full, fractional and
super-revivals from tomograms. The manner in which a specific state of
the system decoheres under amplitude and phase damping is studied. The
quadrature and higher-order squeezing properties of the single-mode
system are assessed tomographically. In Section 2.4 , we carry out our
investigations on the revival, quadrature and entropic squeezing
phenomena in the double-well BEC system for initial states that are
unentangled coherent states or boson-added coherent states. We conclude
with brief remarks.

### 2.2 Tomograms: A brief review

We recall from Chapter 1 that a tomogram is obtained by measuring a
quorum of observables which, in principle, gives complete information
about the state of the system. In the case of a single-mode radiation
field the tomogram (Eq. ( 1.2 )) is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath is the density matrix, and @xmath . It is evident that for a
pure state @xmath , @xmath . We see that the tomogram is a collection of
probability distributions corresponding to the rotated quadrature
operators @xmath . For each @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

The tomogram @xmath is plotted with @xmath on the @xmath -axis and
@xmath on the @xmath -axis.

We can show that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

using the Baker-Campbell-Hausdorff identity for any operator @xmath ,
given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a Hermitian operator. Substituting @xmath and @xmath in
Eq. ( 2.3 ), we get Eq. ( 2.2 ).

From Eq. ( 2.2 ) and @xmath , we get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the eigenstate of the operator @xmath . We note that
@xmath is the parity operator since @xmath , which in turn implies that
@xmath . Using this and Eq. ( 2.4 ), we get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

For state reconstruction, although it is sufficient to work with the
range @xmath , the tomogram plotted for @xmath helps visualise various
features better.

The tomogram of a normalised pure state @xmath , which can be expanded
in the photon number basis @xmath as @xmath , is given by [ 38 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the Hermite polynomial. In this expression (derived in
Appendix A ), @xmath alone is a function of time. Hence Eq. ( 2.6 ) is
useful for numerical computation of tomograms at various instants of
time.

These ideas can be extended in a straightforward manner to multimode
systems. In particular, for a bipartite system we define rotated
quadrature operators,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath and @xmath are the particle annihilation and creation
operators corresponding to subsystems A and B respectively, of the
bipartite system. The bipartite tomogram

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the bipartite density matrix and @xmath ( @xmath ).
Here, and in the rest of the thesis, @xmath is denoted by @xmath . The
normalisation condition is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

for each @xmath and @xmath .

Analogous to the single-mode example, we now consider a pure state
@xmath expanded in the Fock bases @xmath , @xmath corresponding to
subsystems A and B respectively as @xmath . Here, @xmath is a short-hand
notation for @xmath and @xmath are the expansion coefficients.

It is straightforward to extend the procedure (Appendix A ) used in
deriving Eq. ( 2.6 ) to generic bipartite systems whose subsystems are
infinite-dimensional. We then get

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The tomograms corresponding to the subsystems A and B (reduced
tomograms) are respectively given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

for any fixed value of @xmath and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

for any fixed value of @xmath . The reduced density matrix @xmath
(respectively, @xmath ) is given by @xmath (resp., @xmath ).

### 2.3 Single-mode system: A tomographic approach

#### 2.3.1 Revivals and fractional revivals

As stated in Chapter 1 , when an initial quantum wave packet @xmath
evolves under a nonlinear Hamiltonian, it could revive at a later
instant of time @xmath under certain circumstances. The fidelity @xmath
. When an initial coherent state of light @xmath ( @xmath ) propagates
through a nonlinear optical medium, a simple choice for the effective
Hamiltonian is @xmath (Kerr Hamiltonian) where @xmath are photon
destruction and creation operators respectively. In this example, the
state of the radiation field exhibits both periodic revivals and
fractional revivals. Here @xmath and an @xmath -subpacket fractional
revival occurs at @xmath ( @xmath ).

In this system, it has been shown earlier [ 17 ] , that the optical
tomogram at instants of revivals and fractional revivals is composed of
distinct strands in contrast to blurred patterns at other generic
instants during temporal evolution of the field. By using the method of
‘strand-counting’, the authors infer that corresponding to an @xmath
-subpacket fractional revival the field tomogram has @xmath strands.
Thus for instance, at @xmath , the tomogram is comprised of only 3
distinct strands. A limitation in this method is that individual strands
in the tomogram corresponding to an @xmath -subpacket fractional revival
will not be distinct for @xmath sufficiently large (5 or more for @xmath
) due to quantum interference effects. However, to understand the broad
features of the revival phenomena it suffices to employ this procedure
without resorting to detailed quantitative methods.

We now proceed to apply this tomographic approach to a system whose
dynamics is governed by the Hamiltonian @xmath . In what follows we set
@xmath for convenience. To facilitate the discussion, we first consider
an initial CS evolving in an effective cubic Hamiltonian @xmath , where
@xmath and @xmath is a constant with appropriate dimensions. We will
then move on to consider the effects of the full Hamiltonian @xmath
using the tomographic approach. We corroborate our numerical findings
with analytical explanations wherever possible for the revival patterns
that we observe.

It can be easily seen that an initial CS or @xmath -PACS governed by
@xmath revives fully at instants @xmath . Of immediate interest to us is
the nature of tomograms at instants @xmath where @xmath is a positive
integer. The optical tomograms for different values of @xmath are shown
in Figs. 2.1 (a)-(i). The following observations are in order. (i) At
initial time (equivalently at instant @xmath ) and at @xmath , the
tomograms look similar. This is in sharp contrast to the case of the
system governed by the Kerr Hamiltonian mentioned earlier. While the
system at hand is more complicated, the full revival at @xmath is a
simple consequence of the fact that @xmath is even @xmath . Here, @xmath
, with @xmath denoting the photon number basis. Hence corresponding to
an initial state @xmath , the state at instant @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(ii) At instants @xmath and @xmath , the tomograms are similar and have
four strands each, in contrast to what is reported in [ 17 ] , where at
@xmath the tomogram has two strands and at @xmath it has six strands.

The new features in our system obviously follow from the properties of
the unitary time evolution operator corresponding to @xmath . An
analysis of the properties of the time evolution operator would, in
principle, explain the appearance of a specific number of strands in the
tomogram at different instants @xmath .

We are now in a position to investigate tomogram patterns for the full
Hamiltonian

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this case,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is easy to see that if the ratio @xmath is irrational, revivals are
absent and the generic tomogram at any instant is blurred. This is
illustrated in Fig. 2.2 for an initial CS with @xmath with @xmath , and
@xmath at @xmath .

For rational @xmath , revivals and fractional revivals are seen.
Fractional revivals occur at instants @xmath as before, but the
corresponding tomogram patterns are sensitive to the ratio @xmath . We
expect that for a given @xmath , the tomogram will have @xmath strands
as a consequence of the Kerr term in @xmath . The cubic term in @xmath
however allows for other possibilities. We illustrate this for an
initial CS with Hamiltonian @xmath and @xmath in Figs. 2.3 – 2.5 . At
the instant @xmath , apart from the two-strand tomogram for @xmath and
@xmath , one of the other possibilities is a four-strand tomogram for
@xmath and @xmath (Figs. 2.3 (a),(b)). Similarly at @xmath , the
tomogram has three strands for @xmath and @xmath and a single strand
similar to the tomogram of a CS for @xmath and @xmath (Figs. 2.4
(a),(b)). At @xmath three specimen tomograms which are distinctly
different from each other are shown in Figs. 2.5 (a)-(c) with @xmath and
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath respectively.

These features can be explained on a case by case basis as before, by
examining the periodicity properties of the unitary time evolution
operator at appropriate instants. It is however evident that the simple
inference that an @xmath -subpacket fractional revival is associated
with an @xmath -strand tomogram alone, does not hold when more than one
time scale is involved in the Hamiltonian, and there can be several
tomograms possible at a given instant depending on the interplay between
the different time scales in the system.

Thus distinct signatures of higher-order nonlinearities are captured in
tomograms corresponding to specific instants of fractional revivals.
This observation could be of considerable use in understanding the role
of higher-order susceptibilities through experiments. Practical
difficulties arise because the susceptibility parameter is numerically
small for the Kerr medium. (In our discussions we have scaled @xmath to
unity). Typically, the loss rate of the field is such that damping
occurs much faster than @xmath . It is therefore considerably difficult
to sustain field collapses and revivals till @xmath in experiments.
However a forerunner to such studies [ 39 ] has been successfully
carried out by engineering an artificial Kerr medium with sufficiently
high susceptibility in which collapses and revivals of a coherent state
have been observed. Since then, several experiments (see, for instance,
[ 40 , 41 ] ) have been performed in circuit QED to implement Kerr-type
nonlinearities in single-mode and bipartite systems. The coherence time
of the microwave cavity in circuit QED has also significantly increased
to orders of milliseconds [ 42 ] . While effects of higher-order
nonlinearities are more subtle as we have shown, it should still be
possible in future to capture the tomographic signatures reported above,
particularly because they can be seen even at the instant @xmath .

We now examine the role played by interaction of the single-mode system
with an external environment, and the manner in which the purity of the
system gets affected. For illustrative purposes, we consider the state
at the instant @xmath corresponding to an initial CS governed by the
Hamiltonian ( 2.12 ). This is allowed to interact with the environment.
The procedure used is similar to that employed for the Kerr Hamiltonian
[ 17 ] so as to facilitate comparison of the two cases.

We consider two models of decoherence, namely, amplitude decay and phase
damping of the state. First, dissipation is modelled using the master
equation for amplitude decay

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath denotes the density matrix, @xmath is the rate of loss of
photons and @xmath the time parameter is reckoned from the instant
@xmath .

The solution to this master equation is [ 43 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

with matrix elements

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

As is to be expected from Eqs. ( 2.15 ) and ( 2.16 ) as @xmath the state
evolves to @xmath . The purity of the state @xmath initially decreases
from @xmath corresponding to the initial pure state, and subsequently
increases back to @xmath when @xmath (Fig. 2.6 (c)). Depending on the
ratio @xmath we see different extents of loss of purity of the state.
The red (green) curve corresponds to @xmath and @xmath ( @xmath ).
Further, new aspects of decoherence in the system considered by us arise
as a consequence of the possibility of more than one distinctly
different tomograms at @xmath , depending on the ratio @xmath (Figs. 2.6
(a),(b)).

Dissipation through phase damping is modelled using the master equation
[ 43 ] ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the density matrix in the phase damping model and @xmath
is the rate of decoherence. The solution to this master equation also
can be expressed in the form given in Eq. ( 2.15 ), with matrix elements
[ 43 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

As @xmath , it is evident that the off-diagonal terms of the density
matrix vanish while the diagonal terms of @xmath remain unchanged due to
phase damping. In contrast to amplitude damping, the state does not go
back to a pure state as @xmath but remains a mixed state. Further, the
differences between tomograms with different strand structures
(consequent to different ratios of @xmath ) disappear faster than in the
case of amplitude damping. Figures 2.7 (a) and (b) show the effect of
phase damping at @xmath for two such ratios. However, for @xmath the
differences are barely visible.

#### 2.3.2 Squeezing and higher-order squeezing properties

We now proceed to examine the squeezing and higher-order squeezing
properties of the state of the system with Hamiltonian @xmath . Once
again, our aim is to identify and assess these nonclassical effects
directly from the tomogram without attempting to reconstruct the state
at any instant of time. As mentioned in Chapter 1 , we will quantify the
extent of quadrature, Hong-Mandel and Hillery-type higher-order
squeezing. The extent of Hong-Mandel squeezing is obtained by
calculating the central moments of the probability distribution
corresponding to the appropriate quadrature. Thus for instance, to
quantify the extent of second-order Hong-Mandel squeezing in the @xmath
-quadrature, we calculate the fourth central moment of a horizontal cut
of the tomogram at @xmath . (For @xmath , Hong-Mandel squeezing is
identical to quadrature squeezing).

We recall that Hillery-type squeezing of order @xmath corresponds to
squeezing in either @xmath or @xmath ( @xmath ). A useful quantifier
@xmath of @xmath th-power squeezing in @xmath for instance, is defined [
22 ] in terms of the commutator @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the variance in @xmath . A similar definition holds for
@xmath th-power squeezing in @xmath . We note that @xmath is a
polynomial function of order @xmath in @xmath . A state is @xmath
th-power squeezed if @xmath . It is clear that @xmath and @xmath cannot
be obtained in a straightforward manner from the tomogram as they
involve terms with products of powers of different rotated quadrature
operators and hence cannot be assigned probability distributions
directly from a set of tomograms.

However an illustrative treatment [ 23 ] of the problem of expressing
the expectation value of a product of moments of creation and
destruction operators in terms of the tomogram @xmath and Hermite
polynomials leads to the result (Appendix B )

  -- -- -------- -- --------
        @xmath      
        @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This form is useful for computing @xmath numerically. We therefore need
to consider @xmath values of @xmath in order to calculate a moment of
order @xmath . In a single tomogram, this amounts to using @xmath
probability distributions @xmath ) corresponding to these chosen values
of @xmath , in order to compute @xmath . As the system evolves in time,
the extent of squeezing at various instants is determined from the
instantaneous tomograms in this manner.

For the squeezed vacuum, @xmath and @xmath we have verified that the
variance and hence the Hong-Mandel (equivalently Hillery-type squeezing)
properties inferred directly from tomograms are in excellent agreement
with corresponding results obtained analytically from the state. We have
also computed @xmath (equivalently the higher-order Hong-Mandel
squeezing parameter) directly from the tomogram for initial states
@xmath and @xmath evolving under the Kerr Hamiltonian and the cubic
Hamiltonian (Figs. 2.8 (a), (b)). Without loss of generality, we have
set @xmath . From these figures it is evident that independent of the
precise nature of the initial field state, @xmath oscillates more
rapidly in the case of the cubic Hamiltonian compared to the Kerr
Hamiltonian. Earlier these squeezing properties were investigated for an
initial CS and @xmath -PACS evolving under a Kerr Hamiltonian alone [ 44
] by calculating @xmath explicitly for the state at different instants
of time. Our results from the corresponding tomograms are in excellent
agreement with these.

Figure 2.9 (a) is a plot of @xmath versus @xmath ( @xmath real) at
@xmath for an initial CS evolving under both the Kerr and cubic
Hamiltonians for @xmath . It is evident that the state is squeezed for a
larger range of values of @xmath , and that the numerical value of
@xmath is larger for a given @xmath in the case of the Kerr Hamiltonian
as compared with the cubic Hamiltonian.

For the same parameter values, we have also considered an initial state
@xmath and obtained @xmath from the tomogram at @xmath . While @xmath is
not negative for any @xmath in this range for the cubic Hamiltonian, it
becomes negative for @xmath approximately for the Kerr Hamiltonian (Fig.
2.9 (b)). In contrast @xmath is never less than @xmath in both cases
over this range of values of @xmath (Fig. 2.9 (c)).

### 2.4 The double-well BEC: A tomographic approach

#### 2.4.1 The model

We now proceed to examine nonclassical effects in a BEC condensed in a
double-well potential. The effective Hamiltonian of this bipartite
system, setting @xmath , is [ 45 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are constants with appropriate
dimensions. In this case, @xmath and @xmath are the boson annihilation
and creation operators corresponding to the two subsystems A and B,
which comprise the atomic species condensed in the two wells. Here,
@xmath , @xmath and all other commutators are equal to zero. @xmath and
@xmath is the strength of the nonlinearity. It is easy to see that
@xmath .

We denote by @xmath (respectively @xmath ) the CS formed from the
condensate corresponding to subsystem A [resp. B] and by @xmath [ @xmath
] a 1-boson-added CS corresponding to subsystem A [B]. The initial
states considered by us are factored product states of the form @xmath
(denoted by @xmath ), @xmath ( denoted by @xmath ) and @xmath (denoted
by @xmath ).

In general, the state at a subsequent time @xmath is entangled. It has
been shown [ 45 ] that corresponding to the initial state @xmath we have

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

We recall that @xmath denotes @xmath where @xmath , @xmath are the boson
number basis states of subsystems A and B respectively, and,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath .

We have used a similar procedure (outlined in Appendix C ) to obtain the
states @xmath , @xmath and the expression for the density matrix
corresponding to the factored product of generic boson-added coherent
states @xmath ( @xmath , @xmath : positive integers). We denote this
density matrix by @xmath . We give the final expressions below. We have

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath and @xmath .

To obtain an expression for @xmath , we first define @xmath and @xmath .
Then,

  -- -- -------- -- --------
        @xmath      
        @xmath      
        @xmath      
        @xmath      
        @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath and @xmath . @xmath are the Laguerre polynomials which
appear in the normalisation of an @xmath -boson-added CS @xmath . Then,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

This expression for the general density matrix can be easily seen to
reduce to the forms needed in our case where the states are @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath .

#### 2.4.2 The Revival Phenomena

A straightforward calculation reveals that full and fractional revivals
occur provided @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath is odd. Here the
revival time @xmath . This follows from the periodicity property of
@xmath . For instance, we can easily show that for an initial state
@xmath , the state at the instant @xmath ( @xmath : even integer) is

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

If @xmath is an odd integer,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

We note that @xmath and @xmath are obtained from Eqs. ( 2.23 ) and (
2.24 ).

We recall that in the single-mode system the occurrence of full and
fractional revivals are related to the presence of distinct strands in
the tomogram. In this bipartite system however, the tomogram is a
4-dimensional hypersurface. Hence we need to consider appropriate
sections to identify and examine nonclassical effects. The 2-dimensional
section ( @xmath - @xmath ) obtained by choosing a specific value for
@xmath and @xmath , is a natural choice for investigating not only the
revival phenomena but also the state’s squeezing properties. In contrast
to the single-mode case where strands appear in the tomograms, these
sections are characterised by ‘blobs’ at instants of fractional
revivals. The number of blobs gives the number of subpackets in the wave
packet.

Although @xmath is expanded as an infinite superposition of boson number
states, in practice numerical computations can be carried out using only
a large but finite sum of these basis states. While this is the
procedure that we have used, an alternative is to use truncated coherent
state(TCS) [ 46 ] instead of the standard CS. The latter are defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a sufficiently large but finite integer. We have
verified that the revival phenomena and the squeezing properties as
observed from appropriate tomograms in these two approaches agree
remarkably well. We have set @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
, and @xmath in our numerical computation pertaining to revivals and
fractional revivals. We note that with this choice of values, the
necessary conditions for the revival phenomena to occur are satisfied,
namely, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath is odd. Figures 2.10
(a)-(d) are tomograms corresponding to different fractional revivals for
the initial state @xmath . At instants @xmath , @xmath and @xmath (Figs.
2.10 (a), (b) and (d) respectively), there are 4, 3 and a single blob
respectively in the corresponding tomograms along with interference
patterns. However in Fig. 2.10 (c) corresponding to the instant @xmath
blobs are absent and we merely see interference patterns. This is
primarily due to the specific choice of real values of @xmath and @xmath
as explained below. At the instant @xmath it follows from Eq. ( 2.22 )
that the state of the system can be expanded in terms of superpositions
of factored products of CS corresponding to A and B as

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

It is now straightforward to see why the interference patterns alone
appear in the tomogram (Fig. 2.10 (c)), as a simple calculation gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
                 (2.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath denotes @xmath for @xmath and @xmath denotes @xmath for
@xmath . In contrast, it can be seen that if @xmath and @xmath are
generic complex numbers, two blobs together with the interference
pattern would appear at @xmath also.

Similar results hold for initial states @xmath and @xmath .

#### 2.4.3 Squeezing and higher-order squeezing properties of the
condensate

The extent of Hong-Mandel squeezing is obtained as in the single-mode
example, by calculating the central moments of the probability
distribution corresponding to a given quadrature. We examine two-mode
squeezing by evaluating appropriate moments of the quadrature variable
@xmath . These are obtained from the @xmath section of the tomogram as
the system evolves in time. We have also obtained these moments by
explicit calculation of the relevant expectation values of @xmath in the
state of the system at different instants of time. In both cases the
initial state is @xmath . In Figs. 2.11 (a)-(d), @xmath -order moments
for @xmath and @xmath obtained both from the states and directly from
the tomogram are plotted as functions of time. It is evident that they
are in excellent agreement with each other at all instants. The
horizontal line in each figure denotes the value below which the state
is squeezed ( @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath for @xmath
respectively). For all values of @xmath considered, the state is
squeezed (higher-order squeezed) in the neighborhood of revivals, and
the extent of squeezing at various instants is considerably sensitive to
the values of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath as expected.

Turning to Hillery-type higher-order squeezing, we recall that in the
single-mode case we used Eq. ( 2.3.2 ) for this calculation. A
straightforward extension to the two-mode system gives us the expression

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Here

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

@xmath , and @xmath . We note that @xmath gives the number of 2-
dimensional slices of the tomogram that are required to calculate @xmath
.

From Figs. 2.12 (a)-(d), we see that @xmath obtained both from the
states and directly from the tomogram for an initial state @xmath are in
excellent agreement. (The expression in Eq. ( 2.19 ) holds in this case
also, with @xmath and @xmath ). It is clear that for higher values of
@xmath there are more instants of time when higher-order squeezing
occurs as expected from the fact that more cross-terms involving the
creation and destruction operators arise with increase in @xmath .

We have also verified that both the Hong-Mandel and Hillery-type
squeezing and higher-order squeezing parameters obtained from tomograms
and from expectation values of appropriate operators for the initial
states @xmath and @xmath are equal to each other at all instants between
@xmath and @xmath .

#### 2.4.4 Subsystem entropies from tomograms

We now proceed to examine the subsystem’s entropic squeezing properties
by computing the subsystem information entropy @xmath at various
instants of time. (Here, without loss of generality we have considered
subsystem A by setting @xmath , and integrating over the full range of
@xmath to obtain @xmath ). Expressed in terms of the subsystem tomogram,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

For our purpose, we set @xmath (i.e., the @xmath -quadrature). Denoting
the corresponding tomogram by @xmath , the subsystem entropy @xmath is
now equal to @xmath . It can be shown that for a given state, @xmath ,
where @xmath is the variance in @xmath [ 47 ] . The state exhibits
entropic squeezing if @xmath is less than @xmath . Plots of @xmath
versus scaled time @xmath are shown in Figs. 2.13 (a)-(c) for initial
states @xmath , @xmath and @xmath respectively. The horizontal line in
these figures denotes the numerical value below which entropic squeezing
occurs. We see that entropic squeezing occurs close to @xmath and @xmath
. At other instants the subsystem entropy is significantly higher for
initial states @xmath and @xmath compared to initial ideal coherence.
This feature is very prominent close to @xmath . Further, comparing
Figs. 2.13 (b) and (c) it is clear that @xmath is larger at all instants
if both subsystems depart from coherence initially, compared to the case
where one of them displays initial coherence.

The variation of @xmath with @xmath and @xmath , at @xmath , for initial
states @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are shown in Figs. 2.14 (a), (b) and
(d) respectively. Figure 2.14 (c) corresponds to the entropy of
subsystem B for an initial state @xmath . This facilitates comparison of
the features in Figs. 2.14 (b) and (c) where for the same asymmetric
initial state the two subsystems examined are different. It is evident
that @xmath corresponding to A is not squeezed while that corresponding
to B exhibits squeezing for certain values of @xmath and @xmath . The
role played by the asymmetry in the initial states of the two subsystems
is thus clearly brought out in these figures. It is also clear that
entropic squeezing is more if the initial states of the subsystems are
coherent.

### 2.5 Concluding remarks

We have established how tomograms can be exploited to identify and
characterise a variety of nonclassical effects such as the wave packet
revival phenomena and squeezing and higher-order squeezing in both
single-mode and bipartite systems. While a simple relation has been
shown to exist between the number of strands in tomogram patterns and
the nature of fractional revivals when a single-mode radiation field
propagates in a Kerr medium [ 17 ] , our investigations reveal that this
no longer holds even in single-mode systems which display super-revivals
during temporal evolution. The role played by decoherence due to
amplitude decay and phase damping of the state has also been discussed.
We have also analysed the revival phenomena in bipartite systems such as
the double-well BEC evolving in time, solely from tomograms. We have
obtained the extent of squeezing, higher-order Hong-Mandel and
Hillery-type squeezing from tomograms. We have also investigated
entropic squeezing from the tomograms in the case of the double-well
BEC.

In the next chapter, we discuss procedures for extracting the extent of
entanglement directly from quantum state tomograms in the context of
both continuous-variable and hybrid quantum systems. We propose several
entanglement indicators for this purpose. We compare the extent of
entanglement as captured by these indicators with @xmath which is a
standard measure of entanglement.

## Chapter 3 Tomographic entanglement indicators and avoided
energy-level crossings

### 3.1 Introduction

In this chapter, we introduce various entanglement indicators that can
be obtained directly from appropriate tomograms. We assess their
performance as quantifiers of the extent of entanglement in both
bipartite and multipartite systems. We have considered both CV and HQ
systems. Our reference for comparison is set by @xmath . We recall that
@xmath , where @xmath is the subsystem density matrix [ 48 ] .

Some of the entanglement indicators we examine are inspired by classical
tomography. Indicators of correlations between different parts of a
classical system have been used extensively in various applications such
as automated image processing. While these correlators are obtained from
classical tomograms, their definitions however, are not intrinsically
classical in nature. It is therefore worth examining their applicability
in quantum contexts. Since correlations are inherently present in
entangled states of quantum systems, a natural question that arises is
whether the performance of entanglement quantifiers obtained from
classical correlators is comparable to that of standard indicators such
as @xmath .

We focus on quantum systems whose eigenspectrums exhibit avoided
energy-level crossings. In these systems, the spacings between energy
levels change significantly with changes in the parameters, with two or
more levels moving close to each other for specific values of the
parameters, and then moving away as these values change. Our interest
stems from the fact that extensive studies [ 49 , 50 , 51 ] have
established that entanglement as measured by standard indicators such as
@xmath is generically at an extremum at an avoided crossing. Typically,
the energy spectrum and the spacing between the energy levels depend on
the strengths of the nonlinearity and the coupling between subsystems.
With changes in the values of these parameters, the spacing between
adjacent levels can decrease, and even tend to zero, resulting in an
energy-level crossing. According to the von Neumann-Wigner no-crossing
theorem, energy levels within a multiplet generically avoid crossing,
provided only one of the parameters is varied in the Hamiltonian
governing the system. In what follows, we investigate how effectively
some of these entanglement indicators mimic the behaviour of @xmath
close to avoided crossings.

Energy-level crossings display other interesting features. Since they
affect the level spacings and their probability distribution [ 52 ] ,
they are also important from the point of view of non-integrability and
quantum chaos (see, for instance, [ 53 ] ). In addition, avoided
crossings point to phase transitions which trigger a change in the
quantum correlations in the system [ 54 , 55 , 49 , 50 ] . This aspect
has been investigated extensively both theoretically and in experiments
[ 56 , 57 , 58 , 59 , 60 , 61 ] .

The bipartite CV systems that we examine here are a BEC in a double-well
trap [ 45 ] introduced in Chapter 2 , and a multi-level atom interacting
with a radiation field [ 62 ] . We also investigate a multipartite HQ
system [ 63 , 64 ] comprising qubits interacting with a microwave field
that is effectively described by the Tavis-Cummings model [ 65 ] .

In the next section we introduce the entanglement indicators to be
employed. In Section 3.3 , we investigate how these indicators behave
close to avoided crossings in the two bipartite CV models mentioned
above. In Section 3.4 , we extend our analysis to the multipartite HQ
model. We conclude with brief remarks.

### 3.2 Entanglement indicators from tomograms

A typical example of a bipartite CV system is two coupled oscillators
(equivalently, a single-mode radiation field interacting with a
multi-level atom modelled as an oscillator) with @xmath (respectively,
@xmath ) being the oscillator annihilation and creation operators
corresponding to the two subsystems A and B. We recall that Eqs. ( 2.7
), ( 2.10 ) and ( 2.11 ) define the tomograms corresponding to the full
system and the two subsystems respectively. In order to estimate the
degree of correlation between the subsystems, we use the following
tomographic entropies. The bipartite tomographic entropy is given by

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The subsystem tomographic entropy (generalizing Eq. ( 2.35 )) is

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Some of the correlators that we examine are obtained from a section of
the tomogram corresponding to specific values of @xmath and @xmath . The
efficacy of such a correlator as a measure of entanglement is therefore
sensitive to the choice of the tomographic section. We now define these
correlators, and the corresponding entanglement indicators.

The mutual information @xmath which we get from the tomogram of a
quantum system can carry signatures of entanglement. This quantity is
expressed in terms of the tomographic entropies defined above as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Indicators based on the inverse participation ratio (IPR) are also found
to be good candidates for estimating the extent of entanglement [ 66 ,
36 ] . The participation ratio is a measure of delocalisation in a given
basis. The IPR corresponding to a bipartite system in the basis of the
rotated quadrature operators is defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The IPR for each subsystem is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

The entanglement indicator in this case is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Apart from these, we have examined two other correlators which are
familiar in the context of classical tomograms. The first of these is
the Pearson correlation coefficient [ 67 ] between two random variables
@xmath and @xmath , given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath are the standard deviations of @xmath and @xmath
respectively, and @xmath is their covariance. Of direct relevance to us
is @xmath calculated for fixed values of @xmath and @xmath . Since the
quantifier of entanglement between two subsystems must be non-negative,
a simple definition of the entanglement indicator in this case would be

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

This indicator captures the effect of linear correlations. Our
motivation for assessing this indicator arises from the fact that, in
recent experiments on generating and testing the extent of entanglement
in CV systems, the variances of suitably chosen conjugate observables
and the corresponding standard quantum limit alone are used [ 68 ] . We
reiterate that these merely capture the extent of linear correlations
between two states.

The second indicator (to be denoted by @xmath ) that we introduce and
use is arrived at as follows. In probability theory, the mutual
information [ 69 ] between two continuous random variables @xmath and
@xmath can be expressed in terms of the Kullback-Leibler divergence
@xmath [ 70 ] between their joint probability density @xmath and the
product of the corresponding marginal densities @xmath and @xmath , as [
71 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

The quantity @xmath defined in Eq. ( 3.3 ) is precisely the mutual
information in the case of optical tomograms (which are continuous
probability distributions):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

A simpler alternative for our purposes is provided by the Bhattacharyya
distance @xmath [ 72 ] between @xmath and @xmath , defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using Jensen’s inequality, it is easily shown that @xmath . @xmath thus
gives us an approximate estimate (that is an underestimate) of the
mutual information. Based on this quantity, we have an entanglement
indicator that is the analogue of Eq. ( 3.10 ), namely,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The dependence on @xmath and @xmath of each of the foregoing
entanglement indicators @xmath is removed by averaging over a
representative set of values of those variables. We denote the
corresponding averaged value by @xmath . In the context of bipartite CV
models, we find [ 34 , 36 ] that averaging @xmath over @xmath different
values of @xmath selected at equal intervals in the range @xmath yields
a reliable entanglement indicator @xmath . A similar averaging of each
of the quantities @xmath and @xmath yields @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively.

Next, we turn to hybrid systems of field-atom interactions. For a
two-level atom with ground state @xmath and excited state @xmath , the
quorum of observables is [ 73 ]

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Let @xmath . Then @xmath , where @xmath is a general SU(2)
transformation parametrised by @xmath . Denoting @xmath by the unit
vector @xmath , the qubit tomogram is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the qubit density matrix. Corresponding to each value of
@xmath there exists a complete basis set and hence @xmath . The atomic
tomograms are obtained from these, and the corresponding entanglement
properties are quantified using appropriate adaptations of the
indicators (suitably replacing the integrals by sums) described above.
Extension of the foregoing to the multipartite case is straightforward [
11 ] , and the tomograms obtained can be examined on similar lines.

### 3.3 Avoided energy-level crossings in bipartite CV models

#### 3.3.1 The double-well BEC model

The effective Hamiltonian (Eq. ( 2.21 )) for the system and its
diagonalisation are as follows [ 45 ] . Setting @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We recall that @xmath and @xmath are the respective boson annihilation
and creation operators of the atoms in wells A and B (the two
subsystems), and @xmath . @xmath is the strength of nonlinear
interactions between atoms within each well, and also between the two
wells. @xmath , ensuring that the energy spectrum is bounded from below.
@xmath is the linear interaction strength and @xmath is the strength of
the population imbalance between the two wells. The Hamiltonian is
diagonalised by the unitary transformation @xmath (Eq. ( C.3 ) of
Appendix C ) where @xmath , to yield

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.15)
  -- -- -- --------

with @xmath . @xmath and @xmath commute with each other. Their common
eigenstates are the product states @xmath . Here @xmath is the
eigenvalue of @xmath , and @xmath is a boson number state, with @xmath
running from @xmath to @xmath for a given @xmath . The eigenstates and
eigenvalues of @xmath are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

For numerical analysis we set @xmath .

In Fig. 3.1 (a), @xmath is plotted against @xmath for @xmath , with
@xmath . @xmath is the reflection of @xmath about the value @xmath .
Avoided energy-level crossings are seen at @xmath . In order to set the
reference level for the extent of entanglement between the two wells, we
compute @xmath , where @xmath is the reduced density matrix of the
subsystem A. ( @xmath is also equal to @xmath , since @xmath is a
bipartite pure state.) Plots of @xmath corresponding to the state @xmath
for @xmath are shown in Fig. 3.1 (b). The states @xmath and @xmath have
the same @xmath , (as do the states @xmath and @xmath ), owing to the
@xmath symmetry. It is evident that there is a significant extent of
entanglement close to the avoided crossing, and @xmath is marked by a
local maximum or minimum in @xmath .

Figure 3.2 depicts @xmath sections of the tomograms corresponding to the
states @xmath for @xmath and @xmath . It is clear that, for a given
value of @xmath , the qualitative features of the tomograms are altered
considerably as @xmath is varied. The patterns in the tomograms also
reveal nonlinear correlations between the quadrature variables @xmath
and @xmath (top panel). For instance, the tomogram slice on the top
right shows a probability distribution that is essentially unimodal and
symmetric about the origin with the annular structures diminished in
magnitude. It is clear that this case is less correlated than the
tomogram in the top left corner. This conforms to the observed trend in
the extent of entanglement (compare @xmath corresponding to @xmath and
@xmath at @xmath in Fig. 3.1 (b)). Again, in the bottom panel of the
figure, the sub-structures in the patterns increase with increasing
@xmath , signifying a higher degree of nonlinear correlation. This is in
consonance with the trend in the entanglement at @xmath (Fig. 3.1 (b)).
We therefore expect @xmath and its averaged version @xmath to be much
better entanglement indicators than @xmath and @xmath . We also mention
here that the current experimental techniques of testing CV entanglement
based on the variances and covariances of suitably chosen observables [
68 ] are not as effective as calculating nonlinear correlators, for the
same reason.

Our detailed investigations reveal that @xmath and @xmath follow the
trends in @xmath reasonably well for generic eigenstates of @xmath .
This is illustrated in Fig. 3.3 , which shows plots of these indicators
as functions of @xmath . Apart from examining the suitability of @xmath
as an entanglement indicator, we have also assessed the extent of linear
correlation between any two indicators based on the corresponding PCC,
as follows. We have obtained @xmath values each of @xmath and @xmath for
different values of @xmath in the range @xmath in steps of @xmath .
Treating the two sets of values as two sets of random numbers, we obtain
the PCC between them, as defined in Eq. ( 3.7 ). The PCC between @xmath
and @xmath (respectively, @xmath and @xmath ) estimates the extent of
linear correlation between the two indicators, and is found to be @xmath
(resp., @xmath ) in the case shown in Fig. 3.3 corresponding to @xmath .
(In general, the PCC ranges from @xmath for complete correlation, to
@xmath for maximal anti-correlation. Its vanishing indicates the absence
of linear correlation).

Figure 3.4 shows the PCC between @xmath and various indicators, for the
eigenstates @xmath where @xmath . From Fig. 3.4 (a), we see that @xmath
, @xmath and @xmath are very good entanglement indicators. We have also
found that all these indicators improve with increasing @xmath . The
performance of the @xmath -indicators depends, of course, on the
specific choice of the tomographic section. For instance, @xmath and
@xmath perform marginally better for the slice @xmath than for the slice
@xmath . It is also evident that @xmath does not fare as well as the
other indicators. This is to be expected, since @xmath only captures
linear correlations, as already emphasised.

We have verified that the sensitivity of all the indicators decreases
with an increase in @xmath , the strength of the coupling between the
two subsystems (as in Eq. ( 2.21 )). @xmath , however, remains closer to
@xmath than the other indicators. This fact is consistent with
inferences [ 36 ] drawn about the relation between the Hamming distance
[ 74 ] and the efficacy of @xmath . We recall that the Hamming distance
between two bipartite qudits @xmath and @xmath attains its maximum value
of @xmath when @xmath and @xmath . A straightforward extension to CV
systems implies that the Hamming distance between @xmath and @xmath is 2
(so that these states are Hamming-uncorrelated), if @xmath .
Participation ratios are valid measures of entanglement for
superpositions of Hamming-uncorrelated states in spin systems [ 66 ] .
We will show in this and the next chapter that @xmath effectively mimics
standard measures of entanglement in CV systems as well. In the present
instance, the eigenstates @xmath are superpositions of the states @xmath
which are Hamming-uncorrelated for different values of @xmath . This is
the reason for the usefulness of @xmath as an entanglement indicator
even for larger values of @xmath .

We now proceed to examine quantitatively the efficacy of the
entanglement indicators as functions of @xmath . For numerical
computation we have set @xmath . Consider, as an illustration, plots of
the eigenvalues @xmath ( @xmath ) as functions of @xmath . These plots
are exactly the same as those in Fig. 3.1 (a), with @xmath replaced by
@xmath on the horizontal axis, since @xmath only depends on the
parameters @xmath and @xmath in the symmetric combination @xmath . The
avoided crossing of energy levels now occurs at @xmath . But this
symmetry between @xmath and @xmath does not extend to the unitary
transformation @xmath , and hence to the eigenstates of @xmath . (Recall
that @xmath involves the parameter @xmath .) When @xmath there is no
linear interaction between the two modes. @xmath then reduces to the
identity operator, and @xmath is diagonal in the basis @xmath . We
therefore expect the entanglement to vanish at the avoided crossing.
This is borne out in Fig. 3.5 in which @xmath for the state @xmath is
plotted for different values of @xmath . As before, it suffices to
depict the cases @xmath and @xmath because of the @xmath symmetry. We
observe that, in the case @xmath , while there is a minimum in @xmath at
@xmath , there is a maximum in this quantity at @xmath (Fig. 3.1 (b)).

We have also calculated the PCC between various indicators and @xmath
for the set of states @xmath . For this purpose, we have used @xmath
values of each of the @xmath -indicators calculated for each @xmath in
the range @xmath with a step size of @xmath . The results are very
similar to those already found (see Fig. 3.4 ) using @xmath as the
variable parameter instead of @xmath .

#### 3.3.2 Atom-field interaction model

We turn next to the case of a multi-level atom (modelled by an
anharmonic oscillator) that is linearly coupled with strength @xmath to
a radiation field of frequency @xmath . The effective Hamiltonian
(setting @xmath ) is given by [ 62 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath and @xmath ( @xmath for stability) are constants. @xmath and
@xmath are the annihilation and creation operators for the field mode
and the oscillator mode, respectively. As before, @xmath and @xmath . As
in the BEC model of the preceding section, the eigenvalues @xmath and
the common eigenstates @xmath of these two operators are labelled by
@xmath (the eigenvalue of @xmath ) and, within each @xmath -dimensional
subspace for a given @xmath , by the index @xmath that runs from @xmath
to @xmath .

We find @xmath and @xmath numerically. Figures 3.6 (a) and (b) are plots
of @xmath and @xmath versus @xmath for @xmath and @xmath in the case
@xmath . Avoided crossings occur at @xmath , with a corresponding
minimum in @xmath that drops down to zero for each of the three states
@xmath and @xmath . These states are therefore unentangled at @xmath ,
i.e., in the absence of interaction between the two modes of the
bipartite system, as one might expect.

In order to examine what happens when there is a crossing of energy
levels, we introduce a degeneracy by setting @xmath .

Figures 3.7 (a) and (b) are plots of @xmath and @xmath versus @xmath for
@xmath and @xmath , with @xmath , @xmath and @xmath set equal to @xmath
. Both a level crossing and an avoided crossing are seen to occur at
@xmath , signalled by a minimum in @xmath for each of the three states
concerned. The crossing of @xmath and @xmath arises as follows. Let
@xmath denote the product state @xmath , where @xmath is a photon number
state of the field mode and @xmath is an oscillator state of the atom
mode. In the rest of this chapter, we drop the subscript F in the field
state for ease of notation. When @xmath and @xmath , the Hamiltonian
reduces to @xmath . The energy levels @xmath and @xmath become
degenerate at the value @xmath . The degeneracy occurs because the
operator @xmath commutes with @xmath when @xmath and @xmath . Mixing of
the states @xmath and @xmath occurs, and the corresponding energy
eigenstates are given by the symmetric linear combination @xmath and the
antisymmetric linear combination @xmath . As the symmetries of the two
states are different, the level crossing does not violate the von
Neumann-Wigner no-crossing theorem. At the crossing, each of the states
@xmath and @xmath remains a manifestly entangled state that is, in fact,
a Bell state. This is why the corresponding @xmath does not vanish at
that point, but merely dips to a local minimum with value @xmath ,
characteristic of a Bell state. It is interesting to note that the
degeneracy that occurs when @xmath ensures entanglement even in the
absence of any interaction between the two modes.

The level @xmath , on the other hand, is repelled and has the value
@xmath at @xmath . The corresponding eigenstate @xmath becomes the
unentangled product state @xmath at the avoided crossing, and @xmath
drops to zero in this case, as expected.

In Fig. 3.8 , we plot the correlation between various indicators and
@xmath . For this purpose, @xmath values of each of the @xmath
-indicators were calculated with @xmath varied in the range @xmath in
steps of @xmath . Treating these as sets of random numbers, we obtain
the PCC between the various indicators and @xmath , as described in the
foregoing. The performance of the entanglement indicators in this case
is similar to that found in the BEC system. With increase in @xmath ,
the efficacy of all the indicators is marginally decreased.

### 3.4 Avoided crossings in multipartite HQ systems

#### 3.4.1 The Tavis-Cummings model

As our third and final example, we consider hybrid quantum systems
comprising several qubits interacting with an external field. These
systems are described by the class of Tavis-Cummings models [ 65 ] in a
variety of diverse physical situations which include inherent field
nonlinearities and inter-qubit interactions. The model we consider below
is generic, applicable to a system of several two-level atoms with
nearest-neighbour couplings interacting with an external radiation field
in the presence of a Kerr-like nonlinearity, or to a chain of @xmath
superconducting qubits interacting with a microwave field of frequency
@xmath . In the latter case, the model Hamiltonian (setting @xmath ) is
given by [ 63 , 64 ]

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath is the strength of the field nonlinearity, @xmath is the
coupling strength between the field and each of the @xmath qubits,
@xmath are the ladder operators of the @xmath qubit, and @xmath is the
strength of the interaction between nearest-neighbour qubits. @xmath is
the energy difference between the two levels of the @xmath qubit, where
@xmath is the inherent excitation gap and @xmath is the detuning of the
external magnetic flux from the flux quantum @xmath . In our numerical
computations we have used experimentally relevant parameter values [ 64
] , namely, @xmath and @xmath . The level separations @xmath of the
individual qubits have been drawn from a Gaussian distribution with a
mean given by @xmath and a standard deviation @xmath .

We have considered three cases, namely, (i) @xmath ,  (ii) @xmath and  
(iii) @xmath . In each case, @xmath is varied from @xmath to @xmath in
steps of @xmath . It is easily shown that the total number operator

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

commutes with @xmath . For each value of @xmath we have numerically
solved for the complete set @xmath of common eigenstates of @xmath and
@xmath , where @xmath is the eigenvalue of @xmath and @xmath .
Considering the total system as a bipartite composition of the field
subsystem and a subsystem comprising all the qubits, we have computed
the entanglement indicators. Figure 3.9 shows the correlation between
the indicators and @xmath in Case (i). The associated Pearson
correlation coefficients are @xmath for @xmath , @xmath for @xmath ,
@xmath for @xmath , correct to two decimal places. (The accuracy of the
@xmath -indicators depends, of course, on the basis chosen.) On
averaging, we obtain the corresponding @xmath -indicators with a PCC
equal to @xmath , showing that these indicators track @xmath very
closely.

We have carried out a similar exercise in Cases (ii) and (iii). The
results and the inferences drawn from them are broadly similar to those
found in Case (i).

Finally, with @xmath set equal to @xmath , we have examined the effect
of changing the strength of the disorder in @xmath by varying the
standard deviation of @xmath from @xmath to @xmath in steps of @xmath .
Calculating the entanglement indicators for each disorder strength in
@xmath , we have found the correlations between the @xmath -indicators
and @xmath in Cases (i), (ii), and (iii). @xmath and @xmath turn out to
be significantly closer to @xmath , and hence more accurate indicators
of entanglement, than @xmath and @xmath (see Fig. 3.10 ).

### 3.5 Concluding remarks

In this chapter, we have considered generic bipartite
continuous-variable systems and hybrid quantum systems in the presence
of nonlinearities, and tested quantitatively the efficacy of various
indicators in estimating entanglement directly from quantum state
tomograms close to avoided energy-level crossings. We find that the
nonlinear correlation between the respective quadratures of the two
subsystems reflects very reliably the extent of entanglement in
bipartite CV systems governed by number-conserving Hamiltonians. We have
shown that if the eigenstates of the Hamiltonian are superpositions of
Hamming-uncorrelated states, the inverse-participation-ratio-based
quantifier @xmath is an excellent indicator of entanglement near avoided
crossings. In fact, even @xmath (the corresponding indicator for a
single section of the tomogram) suffices to estimate entanglement
reliably. The tomographic entanglement indicator @xmath and the
Bhattacharyya-distance-based indicator @xmath are also good indicators
at avoided crossings, in contrast to the linear correlator @xmath which
is based on the Pearson correlation coefficient. Entanglement indicators
seem to perform better with increasing @xmath . The conclusions drawn
are both significant and readily applicable in identifying optimal
entanglement indicators that are easily obtained from tomograms, without
employing state reconstruction procedures.

In the next chapter, we investigate the performance of some of these
entanglement indicators during temporal evolution of bipartite CV
systems.

## Chapter 4 Assessment and comparison of entanglement indicators in
continuous-variable systems

### 4.1 Introduction

In this chapter, we first examine the entanglement dynamics of bipartite
CV systems. We have seen that @xmath and @xmath are good entanglement
indicators close to avoided crossings. The entanglement indicators we
consider here are @xmath and @xmath . The latter is a modification of
@xmath . We will show in subsequent sections that it performs as well as
@xmath in the context of entanglement dynamics in CV systems. The
performance of these two indicators are compared at specific instants
with both @xmath and @xmath . We recall that @xmath is given by @xmath ,
and the subsystem linear entropy @xmath is @xmath where @xmath is the
subsystem density matrix ( @xmath denotes subsystems A, B). These two
indicators involve both off-diagonal and diagonal elements of the
density matrix in any given basis. In contrast, the tomogram only
provides information about the diagonal elements, although in several
complete bases. It is therefore necessary to carry out a detailed
comparative study between the tomographic indicators, on the one hand,
and @xmath and @xmath , on the other, in order to assess their efficacy
and limitations.

The systems we consider for our purpose are a multi-level atom
interacting with a radiation field [ 62 ] , and the double-well BEC
system [ 45 ] , examined in Chapter 3 , in a different context.

We emphasize that @xmath is not an entanglement measure in contrast to
@xmath and @xmath . Keeping this in mind, we have also obtained a long
data set of the difference @xmath between @xmath and @xmath at various
instants of time, and carried out a detailed time-series analysis for
several initial states and for different strengths of nonlinearity. The
ergodicity properties of @xmath carry information on the performance of
@xmath .

In a recent experiment reported in the literature [ 28 ] , photon
coincidence counts were used to distinguish between two @xmath -photon
states in a CV bipartite system. Here we have demonstrated that by
computing @xmath (defined in Eq. ( 3.3 )) from the tomograms
corresponding to the two states, we can easily distinguish between them.
Through this calculation we have extended our study to chronocyclic
tomograms, which are explained in detail in Section 4.5 .

The plan of this chapter is as follows. In Section 4.2 , we outline the
procedure for obtaining @xmath from @xmath . In Section 4.3 , we compare
@xmath and @xmath with @xmath and @xmath during dynamical evolution of
both the double-well BEC sysem and the multi-level atom interacting with
the radiation field. Section 4.4 is devoted to the time-series analysis.
In Section 4.5 , we briefly review the salient features of chronocyclic
tomograms, and demonstrate the usefulness of the tomographic indicator
in distinguishing between two entangled states. We conclude with brief
remarks.

### 4.2 @xmath-indicators and averaging procedures

The generalised eigenstates of conjugate pairs of quadrature operators
constitute a pair of mutually unbiased bases [ 75 ] , as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

We recall that the specific averaging procedure used to obtain any
@xmath -indicator mentioned in Section 3.2 involves calculating the
corresponding @xmath -indicator in several sets of mutually unbiased
bases. @xmath is obtained by averaging only over the dominant values of
@xmath . Here we have averaged over @xmath values of @xmath to obtain
@xmath . @xmath is calculated only using those values that exceed the
mean by one standard deviation. For this purpose we have numerically
generated several histograms of @xmath for both the atom-field
interaction and the double-well BEC models. For a given initial state,
the system is unitarily evolved in time, and each histogram corresponds
to a specific instant of time. A typical histogram is presented in Fig.
4.1 . The average of @xmath over all the values in the histogram in Fig.
4.1 has been compared with that obtained by averaging only over the
contribution from the shaded portion. The qualitative features were
found to be essentially the same in both cases in all the histograms
considered. The results in the following sections are therefore based on
the latter averaging procedure, since it is clearly computationally less
intensive. We denote the entanglement indicator thus obtained by @xmath
, and in subsequent sections compare @xmath with @xmath and @xmath .

### 4.3 Entanglement indicators in generic bipartite models

In this section, we examine in detail the performance of @xmath in the
atom-field interaction model [ 62 ] and the double-well BEC model [ 45 ]
. We consider initial states of the total bipartite system that are pure
states governed by unitary evolution.

#### 4.3.1 Atom-field interaction model

The effective Hamiltonian (Eq. ( 3.18 )), setting @xmath , is [ 62 ]

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We recall that ( @xmath ) are photon annihilation and creation
operators. The multi-level atom is modelled as an oscillator with
harmonic frequency @xmath and ladder operators ( @xmath ). The
anharmonicity of the oscillator is effectively described by the
Kerr-like term in @xmath with strength @xmath . A variety of initial
states of the total system has been judiciously selected in order to
explore the range of possible nonclassical effects during time
evolution. The unentangled initial states considered correspond to the
atom in its ground state @xmath and the field in either a CS (e.g.,
@xmath ), or an @xmath -PACS (e.g., @xmath ). We also consider two
entangled initial states, namely, the binomial state @xmath (Eq. ( 1.5
)) and the two-mode squeezed state @xmath (Eq. ( 1.6 )). We recall that
the binomial state @xmath , for a non-negative integer @xmath , is given
by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath , the product state corresponding to the field and the atom
in the respective number states @xmath and @xmath . Also, @xmath (
@xmath ) and @xmath is the product state corresponding to @xmath .

Corresponding to these initial states we have numerically generated
tomograms at approximately 2000 instants, separated by a time step 0.2
@xmath as the system evolves. From these, we have obtained @xmath and
the differences

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

These differences are plotted against the scaled time @xmath for an
initial two-mode squeezed state (Fig. 4.2 (a)), and for a factored
product of a CS and atomic ground state @xmath (Fig. 4.2 (b)). From
these plots it is evident that @xmath is in much better agreement with
@xmath than with @xmath over the time interval considered, independent
of the parameter values and the nature of the initial state. We
therefore choose @xmath as the reference entanglement indicator.

Next, we compare @xmath with the difference

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

We have verified that in all the cases considered, @xmath (see, for
instance, Fig. 4.3 ). In what follows, we therefore focus only on @xmath
and the difference

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

This comparison brings out interesting features of both the indicators.
When the strength of the nonlinearity is low relative to that of the
coupling (e.g., @xmath ), it is known [ 76 ] that full and fractional
revivals occur, and entanglement measures may be expected to display
signatures of these revival phenomena. From Fig. 4.4 (a) we see that at
the revival time @xmath , @xmath agrees with @xmath much more closely
than @xmath does. Further, over the entire time interval @xmath , @xmath
is significantly smaller than @xmath . This feature holds even for
larger values of the ratio @xmath , as can be seen from Fig. 4.4 (b).
@xmath is therefore favoured over @xmath as an entanglement indicator.
The time evolution of the difference @xmath is drastically different
from that of @xmath for initial field states that depart from ideal
coherence. In this case, over the entire time considered, @xmath
performs significantly better than @xmath for small values of @xmath
(Fig. 4.4 (c)). As the value of @xmath is increased the two indicators
have essentially the same behaviour (Fig. 4.4 (d)).

We turn now to entangled initial states. In the case of the two-mode
squeezed state @xmath , we see from Figs. 4.5 (a) and (b) that @xmath
fares much better than @xmath over the entire time interval considered,
for small values of @xmath . With an increase in the value of @xmath ,
both the indicators show comparable departures from @xmath .

In the case of an initial binomial state, on the other hand, @xmath
fares significantly better than @xmath . This can be understood by
examining the Hamming distance between the basis states constituting the
binomial state. We define this distance in the context of continuous
variables by extrapolating the idea of Hamming distance for qudits as
explained in Section 3.3 . As pointed out before, the efficacy of @xmath
as an entanglement indicator increases with an increase in the Hamming
distance. This indicator is therefore especially useful for
superpositions of states that are Hamming-uncorrelated (i.e., separated
by a Hamming distance equal to 2 in bipartite states) both in the
context of spin systems [ 66 , 77 ] and CV systems [ 36 , 35 ] .

In the atom-field interaction model considered here, both the subsystems
are infinite-dimensional. We now examine whether the efficacy of @xmath
is correlated with the Hamming distance in this case as well. We note
that @xmath can be expanded as a superposition of states which are
Hamming-uncorrelated. From Fig. 4.6 , we see that in this case also
@xmath is a significantly better entanglement indicator than @xmath .

#### 4.3.2 The double-well BEC model

The effective Hamiltonian (Eq. ( 2.21 )) for the system, setting @xmath
, is given by [ 45 ]

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We recall that @xmath . Here @xmath and @xmath are the boson
annihilation and creation operators of the atoms in wells A and B
respectively. @xmath is the strength of the nonlinearity (both in the
individual modes as well as in their interaction), @xmath is the linear
interaction strength, and @xmath are constants. As in the previous
instance, we select a representative variety of initial states: (i) the
unentangled direct product @xmath of boson-added coherent states of
atoms in the wells A and B respectively, where @xmath ; (ii) the
binomial state @xmath (Eq. ( 1.5 )), and (iii) the two-mode squeezed
vacuum state @xmath (Eq. ( 1.6 )), with the understanding that the basis
states are now product states of the species in the two wells.

In each of these cases, we must first obtain the state of the system at
any time @xmath as it evolves under the Hamiltonian @xmath . It turns
out that, in the case of an initial state of type (i) above, the state
of the system can be calculated explicitly as a function of @xmath , as
outlined in Appendix C . In Cases (ii) and (iii), the state vector at
time @xmath is computed numerically. Using these, we have generated
tomograms at approximately @xmath instants, separated by a time step
0.001 @xmath . We have verified that, in this model also @xmath agrees
better with @xmath than with @xmath , and that the difference between
@xmath and @xmath is smaller than that between @xmath and @xmath . In
what follows, we have therefore chosen @xmath as the reference
entanglement measure and compared @xmath with @xmath .

It is evident that the relevant ratio for characterising the dynamics is
@xmath where @xmath . A representative example of the temporal behaviour
of @xmath and @xmath is shown in Fig. 4.7 . The effect of increasing
@xmath can be seen by comparing Figs. 4.7 (a) and (b), while that of
departure from coherence of the initial state can be seen by comparing
(a) and (c).

We have also carried out analogous studies in the case of entangled
initial states @xmath and @xmath . The general trends in the behaviour
of the entanglement indicators in these cases are consistent with, and
corroborate, those found in the atom-field interaction model (see Fig.
4.8 ).

##### Decoherence effects in the double-well BEC model

Since decoherence is an important issue in experiments, we now
investigate this aspect for an initial state @xmath , where @xmath and
@xmath : since @xmath is sufficiently small in magnitude, @xmath can be
approximated by a superposition of a zero-boson and one-boson states,
whereas @xmath is an infinite superposition of the boson number states.
The states get entangled during unitary evolution. We consider the
entangled state of the system at any instant, say @xmath , and apply
damping to subsystem A alone for a time interval @xmath . This toy
example suffices to examine the extent to which an efficient
entanglement indicator can be extracted from tomograms, when the system
decoheres. We have set @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath equal to
@xmath , for numerical computation. Decoherence takes place through
amplitude damping and phase damping [ 43 ] .

We recall from Chapter 2 that the master equation for amplitude decay
(Eq. ( 2.14 )) is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here, @xmath is the rate of loss and @xmath the time parameter is
reckoned from the instant @xmath . The solution to this master equation
is [ 43 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Note that @xmath is chosen to be @xmath . (The expression for @xmath as
a function of time @xmath is given by Eq. ( 2.22 )).

As the bipartite state is a mixed state owing to decoherence, @xmath
corresponding to subsystems A and B are not equal to each other and are
now denoted by @xmath and @xmath , respectively. The entropy of the full
system is denoted by @xmath . The quantum mutual information

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

is of immediate interest. At each instant @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath have been calculated numerically. Since the subsystem entropies
are not equal, we expect that (if the tomogram captures decoherence
effects well) @xmath must match @xmath during dynamics. This is indeed
borne out in Fig. 4.9 , where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are compared.
We point out that for a bipartite pure state, in the absence of
decoherence @xmath @xmath , and both @xmath and @xmath are denoted by
@xmath .

Phase damping in A is modelled by (Eq. ( 2.17 )) [ 43 ]

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the rate of decoherence. The solution is of the form
given in Eq. ( 4.5 ), with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As before, @xmath mimics @xmath reasonably well (Fig. 4.10 ).

### 4.4 Time-series analysis of @xmath

Finally, we turn to an assessment of the long-time behaviour of @xmath
by means of a detailed time-series analysis.

As we have shown in the foregoing, the deviation of @xmath from @xmath
is much more pronounced than its deviation from @xmath . It is therefore
appropriate to investigate how an initial difference between @xmath and
@xmath changes with time. With this in mind, a time series of @xmath has
been obtained for both models considered in this chapter, and used to
compute local Lyapunov exponents along the lines customary [ 78 , 79 ,
80 ] in the study of dynamical systems. This involves reconstruction of
the effective phase space, estimation of the minimum embedding dimension
@xmath of this space, and calculation of the exponents themselves. The
procedure used is outlined below.

The time series had 20000 data points. The effective phase space was
reconstructed using the TISEAN package [ 81 ] . @xmath different initial
values @xmath were randomly chosen in this phase space. The maximum
local Lyapunov exponent corresponding to each @xmath was computed over
the same time interval @xmath . (The term ‘local’ refers to the fact
that @xmath is much smaller than the time interval over which the
maximum Lyapunov exponent @xmath is obtained in the standard method).
The average value @xmath of these @xmath maximum local Lyapunov
exponents was obtained following the prescription in [ 80 ] (see
Appendix D ). This procedure was repeated for as many as 14 different
values of @xmath . Further, in each case it was verified that, with an
increase in @xmath , @xmath tends to @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath
are constants [ 80 ] . We note that two neighbouring initial values of
the dynamical variable of interest @xmath diverges exponentially with
@xmath , in @xmath steps. For completeness, we also present the power
spectra corresponding to the various time series. We would expect a
broadband spectrum for chaotic data. On the other hand, a ‘spiky’ power
spectrum (i.e., a cluster of clearly defined sharp peaks in the power
spectrum) points to a possible quasi-periodic behaviour. The results are
presented below.

#### 4.4.1 Atom-field interaction model

The difference @xmath has been obtained at each instant with time step
@xmath for @xmath time steps, and the effective phase space has been
reconstructed. We see that for both the initial states @xmath and @xmath
with @xmath and weak nonlinearity ( @xmath ), @xmath is positive, and
both @xmath and @xmath are larger for the second initial state (compare
Figs. 4.11 (a) and (d)). @xmath increases with an increase in @xmath for
the initial state @xmath (compare Figs. 4.11 (a) and (b)). In contrast,
for strong nonlinearity (e.g., as in Fig. 4.11 (c), @xmath ), @xmath is
negative.

For completeness, we present the power spectrum @xmath of the time
series as a function of the frequency @xmath in units of @xmath , for
each of the cases corresponding to Figs. 4.12 (a) to (d). The nearly
quasi-harmonic power spectrum for weak nonlinearity (Fig. 4.12 (a))
changes into a broadband spectrum with increasing @xmath (Fig. 4.12
(b)), while it loses its quasi-harmonicity without becoming a broadband
spectrum with increasing nonlinearity (Fig. 4.12 (c)). The lack of
coherence in the initial state makes the power spectrum broadbanded
(Fig. 4.12 (d)). When a power spectrum exhibits regular or quasi-regular
spikes at different frequencies, it signals quasiperiodicity in the
processes generating the time series. A broadband spectrum, on the other
hand, is an indicator of non-periodic (including chaotic) time
evolution. When the power spectrum of this time series shows
quasiperiodic behaviour (Figs. 4.12 (a) and (c)) in the sense above, we
see that the local Lyapunov exponent is either negative, or small
positive. The two entanglement indicators (namely, @xmath and @xmath )
therefore do not diverge from each other in any significant way. We
regard this as a broad corroboration of the validity of @xmath as an
entanglement indicator. In contrast, when the power spectrum is markedly
broadband (Figs. 4.12 (b) and (d)), the local Lyapunov exponent is
distinctly positive, showing that @xmath diverges significantly from
@xmath . Hence we conclude that @xmath is not a reliable or satisfactory
indicator of entanglement for sufficiently large @xmath or for initial
PACS states with significant departure from coherence.

#### 4.4.2 The double-well BEC model

As in the foregoing, we generate the time series of @xmath by
calculating this difference for @xmath time steps, in this case with
@xmath . As seen in Figs. 4.13 (a)–(c), in this instance @xmath is
positive regardless of the degree of coherence of the initial states of
the subsystems, for a wide range of values of the ratio @xmath ( @xmath
). With an increase in @xmath , @xmath increases (Figs. 4.13 (a), (b)).
In contrast to the atom-field interaction model, a departure of the
initial state from perfect coherence causes @xmath to decrease (Figs.
4.13 (a), (c)).

The power spectra corresponding to the three cases in Fig. 4.13 are
shown in Fig. 4.14 . When the linear part of @xmath is dominant ( @xmath
dominates over @xmath , Fig. 4.14 (a)), @xmath reflects a degree of
quasiperiodicity in the time series. When @xmath becomes comparable to
@xmath , however, the nonlinearity in the Hamiltonian takes over, and
@xmath is a broadband spectrum (Figs. 4.14 (b), (c)).

### 4.5 Tomographic signatures in a @xmath-photon bipartite system

As a further illustration of the use of the tomographic entanglement
indicators, we now assess the performance of @xmath which we recall, is
an indicator obtained from an appropriately chosen slice of the
tomogram. We consider a CV bipartite system that has very recently been
studied experimentally [ 28 ] , and hence is of particular interest in
the present context. One of the aims of the experiment was to analyse
GKP-like states (Gottesman-Kitaev-Preskill-like states [ 82 ] where the
‘qubit’ is encoded in a CV basis, and on which error correction can be
implemented with logic gate operations). What is of relevance to us in
this context is the distinguishability of the two @xmath -photon states.
We will show that the indicator @xmath does so unambiguously.

Some background information is in order. The analogy between an
ultrashort light pulse and a quantum mechanical wave function leads [ 29
] to a chronocyclic representation for the study of ultrashort pulses,
where the time @xmath and frequency @xmath are the conjugate
observables. The state of a single photon of frequency @xmath is denoted
in a spectral representation of infinitely narrow-band pulses by @xmath
. The superposed state of a photon that has a frequency @xmath with a
probability amplitude @xmath is given by @xmath . In an equivalent
temporal representation of infinitely short-duration pulses @xmath ,
this @xmath -photon state is @xmath , where @xmath is the Fourier
transform of @xmath . A family of rotated observables @xmath can then be
defined [ 83 ] , where @xmath and @xmath have been scaled by a natural
time scale of the system to make them dimensionless. Measurements of
these rotated observables form the basis of chronocyclic tomography, in
which the set of histograms corresponding to these observables gives the
tomogram of the state of a @xmath -photon system. In this chronocyclic
representation, a @xmath -photon state can also be described in the
time-frequency ‘phase space’ by a corresponding Wigner function [ 29 ] .
Extension to multipartite states corresponding to two or more photons is
straightforward. For instance, two photons of frequencies @xmath and
@xmath are given by the @xmath -photon CV bipartite state @xmath .

The experiment [ 28 ] used a @xmath -photon CV bipartite system to
generate a pair of distinguishable states that are frequency combs
comprising finite-width peaks. Despite the finite width, the pair of
2-photon states concerned were shown to be clearly distinguishable
experimentally. The measured photon coincidence counts were shown to be
very different for the two states. Our objective here is to use
chronocyclic tomograms to compute the indicator @xmath and to show that
it can also be useful, in principle, to distinguish between these @xmath
-photon states.

We denote by @xmath and @xmath these two @xmath -photon states. In the
experiment, they were generated in a setup comprising a cavity with
resonant frequency @xmath , a photon source using parametric down
conversion, and with input photons of frequency @xmath . If @xmath and
@xmath denote the signal and idler frequencies, respectively, and @xmath
is their difference, the first of the two states is given by

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Here,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are the mean and standard deviation of @xmath .
@xmath is the Gaussian comb

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the standard deviation of each Gaussian, @xmath is the
normalisation constant, and @xmath . We note that Eq. ( 4.7 ) features
the product @xmath , where @xmath is a superposition of Gaussians
corresponding to odd and even values of @xmath such that the two are in
phase with each other.

The second @xmath -photon state is given by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath is the normalisation constant. In contrast to @xmath ,
Eq. ( 4.10 ) features the product @xmath , where @xmath is a
superposition of Gaussians corresponding to odd and even @xmath such
that the two are out of phase with each other. In Appendix E , we
establish in a straightforward manner that the expressions above in
Eqs. ( 4.7 ) and ( 4.10 ) indeed correspond to the two states of concern
in the experiment. In what follows, we will use the tomographic approach
to distinguish between the two @xmath -photon states. Since photon
coincidence counts were used to experimentally distinguish between the
two states, it is reasonable to expect that the time-time slices of the
tomograms corresponding to the two @xmath -photon states will capture
the difference.

The time-time slice of the tomogram corresponding to the state @xmath is
given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath stands for @xmath . We point out that this is analogous to
the bipartite optical tomogram (Eq. ( 2.7 )).

We work with the parameter values used in [ 28 ] , namely, @xmath THz,
@xmath GHz, @xmath GHz, @xmath THz, and @xmath THz. The time-time slices
of the tomograms of @xmath and @xmath have been obtained by substituting
Eqs. ( 4.7 ) and ( 4.10 ) in turn in Eq. ( 4.12 ) and simplifying the
resulting expressions (see Appendix F ).

As expected, @xmath and @xmath are distinctly different from each other,
as seen in Figs. 4.15 (a)-(c). This difference arises because @xmath and
@xmath correspond to combs that are clearly displaced with respect to
each other, when expressed in the time-time basis.

Next, we calculate the reduced tomograms @xmath corresponding to
subsystem @xmath (where @xmath and @xmath ) by integrating out the other
subsystem, as has been done in Eqs. ( 2.10 ) and ( 2.11 ) in the case of
the optical tomograms. (For instance, @xmath .) Substituting these
full-system and subsystem chronocyclic tomograms in place of the
corresponding optical tomograms in Eqs. ( 3.1 )–( 3.3 ), we obtain the
entanglement indicator @xmath corresponding to any chosen slice of the
chronocyclic tomogram. (For ease of notation, we have dropped the
explicit dependence of @xmath on the choice of both the tomogram slice
and the specific state.) In the case of the time-time slice of the
tomograms we get, finally, the values @xmath for the state @xmath , and
@xmath for the state @xmath . Thus, @xmath clearly distinguishes between
these two @xmath -photon states. We emphasize that the methods used by
us could, in principle, provide an alternative approach to the procedure
adopted [ 28 ] in the experiment.

### 4.6 Concluding remarks

Entanglement monotones such as @xmath and @xmath can be constructed only
if the off-diagonal elements of the density operator are known. For a
single-mode system, the optical tomogram is related to the density
matrix @xmath by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath , @xmath constitute the Fock basis. To get
@xmath from the tomogram @xmath , we need to invert Eq. ( 4.13 ). But
this is essentially the procedure for a full state reconstruction which
could be tedious and error-prone. As has been pointed out in [ 1 ] ,
even in linear inversion procedures to get @xmath from histograms
obtained experimentally, small errors in the experimental data get
magnified substantially. Improved procedures for minimising errors are
of great interest and possibilities for improvement have been explored
both experimentally and theoretically (see, for instance, [ 84 , 85 , 2
, 86 ] ). Experimental challenges are primarily associated with gaining
sufficient phase information from more than one copy of the system.
Studies in this regard largely focus on reconstructing single-mode
density matrices minimising the errors. Adapting and extending these
ideas to entangled states which is of direct relevance to us, would be a
significant step towards extracting entanglement monotones.

We have demonstrated that, even without information about the
off-diagonal elements of the density matrix, substantial reproduction of
the qualitative aspects of entanglement dynamics can be achieved using
the tomograms alone . The performance of the entanglement indicator
@xmath thus obtained, in quantifying the extent of entanglement, has
been assessed in this chapter using two model bipartite systems with
inherent nonlinearities. We have shown that @xmath fares significantly
better for generic initial states of the system even during temporal
evolution, compared to better-known entanglement indicators such as
@xmath . In order to quantify the reliability of the indicator over long
intervals of time, the difference between @xmath and @xmath has been
examined using a time-series analysis. The manner in which this
difference @xmath is sensitive to the nonlinearity of the system, the
nature of the interaction, and the precise initial state is revealed by
the time-series analysis. The importance and relevance of this
investigation lies in the fact that detailed state reconstruction from
the tomogram is completely avoided in identifying an efficient
entanglement indicator for generic bipartite systems involving
continuous variables.

Further, we have considered a pair of @xmath -photon states which were
experimentally shown to be distinguishable, using the difference in
their normalised photon coincidence counts [ 28 ] . Here we have
unambiguously distinguished between these states using the entanglement
indicator @xmath . This demonstrates an alternative procedure using the
tomographic approach in an experimentally relevant CV system.

In the next chapter, we extend the investigation to multipartite HQ
systems. We shall also demonstrate the utility of the indicator @xmath
with an experimentally-generated tomogram using the IBM quantum
computer, and with a spin tomogram computed from experimental data from
an NMR experiment [ 30 ] .

## Chapter 5 Dynamics of entanglement indicators in hybrid quantum
systems and spin systems

### 5.1 Introduction

Interesting phenomena such as sudden death and birth of entanglement can
arise during temporal evolution in certain HQ systems such as the double
Jaynes-Cummings (DJC) model [ 25 ] and the double Tavis-Cummings (DTC)
model [ 87 ] . These models of atom-field interactions have been
investigated extensively in the literature [ 88 , 89 , 90 ] . We examine
the performance of @xmath and @xmath in these models by comparing them
with the quantum mutual information @xmath at various instants of time
during temporal evolution. @xmath is a useful measure of the quantum
correlation between any two subsystems of a multipartite system and is
defined as (Eq. ( 4.6 )),

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here the superscripts (A), (B) and (AB) in the RHS refer to the
subsystems A, B and the bipartite subsystem AB respectively. The terms,
quantum correlation and entanglement will be used interchangeably in
this chapter, as the former sets the upper bound on the latter for any
two subsystems.

We have numerically generated tomograms at various instants during
temporal evolution in the DJC and the DTC models. Wherever possible, we
have compared these tomograms with those obtained from equivalent
circuits executed in the IBM quantum computing platform (IBM Q). The
tomograms from the IBM quantum computer have been obtained both through
experimental runs and through simulations using the IBM open quantum
assembly language (QASM) simulator [ 91 , 92 ] .

We have also extended our investigations to spin systems. For this
purpose, we have used the reconstructed density matrices from the
liquid-state NMR experiment, provided to us by the NMR-QIP group in
IISER Pune, India. This experiment has been peformed using NMR
spectroscopic techniques on @xmath , @xmath and @xmath atoms in
dibromofluoromethane dissolved in acetone. The extent of entanglement
has been quantified using negativity at various instants of time [ 30 ]
. Since our aim is to assess the usefulness of @xmath , we have
numerically calculated the tomograms from these reconstructed density
matrices, and compared @xmath with @xmath and negativity.

In Section 5.2 , we describe and investigate the DJC and the DTC models.
In Section 5.3 , we analyse tomograms corresponding to the NMR system.
We also comment on the spin, higher-order and entropic squeezing
properties in this system. We conclude with brief remarks.

### 5.2 Hybrid multipartite models

We now proceed to assess the efficacy of @xmath and @xmath in the DJC
and DTC models.

#### 5.2.1 The double Jaynes-Cummings model

The model comprises two @xmath -level atoms C and D which are initially
in an entangled state, with each atom interacting with strength @xmath
with radiation fields A and B respectively. The effective Hamiltonian
(setting @xmath ) is [ 25 ]

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

@xmath ( @xmath ) are photon annihilation and creation operators, @xmath
is the frequency of the fields, and @xmath is the energy difference
between the two atomic levels. In terms of the matrices @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath (Eq. ( 3.2 )), the atomic ladder operators for subsystem
@xmath are given by @xmath .The initial atomic states considered both in
the DJC model and the DTC model are of the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath and @xmath ( @xmath ) denote the respective ground and
excited states of atom @xmath . In the DJC model, @xmath and @xmath are
to be replaced by C and D respectively. A and B are initially in the
zero-photon states @xmath and @xmath . The two initial states of the
full system that we consider are @xmath and @xmath .

We have numerically generated tomograms at approximately 300 instants of
time, separated by a time step equal to @xmath (in units of @xmath ).
From these, we have obtained @xmath at different instants as the system
evolves. It was shown in Chapter 4 that for radiation fields, both
@xmath and @xmath were in fairly good agreement [ 36 ] . (We recall that
the latter was computed by averaging over only those values of @xmath
that exceed the mean by one standard deviation). We now proceed to
investigate if this holds even in the case of HQ systems.

The entanglement indicators @xmath , @xmath and @xmath are plotted
against the scaled time @xmath in Figs. 5.1 (a)-(c) in the case of the
field subsystems. The detuning parameter, given by @xmath , is @xmath in
Figs. 5.1 (a), (b), and @xmath in Fig. 5.1 (c). The initial states
considered are @xmath in Fig. 5.1 (a) and @xmath in Figs. 5.1 (b),(c).
For ease of comparison, @xmath has been scaled down by a factor of
@xmath . It is evident that @xmath is a good approximation to @xmath and
that both mimic @xmath closely in all the three cases considered.
Sensitivity to the precise initial atomic state and to the extent of
detuning is revealed by examining the qualitative features of the
indicators in the neighbourhood of their maximum values.

Figs. 5.2 (a)-(c) are plots of @xmath and @xmath corresponding to the
atomic subsystem for the same set of parameters and initial states as in
Figs. 5.1 (a)-(c). In this case, although @xmath is in good agreement
with @xmath over the time interval considered, @xmath is not, in sharp
contrast to the situation for the field subsystems. We note that when
the detuning parameter is zero, @xmath returns to its initial value of
@xmath at the instant @xmath . We will use this feature in the sequel,
when we construct an equivalent circuit for the DJC model.

The equivalent circuit that was provided by us to the IBM Q from which
bipartite qubit tomograms are obtained (analogous to the tomograms
corresponding to the atomic subsystem of the DJC model) is shown in Fig.
5.3 . We use the standard notation of the IBM platform [ 91 ] . In the
circuit, @xmath and @xmath are the qubits that follow the dynamics of
the atomic subsystem while @xmath and @xmath act as auxiliary qubits to
aid the dynamics. Since transitions between the two energy levels of
either atom in the DJC model involve absorption or emission of a single
photon, each auxiliary qubit in the equivalent circuit toggles between
the qubit states @xmath and @xmath respectively. The operator @xmath in
the circuit is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath . Each of the four qubits is initially in the
qubit state @xmath . The initial entangled state between @xmath and
@xmath (analogous to the initial state @xmath of the atomic subsystem)
is prepared in the circuit using an Hadamard and a controlled-NOT gate
between @xmath and @xmath and a SWAP gate between @xmath and @xmath .
Here, @xmath is analogous to @xmath in the DJC model. We choose @xmath
so that the extent of entanglement is equal to its initial value (
@xmath ), @xmath and @xmath . The matrix @xmath which appears in the
equivalent circuit is equal to @xmath .

Measurements are carried out in the @xmath , @xmath and @xmath bases
corresponding to the matrices defined in Eq. ( 3.2 ). A measurement in
the @xmath -basis is automatically provided by the IBM platform. A
measurement in the @xmath -basis is achieved by applying an Hadamard
gate followed by a @xmath -basis measurement. Defining the operator

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

measurement in the @xmath -basis is achieved by applying @xmath , then
an Hadamard gate, and finally a measurement in the @xmath -basis.
Measurements in the @xmath , @xmath and @xmath bases are needed for
obtaining the spin tomogram, Fig. 5.4 (a). (This is equivalent to the
bipartite atomic tomogram in the DJC model, in the basis sets of @xmath
, @xmath and @xmath ).

These spin tomograms have also been obtained experimentally using the
IBM superconducting circuit with appropriate Josephson junctions (Fig.
5.4 (a)), and the QASM simulator provided by IBM. The latter does not
take into account losses at various stages of the circuit (Fig. 5.4
(b)). These tomograms are compared with the atomic tomograms (Fig. 5.4
(c)) of the DJC model with decoherence effects neglected.

The qualitative features are very similar in Figs. 5.4 (b) and (c) as
the circuit follows the dynamics of the atomic subsystem of the DJC
model. As expected, Fig. 5.4 (a) is distinctly different due to
experimental losses.

From these tomograms, @xmath has been calculated. The values obtained
from the experiment, simulation and numerical analysis are @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath , respectively. Six tomograms were obtained from six
executions of the experiment. Each execution comprised @xmath runs over
each of the 9 basis sets. The error bar was calculated from the standard
deviation of @xmath .

It is instructive to estimate the extent of loss in state preparation
alone . For this purpose, an entangled state of two qubits was prepared
using an Hadamard and a controlled-NOT gate, to effectively mimic @xmath
. For the initial state @xmath , the values for @xmath obtained from the
experiment, simulation and the DJC model are @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
respectively. This demonstrates that substantial losses arise even in
state preparation. In order to examine the extent to which an increase
in the number of atoms in the system increases these losses, we turn to
the DTC model.

#### 5.2.2 The double Tavis-Cummings model

The model comprises four two-level atoms, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath , with @xmath and @xmath (respectively, @xmath and @xmath )
coupled with strength @xmath to a radiation field A (resp., B) of
frequency @xmath . The notation used is similar to that in @xmath (Eq. (
5.1 )), since the Hamiltonian @xmath can be obtained from the former by
appropriate changes. Setting @xmath , we have [ 87 ] ,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

@xmath and @xmath (respectively, @xmath and @xmath ) are in the initial
state @xmath (Eq. ( 5.2 )) or @xmath (Eq. ( 5.3 )). Each field is
initially in @xmath . We therefore consider the initial states @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath . The notation @xmath indicates, for instance, that A
and B are in the state @xmath , the subsystem @xmath is in the state
@xmath , and the subsystem @xmath is in the state @xmath . (We do not
consider the initial state @xmath separately because the results
corresponding to that case can be obtained using symmetry arguments from
the results for the initial state @xmath ). We shall denote @xmath by C
and @xmath by D.

An equivalent circuit for the DTC model requires @xmath qubits to mimic
the four two-level atoms, and a minimum of @xmath auxiliary qubits to
aid the dynamics. In what follows, we assess the extent of losses in
state preparation alone . For this purpose, @xmath qubits are prepared
in a pairwise entangled state (analogous to the initial state @xmath of
the atomic subsystem (C,D)) using @xmath Hadamard and @xmath
controlled-NOT gates (Fig. 5.5 ). Here qubits @xmath and @xmath are
entangled with qubits @xmath and @xmath respectively. We note that the
pair ( @xmath , @xmath ) is analogous to subsystem C, and ( @xmath ,
@xmath ) is analogous to D. The extent of entanglement between C and D
is quantified using @xmath . The numerical values obtained from
experiment, simulation and the DTC model are @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
, respectively. In this case, the experiment was executed just once.
This comprised @xmath runs [ 91 ] over each of the @xmath basis sets.
Thus the outcome of the experiment, namely @xmath , is not prescribed
with an error bar. As @xmath qubits are involved in this circuit, the
number of possible outcomes is @xmath , in contrast to the earlier case
which had only @xmath outcomes. Hence, the experimental losses, as well
as the difference between the simulated and the numerically obtained
values, are higher than those obtained for the DJC model. We therefore
proceed to investigate the entanglement dynamics in the DTC model
numerically in the absence of losses.

We now investigate the extent of entanglement between the field
subsystems A and B, and between the atomic subsystems C and D, as the
system evolves in time. For this purpose, we have generated tomograms at
300 instants separated by a time step @xmath in units of @xmath setting
the detuning parameter to zero without loss of generality. From these,
@xmath and @xmath have been obtained. Plots of @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath for the field subsystem is shown in Figs. 5.6 (a)-(c) and for the
atomic subsystem in Figs. 5.7 (a)-(c).

As in the DJC model, we see that both @xmath and @xmath mimic @xmath
effectively for the field subsystem, while @xmath does not reflect
@xmath for the atomic subsystem. We therefore do not expect @xmath to
quantify entanglement reasonably in spin systems also. Hence we now
proceed to assess the extent of entanglement using @xmath as the
entanglement indicator in a specific spin system.

### 5.3 The spin system

We now proceed to examine, by means of tomograms, an entangled system of
spins on which an NMR experiment has been performed and reported in the
literature [ 30 ] . Whereas our investigations on the multipartite HQ
systems using the IBM Q platform highlighted the role played by
experimental losses which were not taken into account in numerically
generated tomograms, our present aim is somewhat different. Here we wish
to examine quantitatively the limitations that arise in the tomographic
approach from neglecting the off-diagonal contributions in the density
matrix.

There is also another aspect of interest to us here. In generic
multipartite spin systems where the subsystem states are entangled, spin
squeezing and entanglement are related to each other [ 93 ] . With this
in mind, we will first assess the squeezing properties of the spin
system, quantify entanglement with @xmath , and comment on the
similarities in the dynamics of spin squeezing and entanglement. As
mentioned in Section 5.1 , our starting point is the set of
reconstructed density matrices at different instants of time obtained
from the experiment. The system of interest comprises @xmath atoms
(subsystem M), @xmath atoms (subsystem A) and @xmath atoms (subsystem B)
in dibromofluoromethane, evolving in time. Each subsystem is a qubit,
and the effective Hamiltonian [ 30 ] is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a constant, @xmath is the usual spin matrix, and the
subscripts A, B and M refer to the corresponding subsystems. The
eigenstates of @xmath are denoted by @xmath and @xmath .

The density matrix at time @xmath is

  -- -- -- -------
           (5.8)
  -- -- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are defined as in Eqs. ( 5.2 ) and ( 5.3 )
respectively, with the replacement of @xmath by @xmath and @xmath by
@xmath . Here, @xmath and @xmath refer to the up and down eigenstates of
@xmath and @xmath , @xmath . It is straightforward to show that, at any
@xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.9)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath denotes the identity matrix corresponding to subsystem M.
The experimentally reconstructed density matrices at different instants
have been provided to us by the NMR-QIP group in IISER Pune, India. We
are concerned with the reduced density matrix

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

corresponding to the subsystem AB.

In order to examine its squeezing properties, we use the spin squeezing
condition proposed by Kitagawa and Ueda [ 94 ] . A bipartite system
consisting of two spin- @xmath subsystems is squeezed, if one of the
components normal to the mean spin vector of the bipartite system has a
variance less than @xmath (the latter being the variance of the
corresponding spin coherent state). Here, the spin coherent state for
the bipartite system AB is defined in terms of the polar and azimuthal
angles @xmath as @xmath . For completeness, the tomograms corresponding
to spin coherent states for four different @xmath values are shown in
Figs. 5.8 (a)-(d). Each of the figures (a), (b), and (c) corresponds to
one of the eigenstates of @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , respectively. The
tomogram corresponding to a spin coherent state for @xmath is plotted in
Fig. 5.8 (d).

The mean spin direction is given by @xmath where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath for any operator @xmath . Since @xmath , @xmath and @xmath (
@xmath ) are equal to zero, it follows that @xmath is a null vector.
Hence, any unit vector @xmath can be chosen to obtain the required
variance. We have calculated the variance @xmath as a function of time
for @xmath different vectors @xmath at each instant. From this, we have
identified the minimum variance @xmath and plotted it as a function of
time (Fig. 5.9 (a)). From the figure, it is evident that the variance
obtained numerically using Eq. ( 5.10 ) and that obtained from the
experimentally reconstructed density matrices are in good agreement. We
also point out that the extent of squeezing, @xmath , increases with
time.

We adapt the Kitagawa-Ueda squeezing condition in the following manner
in order to estimate second-order squeezing. By an extension of the
preceding argument, we consider the expectation value of the dyad (or
tensor product) @xmath instead of @xmath . In general, @xmath is not a
null tensor. We may therefore impose the orthogonality condition @xmath
, where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath and @xmath are analogous to the vector @xmath of the earlier
case. The symmetrization with respect to @xmath and @xmath in Eq. ( 5.12
) ensures that @xmath is real. Using Eq. ( 5.10 ), we get

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
                          (5.13)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where the subscripts @xmath , @xmath and @xmath denote the respective
components of @xmath and @xmath . (The symmetry between the @xmath and
@xmath components in Eq. ( 5.13 ) follows from the fact that @xmath ).
We have considered a set of @xmath different pairs @xmath for which
@xmath . For each such pair, the variance @xmath has been computed, and
from this the minimum variance @xmath has been obtained. The reference
value ( @xmath ) below which the state is second-order squeezed is
obtained by minimizing the corresponding variance for the spin coherent
state with respect to @xmath and @xmath . Plots of @xmath versus time
obtained both from the experimentally reconstructed density matrices and
from Eq. ( 5.10 ) are shown in Fig. 5.9 (b). The two curves are in
reasonable agreement with each other. As in the earlier case, the
measure of second-order squeezing, @xmath , increases with time. We have
verified that neither the state of subsystem A nor that of B displays
entropic squeezing [ 95 ] at any time.

We now turn to the entanglement dynamics in the NMR experiment [ 30 ] .
We have computed @xmath from tomograms obtained both from Eq. ( 5.10 )
and from the experimentally reconstructed density matrices at different
instants of time. This is compared with two indicators, @xmath and the
negativity @xmath . The latter has been reported in the experiment, and
is defined as @xmath . Here @xmath is the set of eigenvalues of @xmath ,
the partial transpose of @xmath with respect to the subsystem A.
(Equivalently, the partial transpose @xmath may be used.)

Although all three entanglement indicators are in agreement in their
gross features (Fig. 5.9 (c)), @xmath is closer to @xmath owing to the
similarity in their definitions. The difference between @xmath and
negativity is clearly due to the limitations that arise in the
tomographic approach because the off-diagonal contributions of the
density matrix have been neglected. We emphasise, however, that @xmath
is still a good entanglement indicator which compares favourably with
@xmath . Figures 5.10 (a) and (b) facilitate comparison between @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . It is clear that @xmath
characterises the degree of squeezing and higher-order squeezing
extremely well, and that @xmath and @xmath are reasonable quantifiers of
squeezing properties.

### 5.4 Concluding remarks

In this chapter, we have compared the performance of @xmath and @xmath
with standard entanglement indicators in multipartite HQ models (DJC and
DTC), and we have calculated @xmath in the context of an NMR experiment.
In the former, entanglement within the field subsystem and within the
atomic subsystem have been examined. While @xmath satisfactorily mimics
@xmath for the field subsystem, it does not fare well in the atomic
subsystem. In contrast, @xmath performs well for both subsystems. An
equivalent circuit for the DJC model was both experimentally run and
numerically simulated to obtain @xmath . This facilitates estimation of
experimental losses. Our results show that the IBM simulation agrees
well with numerical simulation of the DJC model. Further, we have
established that in multipartite HQ models, the difference between
@xmath obtained experimentally and numerically increases significantly
with an increase in the number of atoms. Corresponding to the NMR
experiment, we have shown that @xmath is in fair agreement with both the
negativity @xmath and @xmath . Further, it gives a reasonable estimate
of squeezing and second-order squeezing. We therefore conclude that the
entanglement indicator @xmath obtained directly from tomograms is a
convenient and practical quantifier of entanglement both in multipartite
HQ systems and in spin systems.

## Chapter 6 Conclusion

In this thesis, we have carried out a detailed investigation of the
manner in which nonclassical effects such as wave packet revival
phenomena, squeezing properties of different states, and quantum
entanglement in bipartite systems, can be identified and quantitatively
estimated directly from tomograms, without detailed state
reconstruction. We have examined both single-mode and bipartite CV
systems with more than one time scale, and investigated full and
fractional revivals of quantum wave packets governed by nonlinear
Hamiltonians. A range of squeezing phenomena such as quadrature
squeezing, higher-order Hong-Mandel and Hillery-type squeezing, and
entropic squeezing, have been examined in various quantum systems
evolving in time. Several entanglement indicators that can be obtained
from appropriate tomograms have been proposed, and their performance
assessed through detailed comparison with standard measures of
entanglement. We have examined CV, multipartite HQ, and spin systems in
this thesis. In each of these cases, we have studied the nonclassical
properties captured through numerically generated tomograms of quantum
states obtained from known initial states evolving under nonlinear
Hamiltonians. We have also worked with experimental data generated
elsewhere (and in the IBM quantum computing platform). Thus comparison
between experimentally obtained tomograms and numerically generated
tomograms was feasible in certain cases. We have examined optical
tomograms, qubit (spin) tomograms and chronocyclic tomograms in
different contexts. We have used a range of initial states in our
numerical computations. This includes the standard CS, PACS
(equivalently, boson-added CS), direct products of these states,
binomial states, and two-mode squeezed states.

Several bipartite entanglement indicators have been analysed both at
avoided energy-level crossings of specific systems, and during temporal
evolution of certain Hamiltonian systems. We have commented on
decoherence effects wherever possible. Some of these indicators are
inherently quantum mechanical in nature (such as @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath ) while others ( @xmath and @xmath ) are inspired by classical
tomography. The extent to which nonlinear correlations are captured by
these indicators has been assessed in detail. Our main results are the
following.

(1) We have established that, as an entanglement indicator and
quantifier, @xmath performs as well as @xmath close to avoided
energy-level crossings in both CV and HQ systems.

(2) If a bipartite state is a superposition of states that are
Hamming-uncorrelated, @xmath is a better entanglement indicator than
@xmath . In fact, we find that even @xmath (the corresponding indicator
from a single section of the tomogram) suffices to estimate entanglement
reliably near avoided energy-level crossings for superpositions of
Hamming-uncorrelated states such as the eigenstates of certain
number-conserving Hamiltonians.

(3) In the context of bipartite CV systems @xmath (obtained by averaging
only over the dominant @xmath ) is found to be a reasonably good
entanglement indicator. However, the extent to which it agrees with
@xmath is very sensitive to the precise initial state, the nature of the
interaction, and the inherent nonlinearities in the system.

(4) In contrast to the foregoing inference, @xmath is a poor
entanglement indicator for qubit systems, and @xmath has to be used for
such systems.

The tomographic approach to deriving entanglement indicators and
distinguishing between states acquires further validation by its
application to experiments on both CV and spin systems reported in the
literature. In the former case, two @xmath -photon states generated
experimentally were distinguished from each other using interferometric
methods [ 28 ] . We have shown, by examining the entanglement indicator
@xmath corresponding to a judiciously selected slice of the bipartite
chronocyclic tomograms concerned, that these states can be distinguished
clearly from each other. In the latter case, by analysing the
experimental data [ 30 ] pertaining to the spin system of interest and
constructing the corresponding qubit tomograms, we have established that
@xmath is a reasonably good bipartite entanglement indicator in this
context. The limitations that arise from neglecting the contributions of
off-diagonal elements of the density matrix (in computing the
tomographic entanglement indicators) are clearly seen in this context.
Further, using the IBM quantum computing platform we have shown that,
even in multipartite HQ systems comprising radiation fields interacting
with atomic subsystems, @xmath extracted from appropriate qubit
tomograms is a reasonably good bipartite entanglement indicator. Here,
we have compared indicators computed from experimentally obtained
tomograms, on the one hand, and those computed from numerically
generated tomograms which do not account for such losses, on the other.
This facilitates understanding the role of experimental losses. The
thesis also highlights how entanglement indicators which are not
monotones (and hence not bona fide entanglement measures ) can still
mirror the qualitative features of bipartite entanglement quite well,
with the added advantage that they can be computed from tomograms in a
straightforward manner.

Finally, we mention some avenues for future research. The extension of
our studies on nonclassical effects to multipartite systems, including
the computation of multipartite entanglement indicators from tomograms,
is an open question. In this context, a detailed assessment of the
advantages, if any, of the tomographic approach over state
reconstruction programmes needs to be carried out. Further, comparison
with other quantifiers of entanglement in multipartite systems would
facilitate a deeper understanding of the tomographic approach. The
manner in which the nonclassicality of a state is mirrored in the
tomogram (similar to negative values of the Wigner function) also merits
examination in greater detail.

## Appendix A Eigenvectors of rotated quadrature operators

We first obtain a useful expression [ 38 ] for the single-mode tomogram
in terms of the Hermite polynomials. We also indicate the procedure to
obtain eigenvectors of rotated quadrature operators [ 96 ] .

The overlap between a photon number state @xmath and the field
quadrature state @xmath can be expressed in terms of the Hermite
polynomials @xmath as,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using this, and Eq. ( 2.4 ), we see that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

For a pure state @xmath , @xmath . Expanding @xmath in the photon number
basis @xmath as @xmath , the corresponding tomogram is given by [ 38 ]

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

The above expression can be extended in a straightforward manner to
mixed states.

Using Eq. ( A.1 ) and @xmath , we get

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (A.2)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the zero-photon state. The generating function for the
Hermite polynomials is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Substituting Eq. ( A.3 ) in Eq. ( A.2 ), we get [ 96 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (A.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The procedure outlined above can be extended to obtain the corresponding
expressions for multimode tomograms.

## Appendix B Normal-ordered moments from optical tomograms

We outline the procedure [ 23 ] for obtaining normal-ordered moments for
infinite-dimensional single-mode systems from optical tomograms. We
expand any normal-ordered operator @xmath in the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here the coefficients

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

and @xmath is used to denote min( @xmath , @xmath ). (Equation ( B.2 )
can be verified as follows. We first obtain @xmath using Eq. ( B.1 ).
Substituting this in Eq. ( B.2 ), we get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now replacing @xmath with @xmath , changing the order of the sums, and
using

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

it follows that the expansion of @xmath above is valid.)

We write the projection operator

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using @xmath and Eq. ( B.5 ), we see that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (B.7)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

We now consider the special case when @xmath is the density operator
@xmath . Using Eqs. ( B.6 ), ( B.7 ),

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the following property of the Hermite polynomials

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (B.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

we can show that

  -- -- -------- -- --------
        @xmath      
        @xmath      (B.10)
  -- -- -------- -- --------

Using the orthonormality property of the Hermite polynomials together
with the expression

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (B.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

in Eq. ( B.10 ) gives

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (B.12)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This procedure can be extended in a straightforward manner to multimode
systems.

## Appendix C Numerical computation of the time-evolved density matrix
of the bipartite BEC system

We outline the essential steps in computing the time-evolved density
matrix of the double-well BEC system, for initial states @xmath with
Hamiltonian @xmath (Eq. ( 2.21 )). We denote the time-evolved density
matrix by @xmath .

The procedure for obtaining @xmath corresponding to the initial state
@xmath is outlined in [ 45 ] . We obtain [ 34 ] @xmath from @xmath
through appropriate transformations. We first write

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

and @xmath is given in terms of the Laguerre polynomials as @xmath . In
order to recast @xmath in a simpler form we introduce the operator
@xmath , where @xmath [ 45 ] . Consequently, @xmath can be written as
@xmath , where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (C.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

and @xmath . Hence,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (C.4)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

This expression can now be simplified using the following identities
which can be obtained in a straightforward manner by using the
Baker-Hausdorff lemma.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.5)
     @xmath      (C.6)
     @xmath      (C.7)
     @xmath      (C.8)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (C.9)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (C.10)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (C.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Further, using binomial expansions for the two commuting operators
@xmath and @xmath and defining @xmath and @xmath , we arrive at the
following simplified expression for @xmath .

  -- -- -------- -- --------
        @xmath      
        @xmath      
        @xmath      
        @xmath      
        @xmath      (C.12)
  -- -- -------- -- --------

The density matrix can now be expressed in terms of @xmath and @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (C.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

## Appendix D Estimation of the maximal local Lyapunov exponent @xmath

We outline the procedure to obtain the maximal local Lyapunov exponent
@xmath from a time series @xmath ( @xmath ). The underlying dynamical
process is inherently nonlinear. The basic premise is that the
ergodicity properties pertaining to the dynamics can be captured through
a detailed time-series analysis. The first step is to reconstruct an
effective phase space of dimension @xmath (the embedding dimension), in
which the dynamics will be examined. For this purpose, a time delay
@xmath is obtained such that data points separated by a time interval
@xmath can be treated as independent dynamical variables. This is done
as follows. We note that for two data points @xmath and @xmath ( @xmath
is any time duration such that @xmath ), the information about @xmath
that can be deduced from the measured value of @xmath should tend to
zero for sufficiently large @xmath . Hence, if @xmath and @xmath are the
individual probability densities for obtaining the values @xmath and
@xmath respectively, and @xmath is the corresponding joint probability
density, the mutual information

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

should tend to zero, for sufficiently large @xmath . A frequently used
prescription is to choose @xmath to be the first minimum of @xmath [ 97
] .

Using @xmath , @xmath is determined as follows. The next step is to
examine the correlation integral

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath is the Heaviside function. @xmath gives an estimate of the
average correlation between @xmath points in a @xmath -dimensional phase
space and the integrand @xmath is the standard correlation function.
Here @xmath is fixed such that @xmath . If @xmath is sufficiently small,
@xmath [ 98 ] . @xmath is calculated for various values of @xmath . The
embedding dimension @xmath is determined by the requirement that for any
@xmath , @xmath remains constant.

Vectors in the reconstructed phase space are denoted by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The basic assumption is that the dynamics is guided by a map @xmath such
that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Of immediate relevance to us is the Jacobian

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . Since the expression for @xmath is not a priori known
explicitly, the Jacobian is obtained from the time series as follows [
80 ] . For a given @xmath , we find @xmath nearest neighbours in the
reconstructed phase space. They are denoted by @xmath . Defining @xmath
( @xmath ), it can be shown that,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (D.6)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where to second-order, @xmath and @xmath need to be determined. We can
numerically find them by solving the set of simultaneous linear
equations ( D.6 ). We note that the LHS of Eq. ( D.6 ) can be determined
using Eq. ( D.4 ). We point out that @xmath is fixed such that this set
of equations is uniquely solved.

We now define,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

The Oseledec matrix @xmath can be expressed in terms of @xmath as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (D.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The spectrum of local Lyapunov exponents corresponding to @xmath steps
of time are the eigenvalues of @xmath . Of direct relevance to us are
the ergodicity properties of @xmath (Eq. 4.2 ) that can be obtained from
the corresponding time series. Hence, replacing @xmath by @xmath and
setting @xmath , we have obtained @xmath and @xmath from the time series
using the TISEAN package [ 81 ] . Using the procedure outlined above,
the local Lyapunov exponents have been calculated. This procedure has
been repeated for @xmath randomly chosen values of @xmath in the time
series and the average @xmath of the corresponding maximal local
Lyapunov exponents has been calculated.

The global Lyapunov exponents are the eigenvalues of @xmath . We denote
the maximal global Lyapunov exponent by @xmath . Then, for generic
dynamical systems, it has been shown [ 99 , 80 ] that @xmath tends to
@xmath ( @xmath : constants), for sufficiently large @xmath .

## Appendix E The 2-photon frequency combs

In Section 4.5 , the expressions for the two @xmath -photon states
@xmath and @xmath which are distinguished from each other using
tomograms are given in Eqs. ( 4.7 ) and ( 4.10 ) respectively. For
convenience, we give the expressions below.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the normalisation constant. Here, @xmath and @xmath are
defined in Eqs. ( 4.8 ) and ( 4.9 ) respectively. The other @xmath
-photon state

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is defined in Eq. ( 4.11 ), and @xmath is the normalisation
constant.

In what follows, we outline the procedure to show that these two states
are indeed the two states which were shown to be distinguishable using
photon coincidence counts, in the experiment reported in [ 28 ] .

In the experimental setup, the sum of the frequencies of the signal and
the idler photons matches the pump frequency, i.e., @xmath . Hence, as
stated in the supplementary material of [ 28 ] , @xmath can be replaced
by @xmath . Integrating over the variable @xmath , appropriately
changing the integration variables, noting that @xmath , and dropping
the normalisation constant, we get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

This can be identified as one of the states considered in the
experiment, namely, Eq. (B19) in [ 28 ] , on changing the notation from
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath in Eq. ( E.1 ) to @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
respectively.

We now proceed to establish that the other @xmath -photon state @xmath
considered by us, is the same as the state @xmath defined in [ 28 ] .
Here, @xmath where, for instance, @xmath is denoted by @xmath with
@xmath and @xmath being the time variables associated with the signal
and the idler photons respectively, and @xmath . It is convenient to
express @xmath and @xmath @xmath as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

and,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (E.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

These expressions follow from the properties of the displacement
operator, and Eqs. (B1), (B2), (B7) given in [ 28 ] . Here, @xmath
@xmath is the standard deviation in @xmath . It follows from Eqs. ( E.2
) and ( E.3 ) that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (E.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the standard deviation in @xmath . Integrating over the
time variables @xmath and @xmath , writing @xmath , @xmath where @xmath
, @xmath are integers, and using the fact that @xmath is a Gaussian
function with a standard deviation @xmath ( @xmath ), it is
straightforward to see that Eq. ( E.4 ) can be expressed as @xmath (Eq.
( 4.10 )) unnormalised.

## Appendix F Expressions for the chronocyclic tomograms

We are interested in the time-time slice of the tomograms corresponding
to @xmath (Eq. ( 4.7 )) and @xmath (Eq. ( 4.10 )). As a first step, we
calculate the explicit expressions for the states @xmath and @xmath in
the Fourier transform basis (i.e., time-time basis) using @xmath in
Eqs. ( 4.7 ) and ( 4.10 ). The @xmath -photon state @xmath in the
time-time basis is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (F.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the time-time slice @xmath corresponding to @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath s (introduced for dimensional purposes),

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the normalisation constant is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (F.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath .

Similarly, the other @xmath -photon state @xmath in the time-time basis
is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (F.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the time-time slice corresponding to @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the normalisation constant @xmath is essentially the same as @xmath
with an extra factor of @xmath within the summation in Eq. ( F.2 ).
