The future of medical imaging is linked to Artificial Intelligence ( AI
). The manual analysis of medical images is nowadays an arduous,
error-prone and often unaffordable task for humans, which has caught the
attention of the Machine Learning ( ML ) community. Magnetic Resonance
Imaging ( MRI ), which constitutes the standard imaging technique for
the diagnosis of many lethal diseases, provides us with a wide variety
of rich representations of the morphology and behavior of lesions
completely inaccessible without a risky invasive intervention.
Nevertheless, harnessing the powerful but often latent information
contained in MRI acquisitions is a very complicated task, which requires
computational intelligent analysis techniques.

Central nervous system tumors are one of the most critical diseases
studied through MRI . Specifically, glioblastoma represents a major
challenge, as it remains a lethal cancer that, to date, lacks a
satisfactory therapy. Of the entire set of characteristics that make
glioblastoma so aggressive, a particular aspect that has been widely
studied is its vascular heterogeneity. The strong vascular proliferation
of glioblastomas, as well as their robust angiogenesis and extensive
microvasculature heterogeneity have been claimed responsible for the
high lethality of the neoplasm. Therefore, the study of these hallmarks
is crucial to better understand the tumorâ€™s aggressiveness and design
new effective therapies that improve patient prognosis.

This thesis focuses on the research and development of the Hemodynamic
Tissue Signature ( HTS ) method: an unsupervised ML approach to describe
the vascular heterogeneity of glioblastomas by means of perfusion MRI
analysis. The HTS builds on the concept of habitats . A habitat is
defined as a sub-region of the lesion with a particular MRI profile
describing a specific physiological behavior. The HTS method delineates
four habitats within the glioblastoma: the High Angiogenic Tumor ( HAT )
habitat, as the most perfused region of the enhancing tumor; the Low
Angiogenic Tumor ( LAT ) habitat, as the region of the enhancing tumor
with a lower angiogenic profile; the potentially Infiltrated Peripheral
Edema ( IPE ) habitat, as the non-enhancing region adjacent to the tumor
with elevated perfusion indexes; and the Vasogenic Peripheral Edema (
VPE ) habitat, as the remaining edema of the lesion with the lowest
perfusion profile. The research and development of the HTS method has
generated a number of contributions to this thesis.

First, in order to verify that unsupervised learning methods are
reliable to extract MRI patterns to describe the heterogeneity of a
lesion, a comparison among several structured and non-structured
unsupervised learning methods was conducted for the task of high grade
glioma segmentation. Additionally a generic postprocessing stage was
also developed to automatically map each label of an unsupervised
segmentation to a healthy or pathological tissue of the brain.

Second, a Bayesian unsupervised learning algorithm from the family of
Spatially Varying Finite Mixture Model s is proposed. The algorithm,
named Non Local Spatially Varying Finite Mixture Model ( NLSVFMM ),
successfully integrates a continuous Gauss- Markov Random Field ( MRF )
prior density weighted by the probabilistic Non Local Means ( NLM )
weighting function, to codify the idea that neighboring pixels tend to
belong to the same semantic object. The proposed prior simultaneously
enforces local smoothness on the segmentations, while preserves the
edges and the structure between classes.

Third, the HTS method to describe the vascular heterogeneity of
glioblastomas through the aforementioned habitats is presented. The HTS
method has been applied to real cases, both in a local cohort of
patients from a single-center, and in an international retrospective
cohort of more than 180 patients from 7 European centers. A
comprehensive evaluation of the method was conducted to measure the
prognostic potential of the HTS habitats, as well as their
stratification capabilities to identify populations with different
prognosis. Statistically significant associations were found between
most of HTS habitats and Overall Survival ( OS ) of patients, as well as
significant differences were observed in survival rates of
sub-populations divided according to HTS derived measurements.

Finally, the methods and technology developed in this thesis have been
integrated into an online public open-access platform for its academic
use. The ONCOhabitats platform is hosted at
https://www.oncohabitats.upv.es , and provides two main services: 1)
glioblastoma tissue segmentation, and 2) vascular heterogeneity
assessment of glioblastomas by means of the HTS method. Both services,
in addition to preprocessed images and segmentation maps, automatically
generate a radiological report, summarizing the findings of the study.
ONCOhabitats not only offers the scientific and medical community access
to leading-edge algorithms for the analysis of these tumors, but gives
access to its computational cluster capable to process about 300 cases
per day.

The results of this thesis have been published in ten scientific
contributions, including top-ranked journals and conferences in the
areas of Medical Informatics, Statistics and Probability, Radiology &
Nuclear Medicine, Machine Learning and Data Mining and Biomedical
Engineering. An industrial patent registered in Spain (ES201431289A),
Europe (EP3190542A1) and EEUU (US20170287133A1) was also issued,
summarizing the efforts of this thesis to generate tangible assets
besides the academic revenue obtained from research publications.
Finally, the methods, technologies and original ideas conceived in this
thesis led to the foundation of ONCOANALYTICS CDX, a company framed into
the business model of companion diagnostics for pharmaceutical
compounds, thought as a vehicle to facilitate the industrialization of
the ONCOhabitats technology.
