This thesis presents the general structure of non-conformal higher-spin
supercurrent multiplets in three and four spacetime dimensions. Such
supercurrents are in one-to-one correspondence with off-shell massless
higher-spin gauge supermultiplets, some of which are constructed in this
thesis for the first time. Explicit realisations of these conserved
current multiplets in various supersymmetric theories are worked out in
detail.

In the first part of the thesis, we begin by reviewing the key
properties of known massless higher-spin @xmath supermultiplets in
four-dimensional (4D) Minkowski and anti-de Sitter (AdS) backgrounds. We
then propose a new off-shell gauge formulation for the massless integer
superspin multiplet. Its novel feature is that the gauge-invariant
action involves an unconstrained complex superconformal prepotential, in
conjunction with two types of compensators. Its dual version is obtained
by applying a superfield Legendre transformation. Next, we deduce the
structure of consistent non-conformal higher-spin @xmath supercurrents
associated with these massless supersymmetric gauge theories. Explicit
closed-form expressions for such supercurrents are derived for various
supersymmetric theories in 4D @xmath Minkowski and AdS superspaces.
These include a model of @xmath massive chiral superfields with an
arbitrary mass matrix, along with free theories of tensor and complex
linear multiplets.

The second part of the thesis is devoted to a detailed study of @xmath
and @xmath supersymmetric higher-spin theories in three-dimensional AdS
space. By analogy with our 4D @xmath constructions, we derive two dually
equivalent off-shell Lagrangian formulations for the massless multiplets
of arbitrary superspin in (1,1) AdS superspace. These formulations allow
us to determine the most general higher-spin supercurrent multiplets and
provide their examples for models of chiral superfields. With regards to
(2,0) AdS supersymmetry, our approach is to first identify a multiplet
of conserved higher-spin currents in simple models for a chiral
superfield. This is then used to construct two series of a massless
half-integer superspin multiplet in (2,0) AdS superspace. Finally, our
(2,0) AdS higher-spin supermultiplets are reduced to (1,0) AdS
superspace, which yield four series of @xmath supersymmetric massless
higher-spin models. We illustrate the duality transformations relating
some of these dynamical systems. We also perform the component reduction
of two new @xmath higher-spin actions in flat superspace. Further
applications of these off-shell @xmath models are discussed, one of
which is related to the construction of two new off-shell formulations
for the massive @xmath gravitino supermultiplet in AdS.

[]
Off-shell higher-spin gauge supermultiplets
and conserved supercurrents

Jessica Hutomo

This thesis is presented for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy

of The University of Western Australia

Department of Physics

March 2020

Supervisor:       Prof. Sergei M. Kuzenko

Co-supervisor(s):   A/Prof. Evgeny I. Buchbinder

Prof. Ian N. McArthur

Examiners:

Prof. Evgeny A. Ivanov (Joint Institute for Nuclear Research, Russia)

Prof. Ulf Lindström (Uppsala University, Sweden)

Prof. Rikard von Unge (Masaryk University, Czech Republic)
