## Introduction

This paper grew out of work in progress of the author trying to bound
from below the Selmer groups attached to the symmetric cube Galois
representations arising from certain modular forms. There has been a lot
of interest lately in these symmetric cube Selmer groups. For example,
there is the recent work of Haining Wang [ wang ] and the work of
Loeffler–Zerbes [ LZBK ] . Both of these papers work in the “Euler
system direction,” establishing upper bounds on the ranks of the
symmetric cube Selmer groups that they study.
To establish lower bounds, however, one would like to work in the
“modular direction,” analogously to the work of Skinner–Urban [ SUgsp4 ]
, who obtain such bounds for the Selmer groups of (standard) Galois
representations arising from modular forms. (See also [ SUunitary ] ,
where the same authors carry out the same method for Galois
representations attached to automorphic forms on unitary groups using
Eisenstein series.) To make their method work, Skinner and Urban must
assume that these modular forms satisfy certain hypotheses, including
that the sign of the functional equation for their @xmath -function is
@xmath . For a given modular form @xmath , this hypothesis in particular
ensures the existence of a holomorphic cusp form for @xmath which
provides a functorial lifting of @xmath from the Siegel Levi subgroup.
Such a cusp form is CAP, in the sense of Piatetski-Shapiro, and they are
then able to @xmath -adically deform this CAP form in a cuspidal family,
ultimately applying Ribet’s method to the associated Galois
representations to obtain nontrivial elements in the correct Selmer
group.
If we would like to apply the method of Skinner–Urban to study Selmer
groups for the symmetric cube of a modular form @xmath , the first step
would be to find a functorial lifting of @xmath which sees the symmetric
cube. Actually, there is such a lifting to @xmath , and it is this
lifting which is used in the works of Wang and Loeffler–Zerbes cited
above. However, for the purposes of the Skinner–Urban method, this
lifting will be of no use by itself. This is because we want to see on
the Galois side not only the symmetric cube Galois representation, but
also something degenerate like the trivial one dimensional
representation, since the desired Selmer class will be constructed as a
nontrivial extension of the symmetric cube by this trivial
representation. But the Galois representation attached to the symmetric
cube lifting is precisely the symmetric cube, and nothing more.
So we need to find a different functorial lifting for modular forms
which sees their symmetric cubes along with some more degenerate data.
Luckily, it turns out that there are certain cuspidally induced
Eisenstein series for the split exceptional group @xmath which do just
this. In fact, as was first observed by Langlands, the constant term of
such an Eisenstein series involves a quotient involving the symmetric
cube @xmath -function of the form being induced, and the Riemann zeta
function, which is better interpreted in this context as the @xmath
-function of the trivial one dimensional representation of the Galois
group. And indeed, the Galois representations attached to these
Eisenstein series are of exactly the right shape to be used in a
Ribet-style construction to produce nontrivial elements of the symmetric
cube Selmer group.
To start the method of Skinner–Urban, we would therefore need to @xmath
-adically deform these @xmath Eisenstein series in a cuspidal family.
Unfortunately, in the absence of a @xmath Shimura variety, our tools for
doing this are essentially limited to those established in the paper of
Urban [ urbanev ] , where he constructs eigenvarieties for groups whose
real points have discrete series representations. There is a difficulty
encountered here in trying to show that our Eisenstein series lies on
the cuspidal eigenvariety for @xmath . This has to do with the @xmath
-adic properties of our Eisenstein series at the place @xmath . Urban’s
machinery, as is usual in the theory of @xmath -adic deformations of
automorphic forms, requires us to make the choice of a @xmath
-stabilization of our Eisenstein series, and in order to obtain in the
end a family of Galois representations which has the correct properties
coming from @xmath -adic Hodge theory, we have to choose a @xmath
-stabilization which is critical, in the sense of Urban’s paper.
Deforming @xmath -adically automorphic forms which have been @xmath
-stabilized noncritically is not so difficult using Urban’s machinery.
But it can be much harder for those which are critically @xmath
-stabilized. However, Urban does provide some tools for doing this, and
the first step toward using these tools to study @xmath -adic
deformations of our Eisenstein series is to locate every instance of the
Eisenstein series in the cohomology of the locally symmetric spaces
attached to @xmath . The main purpose of this paper is to carry out this
first step.
We can be more precise at this point. An irreducible, finite dimensional
representation @xmath of the complex group @xmath gives rise to
compatible local systems on the locally symmetric spaces attached to
@xmath . The cohomology groups of these local systems form a direct
system whose direct limit is an admissible representation of the group
of finite adelic points @xmath . By work of Franke [ franke ] , this
representation can be constructed in the following way.
Let @xmath denote the complexified Lie algebra of @xmath , and fix a
maximal compact subgroup @xmath in the group real points @xmath . One
can define a certain space @xmath of automorphic forms for @xmath using
@xmath , in a way which we will not be precise about in this
introduction. But it is a @xmath -module, making its cohomology

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

a @xmath -module. By a conjecture of Borel, which was proved by Franke
in his paper, this module is exactly the direct limit discussed in the
previous paragraph. Therefore, our goal will be to locate our Eisenstein
series in the cohomology space displayed above. Let us be more precise
about what we mean by this.
Eisenstein series are related to parabolic inductions. Let @xmath be the
so-called long root parabolic subgroup of @xmath , with Levi @xmath .
Then @xmath , and so if we are given a cuspidal automorphic
representation @xmath of @xmath , we can view it as a representation of
@xmath . For @xmath , form the unitary parabolic induction

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath denotes the modulus character of @xmath .
Of interest for us is the Langlands quotient @xmath of the above
parabolic induction at the point @xmath . It is this representation that
we are trying to deform for the purposes of the Skinner–Urban method and
which we therefore want to locate in cohomology.
Let @xmath be the space of cusp forms in @xmath . It has a natural
complement @xmath which is built, in a way which can be made precise,
from Eisenstein series, and the decomposition

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a decomposition of @xmath -modules. We therefore get a decomposition

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as @xmath -modules. The first of these factors is called the cuspidal
cohomology and the second is the Eisenstein cohomology. We then have the
following result, which is a consequence of Theorem 5.3.3 of this paper.

###### Theorem.

Assume @xmath comes from a cuspidal holomorphic eigenform of weight
@xmath and trivial nebentypus. Assume @xmath . Then there is only one
representation @xmath for which the finite part @xmath of our Langlands
quotient appears as a subquotient of the Eisenstein cohomology

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It appears exactly once in this cohomology space, in (middle) degree
@xmath , with multiplicity one.

There are two steps to establishing this result. First, one must
actually construct the representation @xmath as a subquotient of
Eisenstein cohomology. This is made possible by a deeper analysis of the
Eisenstein space @xmath as follows. For @xmath another parabolic
subgroup of @xmath , Franke and Schwermer [ FS ] have defined an
equivalence relation on the cuspidal automorphic representations of the
Levi of @xmath . Let @xmath denote one of these equivalence classes.
Then Franke and Schwermer construct a subspace

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

out of Eisenstein series induced from the representations in @xmath ,
along with their residues and derivatives. (Actually Franke–Schwermer
work much more generally on an arbitrary reductive group.) There is a
decomposition

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the first sum is over a fixed set of parabolic subgroups which
represent the associate classes of proper parabolic subgroups of @xmath
.
If none the Eisenstein series arising in the construction of the space
@xmath have a pole, then the space @xmath has a very nice and explicit
@xmath -module structure as a parabolically induced module. We can then
compute the @xmath -cohomology of this module explicitly in terms of a
representation parabolically induced from the finite part of a
representation in @xmath .
If @xmath is the class for @xmath which contains the representation
@xmath , where @xmath is the same as in our theorem, then it turns out
that none of the Eisenstein series appearing in the construction of
@xmath has a pole, and we can find @xmath as a quotient of the
cohomology

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This is where we use the hypothesis that @xmath ; this vanishing allows
us, via an examination of the constant term of our Eisenstein series, to
conclude that these Eisenstein series do not have poles at @xmath .
This describes the first of the two steps we need to prove our theorem.
The second of these steps is to show that no other summand @xmath of the
decomposition above, besides the summand for @xmath and @xmath just
studied, contains any copy of @xmath in its cohomology. To do this, we
need to study the cohomology of these summands in a way which is
explicit enough to rule out an appearance of @xmath .
One runs into a problem here, as we only know the explicit structure of
the space @xmath as a parabolic induction when the Eisenstein series
involved in its construction have no poles. But it may well be the case
that certain Eisenstein series induced from @xmath do have poles.
Luckily, following Franke [ franke ] , Grobner [ grobner ] has defined a
filtration on these spaces whose graded pieces are parabolically induced
modules whose cohomology can be explicitly studied.
So one just needs to show that @xmath doesn’t appear in the cohomology
of these graded pieces. To do this, we distinguish @xmath from the
representations appearing in the cohomology of the graded pieces by
assigning to them @xmath -adic Galois representations for a fixed prime
@xmath . These Galois representations are only powerful enough to
distinguish between near-equivalence classes of automorphic
representations, that is, to tell them apart outside a set of finitely
many primes. But actually this is enough for our purposes because we can
appeal to strong multiplicity one theorems for the Levis of @xmath .
The next thing to do would be to compute the multiplicity of @xmath in
the cuspidal cohomology. This requires knowledge about the
classification of CAP forms which are nearly equivalent to our Langlands
quotient @xmath . However, not enough about such things is known unless
we assume some standard conjectures related to those of Arthur. So this
is what we do.
As explained by Gan and Gurevich [ gangurl ] , assuming such
conjectures, under the hypothesis still that @xmath , precisely two
kinds of CAP representations @xmath with @xmath should be able to appear
in @xmath , depending on the sign @xmath of the symmetric cube
functional equation. They will appear with multiplicity one in either
case. If @xmath , then @xmath , and hence this appears in cuspidal
cohomology exactly once in each of degrees @xmath and @xmath . But Gan
and Gurevich do not describe @xmath when @xmath . So we must do this
ourselves.
One of the things which Gan and Gurevich explain, however, is that there
is an Arthur parameter @xmath for @xmath whose associated Arthur packet
should consist of the two possible representations which can occur as
@xmath . Upon examination of the parameter @xmath , one sees that the
one corresponding to @xmath must indeed be @xmath , but Arthur’s
conjectures do not immediately tell us anything about the representation
corresponding to @xmath .
However, for certain types of Arthur parameters @xmath , Adams and
Johnson have been able to construct packets @xmath which satisfy the
conclusion of Arthurs conjectures for real groups. We show that our
parameter @xmath is of this special type, and we explicitly compute
@xmath . We find the following, which is the content of Theorem 6.4.4 in
this paper.

###### Theorem.

The Adams–Johnson packet @xmath contains the representation @xmath and
the quaternionic discrete series representation of @xmath of weight
@xmath , in the terminology of Gan–Gross–Savin [ ggs ] .

Thus if @xmath , it follows that our CAP representation @xmath should
again be cohomological, appearing in cuspidal cohomology exactly once in
middle degree @xmath .
This paper is organized as follows. The first three chapters are devoted
to a very general setup, working mostly for an arbitrary reductive
group, and they will be used to make the main computations in Chapters 4
and 5 .
In Chapter 1 , we review facts about Eisenstein series and the spaces
they comprise, recalling the Franke–Schwermer decomposition and some
facts about the Franke filtration. In Chapter 2 , we compute the
cohomology of some of these spaces of Eisenstein series. In Chapter 3 ,
we explain what we mean when we say an automorphic representation has
attached to it an @xmath -adic Galois representation.
Chapter 4 is then devoted to applying the tools set up in the first
three chapters to compute the cohomological multiplicity of certain
Langlands quotients for @xmath . Some of the results in this chapter
were originally stated by Urban in [ urbanev ] , Example 5.5.3. However,
he made an error in that example which we take the opportunity to
correct (see Remark 4.4.2 in this paper).
Chapter 5 makes the same kind of computations for @xmath , and although
a lot of the arguments there are completely analogous to the @xmath
case, the chapter is written in such a way that the reader can read it
without having read Chapter 4 .
What is not completely analogous between these two chapters is that for
@xmath , the CAP forms we need have been completely classified, and so
the computation of the cuspidal multiplicity in the @xmath case is
unconditional. As we mentioned, this is not the case for @xmath , and
Chapter 6 is devoted to the aforementioned computation of the
Adams–Johnson packet which makes our conditional results reasonable.

### Acknowledgements

I want to thank my advisor Eric Urban for suggesting the problem that
eventually led to this work, and for his guidance in navigating the
automorphic ocean. Many thanks are also due to Jeffrey Adams for his
help with the problem whose solution became the final chapter of this
paper.
We would also like to thank Raphaël Beuzart-Plessis, Johan de Jong, Wee
Teck Gan, Michael Harris, Hervé Jacquet, Stephen D. Miller, Aaron
Pollack, Christopher Skinner, and Shuai Wang for helpful conversations.

## Notation and conventions

We now set the notation that will be used throughout the rest of this
paper.

#### Groups and Lie algebras

In Chapters 1 and 2 , @xmath will denote a reductive group over the
field @xmath of rational numbers. In Chapter 3 , @xmath will furthermore
be split over @xmath . In Chapter 4 , we will specialize to the group
@xmath and, in Chapter 5 , to @xmath . In Chapter 6 , we will be working
primarily with a real reductive Lie group, and we will denote that group
by @xmath .
In general, our convention is to use uppercase roman letters to denote
groups over @xmath , such as @xmath , to use uppercase boldface letters
to denote real Lie groups, such as @xmath , and to use the corresponding
lowercase fraktur letters to denote complex Lie algebras. So for
example, @xmath will always denote the complexified Lie algebra of
either the @xmath -group @xmath or the real Lie group @xmath . There
will be a few exceptions to this convention, however. For example, when
we have fixed a reductive @xmath -group @xmath , unless otherwise noted,
we will simply write @xmath for the real Lie group consisting of its
@xmath -points.
When working with the group @xmath , we will often fix a parabolic
subgroup @xmath of @xmath along with a Levi decomposition @xmath . In
this decomposition, @xmath will always denote the Levi factor and @xmath
the unipotent radical. If we have another parabolic subgroup with fixed
Levi decomposition, then we use subscripts on the notation for its fixed
Levi factor and its unipotent radical to distinguish them from those of
@xmath ; so if @xmath is another parabolic subgroup, we will write
@xmath for its Levi decomposition.
For any parabolic @xmath as above, the notation @xmath will denote the
maximal @xmath -split torus in the center of the Levi @xmath of @xmath .
This applies in particular to @xmath and @xmath ; we use @xmath to
denote the maximal @xmath -split torus in the center of @xmath , and
@xmath that of @xmath .
Now we have the complexified Lie algebras @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath of,
respectively, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . We let @xmath , the self-commutator of
@xmath , and more generally, we write @xmath , or @xmath . We also write
@xmath and @xmath , and similarly for @xmath and @xmath . Then there are
decompositions

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

When @xmath and @xmath are fixed along with their respective Levi
decompositions, we will write @xmath for the set equivalence classes of
elements @xmath such that @xmath . where @xmath and @xmath are
considered equivalent if @xmath centralizes @xmath .
We will always write @xmath for the character @xmath given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and similarly for @xmath .

#### Points of groups

When @xmath is a place of @xmath , we write @xmath for the completion of
@xmath at @xmath . Then @xmath . The group of @xmath -points of any
affine algebraic group over @xmath is always given the usual topology
induced from @xmath .
We write @xmath for the adeles of @xmath and @xmath for the finite
adeles. The groups of @xmath -points or @xmath -points of any affine
algebraic group over @xmath are also given their standard topologies.
When @xmath is fixed as above, we will often consider the associated
height function @xmath . This is a function

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

To define it, we must fix a maximal compact subgroup @xmath . We assume
@xmath where @xmath is a fixed maximal compact subgroup of @xmath and
@xmath is a maximal compact subgroup of @xmath which we assume to be in
good position with respect to a fixed minimal parabolic inside @xmath .
(Here the groups @xmath are maximal compact subgroups of @xmath .) In
particular, the Iwasawa decomposition holds for @xmath and @xmath .
Write @xmath for the natural pairing

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

given by evaluation, where @xmath . Write @xmath for the group of
algebraic characters of @xmath . Then @xmath is defined first on the
subgroup @xmath by requiring

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath denotes the restriction to @xmath of the differential at
the identity of the restriction of @xmath to @xmath , and @xmath is
usual the adelic absolute value. Then @xmath is defined in general by
declaring it to be left invariant with respect to @xmath and right
invariant with respect to @xmath .
If @xmath is one of the rings @xmath , @xmath , or @xmath , we use the
notation @xmath to denote the modulus character of @xmath , and
similarly for other parabolics.

#### Automorphic representations

We take the point of view that an “automorphic representation” of @xmath
is (among other things) an irreducible object in the category of
admissible @xmath -modules. We often even view automorphic
representations as @xmath -modules by restriction. We let @xmath denote
the space of all automorphic forms on @xmath .
If @xmath is an automorphic representation of @xmath and @xmath is a
place of @xmath , we will denote by @xmath the local component of @xmath
at @xmath . If @xmath is finite, then this is an irreducible admissible
representation of @xmath , and if @xmath , then this is an irreducible
admissible @xmath -module.

#### Galois theory

We will write @xmath for the absolute Galois group of @xmath , and for
any place @xmath of @xmath , we will similarly write @xmath for the
absolute Galois group of @xmath . If @xmath is finite, we always view
@xmath as a subgroup of @xmath via by fixing a decomposition group at
@xmath .
Galois representations for us will always be into the @xmath -points of
a fixed algebraic group. We always identify @xmath with @xmath via a
fixed isomorphism.
For @xmath a prime, @xmath always denotes a fixed geometric Frobenius
element at @xmath in @xmath . If @xmath denotes the @xmath -adic
cyclotomic character, then our conventions will be such that twists by
@xmath on the automorphic side correspond to twists by @xmath on the
Galois side; @xmath sends @xmath to @xmath , and @xmath also sends
@xmath to @xmath .

#### Duals

We use the symbol @xmath in various ways. If @xmath is an abelian Lie
algebra, @xmath will denote the characters of @xmath . If @xmath is a
complex representation of a group, then @xmath is the usual dual
representation over @xmath . Similarly, if @xmath is an @xmath -adic
Galois representation, then @xmath is the usual dual representation over
@xmath . If @xmath is our reductive @xmath -group, then @xmath or @xmath
will denote the dual group over either of the algebraically closed
fields @xmath or @xmath , respectively. Similarly, if @xmath is a real
reductive Lie group, @xmath will denote its dual group.

###### Contents

-    1 Eisenstein series and spaces of automorphic forms
    -    1.1 Review of Eisenstein series
    -    1.2 The Franke–Schwermer decomposition
    -    1.3 Structure of the pieces of the Franke–Schwermer
        decomposition
-    2 Cohomology
    -    2.1 The cohomology of the space of automorphic forms
    -    2.2 The cohomology of induced representations
-    3 Galois representations
    -    3.1 Galois representations attached to automorphic
        representations
    -    3.2 Galois representations and induced representations
-    4 The case of @xmath
    -    4.1 The group @xmath
    -    4.2 Near equivalence and induced representations
    -    4.3 Eisenstein multiplicity of Langlands quotients
    -    4.4 Cuspidal multiplicity of Langlands quotients
-    5 The case of @xmath
    -    5.1 The group @xmath
    -    5.2 Near equivalence and induced representations
    -    5.3 Eisenstein multiplicity of Langlands quotients
    -    5.4 Arthur’s conjectures and the cuspidal multiplicity of
        Langlands quotients
-    6 The archimedean Arthur packet for @xmath
    -    6.1 Cohomological induction
    -    6.2 Discrete series and Harish-Chandra’s classification
    -    6.3 The Adams–Johnson construction
    -    6.4 Determination of the packet for @xmath

## 1 Eisenstein series and spaces of automorphic forms

This chapter will be devoted to studying spaces of automorphic forms in
the style of Franke [ franke ] and Franke–Schwermer [ FS ] . We will
state the Franke–Schwermer decomposition and study the structure of its
pieces using the Franke filtration. But first, we recall some of the
theory of Eisenstein series.

### 1.1 Review of Eisenstein series

Let @xmath a parabolic @xmath -subgroup of our reductive group @xmath
(see the section on notation in the introduction) with fixed Levi
decomposition @xmath . In this section, we will recall how to use
automorphic representations of @xmath to construct Eisenstein series,
and we will explain how to study these Eisenstein series using
parabolically induced representations and intertwining operators.

#### Eisenstein series and their constant terms

We start with a cuspidal automorphic representation @xmath of @xmath
with central character @xmath , and we assume @xmath is trivial on
@xmath . So if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

denotes the space of functions on @xmath which are square integrable
modulo center and which transform under the center with respect to
@xmath , then @xmath occurs in the cuspidal spectrum

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Write @xmath for the differential of the restriction of @xmath to @xmath
. The character @xmath is an element of @xmath . Then we consider the
automorphic representation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The representation @xmath is a unitary automorphic representation. If
@xmath is realized on a space of functions

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then @xmath is realized on the space

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is a subspace of @xmath .
Now we let @xmath be the space of smooth, @xmath -finite, @xmath -valued
functions @xmath on

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that, for all @xmath , the function

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

of @xmath lies in the space

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here, the brackets denote an isotypic component.
The space @xmath lets us build Eisenstein series. In fact, let @xmath .
We define, for @xmath and @xmath , the Eisenstein series @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This series only converges for @xmath sufficiently far inside a positive
Weyl chamber, but it defines a holomorphic function there in the
variable @xmath which continues meromorphically to all of @xmath ; see [
Langlands ] , [ MW ] , or more recently [ BL ] , where the proof has
been greatly simplified.
For each fixed @xmath and for each fixed @xmath at which @xmath does not
have a pole, the Eisenstein series @xmath is an automorphic form on
@xmath . It will be important for us in our examples of @xmath and
@xmath to study when and how certain Eisenstein series have poles. The
general theory which explains how to do this, as developed for instance
in [ LEP ] and [ shahidies ] , goes through two steps. First, one
reduces to studying the constant terms of Eisenstein series, and second,
one computes the constant terms using local calculations involving
intertwining operators.
This first step is relatively easy to explain. Let @xmath be another
parabolic subgroup, this time with Levi decomposition @xmath . The
constant term of @xmath along @xmath is, as usual, defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is meromorphic in @xmath . Furthermore, the Eisenstein series @xmath
has a pole at a point @xmath if and only if there is a proper parabolic
subgroup @xmath such that @xmath has a pole at @xmath .
Next, to proceed and compute the constant terms of Eisenstein series
using local computations, we first need to express the space @xmath in
terms of local pieces.

#### Induced representations

The space @xmath is a parabolic induction space. In fact, let us view
@xmath as acting on the subspace @xmath of @xmath . The pair @xmath is
an @xmath -module, and we extend this structure to a @xmath -module
structure via the trivial action by the unipotent radical. We consider
the parabolic induction functor

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and, for @xmath , we write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for short. The space above is an unnormalized induction, and we can
normalize it by writing

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then there is an isomorphism of @xmath -modules

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the space on the right hand side is just defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore, elements of the induction @xmath can also be used to define
Eisenstein series as above.

#### Intertwining operators

We now need to define the intertwining operators, which will let us
access the constant terms of Eisenstein series.
Given another parabolic subgroup @xmath of @xmath , let given @xmath ,
let us identify @xmath with an element of @xmath . For @xmath and @xmath
, define a new element @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We say that this assignment @xmath is a flat section of the induction.
Now define (formally) for @xmath varying in a flat section, the
intertwining operator @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

When convergent, this defines a map of @xmath -modules,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where if @xmath is an automorphic representation of @xmath , then @xmath
denotes the automorphic representation of @xmath defined by @xmath . It
is a fact that the integral defining @xmath does converge for @xmath in
a certain cone in @xmath and is holomorphic in @xmath there, and that it
continues meromorphically to all of @xmath .
We can use the intertwining operators to describe the constant term. The
following theorem is due to Langlands. See Section 6.2 of the book by
Shahidi [ shahidies ] .

###### Theorem 1.1.1.

Let @xmath be a parabolic @xmath -subgroup of @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is an equality of functions of @xmath varying meromorphically in
@xmath .

#### Local study of intertwining operators

Now we make a local study of the intertwining operators in order to
incorporate the theory of @xmath -functions into our considerations. To
do this, we first write the automorphic representation @xmath in terms
of its local components as usual as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the restricted tensor product is over all places @xmath of @xmath
; the representation @xmath is a smooth, admissible representation of
@xmath if @xmath is finite, and it is an admissible @xmath -module is
@xmath .
If @xmath is finite, @xmath , and @xmath is a smooth admissible
representation of @xmath , let us write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for the usual smooth, @xmath -finite parabolic induction, where @xmath
is being viewed as a character of @xmath via the canonical
identification @xmath and the inclusion @xmath . Similarly if @xmath is
instead an admissible @xmath -module, let us write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for the usual archimedean parabolic induction, where this time @xmath is
being viewed as a character of @xmath by letting it act trivially on
@xmath and @xmath . Then via the decomposition of @xmath above, we have
an isomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath again be another parabolic @xmath -subgroup of @xmath . For
any @xmath and any place @xmath , there are also local intertwining
operators

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

defined by integrals analogous to the global intertwining operator above
(at least in the nonarchimedean case). Here @xmath is defined similarly
as in the global case above.
If @xmath is finite and @xmath is a smooth admissible representation of
@xmath , then any @xmath can be made to vary with @xmath in a unique way
such that @xmath is independent of @xmath , because of the Iwasawa
decomposition. We say in this case that @xmath is a flat section of the
induction.
If @xmath is furthermore irreducible and unramified, then @xmath has a
unique up to scalar @xmath -fixed vector; given a @xmath -fixed vector
@xmath in the space @xmath of @xmath , there is a unique @xmath such
that @xmath for any @xmath . Then @xmath is @xmath -fixed and forms a
flat section. If @xmath , then @xmath is also @xmath -fixed, and hence
is a scalar multiple of the @xmath -fixed vector @xmath given by the
property that @xmath for any @xmath (recall that @xmath and @xmath act
on the same space). If we let @xmath vary in a flat section, this scalar
multiple will vary, and it is possible to say how in particular cases
when @xmath is maximal. In fact, there is a classical formula of
Gindikin–Karpelevich which expresses this multiple in terms of local
@xmath -functions.

#### @xmath-functions and intertwining operators

We will not need the local formula of Gindikin–Karpelevich here, but we
will need a global consequence of it, which is at the heart of the
Langlands–Shihidi method. We need to set up some notation before we can
state it, however, and we do this now.
Assume for the rest of this section that @xmath is split and @xmath is
maximal. Let @xmath be a Borel subgroup of @xmath with Levi @xmath , and
fix a set @xmath of positive simple roots for @xmath in @xmath that
makes @xmath standard. Assume @xmath corresponds to the subset of @xmath
obtained by omitting a single simple root @xmath . Let @xmath be the
unique element of the Weyl group of @xmath in @xmath which sends every
root in @xmath to positive simple roots, and which sends @xmath to a
negative root. If @xmath is the standard maximal parabolic with Levi
@xmath , then @xmath .
View @xmath as an element of @xmath and write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the usual pairing on @xmath induced from the Killing
form. Then @xmath is one dimensional, generated by @xmath .
Let @xmath be the parabolic subgroup of the dual group @xmath
corresponding to the set of coroots associated with the simple roots in
@xmath . The dual group @xmath is the Levi of @xmath , and we let @xmath
be the unipotent radical of @xmath . The group @xmath acts on @xmath via
the adjoint action. For @xmath an integer, let @xmath generated by the
coroots @xmath for which @xmath . Then each @xmath is a representation
of @xmath , and we denote the corresponding action of @xmath by @xmath .

###### Theorem 1.1.2.

Let @xmath be maximal and let @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath be
as above. Let @xmath be a set of places which includes all the ramified
places for @xmath and the archimedean place. For @xmath , fix @xmath a
nonzero @xmath -fixed vector in the space of @xmath . Let @xmath and let
@xmath and @xmath be spherical sections defined as above so that @xmath
.
Assume @xmath decomposes as @xmath where @xmath for @xmath . Then we
have the formula

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath denotes a partial @xmath -function, away from the places of
@xmath .

###### Proof.

See Shahidi [ shahidies ] , Theorem 6.3.1. ∎

Thus the theorem above, in combination with Theorem 1.1.1 , will later
allow us to compute constant terms of maximal parabolically induced
Eisenstein series along the maximal parabolics from which they are
induced.

### 1.2 The Franke–Schwermer decomposition

Let @xmath be a finite dimensional irreducible representation of @xmath
. Then the annihilator of @xmath in the center of the universal
enveloping algebra of @xmath is an ideal, and we denote it by @xmath .
Denote by @xmath the space of automorphic forms on @xmath which are
annihilated by a power of @xmath , and which transform trivially under
@xmath . The forms in @xmath are the ones that can possibly contribute
to the cohomology of @xmath , as we will discuss later.
In [ FS ] , Franke and Schwermer wrote down a decomposition of @xmath
into pieces defined by certain parabolic subgroups of @xmath and
cuspidal automorphic representations of their Levis. This decomposition
is a direct sum decomposition of @xmath -modules, and we describe it in
this section.
First, given two parabolic subgroups of @xmath defined over @xmath , we
say that they are associate if their Levis are conjugate by an element
of @xmath . Let @xmath be the set of equivalence classes for this
relation. It is a finite set. If @xmath is a parabolic @xmath -subgroup
of @xmath , let @xmath denote its equivalence class in @xmath .
Now fix @xmath a parabolic @xmath -subgroup of @xmath with Levi
decomposition @xmath . Given another parabolic @xmath -subgroup @xmath
of @xmath , we say a function @xmath is negligible along @xmath if for
any @xmath , the function given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is orthogonal to the space of cuspidal functions on @xmath . Let @xmath
be the subspace of all functions in @xmath which are negligible along
any parabolic subgroup @xmath . It is a theorem of Langlands that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as @xmath -modules. The summand @xmath is the space of cusp forms in
@xmath .
Franke and Schwermer refine this decomposition even further using
cuspidal automorphic representations of the Levis of the parabolics in
each class @xmath . We briefly recall how.
Let @xmath be an associate class of cuspidal automorphic representations
of @xmath . We do not recall here the exact definition of this notion,
referring instead to [ FS ] Section 1.2, or [ LS ] Section 1.3. Each
@xmath is a collection of irreducible representations of the groups
@xmath for each @xmath with Levi decomposition @xmath , finitely many
for each such @xmath , and each such representation @xmath must occur in
@xmath where @xmath is the central character of @xmath . Conversely, any
irreducible representation @xmath of @xmath with central character
@xmath occurring in @xmath determines a unique @xmath . We let @xmath
denote the set of all associate classes of cuspidal automorphic
representations of @xmath .
Now given a @xmath , let @xmath be one of the representations comprising
@xmath ; say @xmath is a representation of the @xmath -points of a Levi
@xmath for @xmath a parabolic associate to @xmath . Form the space
@xmath as in Section 1.1 . Let @xmath be the differential of the central
character of @xmath at the archimedean place, viewed as an element of
@xmath . Then for any @xmath we can form the Eisenstein series @xmath ,
@xmath .
Depending on the choice of @xmath , the Eisenstein series @xmath may
have a pole at @xmath . Nevertheless, one can still take residues of
@xmath at @xmath to obtain residual Eisenstein series. We let @xmath to
be the collection of all possible Eisenstein series, residual Eisenstein
series, and partial derivatives of such with respect to @xmath ,
evaluated at @xmath , built from any @xmath . (For a more precise
description of this space, see [ FS ] , Section 1.3, or [ LS ] , Section
1.4. There is also a more intrinsic definition of this space, defined
without reference to Eisenstein series, in [ FS ] , Section 1.2, or [ LS
] , Section 1.4, which is proved to be equivalent to this description in
[ FS ] .) One can use the functional equation of Eisenstein series to
show that the space @xmath is independent of the @xmath in @xmath used
to define it.
We can now state the Franke–Schwermer decomposition of @xmath .

###### Theorem 1.2.1 (Franke–Schwermer [Fs]).

There is a direct sum decomposition of @xmath -modules

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

### 1.3 Structure of the pieces of the Franke–Schwermer decomposition

We introduce in this section certain @xmath -modules, whose structures
as such modules are explicit, and explain how they can be related to the
pieces of the Franke–Schwermer decomposition introduced just above.
Almost everything in this section is done in Franke’s paper [ franke ] ,
pp. 218, 234, but without taking into consideration the associate
classes @xmath .
We consider again a parabolic @xmath -subgroup @xmath of @xmath with
Levi decomposition @xmath . As before, let us fix @xmath a cuspidal
automorphic representation of @xmath , and let @xmath be its
unitarization, as in Section 1.1 . Then @xmath occurs in @xmath . For
brevity, let us write @xmath for the smooth, @xmath -finite vectors in
the @xmath -isotypic component of @xmath . Then @xmath is a @xmath
-module, and we extend this structure to one of a @xmath -module by
letting @xmath and @xmath act trivially, as well as @xmath and @xmath .
Fix for the rest of this section a point @xmath . Let @xmath be the
symmetric algebra on the vector space @xmath ; we view this space as the
space of differential operators on @xmath at the point @xmath . So if
@xmath is a holomorphic function on @xmath , then @xmath acts on @xmath
by taking a sum of iterated partial derivatives of @xmath and evaluating
the result at the point @xmath . So in this way, every @xmath can be
viewed as a distribution on holomorphic functions on @xmath supported at
the point @xmath .
With this point of view, these distributions can be multiplied by
holomorphic functions on @xmath ; just multiply the test function by the
given holomorphic function before evaluating the distribution. With this
in mind, we can define an action of @xmath on @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We also let @xmath and @xmath act trivially on @xmath , which gives us
an action of @xmath on @xmath .
We also let @xmath act trivially on @xmath . Since the Lie algebra of
@xmath lies in @xmath , this is consistent with the @xmath action just
defined and makes @xmath a @xmath -module.
Finally, let @xmath act on @xmath by the formula

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then with the actions just defined, @xmath gets the structure of a
@xmath -module.
Now we form the tensor product @xmath , which carries a natural @xmath
-module structure coming from those on the two factors. We will consider
in what follows the induced @xmath -module

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This space turns out to be isomorphic to another @xmath -module, which
we now describe.
Let @xmath be the induction space introduced in Section 1.1 ; it is the
unnormalized parabolic induction of the space @xmath above. Form the
tensor product

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

While the first factor in this tensor product is a @xmath -module, the
second is only a @xmath -module, and so we do not immediately get a
@xmath -module structure on the tensor product. However, one can endow
this space with a @xmath -module structure by viewing it as a space of
distributions in a manner to be described now.
We first introduce the space of functions on which we will consider
distributions. These will be functions on @xmath . Let us write @xmath
for a variable in @xmath and @xmath for a variable in @xmath . Let
@xmath be the space of functions @xmath on @xmath which are smooth and
compactly supported in the variable @xmath when @xmath is fixed, and
which are holomorphic in the variable @xmath when @xmath is fixed. Then
we consider the space @xmath of distributions on @xmath which are
compactly supported in the variable @xmath .
The space @xmath embeds naturally as a subspace of @xmath . In fact, we
can identify the simple tensor @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath , with
the distribution given on functions @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here, @xmath is being viewed as a distribution on holomorphic functions
on @xmath as described above, so indeed the right hand side of this
equality is a complex number.
Now we describe a @xmath -module structure on the space @xmath through
formulas that make sense in @xmath . Let us give these formulas and then
make comments on them afterward. For @xmath and @xmath , we consider
@xmath as a distribution in the variables @xmath and we define:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath , and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath .
Now in the formulas defining the actions of @xmath and @xmath , there
are distributions on the right hand side that have been multiplied by
functions depending on both @xmath and @xmath . Therefore, it is not
immediately obvious that these expressions define elements of the image
of @xmath in @xmath ; that is, it is not completely clear that these
expressions can be written as a finite sum of simple tensors in @xmath .
However, using properties of the function @xmath , this can be checked.
We omit the verification here for sake of brevity.
Now we can relate the two @xmath -modules defined in this section. We
have the following proposition, whose proof we again omit.

###### Proposition 1.3.1.

There is an isomorphism of @xmath -modules

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

More generally, if @xmath is a finite dimensional representation of
@xmath , then we also have an isomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where on the left hand side, @xmath is being viewed as a @xmath -module,
and on the right, it is viewed as a @xmath -module by restriction.

The reason we introduce the representation @xmath in the second part of
this proposition will become more apparent when we discuss cohomology
later.
Now we come back to Eisenstein series. Assume @xmath is such that there
is an irreducible finite dimensional representation @xmath of @xmath
such that the associate class @xmath containing @xmath is in @xmath .
Then we can construct elements of the piece @xmath of the
Franke–Schwermer decomposition from Section 1.2 from elements of @xmath
using Eisenstein series as follows.
Recall that, in the notation of Section 1.1 , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Elements @xmath fit into flat sections @xmath where @xmath varies in
@xmath . Then for such @xmath we have @xmath . In what follows, we will
identify elements of @xmath with elements of @xmath , and then use this
notation to vary them in flat sections.
Let @xmath denote the differential of the archimedean component of the
central character of @xmath . Then as in Section 1.1 , if we are given
@xmath , we can form the Eisenstein series @xmath for @xmath varying in
@xmath . This is a family of automorphic forms which varies
meromorphically in @xmath . Let @xmath be a holomorphic function on
@xmath such that, for any @xmath , the product @xmath is holomorphic
near @xmath . Then we define a map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

in other words, this map forms an Eisenstein series according to @xmath
, multiplies it by @xmath in order to cancel any poles, and then
differentiates the result at the point @xmath according to @xmath .
The map @xmath is surjective by our definition of @xmath . If all the
Eisenstein series @xmath , for @xmath , are holomorphic at @xmath , then
we write @xmath for the map just defined with @xmath .

###### Proposition 1.3.2.

The map @xmath defined just above is a surjective map of @xmath
-modules. Furthermore, if all the Eisenstein series @xmath arising from
@xmath are holomorphic at @xmath , then the map @xmath is an
isomorphism.

###### Proof.

To check that @xmath is a map of @xmath -modules, one just needs to use
the formulas defining the @xmath -module structure on @xmath and show
they are preserved when forming Eisenstein series and taking
derivatives; this can be checked when @xmath is in the region of
convergence for the Eisenstein series, and then this extends to all
@xmath by analytic continuation. We omit the precise details of this
check.
For the second claim in the proposition, that @xmath is an isomorphism,
this follows essentially from Theorem 14 in Franke’s paper [ franke ] ;
this theorem implies that @xmath injective, since it equals the
restriction of Franke’s mean value map @xmath to @xmath . Whence by
surjectivity and the first part of the proposition, we are done. ∎

The spaces @xmath carry a filtration by @xmath -modules which is due to
Franke. We will not need for this paper the precise definition of this
filtration, but just a rough description of its graded pieces. This is
described in the following theorem.

###### Theorem 1.3.3.

There is a decreasing filtration

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

of @xmath -modules on @xmath , for which we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some @xmath (depending on @xmath ), and whose graded pieces have the
property described below.
Fix @xmath in @xmath , and say @xmath is a representation of the @xmath
-points of a Levi @xmath of a parabolic @xmath in @xmath . Let @xmath be
the differential of the archimedean component of the central character
of @xmath . Let @xmath be the set of quadruples @xmath where:

-   @xmath is a parabolic subgroup of @xmath which contains @xmath ;

-   @xmath is an element of @xmath ;

-   @xmath is an automorphic representation of @xmath occurring in

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and which is spanned by values at, or residues at, the point @xmath
    of Eisenstein series parabolically induced from @xmath to @xmath by
    representations in @xmath ; and

-   @xmath is an element of @xmath whose real part in @xmath is in the
    closure of the positive chamber, and such that the following
    relation between @xmath , @xmath and @xmath holds: Let @xmath be the
    infinitesimal character of the archimedean component of @xmath .
    Then

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    may be viewed as a collection of weights of a Cartan subalgebra of
    @xmath , and the condition we impose is that these weights are in
    the support of the infinitesimal character of @xmath .

For such a quadruple @xmath , let @xmath denote the @xmath -isotypic
component of the space

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then the property of the graded pieces of the filtration above is that,
for every @xmath with @xmath , there is a subset @xmath and an
isomorphism of @xmath -modules

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

While this essentially follows again from the work of Franke [ franke ]
, in this form, this theorem is a consequence of Theorem 4 in the paper
of Grobner [ grobner ] ; the latter paper takes into account the
presence of the class @xmath while the former does not. ∎

###### Remark 1.3.4.

In the context of Proposition 1.3.2 and Theorem 1.3.3 , when all the
Eisenstein series @xmath arising from @xmath are holomorphic at @xmath ,
what happens is that the filtration of Theorem 1.3.3 collapses to a
single step. The nontrivial piece of this filtration is then given by
@xmath through the map @xmath along with the isomorphism of Proposition
1.3.1 .

When @xmath is a maximal parabolic, the filtration of Theorem 1.3.3
becomes particularly simple. To describe it, we set some notation.
Assume @xmath is maximal. If @xmath is a unitary cuspidal automorphic
representation of @xmath and @xmath with @xmath , let us write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for the Langlands quotient of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

One definition of this is that it is the quotient of the induction above
by the kernel of the intertwining operator

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

of Section 1.1 . Here, if we fix a minimal parabolic contained in @xmath
, then @xmath is the Weyl element that sends every simple root in @xmath
to another positive simple root, and which sends the positive simple
root not in @xmath to a negative root, and @xmath is the standard
parabolic with Levi @xmath . Then we have

###### Theorem 1.3.5 (Grbac [grbac]).

In the setting above, with @xmath maximal and @xmath , assume @xmath
defines an associate class @xmath . If any of the Eisenstein series
@xmath coming from @xmath have a pole at @xmath , then there is an exact
sequence of @xmath -modules as follows:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

This follows from Theorem 3.1 in the paper of Grbac [ grbac ] . ∎

## 2 Cohomology

We now would like to study the cohomology of the pieces of the
Franke–Schwermer decomposition. We can reduce this to studying the
parabolically induced representations introduced in the previous chapter
and applying a classical argument involving the Kostant decomposition,
as in [ BW ] , Theorem III.3.3. We start with a general discussion of
cohomology.

### 2.1 The cohomology of the space of automorphic forms

We continue to use the notation set in the introduction, and in
particular, we will resume working with our reductive @xmath -group
@xmath . We have our maximal compact subgroup @xmath , and we fix an
open subgroup @xmath of @xmath . Then we necessarily have @xmath .
We will be interested in the @xmath -cohomology of the space of
automorphic forms on @xmath . By Franke’s resolution of Borel’s
conjecture ( [ franke ] , Theorem 18), this cohomology space (for
suitable @xmath ) computes the cohomology of certain locally symmetric
spaces attached to @xmath , and is therefore of arithmetic interest.
So as before, let @xmath be an irreducible, finite dimensional, complex
representation of @xmath . We view @xmath as a @xmath -module via its
restriction to @xmath , and hence as a @xmath -module by giving it a
trivial @xmath action. Our goal is to study the @xmath -cohomology space

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for any @xmath , which is naturally a @xmath -module; see the standard
reference by Borel–Wallach [ BW ] for the definition of @xmath
-cohomology and discussions of many of its most important properties.
Actually, the cohomology space above is smooth and admissible as a
@xmath -module, as can be seen by comparing it to the cohomology of
certain local systems on the locally symmetric spaces attached to @xmath
. By the results recalled in Section 1.2 and the Franke–Schwermer
decomposition (Theorem 1.2.1 ) we have a direct sum decomposition as
@xmath -modules

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Each summand in the decomposition above is therefore a smooth,
admissible @xmath -module, and although there may be infinitely summands
on the right hand side which don’t vanish, only finitely many of them
have nonzero @xmath -invariants for any given open compact subgroup
@xmath .
Let us write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for the cuspidal cohomology of @xmath . This is also the same as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The natural complement to the cuspidal cohomology in the decomposition
above is called the Eisenstein cohomology, i.e.,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath is a proper parabolic subgroup of @xmath defined over @xmath ,
let us define the @xmath -Eisenstein cohomology to be the summand
corresponding to the class @xmath , so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now let @xmath be the Hecke algebra of smooth, compactly supported,
complex-valued functions on @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then @xmath acts on any smooth, admissible @xmath -module @xmath via
convolution. Furthermore, for any @xmath and any open compact subgroup
@xmath for which @xmath is @xmath -biinvariant, we can consider the
trace @xmath of @xmath acting as a linear operator on the @xmath
invariants of @xmath . This is independent of the choice of @xmath and
defines an association

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and we call @xmath the character distribution associated with @xmath .
An irreducible admissible @xmath -module is determined by its character
distribution.

###### Definition 2.1.1.

The multiplicity of an irreducible admissible @xmath -module @xmath in
the @xmath th @xmath -cohomology of @xmath is the nonnegative integer
@xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for any @xmath and any open compact subgroup @xmath for which @xmath is
@xmath -biinvariant. Here, on the right hand side, the sum is over all
irreducible admissible @xmath -modules.
Similarly we define @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath for a proper parabolic
@xmath -subgroup @xmath of @xmath , by formulas similar to the one
above, namely:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We call these numbers, respectively, the cuspidal multiplicity, the
Eisenstein multiplicity, and the @xmath -Eisenstein multiplicity of
@xmath in the @xmath th cohomology of @xmath .

It follows immediately from the definitions that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The goal in the following will be to precisely compute, for certain
choices of @xmath , the multiplicity of the Langlands quotients of
certain induced representations, induced from maximal parabolic
subgroups, in the cohomology of particular @xmath ’s. These induced
representations will show up in Eisenstein cohomology naturally, as we
will explain in the next section. Perhaps more interestingly is that
these Langlands quotients can also occur in cuspidal cohomology, and we
will see examples of this in the cases of @xmath and @xmath later.

### 2.2 The cohomology of induced representations

We now calculate the cohomology of representations of @xmath that are
parabolically induced from automorphic representations of Levi
subgroups, and hence compute the cohomology of the graded pieces of the
Franke filtration described in Theorem 1.3.3 . The computations done in
this section were essentially carried out by Franke in [ franke ] ,
Section 7.4, but not in so much detail. We fill in some of the details
and give a sharper result, which we can give because we are focusing on
one representation of the Levi at a time, and we can do this because we
have access to the Franke–Schwermer decomposition, Theorem 1.2.1 . The
method is essentially that of the proof of Theorem III.3.3 in [ BW ] .
This method also appears in the computations of Grbac–Grobner [ GG ] and
Grbac–Schwermer [ GS ] .
Let @xmath be a parabolic subgroup defined over @xmath with Levi
decomposition @xmath . Fix an automorphic representation @xmath of
@xmath with central character @xmath , occurring in

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then the unitarization @xmath occurs in

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath denote the differential of the archimedean component of
@xmath . Fix also an irreducible finite dimensional representation
@xmath of @xmath .
As before, fix a compact subgroup @xmath of @xmath such that @xmath . We
will compute the @xmath -cohomology space

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

in terms of @xmath -cohomology spaces attached to @xmath . We will
require the following lemma.

###### Lemma 2.2.1.

Let @xmath . Let @xmath denote the one dimensional @xmath -module on
which @xmath acts through multiplication by @xmath . Then there is an
isomorphism of @xmath -modules

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here, @xmath is just the one dimensional representation of @xmath on
which @xmath acts via @xmath .

###### Proof.

It will be convenient to work in coordinates. So let @xmath be
coordinates on @xmath ; this is the same as fixing a basis of @xmath .
Then the elements of @xmath may be viewed as polynomials in the
variables @xmath .
Let @xmath be a multi-index. By definition, the monomial @xmath acts as
a distribution on holomorphic functions @xmath on @xmath via the formula

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Also by definition, if @xmath , then @xmath acts as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be a polynomial in @xmath . Then a quick induction using the
above formulas shows that @xmath acts on @xmath as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence @xmath acts on the element @xmath in @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It follows from this that if @xmath is the basis of @xmath corresponding
to the coordinates @xmath , then the decomposition

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

realizes @xmath as an exterior tensor product of analogous
single-variable symmetric powers:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath are the @xmath th components of @xmath in the dual basis of
@xmath to @xmath . To be explicit, here the space @xmath can be
identified as the space of polynomials in the variable @xmath with the
structure of a module over the one-dimensional abelian Lie algebra
@xmath given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By the Künneth formula, if we ignore for now the @xmath -action, we then
reduce to checking the one-dimensional analog of the lemma, that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

To check this formula, we first note that by definition of Lie algebra
cohomology, the space @xmath is the cohomology of the complex

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the map between the first two terms is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath , then this map is an isomorphism since the action of @xmath
on a polynomial preserves its degree. On the other hand, if @xmath ,
then @xmath decreases the degree of a polynomial by one exactly, and
therefore this map is surjective with kernel consisting of constant
polynomials. This therefore proves our formula, at least without taking
into account the @xmath action, and shows in fact that @xmath can be
identified with subspace of @xmath consisting of constants. By
definition, this space has an action of @xmath given by the character
@xmath , which proves our lemma. ∎

Another ingredient we need is a well-known theorem of Kostant. To state
it, we need to set some notation.
Let @xmath be a Cartan subalgebra, and assume @xmath . Fix an ordering
on the roots of @xmath in @xmath which makes @xmath standard. If @xmath
denotes the Weyl group of @xmath in @xmath , then write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Write @xmath for half the sum of the positive roots of @xmath in @xmath
.
If @xmath is a dominant weight, write @xmath for the representation of
@xmath of highest weight @xmath . If @xmath is a weight which is
dominant for @xmath we denote by @xmath the representation of @xmath of
highest weight @xmath . In both cases, these weights may be nontrivial
on the center, in which case these representations are considered to
have central character given by the restriction of these weights to the
respective centers. Then we have the following well-known theorem, whose
proof we omit.

###### Theorem 2.2.2 (Kostant).

With notation as above, let @xmath be a dominant weight. Then, as
representations of @xmath , we have an isomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath denotes the length of the Weyl group element @xmath .

Now we are ready to state and prove the main theorem of this chapter.
Its proof follows the strategy in Borel–Wallach [ BW ] , Theorem
III.3.3.

###### Theorem 2.2.3.

Notation as above, let @xmath be a dominant weight such that @xmath .
Assume that the cohomology space

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is nontrivial. Then there is a unique @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and such that the infinitesimal character of the archimedean component
of @xmath contains @xmath . Furthermore, if @xmath is the length of such
an element @xmath , then for any @xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath denotes a normalized parabolic induction functor, and
@xmath denotes the restriction to @xmath of the representation of @xmath
of highest weight @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let us first prove the uniqueness of the element @xmath in the theorem.
Note first that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Because @xmath is dominant, we know @xmath is regular, and the
conditions in the theorem therefore pin down the element @xmath uniquely
up to the Weyl group @xmath of @xmath in @xmath . But it is well known
that @xmath is a set of representatives for @xmath modulo @xmath .
Therefore @xmath lies in a unique Weyl chamber, and so @xmath is
determined.
Let @xmath be an integer. We now begin to compute the cohomology space

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

First, Proposition 1.3.1 allows us to pull the tensor product with
@xmath inside the induction, whence by Frobenius reciprocity, we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (2.2.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

It is our goal, therefore, to compute

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now, as @xmath -modules, the space @xmath comes from a @xmath -module
and @xmath comes from an @xmath -module. Thus, using

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we get a spectral sequence whose @xmath page is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and which degenerates to the cohomology space above with @xmath . We
will eventually be able to say that this spectral sequence degenerates
on its @xmath page, but this will follow from the vanishing of enough of
its terms. So we compute this page now.
By the Kostant decomposition (Theorem 2.2.2 ), the @xmath -term on this
@xmath page is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Write @xmath , As an @xmath -module, the representation @xmath
decomposes as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as an exterior tensor product over the direct sum @xmath . Thus by the
Künneth formula, we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By Lemma 2.2.1 , the second factor here is nonvanishing if and only if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the first factor is nonvanishing only if the infinitesimal character
of @xmath matches the negative of that of the archimedean component of
@xmath . Since @xmath is standard, we have @xmath , which implies

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and so this first nonvanishing condition is equivalent to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the second of these nonvanishing conditions is just that @xmath occurs
in the infinitesimal character of the archimedean component of @xmath .
As shown at the beginning of this proof, there is only one @xmath
satisfying these two conditions, and we will denote it by @xmath .
Thus, by Lemma 2.2.1 , we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the factor @xmath is concentrated in degree zero.
Retracing our steps, we have thus computed the @xmath page of our
spectral sequence. It is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The @xmath page therefore consists only of one row, and thus our
spectral sequence degenerates. Hence we have shown

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now we rewrite

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

so that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We therefore have, by ( 2.2.1 ),

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is what we wanted to prove. ∎

The above theorem will allow us to produce Eisenstein cohomology
classes. To distinguish the representations of @xmath generated by these
classes, we will need to see what might correspond to them on the Galois
side. We set up the tools to do this in the next chapter.

## 3 Galois representations

We now recall the facts we need about @xmath -adic Galois
representations. The reason for introducing Galois representations into
the picture is that they will allow us to distinguish the automorphic
representations to which they will be attached.
Our notion of what it means for a Galois representation to be attached
to an automorphic representation is relatively weak, but it will suffice
for our purposes.

### 3.1 Galois representations attached to automorphic representations

We continue to use the notation set previously, and in particular we
will continue working with our reductive @xmath -group @xmath , but with
one modification: We now assume that @xmath is split. This will simplify
our discussion of Satake parameters, and it will also allow us to work
only with the Galois group of @xmath instead of that of some finite
extension.
We explain in this section what we mean when we say that an automorphic
representation of @xmath has attached to it a Galois representation. Our
version of this notion will be a weak one, in the sense that it will
only depend on the automorphic representation in question at all but
finitely many of its unramified places. But this will suffice for our
purposes.
So to get started, fix a prime @xmath . We will recall some of the
theory of unramified representations of @xmath due to Langlands, Satake,
and others.
First we fix a split maximal torus @xmath and a Borel subgroup @xmath
containing @xmath . Write @xmath for the unipotent radical of @xmath .
Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

be the Weyl group of @xmath . Let @xmath denote the modulus character of
@xmath .
Next, fix a model of @xmath over @xmath . Write @xmath ; this is a
hyperspecial maximal compact subgroup of @xmath . Let @xmath be the
spherical Hecke algebra, defined as the convolution algebra of smooth,
compactly supported, @xmath -biinvariant, @xmath -valued functions on
@xmath .
Fix an irreducible admissible representation @xmath of @xmath which is
spherical, i.e., which has a @xmath -fixed vector. Then the @xmath
-invariant subspace @xmath is one dimensional. Thus we get a character
of the Hecke algebra

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

On the other hand, we have the Satake transform @xmath , which is an
isomorphism from @xmath to the Weyl group invariants of the analogously
defined Hecke algebra @xmath . In more detail, the Hecke algebra @xmath
is defined to be the convolution algebra of smooth, compactly supported,
@xmath -biinvariant, @xmath -valued functions on @xmath . Because @xmath
is abelian, this is the same as the group algebra @xmath . Of course,
@xmath acts on @xmath and therefore gives compatible actions on both
@xmath and @xmath .
The Satake transform

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is a theorem that the image of @xmath is contained in the Weyl group
invariants @xmath and, in fact, is an isomorphism when @xmath is
considered at its target. Thus, through the identifications above, we
get an isomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We can therefore transfer the character @xmath defined above to @xmath
and obtain a character

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

There is another construction that gives a character of @xmath starting
from the representation @xmath , which we describe now. It is a theorem
that @xmath , since it is spherical, occurs as a subquotient of a
principal series representation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some character @xmath of @xmath which is trivial on @xmath . The
character @xmath with this property is unique only up to the action of
@xmath . But in any case, the character @xmath , when viewed as a
character @xmath , gives naturally a character

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The restriction of this character to the Weyl invariants will be written
as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

While there is a choice involved in selecting the character @xmath , and
hence in defining @xmath , the character @xmath does not depend on this
choice and is well defined.
We state the following well known result as a proposition.

###### Proposition 3.1.1.

In the setting above, the two characters

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

coincide.

Let us denote by @xmath the common character @xmath .
Now the group @xmath can be naturally identified with the cocharacter
group @xmath ; the identification is given by evaluating a cocharacter
@xmath at a uniformizer in @xmath . Also, if we fix a maximal torus
@xmath in the dual group @xmath , we have a natural identification
@xmath of the cocharacter group of @xmath with the character group of
@xmath .
Therefore the character @xmath just constructed may well be viewed as a
character

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now given a finite dimensional representation @xmath of @xmath , we can
view its character @xmath as an element of @xmath . Then the character
@xmath gives a conjugacy class @xmath in @xmath ; it is the unique
conjugacy class with the property that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for any finite dimensional representation @xmath of @xmath . We call
@xmath the Satake parameter or Langlands parameter attached to @xmath .
We now fix a prime @xmath different from @xmath . Since @xmath is
isomorphic to @xmath , everything above could be done over @xmath
instead. In particular, we may view @xmath as a character of @xmath ,
and we may view the Satake parameter @xmath as a conjugacy class in
@xmath .
We need to make this change of field because our Galois representations
will have as their target the group @xmath . In fact, we are ready to
give the following definition.

###### Definition 3.1.2.

Let @xmath be an automorphic representation of @xmath . We will say that
a continuous representation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is attached to @xmath if there is a finite set @xmath of places of
@xmath containing @xmath , the archimedean place, and all the ramified
places for @xmath , such that for any prime @xmath , @xmath is
unramified at @xmath and we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is any choice of (geometric) Frobenius element at @xmath ,
the element @xmath is the semisimplification of @xmath , and the Satake
parameter @xmath of the local component of @xmath at @xmath is viewed as
a conjugacy class in @xmath .

We remark that in the definition, the semisimplification @xmath may be
defined to be the semisimple element of @xmath whose image in any finite
dimensional representation of @xmath has the same characteristic
polynomial as @xmath .
Now in the case of the group @xmath a lot is known about when such
Galois representations exist. Let us recall some results in this
direction.
Let @xmath be a holomorphic cuspidal eigenform of weight @xmath ,
conductor @xmath , and nebentypus @xmath . Then @xmath gives rise to a
unitary automorphic representation @xmath of @xmath . This
representation @xmath has central character given by the adelization of
@xmath . Write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This normalization is necessary to recover the usual Galois
representation attached to @xmath . In fact, we have the following
theorem.

###### Theorem 3.1.3.

With the setting as in the above paragraph, fix a prime @xmath not
dividing @xmath . Then there is a continuous Galois representation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is attached to @xmath in the sense of Definition 3.1.2 ; in fact
the set @xmath in that definition can be taken to be the set of primes
dividing @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . This representation @xmath is
unique up to conjugation by elements of @xmath , and it is irreducible.
Furthermore, @xmath is Hodge–Tate (in fact, de Rham) at @xmath with
Hodge–Tate weights @xmath and @xmath .

###### Remark 3.1.4.

The above is a classical theorem which (except for the final claim about
@xmath being Hodge–Tate) is due to Eichler–Shimura when @xmath , to
Deligne when @xmath , and to Deligne–Serre when @xmath . Usually when
recalling this theorem one states explicitly the properties that, for
@xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the @xmath th Hecke eigenvalue of @xmath , and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath denotes the @xmath -adic cyclotomic character and @xmath is
viewed as a finite order Galois character by class field theory.
Actually, these assertions follow from our statement of the theorem once
we know @xmath explicitly enough to know the characteristic polynomial
of @xmath for @xmath .

We conclude this section with a proposition which will be useful for us
later when distinguishing between different automorphic representations.
To state it, we recall the following definition.

###### Definition 3.1.5.

Let @xmath be two automorphic representations of a reductive group
@xmath , with respective local components @xmath at places @xmath . We
say @xmath and @xmath are nearly equivalent if, for all but finitely
many places @xmath , there is an isomorphism @xmath .

###### Proposition 3.1.6.

Let @xmath be two automorphic representations of @xmath with respective
Galois representations

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Assume @xmath and @xmath are nearly equivalent. Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

be a finite dimensional representation of @xmath . Then the
semisimplified Galois representations

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which are semisimple representations of @xmath into @xmath , are
equivalent.

###### Proof.

By the hypotheses, there is a finite set @xmath of places, including
@xmath and the archimedean place, such that for @xmath , the local
components @xmath and @xmath of our automorphic representations at
@xmath are unramified and isomorphic. Therefore we have an equality of
Satake parameters for @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

After possibly enlarging @xmath , we have then that for @xmath , the
semisimple elements

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

are conjugate in @xmath . Therefore we have an equality of traces

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By continuity and Chebotarev, this implies an equality of characters

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which in turn implies the conclusion of our proposition. ∎

###### Remark 3.1.7.

The above proposition may be summarized as saying that @xmath is a
near-equivalence invariant of automorphic representations (at least when
@xmath exists). It is therefore also an isomorphism invariant; that is,
the proposition can be applied when @xmath . This is useful, since it is
possible for an automorphic representation to have many Galois
representations attached to it in the sense of our definition. This is
especially possible when @xmath is reducible (i.e., factors through a
proper parabolic subgroup of @xmath ).

### 3.2 Galois representations and induced representations

In this section we explain how to attach Galois representations to
subquotients of parabolically induced representations. This will
therefore give us a way of attaching Galois representations to
Eisenstein series.
We continue with the notation of the previous section, and in particular
we will work with our split reductive @xmath -group @xmath and a choice
of split maximal torus @xmath and Borel subgroup @xmath containing
@xmath . As we did before, we choose a split maximal torus @xmath in the
dual group @xmath and a Borel @xmath containing @xmath .
Now let @xmath be a parabolic subgroup containing @xmath , and let
@xmath be its standard Levi. The parabolic @xmath corresponds to a
subset of the set of simple roots of @xmath in @xmath , and the set of
corresponding coroots gives us a standard parabolic @xmath in @xmath .
Its standard Levi @xmath is, as this notation suggests, identified with
the dual group of @xmath .

###### Proposition 3.2.1.

Let @xmath be an automorphic representation of @xmath . Assume that
@xmath has attached to it a Galois representation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

in the sense of Definition 3.1.2 . Let @xmath be an automorphic
representation of @xmath which is a subquotient of the induced
representation

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

where @xmath is the modulus character of @xmath . Let @xmath be the
inclusion map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then the Galois representation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is attached to @xmath , again in the sense of Definition 3.1.2 .

###### Proof.

Decompose @xmath and @xmath into their local components,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be a finite set of places of @xmath , which contains @xmath
and the archimedean place, and such that for @xmath , the condition

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

of Definition 3.1.2 is satisfied for @xmath . Let @xmath be the set of
primes containing all those in @xmath , as well as any place @xmath for
which @xmath is not spherical. We are to verify that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (3.2.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

for @xmath .
Let @xmath be the Weyl group of @xmath in @xmath , and @xmath that of
@xmath in @xmath , and let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

be the characters constructed in Proposition 3.1.1 . Let @xmath be any
finite dimensional representation of @xmath , and let @xmath be the same
representation but viewed as a representation of @xmath . By the
characterizing property of the Satake parameter, checking ( 3.2.1 ) is
the same as checking that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the character of @xmath . This will of course follow if
we show @xmath is the restriction of @xmath to the @xmath -invariants
@xmath .
Recall the construction of @xmath via normalized induction; the
representation @xmath occurs as the irreducible spherical subquotient of
a Borel induction

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

But by induction in stages, @xmath is the irreducible spherical
subquotient of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This shows then that @xmath is the restriction of the character @xmath
induced from @xmath to the @xmath -invariants, and similarly @xmath is
the restriction of the same character to @xmath . Once we pass through
the identification @xmath , this is exactly what we wanted to show. ∎

## 4 The case of @xmath

We now apply the theory of the previous three chapters to the case when
@xmath . We will define certain Langlands quotients of parabolically
induced representations, induced from the Siegel parabolic, and study
their multiplicities in Eisenstein and cuspidal cohomology.

### 4.1 The group @xmath

We fix in this section some notation that will be used throughout this
chapter.
Let @xmath be the matrix

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Define @xmath to be the group over @xmath defined matricially for @xmath
-algebras @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The group @xmath is reductive and split. In fact, a split maximal torus
@xmath is given by the subgroup of all diagonal matrices in @xmath .
The assignment @xmath , where @xmath is as in the definition above,
defines a character of @xmath , called the similitude character, and
which we denote simply by @xmath . We also denote by the same letter the
restriction of @xmath to the maximal torus @xmath .
The group @xmath contains the subgroup @xmath , defined as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The group @xmath is the split simple group of type @xmath , with a
choice of split maximal torus @xmath , given again by diagonal matrices.
Let us now study this group from the perspective of its root lattice.

#### The root lattice

The Dynkin diagram of @xmath is as in Figure 4.1 .

So we are writing @xmath for the long simple root and @xmath for the
short simple root. This way of labelling the roots will be consistent
with our notation for the simple roots of @xmath later.
Explicitly, any element of @xmath is a diagonal matrix of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the characters @xmath and @xmath act on these matrices by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The character @xmath has an obvious square root, which we write
additively as @xmath , which picks out the @xmath entry of a diagonal
matrix as above. Then @xmath and @xmath generate the character group
@xmath .
The inner product space @xmath is isometric to @xmath with its usual
inner product, and an isometry is given by @xmath and @xmath . Thus we
get a picture of the root lattice as in Figure 4.2 ; there, the dominant
chamber is shaded.

We can extend the characters @xmath and @xmath to characters of the
torus @xmath as follows. Every element of @xmath can be written as a
diagonal matrix of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and for such matrices, we let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By its definition, the character @xmath acts on these matrices as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The characters @xmath generate an index @xmath subgroup in the character
group @xmath , and the character @xmath (we write the group law in
@xmath additively) has a square root.
The center of @xmath is equal to the center of @xmath ; it is just the
subgroup of invertible multiples of the identity matrix @xmath . The
center of @xmath has order @xmath and is equal to @xmath .
Let us write @xmath for the set of roots of @xmath in @xmath obtained
above, or for the set of roots in @xmath in @xmath . Write @xmath for
the positive roots. So

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

#### Parabolic subgroups

For @xmath , write @xmath for the unipotent root group homomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath denotes as usual the additive group scheme. Then we have the
following matrix formulas for each @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.1.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath .
Let @xmath be the standard parabolic subgroup whose Levi contains the
image of @xmath . Write @xmath for its Levi decomposition. We similarly
define @xmath and write @xmath for its Levi decomposition. We write
@xmath for the standard Borel and @xmath for its Levi decomposition.
Then by ( 4.1.1 ) it follows that @xmath , @xmath and @xmath take the
following forms:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Along with @xmath itself, these comprise all the standard parabolic
subgroups of @xmath . The parabolics @xmath and @xmath are both maximal
and have Levis isomorphic to @xmath . Explicit isomorphisms

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

are given by, for @xmath and @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.1.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

As is often done, we call @xmath the Klingen parabolic and @xmath the
Siegel parabolic.

#### Duality

The group @xmath is self dual. Identifying @xmath with its dual group
switches the long and short simple roots. For us this will mean that
certain data associated with the Siegel parabolic will become associated
with the Klingen parabolic on the dual side, and vice-versa.
This can be made explicit as follows. There are isomorphisms @xmath ,
@xmath , and @xmath such that the diagrams below commute. Identify
@xmath and @xmath with @xmath via the maps @xmath and @xmath of ( 4.1.2
). Then @xmath and @xmath are identified with @xmath as well, and these
latter identifications fit into a commutative diagram as follows. We
have

  -- -- -- ---------
           (4.1.3)
  -- -- -- ---------

where the map @xmath is the map given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.1.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Similarly, we have a commutative diagram

  -- -- -- ---------
           (4.1.5)
  -- -- -- ---------

where the map @xmath given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.1.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Finally, for the Borel, the map @xmath given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.1.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

is an isomorphism which identifies @xmath with @xmath , and hence also
@xmath and @xmath . This latter identification fits into the commutative
diagram

  -- -- -- ---------
           (4.1.8)
  -- -- -- ---------

where the map @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.1.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

#### The Weyl group

Let @xmath be the Weyl group of @xmath . The group @xmath is isomorphic
to the dihedral group @xmath with eight elements acting naturally on the
root lattice.
For @xmath , let @xmath be the reflection about the line perpendicular
to @xmath . Then @xmath is generated by the simple reflections @xmath
and @xmath . Let us amalgamate products of these reflections into a
single notation: Write @xmath , @xmath , and so on. Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The elements above are written minimally in terms of products of the
simple reflections @xmath and @xmath , except for the final element
@xmath . This element @xmath is the element that acts by negation on the
root lattice, and it of length @xmath , equal to both @xmath and @xmath
.
For @xmath one of the standard parabolic subgroups of @xmath , let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This is the set of minimal length representatives for the quotient
@xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath .
Finally, we note for future reference that the action of @xmath on
@xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.1.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

#### The group @xmath

The real Lie group @xmath has discrete series representations, but is
disconnected. However, @xmath is connected as a real Lie group.
Therefore it will be easier to describe the classification of the
discrete series representations of @xmath first and then use it to
classify those of @xmath . For a review of Harish-Chandra’s
classification of discrete series, the reader may jump ahead to Section
6.2 , specifically Theorem 6.2.1 .
Fix first a maximal compact subgroup @xmath in @xmath . Then the
connected component @xmath of the identity is a maximal compact subgroup
of @xmath .
The group @xmath is isomorphic to the real unitary group @xmath .
Therefore any maximal torus in @xmath is two dimensional. Fix @xmath
such a maximal torus. Then @xmath is also a maximal torus in @xmath .
Let @xmath be the complexified Lie algebra of @xmath and @xmath that of
@xmath . Abusing notation, we let @xmath be the roots of @xmath in
@xmath , and let @xmath be the set of compact roots. There are two roots
in @xmath and they are short. Pick one, and again by abuse of notation,
call it @xmath . Choose a long root @xmath in @xmath such that @xmath
and @xmath are a pair of simple roots. The roots @xmath and @xmath
generate the lattice of analytically integral weights in @xmath .
The compact Weyl group @xmath has two elements and is generated by the
simple reflection @xmath across the line perpendicular to @xmath . If we
write @xmath for the Weyl group of @xmath , then @xmath has index @xmath
in @xmath . Therefore the discrete series representations of @xmath are
parametrized by analytically integral weights that lie far enough inside
the four chambers below the line perpendicular to @xmath .
The element @xmath is in the Weyl group @xmath , and the element @xmath
is equal to the simple reflection @xmath across the line perpendicular
to @xmath . If a discrete series representation @xmath has
Harish-Chandra parameter @xmath , then the contragredient @xmath has
Harish-Chandra parameter @xmath ; but if the weight @xmath is in one of
the four chambers under the line perpendicular to @xmath , then @xmath
will lie above this line. Therefore we should choose @xmath as the
parameter for @xmath .
Now there is an element @xmath of order @xmath in the nonidentity
component of @xmath such that the adjoint action of @xmath on @xmath
preserves @xmath and acts as inversion there. Write @xmath for the
subgroup of @xmath given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and each discrete series representation @xmath of @xmath can be extended
to a representation @xmath of @xmath by letting the @xmath component act
trivially. Then we can induce to @xmath to get a representation @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As a representation of @xmath , @xmath splits as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath switching between the two summands. It follows that, up to
twists, the discrete series representations of @xmath are parametrized
by orbits of certain analytically integral weights under the action of
the four element subgroup

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the discrete series representations obtained in the same manner as
@xmath , without twisting, are self-dual.

### 4.2 Near equivalence and induced representations

In this section we introduce the induced representations whose Langlands
quotients we will be interested in. These representations will be
induced from the maximal parabolics of @xmath , and when computing the
Eisenstein multiplicity of their Langlands quotients it will be enough,
by multiplicity one theorems, to distinguish them up to near
equivalence.
Now by Theorem 2.2.3 , the pieces of the Franke filtration that can
contribute to Eisenstein cohomology are those which are induced from a
cuspidal representation of a Levi subgroup which itself has cohomology.
For the Levis of the maximal parabolic subgroups of @xmath , which are
both isomorphic to @xmath , such representations are given by pairs
@xmath , where @xmath is a holomorphic cuspidal eigenform form of weight
at least @xmath , and @xmath is a Dirichlet character.
For such a pair @xmath , let us view @xmath as a character of @xmath in
the usual way, and let us write @xmath for the unitary automorphic
representation of @xmath attached to @xmath . Write @xmath for the
weight of @xmath and @xmath for the nebentypus. Then @xmath is
identified with the central character of @xmath .
The archimedean component @xmath of @xmath is the discrete series
representation of @xmath of weight @xmath with trivial character on the
central @xmath . This representation is the sum of the two discrete
series representations of @xmath with Harish-Chandra parameters @xmath ,
and occurs in the cohomology of the representation of @xmath of highest
weight @xmath .
Now we have the representation @xmath of @xmath ; the symbol @xmath here
is meant to signal that this is an exterior tensor product. We identify
the maximal Levis @xmath and @xmath with @xmath via the isomorphisms of
( 4.1.2 ). Let @xmath and @xmath be the respective modulus characters of
@xmath and @xmath . We note that for @xmath and @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.2.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Now let @xmath . We define the normalized induced representations

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.2.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

These representations are trivial on @xmath .

###### Proposition 4.2.1.

Let @xmath be one of the simple roots of @xmath . Let @xmath be
holomorphic cuspidal eigenforms, let @xmath be Dirichlet characters, and
let @xmath . If there are irreducible subquotients

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that @xmath and @xmath are nearly equivalent, then @xmath , @xmath
, and @xmath .

###### Proof.

We will prove this proposition for the Siegel parabolic @xmath ; the
proof in the Klingen case is analogous.
Let @xmath be a finite set of places, including the archimedean place,
such that for @xmath , the local components @xmath and @xmath are
unramified and isomorphic. Then for such @xmath , we have in particular
that @xmath and @xmath are unramified, and so are @xmath and @xmath .
Write @xmath for the standard diagonal torus of @xmath and @xmath for
the standard upper triangular Borel in @xmath . Then we know that there
are unramified characters @xmath of @xmath such that @xmath is the
unramified subquotient of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the character of @xmath defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath is the usual modulus character of @xmath . Similarly, there
are also unramified characters @xmath of @xmath such that @xmath is the
unramified subquotient of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Furthermore, by temperedness, we know that @xmath are all unitary.
For @xmath , consider the element of @xmath given in @xmath by @xmath .
Write @xmath for the character of @xmath given on such elements by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By induction in stages, we have that @xmath is the unramified
subquotient of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and similarly @xmath is the unramified subquotient of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By the theory of the Satake isomorphism recalled in Section 3.1 , since
@xmath , the characters

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

are equal up to the Weyl group @xmath ; that is, there is a @xmath such
that for all @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.2.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

First, let us take the absolute value of both sides of ( 4.2.3 ). Since
all characters involved except @xmath are unitary, this gives

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.2.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

By the local analogue of ( 4.2.1 ), this becomes

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.2.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Now we compute, using ( 4.1.10 ), the following identities

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --

From these identities follow

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --

Letting @xmath in the equations above and using ( 4.2.5 ) then gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath , this is impossible, which forces @xmath or @xmath . In
either case, an analogous computation as above then gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

from which we conclude @xmath . Then we can cancel the modulus
characters in ( 4.2.3 ) and get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In the case that @xmath , we conclude that @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath
. If instead @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and we conclude @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . In either case we have
@xmath and that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

have the same unramified subquotients, which means @xmath . Since this
is true for any @xmath , strong multiplicity one for @xmath (and @xmath
) finishes the proof. ∎

Next we want to distinguish between representations induced from
different standard parabolics, including the Borel. So let us first
describe how we will induce characters from the torus @xmath .
First identify @xmath with @xmath via the map ( 4.1.7 ). Let @xmath be
Dirichlet characters, viewed as characters of @xmath . Write @xmath for
the character of @xmath given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be the modulus character of @xmath . When restricted to
@xmath , this gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

More generally, for @xmath , we will consider the character of @xmath
given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath is half the sum of the positive roots, then we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We write

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.2.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

for the normalized induction.
To distinguish between representations induced from different
parabolics, we will attach to them Galois representations and
distinguish between those. The next three propositions will do this for
@xmath , @xmath , and @xmath , respectively.
Fix any prime @xmath and fix an isomorphism of @xmath with @xmath .

###### Proposition 4.2.2.

Let @xmath be Dirichlet characters, and let @xmath . Let @xmath be an
irreducible subquotient of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be the inclusion @xmath . Then @xmath has attached to it the
Galois representation @xmath given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we have viewed @xmath as Galois characters via class field theory.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be a prime different from @xmath which is unramified for
@xmath , and hence which not divide the conductors of the @xmath ’s. Let
@xmath for @xmath . (This is the Satake parameter of @xmath at @xmath .)
Then the character

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

of @xmath has Satake parameter at @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.2.7)
  -- -------- -- ---------

has Satake parameter at @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

When identifying @xmath with @xmath on the dual side via the map @xmath
of ( 4.1.8 ) and ( 4.1.9 ), this implies that the character ( 4.2.7 )
has attached to it the Galois representation into @xmath given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now we can pass the similitude twist inside the induction and get that
@xmath is a subquotient of the normalized induction of the character (
4.2.7 ), whence an appeal to Proposition 3.2.1 finishes the proof. ∎

###### Proposition 4.2.3.

Let @xmath be a holomorphic cuspidal eigenform of weight @xmath with
central character @xmath , and let @xmath be a Dirichlet character. Let
@xmath , and let @xmath be any irreducible subquotient of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be the inclusion @xmath . Then @xmath has attached to it the
Galois representation @xmath given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the Galois representation attached to @xmath by
Eichler–Shimura, Deligne, and Deligne–Serre (Theorem 3.1.3 ), and @xmath
and @xmath are identified with Galois characters via class field theory.

###### Proof.

The proof will be similar to the previous proposition. Let @xmath be a
prime different from @xmath which is unramified for @xmath , and hence
which is unramified for @xmath and @xmath . Let @xmath be a diagonal
representative of the Satake parameter of @xmath at @xmath , and let
@xmath . Then the automorphic representation of @xmath given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

has Satake parameter at @xmath represented by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

by ( 4.2.1 ). Thus

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.2.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

has Satake parameter at @xmath represented by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

because @xmath for @xmath .
Now we pass through the map @xmath of ( 4.1.3 ) and ( 4.1.4 ) to get
that the representation of ( 4.2.8 ) has Satake parameter represented by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and therefore has the Galois representation @xmath given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

attached to it. Thus we are done by Proposition 3.2.1 . ∎

###### Proposition 4.2.4.

Let @xmath be a holomorphic cuspidal eigenform of weight @xmath , and
let @xmath be a Dirichlet character. Let @xmath , and assume @xmath .
Let @xmath be any irreducible subquotient of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be the inclusion @xmath . Then @xmath has attached to it the
Galois representation @xmath given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the Galois representation attached to @xmath by
Eichler–Shimura, Deligne, and Deligne–Serre (Theorem 3.1.3 ), and @xmath
is identified with a Galois character via class field theory.

###### Proof.

The proof will again be very similar to the previous two propositions.
Let @xmath be a prime different from @xmath which is unramified for
@xmath , and hence which is unramified for @xmath and @xmath . Let
@xmath be a diagonal representative of the Satake parameter of @xmath at
@xmath , and let @xmath . Then the automorphic representation of @xmath
given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

has Satake parameter at @xmath represented by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

by ( 4.2.1 ). Thus

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.2.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

has Satake parameter at @xmath represented by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

because @xmath for @xmath .
Now we pass through the map @xmath of ( 4.1.5 ) and ( 4.1.6 ) to get
that the representation of ( 4.2.9 ) has Satake parameter represented by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and therefore has the Galois representation @xmath given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

attached to it. Thus we are done once again by Proposition 3.2.1 . ∎

###### Proposition 4.2.5.

Let @xmath be two holomorphic cuspidal eigenforms of weights @xmath and
@xmath , respectively. Let @xmath be Dirichlet characters, and let
@xmath . Assume that @xmath . Then given any irreducible subquotients

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we have that no two of @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are nearly
equivalent.

###### Proof.

We first prove the proposition in the case that

  -- -------- -- ----------
     @xmath      (4.2.10)
  -- -------- -- ----------

Assume moreover that the quantities of ( 4.2.10 ) are all even. Then
Propositions 4.2.3 , 4.2.4 , and 4.2.2 attach to @xmath , @xmath , and
@xmath , respectively, a Galois representation (which, by the parity
assumption just made, are central twists by an integral power of the
cyclotomic character of the Galois representations from those
propositions). Let @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath , respectively, be these
Galois representations. Denote by @xmath the standard representation of
@xmath into @xmath which we used to define the group @xmath . Then we
have the following formulas for our Galois representations when composed
with @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

These follow from the usual formulas we use to include the Levis @xmath
, @xmath , and @xmath into @xmath ; here, of course, @xmath is the
nebentypus of @xmath and all Dirichlet characters are identified with
Galois characters via class field theory.
Now since @xmath and @xmath are irreducible, the three representations
above (and any twist of them) are semisimple. In particular, @xmath is
the sum of two irreducible representations, @xmath is the sum of three,
and @xmath is the sum of four. Therefore these representations are
pairwise non-isomorphic, and we can now appeal to Proposition 3.1.6 to
conclude when the quantities of ( 4.2.10 ) are all even.
On the other hand, when the quantities of ( 4.2.10 ) are all odd, we can
just apply a completely analogous argument to attach Galois
representations to the twisted representations @xmath , @xmath , and
@xmath , and we conclude in this case too.
Finally, assume that one of the quantities in ( 4.2.10 ) is even and
another is odd. Let @xmath be the representation of @xmath , @xmath ,
and @xmath corresponding to the even quantity, and let @xmath be the one
corresponding to the odd quantity. Then, as we just saw, @xmath has
attached to it a Galois representation @xmath such that @xmath is
semisimple and Hodge-Tate. But @xmath may not have a Galois
representation attached to it; we only know that @xmath does. If there
is no such Galois representation, then we are done. Otherwise, it does
have a Galois representation, call it @xmath , and we may assume @xmath
is odd. We then restrict to @xmath , where @xmath is a primitive @xmath
th root of unity. Then @xmath has a square root, and the representation
of @xmath given by @xmath must be the restriction to @xmath of the
Galois representation attached to @xmath ; they are both semisimple and
their traces agree on Frobenius elements @xmath with @xmath . But since
the Galois representation attached to @xmath is Hodge–Tate, @xmath
cannot be, and this distinguishes @xmath from @xmath , as desired. ∎

###### Remark 4.2.6.

Some of the assumptions above on the parameters in the proof may look
strange at first, but there is an explanation for them. If one computes
exactly which representations induced from @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath
can have cohomology for a given representation @xmath of @xmath , their
parameters will satisfy ( 4.2.10 ). More precisely, if @xmath has
highest weight @xmath , and if the representations @xmath , @xmath , and
@xmath of the proposition appear in the cohomology of @xmath , then the
quantities of ( 4.2.10 ) are all even if @xmath is in the integral span
of the root lattice, and they are all odd otherwise. In either of these
cases, the quantity @xmath is always even.
This is to be expected for the following reason. In the case that @xmath
is in the integral span of the root lattice, the Galois representations
attached to the automorphic representations appearing in the cohomology
of @xmath should be de Rham with Hodge–Tate weights given by the
cocharacter of @xmath corresponding to the infinitesimal character of
these automorphic representations at infinity. This infinitesimal
character must then match that of @xmath , and is therefore given by the
integral parameter @xmath . In the case of @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath
, these Galois representations are described up to a twist by a power of
the cyclotomic character respectively by Propositions 4.2.3 , 4.2.4 ,
and 4.2.2 , and because the quantities of ( 4.2.10 ) are all even, the
power we are twisting by is integral. Are applying that twist, the
Hodge–Tate weights of these Galois representations will match the
cocharacter of @xmath given by @xmath .
On the other hand, if @xmath is not in the integral span of the root
lattice, then the automorphic representations appearing in the
cohomology of @xmath only have associated Galois representations (at
least ones which are de Rham) after twisting by a half power of the
similitude character. Correspondingly, since the quantities of ( 4.2.10
) are all odd in this case, the representations @xmath , @xmath , and
@xmath must also be twisted by a half power of the similitude character
to obtain nice Galois representations.

### 4.3 Eisenstein multiplicity of Langlands quotients

In this section we introduce the Langlands quotients we are interested
in and compute their multiplicities in Eisenstein cohomology. Before we
do that, however, let us compute the cohomology of certain induced
representations of the kind considered in Theorem 2.2.3 . We do this in
the next proposition for representations induced from the Siegel
parabolic of @xmath .
In what follows, we will be considering the @xmath -cohomology of
representations when @xmath . In this case we have @xmath , the
complexified Lie algebra of @xmath . As discussed in Section 4.1 , the
group @xmath has two connected components, and so the cohomology spaces
we obtain will be modules for the two element group of components of
@xmath , as well as for the group @xmath .
We will also consider the normalized induction functors @xmath , for
@xmath a standard parabolic, defined in ( 4.2.2 ) and ( 4.2.6 ), and
also their finite adelic analogues @xmath which are defined similarly.
The following proposition is essentially proved by Grbac and Grobner in
[ GG ] , Proposition 4.2, using the same techniques as the ones we use.
The main differences are that Grbac and Grobner work with @xmath instead
of @xmath , which is not a serious difference, and that they also obtain
results for totally real fields instead of just @xmath . Actually, we
have set things up so that it is possible to use the results in this
paper to obtain results over totally real fields as well, but we are
content with working over @xmath for simplicity.

###### Proposition 4.3.1.

Let @xmath be an irreducible, finite dimensional representation of
@xmath , and say that @xmath has highest weight @xmath . Let @xmath , so
that there are @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be a holomorphic cuspidal eigenform of weight @xmath and
trivial nebentypus, and let @xmath with @xmath . Assume

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then either:

1.   [label=()]

2.   We have

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    or,

3.   We have

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

In both cases the cohomology spaces have the trivial action of the
component group of @xmath .

###### Proof.

We will apply Theorem 2.2.3 to our present situation with @xmath and
@xmath , the complexified Lie algebra of @xmath . In fact, it suffices
to do all our computations restricted to the complexified Lie algebra
@xmath of @xmath , which is a Cartan subalgebra of @xmath . We have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and one readily computes

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Note that we have a decomposition

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and note also that @xmath acts as zero on the first summand, while
@xmath acts as zero on the second.
Now by Theorem 2.2.3 , in order for our cohomology space to be
nontrivial, we need there to be a @xmath with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore, because @xmath , we see from the formulas for @xmath that
@xmath can only equal @xmath or @xmath .
In the case that @xmath , we obtain by matching coefficients that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with this choice of sign because @xmath , and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We have that the length @xmath of @xmath is @xmath . Also, since

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore, the isomorphism of Theorem 2.2.3 in our case is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the representation of @xmath of highest weight @xmath .
Now, since @xmath , the representation @xmath is the discrete series
representation of @xmath of weight @xmath , and therefore has nontrivial
cohomology when tensored with @xmath in degree @xmath and degree @xmath
only. Since @xmath is a maximal compact subgroup of @xmath (instead of
just being its identity component) the cohomology of @xmath in degree
@xmath is @xmath dimensional (instead of being @xmath dimensional). The
claim (i) of our proposition is now immediate.
The computation which uses @xmath and which proves the claim (ii) of the
proposition is completely similar, and we omit it. If instead we decided
to take @xmath -cohomology, rather than @xmath -cohomology, then we
would obtain the same results. This is because we decided to induce the
trivial character on the @xmath component of @xmath , and the maximal
compact subgroup @xmath of @xmath acts trivially via this character. It
follows that the component group of @xmath acts trivially on the
cohomology, and this finishes the proof. ∎

Now fix @xmath a holomorphic cuspidal eigenform of weight @xmath and
trivial nebentypus. For @xmath with @xmath , let us write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This notion was introduced just before Theorem 1.3.5 .
The Langlands quotient @xmath is irreducible, and under a vanishing
assumption on the @xmath -function of @xmath , we will calculate the
multiplicity of the finite part @xmath in the Eisenstein cohomology of
@xmath . The following lemma will be key to this.

###### Lemma 4.3.2.

For any flat section @xmath , the Eisenstein series @xmath does not have
a pole for @xmath except perhaps if @xmath . If furthermore

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then @xmath is also holomorphic at @xmath .

###### Proof.

This is an easy consequence of what is done in the paper of Kim [ kim ]
, but let us quickly explain how this is proved, since we have set up
the tools to do so already.
It suffices to prove the lemma for @xmath decomposable into local
sections. Write @xmath . By Theorem 1.1.1 , the constant term of @xmath
along @xmath (and hence along @xmath ) is zero, and the constant term
along @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then we apply Theorem 1.1.2 ; in our current setting the root @xmath of
that theorem is @xmath , and @xmath , and adjusting for this gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a finite set of places such that for @xmath , @xmath is
spherical, and @xmath are certain spherical vectors. Also, the
representations @xmath of @xmath can be determined from the action of
the Levi of @xmath on its unipotent radical; there are two of them, and
@xmath is the standard representation of @xmath , and @xmath is the
determinant. Thus the quotient of @xmath -functions is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now by Harish-Chandra, the local intertwining operators are all
holomorphic for @xmath since @xmath is tempered. So we only have to
worry about the poles and zeros of the @xmath -functions in the quotient
above. Again since @xmath , the @xmath -functions in the denominator do
not vanish as they are in the range of convergence, and the only pole in
the numerator comes from the @xmath -function at @xmath . But if @xmath
, this zero cancels with the pole from the @xmath -function.
Since the poles of @xmath are determined by the poles of the constant
term at all standard proper parabolics, we are done. ∎

We are now ready to put everything together and compute the Eisenstein
multiplicity of @xmath for @xmath . See Definition 2.1.1 for the
definition of this multiplicity.

###### Theorem 4.3.3.

Let @xmath be an irreducible representation of @xmath , and say that
@xmath has highest weight @xmath . Let @xmath , so that there are @xmath
such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be a holomorphic cuspidal eigenform of weight @xmath and
trivial nebentypus, and let @xmath with @xmath . If @xmath and @xmath ,
also assume that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore we also have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Finally, all of these multiplicities are the same if we replace @xmath
by @xmath .

###### Proof.

There are four associate classes of parabolics for @xmath and they are
equal to the conjugacy classes of such. From the Franke–Schwermer
decomposition (Theorem 1.2.1 ) we have that the Eisenstein cohomology
decomposes as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We will study the summands corresponding to @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath
in what follows. The strategy for the @xmath summand will be to show
that if the representation @xmath occurs as a subquotient of one of
these summands, then the corresponding associate class in @xmath is the
unique one that contains @xmath . Then Proposition 4.3.1 will allow us
to deduce the @xmath -Eisenstein multiplicity claimed. In the remaining
cases of @xmath and @xmath , we just show that none of the summands of
the cohomology corresponding to these parabolic subgroups can contain
@xmath as a subquotient, the key input being Proposition 4.2.5 .
Case of @xmath . Let @xmath be an associate class of cuspidal
automorphic representations for @xmath and @xmath as in Section 1.2 .
Then @xmath contains a cuspidal automorphic representation of @xmath
which tranforms trivially under @xmath , and which therefore must be of
the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a unitary cuspidal automorphic representation of @xmath
, @xmath is a Dirichlet character, and @xmath . After possibly
conjugating by @xmath , we may even assume @xmath .
We will study the piece @xmath of the Franke–Schwermer decomposition
using Theorem 1.3.5 of Grbac. But first, we note that the infinitesimal
character of @xmath as an @xmath -module must match that of @xmath . The
former is given in terms of the representations in @xmath by the Weyl
orbit of @xmath , where @xmath is the infinitesimal character of @xmath
, and the latter is given by @xmath . But the weight @xmath is regular
and real, and so since @xmath is a multiple of the root @xmath and
@xmath is a multiple of the root @xmath , it follows that @xmath and
@xmath are real and nonzero. In particular, @xmath since we assumed
@xmath .
Now we apply Theorem 1.3.5 and Proposition 1.3.2 to find that the
cohomology space

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

if nontrivial, is made up of subquotients of the cohomology spaces

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.3.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.3.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We claim that if ( 4.3.1 ) is nonzero, then @xmath is cohomological.
This will imply that @xmath is attached to a cuspidal holomorphic
eigenform of weight at least @xmath . To start, we split into two cases:
Either @xmath is tempered or nontempered. Of course, by Selberg’s
conjecture, the latter possibility should not occur, but we will use the
following ad-hoc argument to bypass a dependence on this conjecture.
So assume now, for sake of contradiction, both that the cohomology space
( 4.3.1 ) is nontrivial and that @xmath is nontempered. By the Langlands
classification for real groups, @xmath is the Langlands quotient of a
representation induced from a character, say @xmath , of @xmath , and
then @xmath is the Langlands quotient of a representation induced from
@xmath . If @xmath has nontrivial @xmath -cohomology, then by [ BW ] ,
Theorem VI.1.7 (iii) (or rather, the analogue of this theorem with
twisted coefficients) so does the (normalized) induced representation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By [ BW ] , Theorem III.3.3 and induction in stages, the induction

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

has nontrivial @xmath -cohomology when twisted by some finite
dimensional representation of @xmath , and hence so does

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

since @xmath is trivial on @xmath . Thus by [ BW ] , Theorem VI.1.7
(ii), @xmath , which is the Langlands quotient of this induction, also
has cohomology. But the cohomological cusp forms for @xmath are the
holomorphic modular forms, which are in particular tempered at infinity.
This is a contradiction.
Therefore, still assuming ( 4.3.1 ) is nonzero, we must have @xmath is
tempered. Then by (the twisted version of) [ BW ] , Lemma VI.1.5,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

But by [ BW ] , Theorem III.3.3, this is computed in terms of the
cohomology of @xmath , and we conclude that @xmath is cohomological, as
desired.
If instead ( 4.3.2 ) is nonzero, then we can use Theorem 2.2.3 to
conclude that @xmath is cohomological. In any case, if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then @xmath for some cuspidal holomorphic eigenform @xmath of weight at
least @xmath . Furthermore, any irreducible subquotient of this
cohomology space must be an irreducible subquotient of either ( 4.3.2 )
or ( 4.3.1 ). The former, by Theorem 2.2.3 is a sum of copies of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

while the latter is a sum of copies of the Langlands quotient of this
induction. In particular, they are all nearly equivalent and occur in
this induction.
So if we now assume that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

contains @xmath as a subquotient, then since we have shown @xmath , by
Proposition 4.2.1 , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath .
Therefore we have just shown that @xmath contains @xmath . Since no two
classes @xmath overlap, this determines @xmath uniquely. By Proposition
1.3.2 , Proposition 4.3.2 and our vanishing assumption on the @xmath
-function of @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and then Proposition 4.3.1 gives the @xmath -Eisenstein multiplicities
claimed.
Case of @xmath . Let @xmath this time be an associate class for @xmath
and @xmath . Then @xmath contains a representation of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath a unitary cuspidal automorphic representation of @xmath ,
@xmath a Dirichlet character, and @xmath with @xmath . Then the same
argument as in the @xmath case shows that @xmath is real and positive.
Now we once again apply Theorem 1.3.5 and Proposition 1.3.2 to find that
the cohomology space

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

if nontrivial, is made up of subquotients of the cohomology spaces

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.3.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.3.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Just as in the @xmath case, the nonvanishing of either ( 4.3.3 ) or (
4.3.4 ) implies that @xmath for a cuspidal holomorphic eigenform @xmath
of weight at least @xmath , and that any irreducible subquotient of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is nearly equivalent to an irreducible subquotient of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now we use Proposition 4.2.5 to conclude that @xmath cannot also occur
as a subquotient, which finishes the proof in the case of @xmath .
Case of @xmath . Now we let @xmath be an associate class for @xmath and
@xmath . So @xmath contains a character of @xmath of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath are Dirichlet characters and @xmath . Let us write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for short.
We will study the piece @xmath of the Franke–Schwermer decomposition
using the (Franke) filtration of Theorem 1.3.3 . By that theorem, there
is a filtration on the space @xmath whose graded pieces are parametrized
by certain quadruples @xmath . For the convenience of the reader, we
recall what these quadruples consist of now:

-   @xmath is a standard parabolic subgroup of @xmath ;

-   @xmath is an element of @xmath ;

-   @xmath is an automorphic representation of @xmath occurring in

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and which is spanned by values at, or residues at, the point @xmath
    of Eisenstein series parabolically induced from @xmath to @xmath by
    representations in @xmath ; and

-   @xmath is an element of @xmath whose real part in @xmath is in the
    closure of the positive cone, and such that @xmath lies in the Weyl
    orbit of @xmath .

Then the graded pieces of @xmath are isomorphic to direct sums of @xmath
-modules of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for certain quadruples @xmath of the form just described.
For each of the four possible parabolic subgroups @xmath and any
corresponding quadruple @xmath as above, we will show using Proposition
4.2.5 that the cohomology

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (4.3.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

cannot have @xmath as a subquotient, which will finish the proof.
So first assume we have a quadruple @xmath as above where @xmath . Then
@xmath , forcing @xmath . The entry @xmath is the unitarization of a
representation in @xmath , and thus must be a character @xmath of @xmath
conjugate to @xmath . Finally, we have @xmath is Weyl conjugate to
@xmath .
Therefore the cohomology ( 4.3.5 ) is isomorphic, by Theorem 2.2.3 , to
a finite sum of copies of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By Proposition 4.2.5 , @xmath cannot be a subquotient of this space, and
we conclude in the case when @xmath .
If now we have a quadruple @xmath where @xmath , then @xmath is an
integer multiple of @xmath and @xmath is a multiple of @xmath , and
@xmath is conjugate to @xmath . We find that @xmath is a representation
generated by residual Eisenstein series at the point @xmath and is
therefore a subquotient of the normalized induction

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a character of @xmath conjugate to @xmath . Then by
2.2.3 and induction in stages, ( 4.3.5 ) is isomorphic to a subquotient
of a finite sum of copies of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We then conclude in this case as well using Proposition 4.2.5 .
The case when @xmath is completely similar, and we omit the details.
When @xmath , it is once again similar, but easier since we do not need
to use induction in stages. So we are done with the proof of the @xmath
-Eisenstein multiplicity.
Finally, if we instead used @xmath instead of @xmath to compute
cohomology, then all the multiplicities that were zero remain zero. The
multiplicities that were @xmath remain @xmath because they followed from
Proposition 4.3.1 , which gets the same answer in both cases. The final
claim about the action of the component group of @xmath follows. ∎

### 4.4 Cuspidal multiplicity of Langlands quotients

Despite being nontempered quotients of induced representations, some of
the Langlands quotients we studied in the previous section can be found
in cuspidal cohomology as well as Eisenstein cohomology. The purpose of
this section is to explain how this happens.
The occurrence of this phenomenon relies on the study of CAP
representations, which were first studied in an automorphic context by
Piatetski-Shapiro in [ PS ] . These, by definition, are cuspidal
automorphic representations which are nearly equivalent to an
irreducible constituent of a parabolically induced representation. In
our context, these show up in the proof of the following theorem.

###### Theorem 4.4.1.

Let @xmath be a cuspidal holomorphic eigenform of even weight @xmath ,
and let @xmath be the sign of the functional equation for the @xmath
-function @xmath . Assume @xmath . Let @xmath be the irreducible
representation of @xmath of highest weight @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Consequently,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

In [ PS ] , Piatetski-Shapiro proves that all CAP representations which
are nearly equivalent to @xmath come from Saito–Kurokawa forms, and each
Saito–Kurokawa form appears with multiplicity one. If @xmath , then the
corresponding Saito–Kurokawa representation which, at finite places, is
given by @xmath , is in the (holomorphic) discrete series at infinity
with Harish-Chandra parameter @xmath . The @xmath -cohomology of the
archimedean component of this Saito–Kurokawa representation, with
coefficients twisted by @xmath , is therefore concentrated in middle
degree @xmath and is @xmath dimensional. (See the remarks on discrete
representations in Section 4.1 ; the discrete series representations of
@xmath are sums to two such representations of @xmath .)
If instead @xmath , then the Saito–Kurokawa representation in question
has archimedean component isomorphic to @xmath . Its cohomology is
therefore concentrated in degrees @xmath and @xmath , and there it is
isomorphic to the @xmath -cohomology of @xmath . (Note @xmath contains
all of @xmath .) Since @xmath is the discrete series representation of
@xmath of weight @xmath , its cohomology is @xmath dimensional.
Therefore we have justified the cuspidal multiplicity of @xmath . The
full multiplicity follows from adding the Eisenstein multiplicity
computed in Theorem 4.3.3 .
For a nice account of the facts we used about the CAP representations
appearing here, see Gan [ ganSK ] ∎

We now make several remarks.

###### Remark 4.4.2.

The above theorem corrects a computation made in the paper of Urban [
urbanev ] , 5.5.3. There he obtains the same result except with the
claim that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

equals @xmath instead of @xmath . When we factor in this correction,
this shows that the Euler–Poincaré multiplicity (equivalent to the
alternating sum of our multiplicities @xmath ) discussed there is @xmath
when @xmath and is @xmath when @xmath .
But this would seem to throw off the computation in [ urbanev ] of the
cuspidal overconvergent multiplicity of the critical @xmath
-stabilization of @xmath . However, when we take into account the fact
that @xmath contains the maximal compact subgroup @xmath of the @xmath
factor of @xmath , we see that all Eisenstein multiplicities there
should be computed via @xmath -cohomology, instead of @xmath
-cohomology. Taking this into account makes Urban’s overconvergent
Eisenstein multiplicities equal to @xmath instead of @xmath when they
are nonzero. The cuspidal overconvergent multiplicity is then still
equal to @xmath , which is what was claimed in [ urbanev ] .

###### Remark 4.4.3.

One could, in principle, use our methods to obtain analogous results as
Theorems 4.3.3 and 4.4.1 in the case of @xmath instead of @xmath . To
compute the cuspidal multiplicities for @xmath , one would instead need
to use results of Howe–Piatetski-Shapiro [ HPS ] and Soudry [ soudry ] .

###### Remark 4.4.4.

In the case of @xmath , the results that allow us to compute the
cuspidal multiplicity for Langlands quotients coming from the short root
parabolic are contained in the work on Gan–Gurevich [ gangurs ] .
However, the corresponding results in the case of the long root
parabolic are not known. There are partial results in another work of
Gan and Gurevich [ gangurl ] , but it does not give all the results we
need. In particular, they say nothing about the CAP representations they
obtain at infinity, and so we compute what these representations should
be explicitly assuming Arthur’s conjectures in Chapter 6 .

## 5 The case of @xmath

In this chapter, we carry out computations analogous to those in the
previous chapter for Langlands quotients coming from the long root
parabolic in @xmath . However, we note that it is not necessary to have
read the previous chapter in order to read this one.

### 5.1 The group @xmath

We define @xmath to be the split simple group over @xmath with Dynkin
diagram as in Figure 5.1 .

Fixing a maximal @xmath -split torus @xmath in @xmath , we choose a long
simple root @xmath and a short simple root @xmath , as notated in the
Dynkin diagram.
The group @xmath has trivial center, so unlike @xmath , there are no
central extensions of it which are nontrivial.
Also different from @xmath is that @xmath does not have such a nice
matricial definition. There is a faithful representation of @xmath into
@xmath that we will make some use of, and while it is possible to
characterize the image of that representation in terms of the
preservation of certain alternating @xmath -forms, it is hard to make
that characterization explicit in terms of matrices. Consequently, we
will study @xmath from the point of view of its root system, which we
discuss now.

#### The root lattice

The root lattice of @xmath looks as in Figure 5.2 . There, the dominant
chamber is shaded.

Write @xmath for the set of roots of @xmath in @xmath , and write @xmath
for the positive ones. So we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

One nice feature of @xmath is that the @xmath -span of the root lattice
equals the character group of @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since the Cartan matrix of @xmath has determinant @xmath , an analogous
fact holds for the cocharacter group:

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.1.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

#### Parabolic subgroups

Let @xmath denote the standard Borel subgroup of @xmath with respect to
our positive system of roots @xmath . We write @xmath for its Levi
decomposition. Besides @xmath , there are two other proper standard
parabolic subgroups, and they are maximal. Let @xmath denote the
standard parabolic subgroup whose Levi contains @xmath , and write
@xmath for its Levi decomposition. Similarly define @xmath .
The maximal torus @xmath is of course isomorphic to @xmath . In fact we
fix an isomorphism @xmath , defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This is indeed an isomorphism by ( 5.1.1 ).
For @xmath a root, write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for the corresponding root group homomorphism, where @xmath is the
additive group scheme.
The Levis @xmath and @xmath are both isomorphic to @xmath . We write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for the isomorphisms which send the upper triangular matrix @xmath in
@xmath to the element @xmath and @xmath , respectively.
We then have the following relations among these isomorphisms:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We will often identify @xmath with @xmath via @xmath and drop the
notation from formulas. Similarly we will often identify @xmath and
@xmath with @xmath and drop @xmath and @xmath from notation when it
causes no confusion.

#### The standard representation

The smallest fundamental weight of @xmath is @xmath , and the
representation attached to it is seven dimensional. We denote it by
@xmath and call it the standard representation of @xmath ; it is the
representation one naturally gets when defining @xmath through its
action on traceless split octonions.
Let @xmath be the space of @xmath . This representation contains weight
vectors for the seven weights given by the six short roots together with
the zero weight; see Figure 5.3 .

For such a weight @xmath , choose a nonzero vector @xmath corresponding
to that weight.
Let us order our weight vectors as follows:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then using the above list as an ordered basis represents @xmath as
@xmath matrices acting on the linear span of these seven weight vectors.
We then have the following matrix representations of the standard Levi
subgroups of @xmath . For @xmath we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.1.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and for @xmath and @xmath we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.1.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the standard representation of @xmath , and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.1.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the adjoint representation of @xmath . These can be seen
by looking at strings in the directions of @xmath and @xmath in the
weight diagram as in Figure 5.4 .

#### Duality

As in the case of @xmath , the group @xmath is self dual, and
identifying @xmath with its dual group switches the long and short
simple roots.
More explicitly, fix identifications @xmath and @xmath so that positive
coroots correspond on the dual side to positive roots. Identify @xmath
and @xmath with @xmath via the maps @xmath and @xmath introduced above.
Then @xmath and @xmath are identified with @xmath , and we have
commuting diagrams

  -- -- -- ---------
           (5.1.5)
  -- -- -- ---------

and

  -- -- -- ---------
           (5.1.6)
  -- -- -- ---------

This is simpler than in the @xmath case; the obvious identifications are
the correct ones. However, the situation for the Borel is still a little
bit complicated. Identifying @xmath and @xmath , we have a commuting
diagram

  -- -- -- ---------
           (5.1.7)
  -- -- -- ---------

where @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.1.8)
  -- -------- -- ---------

#### The Weyl group

Let @xmath be the Weyl group of @xmath . The group @xmath is isomorphic
to the dihedral group @xmath with @xmath elements acting naturally on
the root lattice.
For @xmath , let @xmath be the reflection about the line perpendicular
to @xmath . Then @xmath is generated by the simple reflections @xmath
and @xmath . As before, we use the following notation: Write @xmath ,
@xmath , and so on. Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The elements above are written minimally in terms of products of the
simple reflections @xmath and @xmath , except for the final element
@xmath . This is the element that acts by negation on the root lattice,
and it of length @xmath , equal to both @xmath and @xmath .
For @xmath one of the standard parabolic subgroups of @xmath , we write
as usual

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for the set of representatives for the quotient @xmath of minimal
length. Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath .
We note for later use that

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.1.9)
  -- -------- -- ---------

#### The group @xmath

The real Lie group @xmath is connected and has discrete series (see
Section 6.2 for a review of the classification of discrete series,
particularly Theorem 6.2.1 ).
Fix a maximal compact torus @xmath in @xmath . Then @xmath is two
dimensional and lies in a maximal compact subgroup of @xmath , which we
denote by @xmath . Then @xmath is connected and @xmath dimensional. In
fact

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is diagonally embedded in @xmath .
Let @xmath be the complexified Lie algebra of @xmath , and @xmath that
of @xmath . We abuse notation and write @xmath for the roots of @xmath
in @xmath . Let @xmath denote the set of compact roots. There are four
roots in @xmath consisting of a pair of short roots and a pair of long
roots. The short compact roots are orthogonal to the long ones.
Again, abusing notation, choose two simple roots @xmath of @xmath in
@xmath with @xmath long and @xmath short, and choose them so that @xmath
is compact. Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The compact Weyl group @xmath has four elements and is isomorphic to
@xmath . We in fact have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath equals the reflection across the line perpendicular to @xmath
. It follows that the discrete series representations of @xmath are
parameterized by integral weights in the union of the three chambers
between @xmath and @xmath which are far enough from the walls of those
chambers.

### 5.2 Near equivalence and induced representations

In this section we will study the parabolically induced representations
whose Langlands quotients we will try to locate in cohomology later.
Let @xmath be a cuspidal holomorphic eigenform, and let @xmath be the
unitary automorphic representation of @xmath associated with it. We can
then view @xmath as an automorphic representation of either @xmath or
@xmath .
Let @xmath be the modulus character of @xmath , and @xmath that of
@xmath . Then for @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath , we define the normalized parabolic inductions

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.2.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We then have the following analogue of Proposition 4.2.1 .

###### Proposition 5.2.1.

Let @xmath be one of the simple roots of @xmath . Let @xmath be cuspidal
holomorphic eigenforms, and let @xmath . If there are irreducible
subquotients

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that @xmath and @xmath are nearly equivalent, then @xmath and
@xmath .

###### Proof.

We prove this for the short root parabolic @xmath since the proof in the
case of @xmath is completely analogous.
Let @xmath be a prime where the local components @xmath and @xmath are
unramified and isomorphic. Then @xmath and @xmath are unramified.
Write @xmath for the standard diagonal torus of @xmath and @xmath for
the standard upper triangular Borel in @xmath . Let @xmath be the usual
modulus character of @xmath . Then by the results recalled in Section
3.1 , there are characters @xmath of @xmath such that @xmath is the
unramified subquotient of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath is the unramified subquotient of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here, @xmath is the character of @xmath which evaluated at @xmath gives
the product @xmath , and similarly for @xmath . By temperedness, the
characters @xmath are unitary.
By induction in stages, @xmath is the unramified subquotient of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the character of @xmath given by @xmath (see the
subsection on parabolic subgroups in Section 5.1 ) and similarly @xmath
is the unramified subquotient of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath . The characters @xmath and @xmath are unitary. Since
@xmath , the characters

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

are equal up to the Weyl group @xmath ; there is a @xmath such that for
all @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.2.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Now let @xmath and let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then we compute, using ( 5.1.9 ), that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Since @xmath , the above gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Comparing this to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

via ( 5.2.2 ) gives, since @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

But in this latter case we can then repeat the calculation with @xmath
instead. In this case we then find

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and the same argument then rules out @xmath .
Therefore @xmath and @xmath . Then ( 5.2.2 ) implies @xmath and @xmath
if @xmath , or @xmath and @xmath if @xmath . In either case we have

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

have the same unramified subquotients, which means @xmath .
Now letting @xmath vary over all unramified primes for which @xmath and
applying strong multiplicity one for @xmath finishes the proof. ∎

Let @xmath be Dirichlet characters, and consider the character @xmath of
@xmath given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be the modulus character of @xmath . We have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is half the sum of positive roots. If @xmath , write

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.2.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

for the normalized induction.
For the following we fix any prime @xmath and identify @xmath and @xmath
via a fixed isomorphism.

###### Proposition 5.2.2.

Let @xmath be Dirichlet characters, and let @xmath . Let @xmath be an
irreducible subquotient of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be the inclusion of @xmath into @xmath . Then @xmath has
attached to it the Galois representation @xmath given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we have viewed @xmath as Galois characters via class field theory.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be a prime different from @xmath which is unramified for
@xmath , and hence which not divide the conductors of the @xmath ’s. Let
@xmath for @xmath . Then the character

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.2.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

of @xmath has Satake parameter at @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Identifying @xmath with @xmath on the dual side via the map @xmath of (
5.1.7 ) and ( 5.1.8 ) gives that the character ( 5.2.4 ) has attached to
it the Galois representation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then we appeal to Proposition 3.2.1 to finish the proof. ∎

###### Proposition 5.2.3.

Let @xmath be a holomorphic cuspidal eigenform of weight @xmath and let
@xmath with @xmath . Let @xmath be any irreducible subquotient of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be the inclusion @xmath . Then @xmath has attached to it the
Galois representation @xmath given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the Galois representation attached to @xmath by
Eichler–Shimura, Deligne, and Deligne–Serre (Theorem 3.1.3 ).

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be a prime different from @xmath which is unramified for
@xmath , and hence which is unramified for @xmath . Let @xmath be a
diagonal representative of the Satake parameter of @xmath at @xmath .
Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

has Satake parameter at @xmath represented by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

because @xmath acts as @xmath . Now we use the commutativity of ( 5.1.5
) and Proposition 3.2.1 to conclude. ∎

###### Proposition 5.2.4.

Let @xmath be a holomorphic cuspidal eigenform of weight @xmath and let
@xmath with @xmath . Let @xmath be any irreducible subquotient of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be the inclusion @xmath . Then @xmath has attached to it the
Galois representation @xmath given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the Galois representation attached to @xmath by
Eichler–Shimura, Deligne, and Deligne–Serre (Theorem 3.1.3 ).

###### Proof.

The proof is completely similar to that of 5.2.3 above; switch @xmath
and @xmath and appeal to ( 5.1.6 ) instead of ( 5.1.5 ). ∎

Before giving the analogue of Proposition 4.2.5 , we need to prove a
lemma about Galois representations attached to modular forms. The
analogue of this lemma in the @xmath case was not necessary because of
the nice shape of the Levis of the standard parabolic subgroups in the
standard representation of @xmath . Here in the @xmath case, however,
the blocks of @xmath in the standard representation @xmath include a
symmetric square representation of @xmath , and we will need the
following lemma to distinguish representations factoring through it and
those factoring through @xmath .

###### Lemma 5.2.5.

Let @xmath be a holomorphic cuspidal eigenform of weight @xmath , and
let @xmath be its Galois representation into @xmath (Theorem 3.1.3 ).
Then @xmath is either irreducible, or is the direct sum of two
irreducible representations.

###### Proof.

We separate the proof into two cases, first when @xmath does not have CM
and second when it does.
Assume @xmath does not have CM. By results of Momose [ momose ] (See
also [ loeimage ] ) we know then that the image of @xmath in @xmath can
be conjugated to be either:

-   an open subgroup of @xmath , or

-   an open subgroup of @xmath , where @xmath is a certain quaternion
    algebra over @xmath .

In either case the image of @xmath is large enough for @xmath to be
irreducible.
Now assume @xmath has CM by an imaginary quadratic field @xmath . Then
@xmath is the induction

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a Hecke character of @xmath . Thus, if @xmath is a
complex conjugation, then writing @xmath for the space of @xmath , there
are linearly independent vectors @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let us write @xmath for the character given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath . If @xmath , write @xmath for the corresponding product in
@xmath .
Now we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath . So the space spanned by @xmath is invariant and gives the
character @xmath of @xmath which is given by @xmath on @xmath and is
trivial on @xmath . Also,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath . Therefore the space spanned by @xmath and @xmath is also
invariant, and @xmath acts on it as @xmath . Thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It now suffices to prove that @xmath is irreducible.
To this end, we first note that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath is Hodge–Tate with Hodge–Tate weights @xmath , @xmath , and
@xmath , it follows that either @xmath or @xmath is finite order, and
the other is a finite order character times @xmath . Therefore @xmath
and @xmath are distinct, because the evaluation of either character on a
Frobenius element @xmath in @xmath gives @xmath -Weil numbers of
different weights (since @xmath ) and by Chebotarev, there are
infinitely many such Frobenius elements in @xmath .
Now assume that the space of @xmath , spanned by @xmath and @xmath , has
an invariant vector

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for some scalars @xmath . We will show that this implies @xmath , which
will prove that @xmath is irreducible. Choose @xmath with @xmath . Then
we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which cannot be in the span of @xmath unless @xmath or @xmath . Since
@xmath switches @xmath and @xmath , we must have both @xmath and @xmath
, which finishes the proof. ∎

###### Remark 5.2.6.

In our applications, we actually only need this lemma for one single
@xmath , but it was essentially no harder to write down the proof for
all @xmath .

###### Remark 5.2.7.

We thank Shuai Wang for bringing the following to our attention. There
are examples of irreducible, two dimensional representations of finite
groups whose symmetric squares do actually decompose as sums of three
characters. It seems they tend to come from certain representations of
dihedral groups of order divisible by @xmath , though they can also come
from other groups of order divisible by @xmath as well.
Therefore we cannot hope to get by on the irreducibility of @xmath alone
in proving the above lemma. Also, this shows that the hypothesis that
weight @xmath is essential, otherwise @xmath may factor through one of
the aforementioned dihedral representations (for example if @xmath has
image precisely @xmath ).

###### Proposition 5.2.8.

Let @xmath be two holomorphic cuspidal eigenforms of weights @xmath and
@xmath , respectively, and assume @xmath . Let @xmath and @xmath be
Dirichlet characters, and let @xmath . Assume that @xmath and @xmath .
Then given any irreducible subquotients

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we have that no two of @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath are nearly
equivalent.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath be, respectively, the Galois
representations attached to @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath by Propositions
5.2.3 , 5.2.4 , and 5.2.2 . We compose these with the standard
representation @xmath and obtain, using ( 5.1.4 ), ( 5.1.3 ), and (
5.1.2 ),

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath is the nebentypus of @xmath . We see that the first of these
representations is either the sum of @xmath or @xmath irreducible
representations by Lemma 5.2.5 , that the second is the sum of @xmath
irreducible representations, and the last is the sum of @xmath .
Therefore we are done by invoking Proposition 3.1.6 . ∎

### 5.3 Eisenstein multiplicity of Langlands quotients

We compute in this section the Eisenstein multiplicity of Langlands
quotients coming from the long root parabolic @xmath . What follows will
be highly analogous to the content of Section 4.3 where we computed the
Eisenstein multiplicity of Langlands quotients coming from the Siegel
(short root) parabolic of @xmath . It is interesting to note that the
roles of the long and short root parabolics switch when passing from
@xmath to @xmath .
For standard parabolics @xmath in @xmath , we will make use of the
normalized parabolic induction functors @xmath defined in ( 5.2.1 ) and
( 5.2.3 ), and their similarly defined finite adelic analogues @xmath .

###### Proposition 5.3.1.

Let @xmath be an irreducible, finite dimensional representation of
@xmath , and say that @xmath has highest weight @xmath . Write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath . Let @xmath be a holomorphic cuspidal eigenform of weight
@xmath and trivial nebentypus, and let @xmath with @xmath . Assume

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then either:

1.   [label=()]

2.   We have

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    or,

3.   We have

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    or,

4.   We have

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be the complexified Lie algebra of @xmath . Note that we have
a decomposition

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath acts by zero on the first component while @xmath acts by zero
on the second. We also have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and one computes

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Now by Theorem 2.2.3 , in order for our cohomology space to be
nontrivial, there needs to be a @xmath with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore, since @xmath , we see from the formulas for each @xmath that
@xmath can only equal @xmath , @xmath , or @xmath .
In the case that @xmath , we get that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with this choice of sign because @xmath , and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We also have that the length @xmath of @xmath is @xmath . Finally, since

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore, the isomorphism of Theorem 2.2.3 in our case is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the representation of @xmath of highest weight @xmath .
Now, since @xmath , the representation @xmath is the discrete series
representation of @xmath of weight @xmath , and therefore has nontrivial
cohomology when tensored with @xmath in degree @xmath and degree @xmath
only. Since @xmath is a maximal compact subgroup of @xmath , the
cohomology of @xmath in degree @xmath is @xmath dimensional. The claim
(i) of our proposition is now immediate.
The claims (ii) and (iii) are completely similar, using instead the
length @xmath element @xmath and the length @xmath element @xmath ,
respectively; we omit the details. ∎

We now prove an analogue of Lemma 4.3.2 in our context.

###### Lemma 5.3.2.

Let @xmath be a holomorphic cuspidal eigenform of weight @xmath and
trivial nebentypus. For any flat section @xmath , the Eisenstein series
@xmath does not have a pole for @xmath except perhaps if @xmath . If
furthermore

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then @xmath is also holomorphic at @xmath .

###### Proof.

This is an easy consequence of what is done in the paper of Žampera [
zampera ] , but let us quickly explain how this is proved, since we have
set up the tools to do so already.
It suffices to prove the lemma for @xmath decomposable into local
sections. Write @xmath . By Theorem 1.1.1 , the constant term of @xmath
along @xmath (and hence along @xmath ) is zero, and the constant term
along @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then we apply Theorem 1.1.2 ; in our current setting the root @xmath of
that theorem is @xmath , and @xmath , and adjusting for this gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a finite set of places such that for @xmath , @xmath is
spherical, and @xmath are certain spherical vectors. Also, the
representations @xmath of @xmath can be determined from the action of
the Levi of @xmath on its unipotent radical; there are two of them, and
@xmath is the representation @xmath of @xmath , and @xmath is the
determinant. Thus the quotient of @xmath -functions is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now by Harish-Chandra, the local intertwining operators are all
holomorphic for @xmath since @xmath is tempered. So we only have to
worry about the poles and zeros of the @xmath -functions in the quotient
above. Again since @xmath , the @xmath -functions in the denominator do
not vanish as they are in the range of convergence. By a result of Kim
and Shahidi [ KS ] , the symmetric cube @xmath -function is entire, and
so the only pole in the numerator comes from the @xmath -function at
@xmath . But if @xmath , this zero cancels with the pole from the @xmath
-function.
Since the poles of @xmath are determined by the poles of the constant
term at all standard proper parabolics, we are done. ∎

Now fix @xmath a holomorphic cuspidal eigenform of weight @xmath and
trivial nebentypus. For @xmath with @xmath , let us write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This notion was introduced just before Theorem 1.3.5 .
We now compute the Eisenstein multiplicity of this Langlands quotient
(see Definition 2.1.1 ).

###### Theorem 5.3.3.

Let @xmath be an irreducible, finite dimensional representation of
@xmath , and say that @xmath has highest weight @xmath . Write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath . Let @xmath be a holomorphic cuspidal eigenform of weight
@xmath and trivial nebentypus, and let @xmath with @xmath . If @xmath
and @xmath , also assume that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore we also have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

From the Franke–Schwermer decomposition (Theorem 1.2.1 ) we have that
the Eisenstein cohomology decomposes as

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

We will study the summands corresponding to @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath
in what follows.
Case of @xmath . Let @xmath be an associate class of cuspidal
automorphic representations for @xmath and @xmath as in Section 1.2 .
Then @xmath contains a cuspidal automorphic representation of @xmath ,
and which therefore must be of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a unitary cuspidal automorphic representation of @xmath
and @xmath . After possibly conjugating by @xmath , we may even assume
@xmath .
First, we note that the infinitesimal character of @xmath as a @xmath
-module must match that of @xmath . The former is given by the Weyl
orbit of @xmath , where @xmath is the infinitesimal character of @xmath
, and the latter is given by the Weyl orbit of @xmath . But the weight
@xmath is regular and real, and so since @xmath is a multiple of the
root @xmath and @xmath is a multiple of the root @xmath , it follows
that @xmath and @xmath are real and nonzero. In particular, @xmath since
we assumed @xmath .
Now we apply Theorem 1.3.5 and Proposition 1.3.2 to find that the
cohomology space

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

if nontrivial, is made up of subquotients of the cohomology spaces

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.3.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.3.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

We claim that if ( 5.3.1 ) is nonzero, then @xmath is cohomological.
This will imply that @xmath is attached to a cuspidal holomorphic
eigenform of weight at least @xmath . To start, we split into two cases:
Either @xmath is tempered or nontempered. Of course, by Selberg’s
conjecture, the latter possibility should not occur, but we will use the
following ad-hoc argument to bypass a dependence on this conjecture.
So assume now, for sake of contradiction, both that the cohomology space
( 5.3.3 ) is nontrivial and that @xmath is nontempered. By the Langlands
classification for real groups, @xmath is the Langlands quotient of a
representation induced from a character, say @xmath , of @xmath , and
then @xmath is the Langlands quotient of a representation induced from
@xmath . If @xmath has nontrivial @xmath -cohomology, then by [ BW ] ,
Theorem VI.1.7 (iii) (or rather, the analogue of this theorem with
twisted coefficients) so does the (normalized) induced representation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By [ BW ] , Theorem III.3.3 and induction in stages, the induction

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

has nontrivial @xmath -cohomology when twisted by some finite
dimensional representation of @xmath , and hence so does

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

since @xmath is trivial on @xmath . Thus by [ BW ] , Theorem VI.1.7
(ii), @xmath , which is the Langlands quotient of this induction, also
has cohomology. But the cohomological cusp forms for @xmath are the
holomorphic modular forms, which are in particular tempered at infinity.
This is a contradiction.
Therefore, still assuming ( 5.3.1 ) is nonzero, we must have @xmath is
tempered. Then by (the twisted version of) [ BW ] , Lemma VI.1.5,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

But by [ BW ] , Theorem III.3.3, this is computed in terms of the
cohomology of @xmath itself, and we conclude that @xmath is
cohomological, as desired.
If instead ( 5.3.2 ) is nonzero, then we can use Theorem 2.2.3 to
conclude that @xmath is cohomological. In any case, if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then @xmath for some cuspidal holomorphic eigenform @xmath of weight at
least @xmath . Furthermore, any irreducible subquotient of this
cohomology space must be an irreducible subquotient of either ( 5.3.2 )
or ( 4.3.1 ). The former, by Theorem 2.2.3 is a sum of copies of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

while the latter is a sum of copies of the Langlands quotient of this
induction. In particular, they are all nearly equivalent and occur in
this induction.
So if we now assume that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

contains @xmath as a subquotient, then since we have shown @xmath , by
Proposition 5.2.1 , @xmath and @xmath .
Therefore we have just shown that @xmath contains @xmath . Since no two
classes @xmath overlap, this determines @xmath uniquely. By Proposition
1.3.2 , Proposition 5.3.2 and our vanishing assumption on the symmetric
cube @xmath -function of @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and then Proposition 5.3.1 gives the @xmath -Eisenstein multiplicities
claimed.
Case of @xmath . Let @xmath this time be an associate class for @xmath
and @xmath . Then @xmath contains a representation of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with @xmath a unitary cuspidal automorphic representation of @xmath and
@xmath with @xmath . Then the same argument as in the @xmath case shows
that @xmath is real and positive.
Now we once again apply Theorem 1.3.5 and Proposition 1.3.2 to find that
the cohomology space

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

if nontrivial, is made up of subquotients of the cohomology spaces

  -- -- -- ---------
           (5.3.3)
  -- -- -- ---------

and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.3.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Just as in the @xmath case, the nonvanishing of either ( 5.3.3 ) or (
5.3.4 ) implies that @xmath for a cuspidal holomorphic eigenform @xmath
of weight at least @xmath , and that any irreducible subquotient of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is nearly equivalent to an irreducible subquotient of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now we use Proposition 5.2.8 to conclude that @xmath cannot also occur
as a subquotient, which finishes the proof in the case of @xmath .
Case of @xmath . Now we let @xmath be an associate class for @xmath and
@xmath . So @xmath contains a character of @xmath of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath are Dirichlet characters and @xmath . Let us write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for short.
We will study the piece @xmath of the Franke–Schwermer decomposition
using the (Franke) filtration of Theorem 1.3.3 . By that theorem, there
is a filtration on the space @xmath whose graded pieces are parametrized
by certain quadruples @xmath . For the convenience of the reader, we
recall what these quadruples consist of now:

-   @xmath is a standard parabolic subgroup of @xmath ;

-   @xmath is an element of @xmath ;

-   @xmath is an automorphic representation of @xmath occurring in

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and which is spanned by values at, or residues at, the point @xmath
    of Eisenstein series parabolically induced from @xmath to @xmath by
    representations in @xmath ; and

-   @xmath is an element of @xmath whose real part in @xmath is in the
    closure of the positive cone, and such that @xmath lies in the Weyl
    orbit of @xmath .

Then the graded pieces of @xmath are isomorphic to direct sums of @xmath
-modules of the form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for certain quadruples @xmath of the form just described.
For each of the four possible parabolic subgroups @xmath and any
corresponding quadruple @xmath as above, we will show using Proposition
5.2.8 that the cohomology

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (5.3.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

cannot have @xmath as a subquotient, which will finish the proof.
So first assume we have a quadruple @xmath as above where @xmath . Then
@xmath , forcing @xmath . The entry @xmath is the unitarization of a
representation in @xmath , and thus must be a character @xmath of @xmath
conjugate to @xmath . Finally, we have @xmath is Weyl conjugate to
@xmath .
Therefore the cohomology ( 4.3.5 ) is isomorphic, by Theorem 2.2.3 , to
a finite sum of copies of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By Proposition 5.2.8 , @xmath cannot be a subquotient of this space, and
we conclude in the case when @xmath .
If now we have a quadruple @xmath where @xmath , and @xmath is an
integral weight because it is conjugate to @xmath . We find that @xmath
is a representation generated by residual Eisenstein series at the point
@xmath and is therefore a subquotient of the normalized induction

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a character of @xmath conjugate to @xmath . Then by
2.2.3 and induction in stages, ( 5.3.5 ) is isomorphic to a subquotient
of a finite sum of copies of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We then conclude in this case as well using Proposition 5.2.8 .
The case when @xmath is completely similar, and we omit the details.
When @xmath , it is once again similar, but easier since we do not need
to use induction in stages. So we are done. ∎

### 5.4 Arthur’s conjectures and the cuspidal multiplicity of Langlands
quotients

We would like now to determine the cuspidal multiplicity of the
Langlands quotient we studied in Theorem 5.3.3 . Unfortunately, not
enough information is known about the CAP representations which can
occur in the cuspidal spectrum of @xmath . So our computation will have
to rely on some conjectures.
Recall that a cuspidal automorphic representation is CAP if it is nearly
equivalent to an irreducible subquotient of a parabolically induced
representation. A point of view put forth by Gan and others is that CAP
representations should be studied through the lens of Arthur’s
conjectures, as we explain now.
In his celebrated work [ artconj ] , Arthur introduced a series of
conjectures which, for a reductive @xmath -group @xmath , classify the
representations occurring in the space @xmath . The data involved in
this classification decomposes into local data, and so part of this
classification is to build packets of representations of @xmath for
every place @xmath . Of particular importance for us will be the shape
of these local packets at @xmath , and so we start (as Arthur did in [
artconj ] ) by reviewing these conjectures for real groups.

#### Arthur’s conjecture for real groups

Let @xmath be the Weil group of @xmath . Recall that @xmath is the union
@xmath where the element @xmath has the properties that @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The group @xmath comes equipped with a natural multiplicative map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

extending the usual absolute value on @xmath and for which @xmath .
Now let @xmath be a real reductive group. Attached to @xmath we have the
complex dual group @xmath and the @xmath -group

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we will not need to recall how the action of @xmath on @xmath is defined
here, but we will remark that it is trivial if @xmath is split.
Langlands classified the irreducible admissible representations of
@xmath in terms of certain homomorphisms @xmath , viewed up to conjugacy
under @xmath , called Langlands parameters. The classification is
finite-to-one from representations to parameters, the preimage of any
parameter under the classification being called an @xmath -packet.
Certain properties of parameters correspond to certain properties of the
representations in the corresponding @xmath -packets; for example, if
the projection of the image of a parameter @xmath onto @xmath is
bounded, then @xmath is called tempered because all of the
representations in the corresponding @xmath -packet are tempered.
In formulating his conjectures, Arthur needed to define a new kind of
parameter; the goal of his definition of parameters is not to classify
representations of @xmath , but rather to define the local (in our case,
archimedean) components of a classification of certain representations
of the adelic points of a group which has @xmath as its real factor. An
Arthur parameter, as we will call it, is a homomorphism

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

viewed up to conjugacy under @xmath , whose restriction to @xmath is a
tempered Langlands parameter.
There are at least two ways to obtain a Langlands parameter from an
Arthur parameter @xmath , and the correct way perhaps is not the one
suggested by the definition. Instead, given an Arthur parameter @xmath ,
we define the attached Langlands parameter @xmath to be given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The statement of Arthur’s conjecture for @xmath will involve the @xmath
-packet attached to the parameter @xmath .
It would be unreasonable for us to recall here all of the ingredients
necessary to completely define everything that appears in the statement
of Arthur’s conjecture, but we will recall some of these ingredients now
before stating the conjecture, albeit a minimal amount.
Fix now an Arthur parameter @xmath for @xmath . Write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for the centralizer of the image of @xmath in @xmath , and define the
finite group

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We can make the same definition for the Langlands parameter @xmath to
get a group @xmath and a finite group @xmath , and we get a natural map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is surjective. Hence we get an injective map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the hat denotes the set of irreducible characters of the group
which it decorates.
Let @xmath be an Arthur parameter for @xmath . Arthur’s conjecture
asserts that there is a unique triple @xmath where

-   @xmath is a finite set of irreducible representations of @xmath ,

-   @xmath is a function, and

-   @xmath is a function @xmath ,

satisfying certain properties. Among these are that @xmath contains the
@xmath -packet for @xmath , @xmath equals @xmath on this @xmath -packet,
and that for @xmath , we have that @xmath appears in the @xmath -packet
for @xmath if and only if @xmath is in @xmath . There are two more
properties that these triples are expected to satisfy (labelled (ii) and
(iii) in [ artconj ] , Conjecture 1.3.3). The property (ii) is that a
certain distribution built out of the triple and @xmath is stable, and
the property (iii) is an identity involving these triples for endoscopic
groups of @xmath ; it asserts that the distributions constructed in (ii)
for @xmath and its endoscopic groups are related by transfer.
In any case, we do not actually need the precise statement of this
conjecture; we will check this conjecture in Chapter 6 for a candidate
triple attached to a particular Arthur parameter for @xmath by proving
that our triple is an instance of a general construction of
Adams–Johnson [ adjo ] , who prove that their construction satisfies the
properties asserted by Arthur’s conjecture.
Given a triple @xmath as described above, let us call the component
@xmath the Arthur packet attached to @xmath .

#### Arthur’s global conjecture

Arthur’s archimedean conjecture discussed above also has an analogue for
nonarchimedean local fields, as long as one replaces the Weil group with
the Weil–Deligne group. There is also a global conjecture which Arthur
formulates (at least for split groups) in Section 2 of [ artconj ] .
So let @xmath be a split reductive group over @xmath . To make a global
conjecture, one must replace the Weil–Deligne group from the local
situation with the conjectural Langlands group @xmath . For any place
@xmath , the group @xmath should come equipped with embeddings @xmath ,
where we use @xmath to denote the Weil–Deligne group of @xmath unless
@xmath is archimedean, in which case we use it to denote the Weil group.
An Arthur parameter is then a @xmath -conjugacy class of maps

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

satisfying certain properties. Here @xmath is the global @xmath -group
of @xmath . Restriction of such a parameter @xmath to @xmath then gives
a local Arthur parameter @xmath at @xmath .
One can also make definitions of @xmath and @xmath in the global
setting, analogous to those made in the local setting. Then there are
maps

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We consider the set @xmath to be the set of all representations of the
form @xmath for @xmath . For such a @xmath , we define @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath is its image in @xmath , and @xmath is the
function appearing in Arthur’s local conjecture.
Then Arthur conjectures the following. First of all, the representations
occurring in @xmath all occur in some @xmath , and if @xmath is such
that @xmath is finite, then the representations in @xmath which lie in
@xmath all occur in the discrete spectrum @xmath .
Furthermore, he gives a formula for the multiplicity with which these
representations occur in the discrete spectrum: There should be an
integer @xmath and a homomorphism @xmath such that the multiplicity
@xmath for which any @xmath occurs in @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath is such that @xmath is finite, let us call @xmath the Arthur
packet attached to @xmath .

#### An Arthur packet for @xmath

In [ gangurl ] , Gan and Gurevich made a study of certain automorphic
representations of @xmath which are CAP with respect to the long root
parabolic @xmath , and in Section 13 of that paper, they interpret what
Arthur’s conjectures would mean in terms of those CAP representations.
More precisely, they define a certain Arthur parameter for @xmath and
explain the shape of the corresponding Arthur packets, both globally and
locally. We now recall their work.
First, let @xmath be a unitary cuspidal automorphic representation of
@xmath with trivial central character. Then @xmath can be viewed as a
representation of @xmath and there should correspond to @xmath a global
Langlands parameter

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We remark that @xmath is the dual group of @xmath , and that since
@xmath is split, we may replace the @xmath -group of @xmath with just
the dual group in the definition of Langlands parameter.
Now from @xmath Gan and Gurevich construct an Arthur parameter for
@xmath as follows. Let @xmath and @xmath be two orthogonal roots of
@xmath . Assume @xmath is short, so that @xmath is long. Let @xmath be
the @xmath subgroup of @xmath corresponding to the @xmath -triple coming
from @xmath , and similarly for @xmath . Then because @xmath and @xmath
are orthogonal, @xmath and @xmath centralize each other. Let @xmath be
the inclusion @xmath , and similarly define @xmath . Then we can make
the following composition, which we take to be our Arthur parameter
@xmath .

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The last map in this composition is well defined because @xmath and
@xmath centralize each other, and in fact its kernel is @xmath
diagonally embedded. Since @xmath is split and self dual, we may view
Arthur parameters for @xmath as maps into @xmath .
Now we can start to look at the multiplicity formula. According to [
gangurl ] , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore the representations occurring in @xmath and @xmath are
discrete. We also have @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath . Here @xmath is the sign of the functional equation for the
symmetric cube @xmath -function of @xmath .
Of course, to get further information, we have to inspect the local
situation. Write @xmath . The Langlands parameter @xmath decomposes into
local parameters @xmath which are the parameters attached by the local
Langlands correspondence for @xmath to the representations @xmath . The
local Arthur parameter @xmath then equals the composition

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Again according to [ gangurl ] , the local component group @xmath is
isomorphic to @xmath if @xmath is discrete series, and is trivial
otherwise. The local Arthur packet @xmath should have two elements if
@xmath is discrete series, and should have one element otherwise. Let us
write

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and otherwise

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Here @xmath should be the representation which is attached to @xmath by
the local Langlands correspondence. Hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is the Langlands quotient of the unitary induction of @xmath from
@xmath . (We will explain later in more detail why the parameter @xmath
corresponds to this representation, at least in the archimedean case.)
Then if @xmath is discrete series, we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Feeding all this back into the multiplicity formula above gives the
following. If @xmath with @xmath and with each @xmath in @xmath , then
we have @xmath if and only if @xmath and @xmath for an even number of
@xmath , or @xmath and @xmath for an odd number of @xmath . Otherwise
@xmath .
Based on what we have seen, we feel it is reasonable to make the
following conjecture.

###### Conjecture 5.4.1.

Let @xmath be a unitary cuspidal automorphic representation of @xmath .
Write @xmath and write @xmath for the Langlands quotient of the unitary
induction of @xmath from @xmath to @xmath .

1.   [label=()]

2.   Let @xmath be the set of places @xmath for which @xmath is discrete
    series. For every @xmath , there is a representation @xmath of
    @xmath , different from @xmath , such that the following holds. Let
    @xmath be a subset. Then

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    occurs in @xmath with either multiplicity zero or one, and it does
    so with multiplicity one if and only if either @xmath and @xmath is
    even, or @xmath and @xmath is odd.

3.   If @xmath , then the representations @xmath above which occur in
    the discrete spectrum are cuspidal.

4.   If @xmath is the discrete series of @xmath of even weight @xmath ,
    then @xmath is the discrete series representation of @xmath with
    Harish-Chandra parameter @xmath .

Of course, part (a) of this conjecture is just a slight reformulation of
what was said above, and what was expected in [ gangurl ] . Part (b) was
also expected by [ gangurl ] , and is more generally reflective of the
expected behavior for CAP forms. Part (c), on the other hand, will
require some explanation, and Chapter 6 will be devoted to justifying
it. Essentially, Adams and Johnson [ adjo ] have made a general
construction of packets corresponding to a certain type of archimedean
Arthur parameters. What we will show is that the Arthur parameter @xmath
constructed just above is of this type, and that the corresponding
Adams–Johnson construction yields a packet of two representations. We
will explicitly compute these two representations and show that one is
the Langlands quotient @xmath while the other is the discrete series
representation with Harish-Chandra parameter @xmath from our conjecture.
We remark that this discrete series representation is the one which is
called “quaternionic of weight @xmath ” by Gan–Gross–Savin [ ggs ] .
This class of quaternionic discrete series is an analogue of the
holomorphic discrete series for groups such as @xmath . In fact, the
analogue of our conjecture holds for @xmath and its Siegel parabolic (as
partially discussed in the proof of Theorem 4.4.1 ) and one even gets
holomorphic discrete series in that case.

#### Back to cohomology

We can now state what consequences Conjecture 5.4.1 has for cohomology.
We consider again the Langlands quotients @xmath from Section 5.3 .

###### Theorem 5.4.2.

Let @xmath be a cuspidal holomorphic eigenform of even weight @xmath .
Assume @xmath . Let @xmath be the irreducible representation of @xmath
of highest weight @xmath . Assume Conjecture 5.4.1 . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Consequently, under Conjecture 5.4.1 , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

The theorem just follows from the description of the archimedean
components of the representations @xmath appearing in Conjecture 5.4.1 .
Indeed, the discrete series representation appearing there must be
cohomological in middle degree @xmath , and the Langlands quotient is
cohomological in one degree above and below middle. The multiplicities
are @xmath and not higher because @xmath is connected. ∎

## 6 The archimedean Arthur packet for @xmath

In this chapter, we compute what should be the archimedean Arthur packet
discussed in Section 5.4 above. We are indebted to Jeffrey Adams, who
suggested to us that this packet might be constructed via cohomological
induction.

### 6.1 Cohomological induction

In this section we recall a few facts about the cohomological induction
functors of Zuckerman. Everything we discuss in this section is
contained in the reference of Knapp–Vogan [ knvo ] . We will not
actually need give the definition of the cohomological induction
functors because we will be able to study them explicitly enough using
certain properties which we will give instead. The interested reader may
refer to Chapter V of [ knvo ] .
We now set some notation that will be in play throughout this section.
Let @xmath be a real reductive Lie group with complexified Lie algebra
@xmath . We fix @xmath a maximal compact subgroup of @xmath and @xmath a
Cartan involution which gives @xmath . Let @xmath be the complexified
Lie algebra of @xmath .
We fix a @xmath -stable Cartan subalgebra @xmath . Let @xmath be the
pairing on @xmath induced by the Killing form. We also fix a @xmath
-stable parabolic subalgebra @xmath of @xmath containing @xmath , and we
let @xmath be the Levi subalgebra of @xmath containing @xmath , and
@xmath its nilpotent radical. Then @xmath . Let @xmath be the Levi
subgroup of @xmath corresponding to @xmath . Note that @xmath is a
maximal compact subgroup of @xmath .
Finally, if @xmath is a Lie subalgebra which is stable under the adjoint
action of the Cartan subalgebra @xmath , we write @xmath for half the
sum of the roots of @xmath in @xmath .
For @xmath , we consider the cohomological induction functors @xmath
from @xmath -modules to @xmath -modules as defined in Section V.1 of [
knvo ] . These are normalized so that if @xmath is an @xmath -module
with infinitesimal character given by @xmath , the @xmath has
infinitesimal character given by @xmath ( [ knvo ] , Corollary 5.25). We
recall the following fact about the functors @xmath .

###### Theorem 6.1.1.

Let @xmath be an irreducible @xmath -module with infinitesimal character
given by @xmath . Write @xmath . Assume

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all roots @xmath of @xmath in @xmath . Then @xmath for @xmath and
@xmath is nonzero and irreducible.

###### Proof.

This is part of Theorem 0.50 in [ knvo ] . ∎

If @xmath is a weight such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all roots @xmath of @xmath in @xmath , like in the theorem above,
then we say @xmath is in the good range. Modules whose infinitesimal
characters are sufficiently far in the good range are nice for us
because they will make the spectral sequence we are about to discuss
degenerate.
Now this spectral sequence will be the one for cohomological induction
in stages. It is slightly tricky to state with our current notation
because the functors @xmath have a normalization built into them which
will need to be undone when writing down this spectral sequence.
In the following, we will consider another @xmath -stable parabolic
subalgebra @xmath contained in @xmath and containing @xmath . Write
@xmath for the Levi decomposition, and let @xmath be the Levi subgroup
of @xmath corresponding to @xmath . We will also view the weight @xmath
as a character of @xmath , and we will let @xmath be the associated one
dimensional @xmath -module. Similarly, we consider the one dimensional
@xmath -module @xmath , and the one dimensional @xmath -module @xmath ,
both similarly defined.

###### Theorem 6.1.2.

With the notation as above, for @xmath -modules @xmath , there is a
convergent, first-quadrant spectral sequence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

This is Theorem 11.77 of [ knvo ] . (See also the Formula (11.73) there
for the discrepancy in notation which forced us to twist by characters
in each step.) ∎

Note that nothing about cohomologically induced modules is made explicit
by the two theorems in this section; no result here tells us how to
actually compute a given cohomologically induced module. The results of
the next section will begin to do this, and can be combined with the
spectral sequence above to obtain even more information.

### 6.2 Discrete series and Harish-Chandra’s classification

In this section we classify discrete series representations in a manner
which is classical, and then recast this classification using
cohomolgical induction. Let us begin by setting some notation that will
be used throughout this section.
Like the previous section we fix a @xmath a real reductive Lie group
with complexified Lie algebra @xmath . However, now we assume that
@xmath contains a compact Cartan subgroup, say @xmath . By results of
Harish-Chandra, this assumption is equivalent to the assumption that
@xmath has discrete series representations.
Let @xmath be a maximal compact subgroup containing @xmath . We
furthermore assume that @xmath is connected, and hence so is @xmath .
Let @xmath and @xmath denote, respectively, the complexified Lie
algebras of @xmath and @xmath . If @xmath is the Cartan involution of
@xmath which gives @xmath , then everything we have just defined is
@xmath -stable. Finally, let us write @xmath for the Weyl group of
@xmath in @xmath and @xmath for the compact Weyl group.
We call a weight of @xmath analytically integral if it is the
differential of a character @xmath . Harish-Chandra classified the
discrete series representations of @xmath in terms of certain
analytically integral weights of @xmath . Here is his classification.

###### Theorem 6.2.1 (Harish-Chandra).

Let @xmath be a regular weight of @xmath . So the weight @xmath
determines a dominant Weyl chamber in @xmath and hence also an ordering
on the roots of @xmath in @xmath , and we let @xmath denote half the sum
of the roots which are positive with respect to this ordering.
Then there is a bijection between @xmath -orbits of regular weights
@xmath of @xmath such that @xmath is dominant and analytically integral,
and discrete series representations of @xmath with trivial central
character. Let @xmath be the discrete series representation
corresponding to such a weight @xmath . Then this bijection is
determined by the following property.
The ordering determined by @xmath also determines an ordering on the
compact roots (that is, the roots of @xmath in @xmath ). Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

be the decomposition of @xmath into its @xmath -types, where the sum is
over all analytically integral weights @xmath of @xmath which are
dominant with respect to the positive compact roots, and @xmath is the
irreducible representation of @xmath with highest weight @xmath . Let
@xmath denote half the sum of the positive compact roots. Then the
property determining @xmath in terms of @xmath is that the smallest
@xmath for which @xmath is nonzero is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For this particular @xmath we have @xmath .
Finally, any discrete series representation can be obtained from one of
the ones above by a central twist.

In the setting of this theorem, we call (the @xmath orbit of) @xmath the
Harish-Chandra parameter of the discrete series representation @xmath
(or any of its central twists) and we call the representation @xmath
with

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the lowest @xmath -type of @xmath .
Now we explain how to get discrete series representations by
cohomologically inducing characters. Let @xmath be a regular weight of
@xmath , and as in Theorem 6.2.1 , order the roots of @xmath in @xmath
so that @xmath is dominant and let @xmath be half the sum of positive
roots. Let @xmath be the Borel subalgebra of @xmath which is determined
by the positive roots in this ordering, and let @xmath be its Levi
decomposition. Then @xmath is just the sum of @xmath and the center of
@xmath . Let @xmath be the corresponding maximal torus in @xmath .
We will consider the cohomological induction from @xmath -modules to
@xmath -modules with respect to the parabolic subalgebra @xmath . If
@xmath is analytically integral, we view it as a character of @xmath
which has a trivial action of the center of @xmath , and also as a
@xmath -module.

###### Theorem 6.2.2.

With notation as above, assume @xmath is dominant and analytically
integral. Then the cohomologically induced module @xmath is isomorphic
to (the @xmath -module of) the discrete series representation of @xmath
with Harish-Chandra parameter @xmath .

###### Proof.

This is Theorem 11.178(a) in [ knvo ] . ∎

We remark that the weight @xmath in the theorem is by definition in the
good range, in the sense of Theorem 6.1.1 . Therefore it makes sense to
drop the cohomological degree from the notation @xmath .

### 6.3 The Adams–Johnson construction

We will now recall the main results of the work of Adams–Johnson [ adjo
] as interpreted in terms of Arthur parameters. Section 3 of [ adjo ]
explains the connection between these results and Arthur’s conjectures
quickly, but there is also an article of Arthur [ artunipconj ] which
explains this in more detail, and which is very explicit about the
parameters involved. We mostly follow this latter article.
Most of this section is devoted to explaining the construction of the
parameters that are relevant to the Adams–Johnson construction. After
constructing these parameters, the construction of the associated packet
by Adams–Johnson will be easy to describe using cohomological induction.
We keep the notation of the previous section, and in particular we will
be working with the objects @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath defined there. As before, we also
write @xmath for the maximal torus of @xmath containing @xmath , and
@xmath for its Lie algebra. Let @xmath be a @xmath -stable parabolic
subalgebra with Levi factor @xmath containing @xmath , and let @xmath be
the corresponding Levi subgroup of @xmath . Let @xmath be the nilpotent
radical of @xmath .
We will consider, in what follows, the @xmath -group of @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and also that of @xmath . Here @xmath is the Weil group of @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath for @xmath .
Choose a maximal torus in @xmath and identify it with @xmath . Then
@xmath is identified with a Levi subgroup of @xmath containing @xmath .

#### Construction of @xmath

The first order of business is to construct an embedding @xmath of
@xmath into @xmath . This is done on pp. 30-31 of [ artunipconj ] and we
recall here the process.
We already have an embedding @xmath because we have embedded @xmath into
@xmath . So to get the embedding @xmath of @xmath -groups, we only need
to describe where to send elements of @xmath . We will describe @xmath
for @xmath and @xmath separately.
First, for @xmath , let @xmath be the unique element of @xmath such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for any character @xmath of @xmath (equivalently, @xmath is a
cocharacter of @xmath ). Here, as before, @xmath is half the sum of the
roots of @xmath in @xmath . Then the map @xmath is a homomorphism @xmath
, and we set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We now describe @xmath . Let @xmath be any element of the derived group
of @xmath normalizing @xmath and such that @xmath sends the positive
roots of @xmath in @xmath to negative ones. Similarly define the element
@xmath in the derived group of @xmath . Then we declare

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus we have defined the embedding @xmath . It depends on certain
choices, but only up to conjugation in @xmath .

#### Construction of @xmath

Now we construct an Arthur parameter @xmath . Fix a character @xmath .
We also denote by @xmath the restriction of this character to @xmath ,
and the weight of @xmath which that gives. We assume that @xmath is
dominant with respect to the roots of @xmath in @xmath .
This character @xmath , when viewed as a one dimensional representation
of @xmath , determines by the archimedean local Langlands
correspondence, a Langlands parameter

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

whose image lies in @xmath , where we have written @xmath for the center
of @xmath .
Now let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

be the Arthur parameter for @xmath determined by the requirements that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and that @xmath maps to a principal unipotent element in @xmath . Then
we define the Arthur parameter @xmath for @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the embedding above.

#### Construction of the Adams–Johnson packet

Let @xmath be a Weyl group element. We use @xmath to twist our parabolic
subalgebra @xmath in the following way. If @xmath denotes the set of
roots of @xmath in @xmath , we let @xmath be the parabolic subalgebra of
@xmath containing precisely all the roots @xmath for @xmath , along with
@xmath . Let @xmath be the Levi factor containing @xmath and let @xmath
be the Levi subgroup of @xmath corresponding to @xmath .
Now Lemma 2.5 (1) of [ adjo ] states that all the Levis @xmath for
@xmath are inner forms of each other. Therefore they have the same
@xmath -groups. So let @xmath be the Langlands parameter given by @xmath
, but viewed as a parameter for @xmath . Then @xmath corresponds to a
one dimensional representation of @xmath , which we denote by @xmath .
We may now define the Adams–Johnson packet. Let @xmath be the
cohomological induction functor of Section 6.1 (see in particular
Theorem 6.1.1 ).

###### Definition 6.3.1.

The Adams–Johnson packet attached to the Arthur parameter @xmath
constructed above is the set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where, for @xmath , the cohomological induction of @xmath is taken with
respect to the parabolic subalgebra @xmath .

Actually, it can be that a lot of the representations in @xmath
corresponding to different elements @xmath are equal. In fact, it is
noted in [ adjo ] that @xmath lie in the same double coset in @xmath if
and only if @xmath . Arthur notes in [ artunipconj ] that this set
@xmath of double cosets is in bijection with the component group @xmath
attached to @xmath .
Now we have the following theorem, which is the main result of [ adjo ]
as interpreted by Arthur [ artunipconj ] .

###### Theorem 6.3.2 (Adams–Johnson).

For each @xmath as above, there is a function @xmath and a pairing
@xmath between @xmath and @xmath , such that the triples @xmath satisfy
the conclusion of Arthur’s conjecture ( [ artconj ] , Conjecture 1.3.3).

###### Proof.

This is the main result of [ adjo ] ; See Theorems 2.13 and 2.21 there.
Arthur [ artunipconj ] , Section 5, also describes how to get the
objects @xmath and @xmath from the objects appearing in [ adjo ] . ∎

###### Remark 6.3.3.

Strictly speaking, although it is mentioned in [ adjo ] and [
artunipconj ] that @xmath contains the @xmath -packet attached to the
Langlands parameter @xmath associated with @xmath , a proof of this is
written down in neither of these references. We will be able to check
this directly, however, for the packet that we obtain for @xmath in the
next section.

### 6.4 Determination of the packet for @xmath

Recall that in Section 5.4 we constructed a global Arthur parameter for
@xmath whose associated packet should contain the CAP forms that are
nearly equivalent to the Eisenstein series considered there. This Arthur
parameter has a local archimedean component, and in this section we will
recall how it is constructed and denote it @xmath .
This notation suggests that there will be another Arthur parameter in
play, and indeed, we will construct one via the process of the previous
section. This other parameter will be denoted @xmath . But the
parameters @xmath and @xmath will turn out to be equal, which means that
we can apply the methods of the previous section and obtain an
Adams–Johnson packet for @xmath , or equivalently, for @xmath . We then
determine the representations in this packet explicitly. They will turn
out to be the Langlands quotient and the discrete series representation
discussed in Conjecture 5.4.1 .
To be consistent with the rest of this chapter, we change some of the
notation used in Section 5.1 . In particular, let us write @xmath for
the real split @xmath , @xmath for a fixed maximal compact subgroup of
@xmath , and @xmath for a fixed maximal torus contained in @xmath . Let
@xmath , @xmath , and @xmath be the respective complexified Lie
algebras. We still write @xmath and @xmath , respectively, for fixed
long and short simple roots of @xmath in @xmath , and we assume we have
chosen @xmath so that @xmath and @xmath are the compact roots. We fix
@xmath the Cartan involution giving @xmath . Write @xmath for the Weyl
group of @xmath in @xmath and @xmath for the Weyl group of @xmath in
@xmath .
On the dual side of things, we have @xmath , and we fix a maximal torus
in @xmath , identifying it with @xmath . Passage to the dual side
switches the long and short simple roots, so @xmath becomes a short
simple root for @xmath in @xmath , and @xmath becomes a long simple
root. In order to distinguish when we are on the dual side and when we
are not, we will denote roots of @xmath in @xmath with a prime and thus
write @xmath and @xmath . Then we have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --

#### The parameter @xmath

Fix throughout this section an even integer @xmath . We denote by @xmath
the discrete series representation of @xmath with trivial central
character. Then @xmath may be viewed as a representation of @xmath . Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

be its Langlands parameter. This can be made explicit. For one thing,
the @xmath -group of @xmath is just @xmath , and then @xmath takes the
following form. For @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.4.1)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which is an element of @xmath , and

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.4.2)
  -- -------- -- ---------

(See, for example [ praparam ] , Proposition 2.) Note that the quantity
@xmath should be interpreted as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For @xmath a root of @xmath in @xmath , let @xmath be the @xmath
associated with @xmath . It is generated by the images of the unipotent
root group homomorphisms @xmath corresponding to @xmath . If @xmath and
@xmath are orthogonal roots, then the elements in the image of @xmath
and @xmath commute. Hence @xmath and @xmath centralize each other. We
thus get a map

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.4.3)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Now the maximal torus @xmath in @xmath is just the image under this map
of the product of the diagonal tori in @xmath and @xmath . The character
group of @xmath is generated by its root lattice, and it is visible from
the root lattice of @xmath that the characters @xmath and @xmath
generate an index @xmath subgroup of the character group of @xmath . It
follows that the map above has a kernel of order @xmath . The character
@xmath is a root of @xmath , and it generates the whole character group
along with @xmath and @xmath . All three of these characters, when
lifted to @xmath , are trivial on the diagonally embedded @xmath , and
so in fact the kernel of the above map is this @xmath . Thus we identify

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as a subgroup of @xmath in this way. It contains @xmath and is simply
the subgroup generated by the inages of the unipotent root group
homomorphisms @xmath and @xmath .
Now we can define the Arthur parameter @xmath . It is the composition

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where middle map leaves the order of the @xmath ’s the same and only
rearranges the placement of @xmath , and the last map is the product of
the map from ( 6.4.3 ) with the identity map of @xmath . To be clear,
@xmath is mapping into the subgroup @xmath of @xmath , so the image of
the restriction of @xmath to @xmath lands in that subgroup.
The choice of the pair @xmath of orthogonal roots doesn’t really matter,
as long as @xmath is mapping to the short root @xmath . Any other choice
of orthogonal roots would lead to an Arthur parameter which is conjugate
to @xmath .

#### The Levi @xmath

We now begin working towards constructing a parameter @xmath via the
constructions from Section 6.3 , and therefore we must start by
constructing a Levi subgroup of @xmath .
First, let @xmath be the parabolic subalgebra of @xmath whose Levi
@xmath contains the roots @xmath along with @xmath , and whose nilpotent
radical @xmath contains the roots @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ,
and @xmath . (These five roots are the ones lying above the line
containing @xmath in the root diagram.) Then let @xmath be the Levi
subgroup of @xmath containing @xmath and corresponding to @xmath . The
notation is justified by the following lemma.

###### Lemma 6.4.1.

The Levi @xmath is isomorphic to @xmath

###### Proof.

First we look at the complexified situation. The group @xmath is the
Levi subgroup of @xmath containing @xmath and the images of the
unipotent root group homomorphisms @xmath . Therefore, as @xmath is
orthogonal to @xmath , @xmath is the subgroup of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

generated by the first factor and the diagonal torus from the second
factor.
Now we take real points. The group of real points in the diagonal torus
of @xmath is a one dimensional subtorus of @xmath , hence is a circle
@xmath , and the group of real points of @xmath is a form of @xmath .
Since the root @xmath is noncompact, this form is noncompact and is thus
@xmath itself.
We conclude that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and we are done since this latter group is @xmath . ∎

#### The embedding @xmath

We now describe the embedding @xmath constructed in Section 6.3 in our
current context of @xmath . The complexification @xmath is the Levi
subgroup of @xmath containing @xmath and the torus @xmath , and
therefore the dual group @xmath is the Levi containing @xmath and @xmath
. The group @xmath is therefore the subgroup of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

containing the factor @xmath and the diagonal torus in the factor @xmath
. For

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

let @xmath denote the image of @xmath modulo @xmath , viewed as an
element of @xmath .
To describe explicitly the embedding

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we need to describe explicitly the elements @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath
from Section 6.3 . Recall that for @xmath , @xmath was defined by the
requirement that for any character @xmath of @xmath , we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is half the sum of roots of @xmath in @xmath . This half
sum equals @xmath , and so we are requiring

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath , it follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Next we have the element @xmath , which is any element of @xmath that
normalizes @xmath and whose adjoint action negates every positive root.
Thus we can take

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The adjoint action of this element negates the orthogonal roots @xmath
and @xmath and therefore acts as negation on the whole root lattice.
Finally, we have the element @xmath , which is any element of the
derived group of @xmath which normalizes @xmath and whose adjoint action
negates every positive root of @xmath . The derived group of @xmath is
just the subgroup @xmath , and so we may take

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We thus have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The embedding @xmath is then just defined to be the usual inclusion

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

on the subgroup @xmath of @xmath , and on the Weil group it is defined
by the rules @xmath for @xmath , and @xmath . Thus

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.4.4)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

#### The parameter @xmath

To construct our Arthur parameter @xmath , we must start with a
character @xmath of @xmath . Such characters can be specified by weights
of @xmath that are multiples of @xmath . The weight @xmath itself
corresponds to the determinant character of @xmath . Thus we set

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The archimedean local Langlands correspondence attaches to this
character the Langlands parameter

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We now define a parameter @xmath for the Levi, as in Section 6.3 . This
requires us to choose a principal unipotent element in @xmath , and we
choose @xmath . Thus @xmath is defined to be the Arthur parameter

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It follows that the restriction of @xmath to @xmath is just the
identification of @xmath with @xmath .
Finally, we define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We have the following lemma, which is now not so difficult.

###### Lemma 6.4.2.

The parameters @xmath and @xmath are equal.

###### Proof.

We check that @xmath and @xmath coincide on @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath
. We have, for @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where the last equality is just the definition of @xmath , along with (
6.4.1 ). Also,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

by ( 6.4.2 ). Finally, @xmath and @xmath coincide on @xmath , because
when restricted to @xmath , both become the inclusion of @xmath into
@xmath . Therefore we have @xmath , as desired. ∎

#### The character @xmath

Consider the set of double cosets

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This set has two elements and a representative for the nontrivial coset
is given by the Weyl group element that rotates the root lattice by
@xmath clockwise. Let @xmath be this element.
We consider the parabolic subalgebra @xmath which contains @xmath for
every root @xmath of @xmath in @xmath . Thus @xmath contains the all the
positive roots along with @xmath . The Levi subalgebra of @xmath
containing @xmath contains the roots @xmath .
Let @xmath be the Levi subgroup of @xmath containing @xmath and
corresponding to @xmath . Again, the notation is suggestive of the
following lemma.

###### Lemma 6.4.3.

The Levi @xmath is isomorphic to @xmath .

###### Proof.

The proof is completely similar to the proof of Lemma 6.4.1 , except we
replace the root @xmath there by @xmath . Then @xmath is compact, so the
form of @xmath that appears here is @xmath . ∎

Similar to what was discussed above for @xmath , the dual group @xmath
of @xmath is the subgroup of

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

generated by the factor @xmath along with the diagonal torus in @xmath .
The Langlands parameter @xmath can be conjugated to give a parameter
that sends @xmath to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and which sends @xmath to @xmath . This is how we view the parameter
@xmath as a Langlands parameter for @xmath .
Corresponding to this parameter via the archimedean local Langlands
correspondence is the character we call @xmath ; it is the character of
@xmath which acts on @xmath via the weight @xmath .

#### The packet @xmath

We can now construct our packet @xmath . By definition, it consists of
the cohomologically induced representations

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The following is the main result of this section.

###### Theorem 6.4.4.

We have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the Langlands quotient of the parabolic induction of @xmath from the
long root parabolic, where @xmath is the discrete series representation
of @xmath of weight @xmath , and we have that @xmath is the discrete
series representation of @xmath with Harish-Chandra parameter @xmath ,
where @xmath is half the sum of positive roots.
Thus the Adams–Johnson packet attached to @xmath consists of @xmath and
this discrete series representation.

###### Proof.

We study @xmath first, using the spectral sequence of Theorem 6.1.2 .
Let @xmath be the standard Borel subalgebra of @xmath containing @xmath
, and @xmath its unipotent radical. Let @xmath be the one dimensional
@xmath -module given by the character

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We will induce first from @xmath to @xmath , and then from @xmath to
@xmath . The relevant degrees @xmath for the cohomological inductions
(see Theorem 6.1.1 ) are both @xmath ; since @xmath is compact, the
degree @xmath for the induction from @xmath to @xmath just equals the
dimension of the unipotent radical of the Borel subalgebra of @xmath ,
and for @xmath to @xmath , the degree is the number of compact roots not
in @xmath . Both of these numbers are @xmath .
Now the first step is to induce @xmath to @xmath . The weight @xmath
equals @xmath , and hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is the discrete series representation of @xmath with Harish-Chandra
parameter

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

by Theorem 6.2.2 . Since @xmath is compact by Lemma 6.4.3 , this is just
the character of @xmath given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now @xmath , so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is the one dimensional representation of @xmath given by @xmath , and
therefore

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By Theorem 6.1.2 , @xmath is the term @xmath of a spectral sequence
converging to @xmath . The other terms in this spectral sequence vanish
by Theorem 6.1.1 , so we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

But @xmath , so @xmath is the character @xmath . Thus by Theorem 6.2.2
again, @xmath is just the discrete series representation of @xmath with
Harish-Chandra parameter

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as desired.
Now we show that @xmath is the Langlands quotient claimed. The key to
this is a theorem in Vogan’s book [ voganbook ] , Theorem 6.6.15, which
links the composition of ordinary parabolic induction with cohomological
induction with the composition in the opposite order. Instead of
recalling the theorem in general, we explain what it means in our
special case. It requires three types of data as input: We need what
Vogan calls @xmath -stable data, character data, and cuspidal data,
which are defined in general in Definitions 6.5.1, 6.6.1, and 6.6.11,
respectively, in Vogan’s book. Moreover, there is a bijection between
these first two kind of data (Proposition 6.6.2 in [ voganbook ] ) and a
surjective map from pieces of character data to pieces of cuspidal data
(Proposition 6.6.12 in [ voganbook ] ). Pieces of @xmath -stable data
are used to construct cohomological inductions of parabolically induced
representations and in our case will be used to realize the
representation @xmath . On the other hand, cuspidal data are used to
construct parabolic inductions of discrete series representations and
will be used to realize @xmath . Theorem 6.6.15 in Vogan’s book will
then state that these two constructions coincide. We note that this
theorem is stated in terms of Langlands subrepresentations instead of
Langlands quotients, so we have to make a few minor adjustments.
To build the @xmath -stable data we need, we first construct a certain
@xmath -stable maximal torus of @xmath . Let @xmath be the center of
@xmath . Let @xmath be the @xmath -stable maximal split torus in the
derived group of @xmath . Then @xmath is a maximal torus in @xmath . It
is neither split nor compact. Let @xmath be given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Fix a minimal parabolic subgroup @xmath in @xmath containing @xmath ,
and let @xmath be the character given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then the quadruple @xmath is a piece of @xmath -stable data in the sense
of [ voganbook ] . We write @xmath for the character of @xmath given by
@xmath on @xmath and by @xmath on @xmath , and we construct the
representation (called a standard module for our data) given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.4.5)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Of course, in the parabolic induction, the characters @xmath and @xmath
cancel, and the parabolic induction thus becomes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By definition of @xmath , this contains @xmath as its unique
subrepresentation. Since cohomological induction is exact in the good
range, we see that @xmath is a subrepresentation of ( 6.4.5 ).
Now we construct a piece of character data from @xmath as in [ voganbook
] . For us this will be a pair @xmath where @xmath is a character
satisfying certain properties. (Actually, Vogan’s definition contains
also the data of a character of the complexified Lie algebra @xmath of
@xmath , but that character is determined from the differential of
@xmath .) We set @xmath , and we let @xmath be the product of @xmath
with the restriction to @xmath of the character @xmath . This latter
character is equal to the sum of noncompact roots in @xmath , and is
therefore given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Its restriction to @xmath is therefore given by @xmath , and thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

From @xmath we construct another piece of data, which Vogan calls
cuspidal data. Consider the centralizer of @xmath in @xmath ; this is a
Levi subgroup of @xmath , and we write @xmath for its Langlands
decomposition. The torus @xmath was a maximal split torus in a short
root @xmath , and it follows that @xmath is a long root @xmath in @xmath
. Therefore there is a long root parabolic @xmath in @xmath .
A piece of cuspidal data constructed from @xmath will consist of the
Levi @xmath , along with a character of @xmath , which will is given by
@xmath , and also a discrete series representation @xmath of @xmath .
This latter representation is given as the cohomological induction of
@xmath from @xmath to @xmath , where @xmath is the @xmath -stable data
for @xmath obtained from the restriction of the character data @xmath to
@xmath . In this data, the @xmath -stable parabolic @xmath is the
intersection of @xmath with the complexified Lie algebra @xmath of
@xmath . It contains the noncompact root @xmath in its radical. The
character @xmath is the restriction of @xmath to @xmath multiplied by
the inverse of the sum of the noncompact roots in the radical of @xmath
. Thus it is equal to @xmath .
The Theorem 6.6.15 in [ voganbook ] then asserts that ( 6.4.5 ) is
isomorphic to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (6.4.6)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The cohomological induction in this expression is, by Theorem 6.2.2 ,
the twist of the discrete series representation of @xmath of weight
@xmath by the character @xmath . Since @xmath is a long root parabolic,
@xmath , and we get that ( 6.4.6 ), and also hence ( 6.4.5 ), are
isomorphic to the normalized induction

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath is self dual, the unique irreducible subrepresentation of
this is, by dualizing, isomorphic to @xmath , and this is isomorphic to
@xmath by above. This is what we wanted to prove. ∎

###### Remark 6.4.5.

We make one more comparison to the @xmath case. For @xmath , the
normalized induced representation @xmath from the Siegel parabolic
contains as a subrepresentation a member of the large discrete series.
This large discrete series representation has Harish-Chandra parameter
is related, by the Weyl group element which rotates the root lattice
clockwise by an angle of @xmath , to the holomorphic discrete series
which are the archimedean components of the CAP forms appearing in the
proof of Theorem 4.4.1 .
For @xmath , on the other hand, it is possible to make a (somewhat
lengthy) computation using the work of Blank [ blank ] to show that the
induced representation @xmath contains the discrete series
representation of @xmath with Harish-Chandra parameter

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This parameter is the one obtained from the Harish-Chandra parameter of
@xmath by applying the rotation @xmath introduced above. The
Harish-Chandra parameter of @xmath , as discussed before, is the one
called quaternionic of weight @xmath in [ ggs ] . These quaternionic
discrete series are supposed to be analogous to the holomorphic ones,
and so we once again see that the theory of representations induced from
the long root parabolic of @xmath corresponds well to the theory of
those induced from the Siegel parabolic in @xmath .

\printbibliography

Generated by LaTeXML [[LOGO]]
