This thesis explores methods and techniques for testing and emulating
models of modified gravity. In particular, the thesis can be split into
two parts. The first part corresponding to chapters 2 , 3 and 4
introduces a method of testing modified gravity models on galaxy cluster
scales. In more detail, chapter 2 introduces the main concepts from
galaxy cluster physics, which are important in the context of testing
modified gravity. I present a summary of the different probes of mass in
galaxy clusters. More specifically, the properties of the X-ray-emitting
intracluster medium are discussed in the context of measuring
hydrostatic masses. In addition, the key equations for weak lensing of
background galaxies by galaxy clusters are summarized in terms of their
importance for measuring cluster lensing masses.

Chapter 3 introduces a technique for detecting the modifications of
gravity using a combination of X-ray and weak lensing data obtained by
stacking multiple galaxy clusters. This technique first discussed in
Terukina et al. [ 2014 ] and Wilcox et al. [ 2015 ] allows us to put
some of the most competitive constraints on scalar-tensor theories with
chameleon screening as well as the closely related @xmath gravity
models. Chapter 3 also contains a discussion of the key theoretical
concepts of scalar-tensor models and their relationship to @xmath
gravity. Finally, the chapter is concluded by introducing novel results
which update the tests done in Wilcox et al. [ 2015 ] with an improved
dataset consisting of 77 galaxy clusters from the XCS and CFHTLenS
surveys. The updated dataset containing less noisy tangential shear data
allows us to put tight constraints on the chameleon field background
value and the related @xmath parameter: @xmath and @xmath .

Chapter 4 expands the mentioned techniques for testing a different type
of a model. In particular, the model of emergent gravity (introduced in
Verlinde [ 2017 ] ) is tested by using a variation of the techniques
introduced in chapter 3 . The key prediction of Verlindeâ€™s emergent
gravity is a scaling relation similar to the baryonic Tully-Fisher
relation, which allows us to determine the dark matter distribution in a
cluster directly from the baryonic mass distribution. The mentioned
scaling relation was tested by determining the baryonic mass from the
X-ray surface brightness data and calculating the predicted weak lensing
tangential shear profile, which was then compared against the @xmath CDM
prediction based on the Navarro-Frenk-White profile. The test was
performed for the Coma Cluster using data from Terukina et al. [ 2014 ]
and for the 58 galaxy cluster stack from Wilcox et al. [ 2015 ] . The
obtained results indicate that according to the Coma Cluster data, the
emergent gravity predictions agree with the @xmath CDM predictions only
in the range of @xmath @xmath - @xmath kpc. Outside the mentioned radial
range the standard model results are preferred according to the Bayesian
information criterion analysis (despite needing two extra free
parameters). The same general conclusion can be drawn from the 58
cluster stack data, which indicates a good agreement between the models
only for @xmath - @xmath Mpc. Outside of that radial range the standard
model is strongly preferred.

The second part of the thesis, referring specifically to chapters 5 and
6 , contains a study of machine learning techniques for emulating
cosmological simulations. More specifically, generative adversarial
networks are studied as an effective tool for emulating @xmath -body
simulation data quickly and efficiently. Chapter 5 contains a brief
discussion of the different machine learning algorithms in the context
of emulators. Specifically, artificial neural networks are introduced
along with gradient boosting algorithms. Chapter 6 introduces a
generative adversarial network algorithm for emulating cosmic web data
along with weak lensing convergence map data coming from @xmath -body
simulations. The presented approach is based on the cosmoGAN algorithm
first described in Mustafa et al. [ 2019 ] , which allows us to generate
thousands of realistic weak lensing convergence maps in a matter of
seconds. The mentioned approach is then modified to allow emulating
cosmic web and weak lensing data for @xmath CDM and @xmath gravity with
different cosmological parameters and redshifts. In addition, a similar
approach was used to simultaneously emulate dark matter and baryonic
simulation data coming from the Illustris simulation. The obtained
results indicate a 1-20% difference between the power spectra of the
emulated and original ( @xmath -body simulation) datasets depending on
the training data used. Finally, the chapter contains an in-depth study
of the technique of latent space interpolation and how it can be applied
to control the cosmological/modified gravity parameters during the
emulation procedure. The obtained results illustrate that such machine
learning algorithms will play an important role in producing accurate
mock data in the era of future large scale observational surveys.

\pdfbookmark

Table of Contentscontents
