In this thesis, we propose a multitask learning based method to improve
Neural Sign Language Translation (NSLT) consisting of two parts, a
tokenization layer and Neural Machine Translation (NMT). The
tokenization part focuses on how Sign Language (SL) videos should be
represented to be fed into the other part. It has not been studied
elaborately whereas NMT research has attracted several researchers
contributing enormous advancements. Up to now, there are two main input
tokenization levels, namely frame-level and gloss-level tokenization.
Glosses are world-like intermediate presentation and unique to SLs.
Therefore, we aim to develop a generic sign-level tokenization layer so
that it is applicable to other domains without further effort.

We begin with investigating current tokenization approaches and explain
their weaknesses with several experiments. To provide a solution, we
adapt Transfer Learning, Multitask Learning and Unsupervised Domain
Adaptation into this research to leverage additional supervision. We
succeed in enabling knowledge transfer between SLs and improve
translation quality by 5 points in BLEU-4 and 8 points in ROUGE scores.
Secondly, we show the effects of body parts by extensive experiments in
all the tokenization approaches. Apart from these, we adopt 3D-CNNs to
improve efficiency in terms of time and space. Lastly, we discuss the
advantages of sign-level tokenization over gloss-level tokenization. To
sum up, our proposed method eliminates the need for gloss level
annotation to obtain higher scores by providing additional supervision
by utilizing weak supervision sources.

\turkcebaslik

SİMGELEME ÖĞRENEREK SİNİRSEL AĞLARLA İŞARET DİLİ ÇEVİRİSİ \degree B.S.,
Computer Engineering, Bogazici University, 2017 \program Computer
Engineering \subyear 2020 \supervisor Prof. Lale Akarun \examineri Prof.
Murat Saraçlar \examinerii Assist. Prof. Furkan Kıraç \dateofapproval
18.08.2020

\makemstitle \makeapprovalpage {acknowledgements}

First, and most of all, I would like to thank my thesis advisor Prof.
Lale Akarun for her expertise, guidance, assistance and patience during
my masters education. I would also like to thank Prof. Murat Saraçlar
and Assistant Prof. Furkan Kıraç for participating in my thesis jury and
their valuable comments and suggestions on my thesis.

I would like to express my deepest gratitude to my family for their
endless support and encouragement throughout my life. Without them, I
wouldn’t be the person who I am today.

I would like to thank my friends and colleagues in Boğaziçi University
and Percep- tual Intelligence Laboratory for their endless support and
valuable friendship, namely, Ahmet Alp Kındıroğlu, Doğa Siyli, Gizem
Esra Ünlü, Mehmet Burak Kurutmaz, Oğulcan Özdemir. I would also like to
extend my thanks to Umut Başer, Ecem Alantuğ and Burcu Topçcu for
relaxing coffee breaks in our busy schedules.

This thesis has been supported by the Scientific and Technological
Research Council of Turkey (TUBITAK) Project #117E059.

{ozet}

Bu tezde, Çoklu Görev Öğrenmesi tabanlı bir yöntem Sinirsel Ağlarla
İşaret Dili Çevirisini geliştirmek için önerilmiştir. Sinirsel Ağlarla
İşaret Dili Çevirisi, Sinirsel Ağlarla Makine Çevirisi ve Simgeleme
olarak iki parçadan oluşmaktadır. Simgeleme tabakası ana odağına işaret
dili videolarının nasıl bir gösterim ile diğer katmana beslenmesi
gerektiğini ele alır. Simgeleme pek fazla keşfedilmiş bir alan değildir.
Halbuki, Sinirsel Ağlarla Makine Çevirisi pek çok farklı disiplinden
araştırmacının ilgisini çekmiştir ve bu sayede alanda sürekli ilerleme
kaydedilmektedir. Simgeleme bugüne kadar çerçeve ve gloss olmak üzere
iki seviyede incelenmiştir. Glosslar kelime düzeyinde anlam taşıyan ara
gösterimlerdir ve her işaret diline özel anlam taşırlar. Ayrıca, gloss
bazında etiketleme çok emekte gerektiren bir süreçtir. Bu yüzden,
çerçeve seviyesinde Simgeleme ile herhangi bir işaret diline kolay
uygulanabilir yöntem geliştirmeyi hedefledik.

Öncelikle bugüne kadar sunulan yöntemlerin eksik yanlarını pek çok deney
ile açığa çıkarttık. Elde ettiğimiz kazanımlar ile Öğrenme Aktarması,
Çoklu Görev Öğrenme ve Gözetimsiz Alan Uyarlaması tekniklerini bu
probleme uyarladık. Bu sayede etiketlenip anlamlandırılmış veri
eksikliğini gidermeye çalıştık. İşaret dilleri arasında bilgi aktarımını
sağlayarak BLUE-4 metriğinde 5 ve ROUGE skorunda 8 puanlık bir
iyileştirme sağladık. İkinci olarak, insan vücut bölümlerinin anlama
etkilerini her deneyimizde ayrıca inceledik. 3D-CNN yapısını zamansal ve
mekansal bakımdan daha etkili bir sistem oluşturmak için uyguladık. Son
olarak, işaret seviyesinde simgelemenin glossa göre avantajlarını
açıkladık. Özetlemek gerekirse, sunduğumuz yöntem zayıf gözetim
kaynaklarını kullanarak gloss bazında etiketlemeye olan bağlılığı
azaltıyor.
