e1]0

The relevance of hidden symmetries is explored at the level of classical
and quantum mechanics in a variety of physical systems related to
conformal and superconformal invariance. Hidden symmetries, that
correspond to nonlinear in momenta integrals of motion, generally lead
to nonlinear algebras.

First, analyzing the @xmath symmetry, it is concluded that both the
asymptotically free (at infinity) and the harmonically confined models
are two different forms of dynamics described by the same symmetry
algebra. A mapping between these two dynamics is constructed, and its
applications are studied in one-, two- and three-dimensional systems.

Second, rational extensions of the conformal mechanics model of de
Alfaro, Fubini and Furlan (AFF) are derived by employing the generalized
Darboux transformation. In general, the obtained systems have an almost
equidistant spectrum with some gaps inside, and their spectral
properties imply the presence of hidden symmetries. The supersymmetric
extensions of the AFF model are also studied, and the origin of the
hidden bosonized superconformal symmetry of the quantum harmonic
oscillator is established.

Finally, a three-dimensional generalization of the AFF system is
considered. The model describes a particle with electric charge @xmath
in Dirac monopole background of magnetic charge @xmath , and subjected
to the central potential @xmath . When @xmath , the classical
trajectories are periodic for arbitrary initial conditions and at the
quantum level, the spectrum acquires a peculiar degeneration. These
characteristics are described by hidden symmetries, which can be
obtained from the model without harmonic term by means of the mentioned
mapping. A complementary spin-orbit coupling term gives rise to a
supersymmetric extension of the system, characterized by superconformal
symmetry. The spectrum-generating operators of the new model are shown
to be nonlocal.

Keywords: Hidden symmetries; (Super-)Conformal symmetry; de Alfaro,
Fubini and Furlan model; Harmonic oscillator; Supersymmetric quantum
mechanics; Rationally extended systems; Darboux duality; Klein
four-group; Dirac monopole.
