A renewal system divides the slotted timeline into back to back time
periods called “renewal frames”. At the beginning of each frame, it
chooses a policy from a set of options for that frame. The policy
determines the duration of the frame, the penalty incurred during the
frame (such as energy expenditure), and a vector of performance metrics
(such as instantaneous number of jobs served). The starting points of
this line of research are Chapter 7 of the book [ neely2010stochastic ]
, the seminal work [ neely2013dynamic ] , and Chapter 5 of the PhD
thesis of Chih-ping Li [ li2011stochastic ] , who graduated before I
came to USC. These works consider stochastic optimization over a single
renewal system. By way of contrast, this thesis considers optimization
over multiple parallel renewal systems, which is computationally more
challenging and yields much more applications. The goal is to minimize
the time average overall penalty subject to time average overall
constraints on the corresponding performance metrics. The main
difficulty, which is not present in earlier works, is that these systems
act asynchronously due to the fact that the renewal frames of different
renewal systems are not aligned. The goal of the thesis is to resolve
this difficulty head-on via a new asynchronous algorithm and a novel
supermartingale stopping time analysis which shows our algorithms not
only converge to the optimal solution but also enjoy fast convergence
rates. Based on this general theory, we further develop novel algorithms
for data center server provision problems with performance guarantees as
well as new heuristics for the multi-user file downloading problems.

We start by reviewing existing works on the optimization over a single
renewal system in Chapter 1. Then, in Chapter 2, we propose a new
algorithm for the asynchronous renewal optimization so that each system
can make its own decision after observing a global multiplier that is
updated every slot. We show that this algorithm satisfies the desired
constraints and achieves @xmath near optimality with @xmath convergence
time. Based on the new algorithm, we formulate the data center server
provision problem as an asynchronous renewal optimization in Chapter 3
and develop a corresponding algorithm which exceeds the
state-of-the-art. In Chapter 4, we look at another application, namely,
the multi-user file downloading, which can be formulated as a
constrained multi-armed bandit problem. We show that our proposed
algorithm leads to a useful heuristic approximately solving the problem
with experimentally near optimal performance.

In Chapter 5, we consider the constrained optimization over a renewal
system with observed random events at the beginning of each renewal
frame. We propose an online algorithm which does not need the knowledge
of the distributions of random events. We prove that this proposed
algorithm is feasible and achieves @xmath near optimality by
constructing an exponential supermartingale. Simulation experiments
demonstrates the near optimal performance of the proposed algorithm.

Finally, in Chapter 6, we consider online learning over weakly coupled
Markov decision processes. We develop a new distributed online algorithm
where each MDP makes its own decision each slot after observing a
multiplier computed from past information. While the scenario is
significantly more challenging than the classical online learning
context, the algorithm is shown to have a tight @xmath regret and
constraint violations simultaneously over a time horizon @xmath .
