This thesis lies in the field of constant mean curvature (cmc)
hypersurfaces and specifically cmc @xmath surfaces in the three-manifold
@xmath . The value @xmath is the critical mean curvature for @xmath , in
that there do no exist closed cmc surfaces with mean curvature @xmath or
less. Daniel and Hauswirth have constructed a one-parameter family of
complete, cmc @xmath annuli that are symmetric about a reflection in the
horizontal plane @xmath , the horizontal catenoids . In this thesis we
prove that these catenoids converge to a singular limit of two tangent
horocylinders as the neck size tends to zero. We discuss the analytic
gluing construction that this fact suggests, which would create a
multitude of cmc @xmath surfaces with positive genus.

The main result of the thesis concerns a key step in such an analytic
gluing construction. We construct families of cmc @xmath annuli with
boundary, whose single end is asymptotic to an end of a horizontal
catenoid. We produce these families by solving the mean curvature
equation for normal graphs off the end of a horizontal catenoid. This is
a non-linear boundary value problem, which we solve by perturbative
methods. To do so we analyse the linearised mean curvature operator,
known as the Jacobi operator. We show that on carefully chosen weighted
HÃ¶lder spaces the Jacobi operator can be inverted, modulo a
finite-dimensional subspace, and provided the neck size of the
horizontal catenoid is sufficiently small. Using these linear results we
solve the boundary value problem for the mean curvature equation by a
contraction mapping argument.
