In this thesis, it is presented a set
of results in adiabatic dynamics (closed and open system) and
transitionless quantum driving that promote some advances in our
understanding on quantum control and Hamiltonian inverse engineering. In
the context of adiabatic dynamics in closed systems, it is introduced a
validation mechanism for the adiabaticity conditions by studing the
system dynamics from a non-inertial reference frame. It is shown how the
evaluation of relevant adiabatic approximation conditions in different
reference frames (inertial and non-inertial) allows to correctly predict
the adiabatic behavior of quantum system driven by oscillatory and
rotating fields. Such mechanism is applicable to general multi-particle
quantum systems, establishing the conditions for the equivalence of the
adiabatic behavior as described in inertial or non-inertial frames. As a
relevant application to modern quantum devices, the study of
adiabaticity yields an adiabatic protocol to ensure a stable charging
process of quantum batteries, which allows one to avoid the spontaneous
discharging regime. By considering a decohering scenario, validity
conditions of the adiabatic approximation are also studied. As a fresh
general result with potential applications, it is shown that under
decoherence the adiabaticity may still occur in the infinite time limit,
as it happens for closed systems, for a class of initial quantum states.
From the viewpoint of basic studies on adiabaticity in open systems,
this general approach for adiabatic non-unitary evolution leads to
thermodynamics definitions of heat and work in terms of the underlying
Liouville superoperator governing the quantum dynamics. Hence, one
derives conditions under which an adiabatic open-system quantum dynamics
implies in the absence of heat exchange, providing a connection between
quantum and thermal adiabaticity. To end, the original contributions of
this thesis to the theory of shortcuts to adiabaticity refers to a
generalized approach of transitionless quantum driving, where one
explores the gauge freedom of the quantal phase factors accompanying
adiabatic trajectories. It is shown that this generalized transitionless
evolutions can be more robust against decoherence than their standard
and adiabatic counterparts, even by driving the system through fields
that provide a minimal energy demanding scheme. The number of
theoretical prediction presented in this thesis is experimentally
verified through two different experimental setups, namely a qubit
encoded in the energy hyperfine structure of a Ytterbium trapped ion,
and in nuclear magnetic resonance with a nuclear spin qubit.
