##### Contents

-    1 Introduction
-    2 Preliminaries
-    3 Factorization homology
-    4 Extension model structure
-    5 Enriched factorization algebras
-    6 Locally constant factorization algebras
-    7 Variations and generalizations
-    A Appendix: Pushouts of algebras by free maps
-    B Appendix: Comparison of left Kan extensions

## 1 Introduction

One of the most ubiquitous family of operads is that of @xmath . The
first incarnation of them is as configurations of n-dimensional disks
into a fixed bigger one [ may_geometry_1972 ] so it is not surprising
that they play a relevant role in the study of manifolds. As envisioned
in [ andrade_manifolds_2012 ] one can in fact define the homology of a
manifold with coefficients in an @xmath -algebra. This is a smooth, not
just homotopical manifold invariant known as factorization homology [
ayala_factorization_2015 ] or chiral homology [ lurie_higher_2017 ] .
This homology admits a wider class of coefficient systems known as
factorization algebras [ ayala_factorization_2017 , ayala_local_2017 ]
which are the topological analogues of Beilinson-Drinfeld chiral
algebras. Algebras over the @xmath operad are examples of these, which
are local in a sense, since n-disks can be interpreted as local models
for n-manifolds [ costello_factorization_2017 , ginot_notes_2013 ] .
Other kinds of factorization algebras take into account the global
geometry of the manifold where they are defined.

It is often difficult to recognize @xmath -algebras in nature. For
instance, it took several years to solve the Deligne conjecture, which
asserts that the complex computing Hochschild cohomology admits an
@xmath -action. Factorization algebras enter the picture to overcome
this issue, they are much easier to recognize, see for example [
ginot_higher_2012 ] . This simple fact has proved useful in
applications, with striking consequences as Costello-Gwilliam work on
perturbative quantum field theories [ costello_factorization_2017 ] ,
Calaque-Scheimbauer construction of a fully extended field theory
without using the cobordism hypothesis [ calaque_note_2019 ] , or
Lurieâ€™s non-Abelian Poincare Duality [ lurie_higher_2017 ] .

Being more precise, factorization algebras are certain algebraic
structures which satisfy (homotopical) codescent conditions. The
underlying algebraic structure is simple to describe and receives the
name of prefactorization algebra.

###### Definition 1.1.

A prefactorization algebra @xmath over a space @xmath valued in chain
complexes is given by the following data:

-   a chain complex @xmath for each open @xmath in @xmath ,

-   a chain map @xmath for any inclusion of open subsets @xmath in
    @xmath ,

-   a product map @xmath for each disjoint inclusion of open subsets
    @xmath in @xmath ,

subject to associativity, unitality and equivariant conditions.

The aforementioned data can be seen as a precosheaf over @xmath with
additional multiplication maps. Prefactorization algebras admit an
operadic description in terms of a discrete operad @xmath (see
Definition 2.1 ). The codescent conditions on a factorization algebra
(Definition 2.2 ) are designed to provide a local to global principle
which accounts for multilocal data, i.e. simultaneous information around
finite families of points. Manifold calculus [
boavida_de_brito_manifold_2013 ] showed how important is this principle,
since apparently global objects like embedding spaces are multilocal in
this sense.

Observe that, since prefactorization algebras are operadic algebras, its
homotopy theory is well understood, as they form a model category in the
sense of Quillen (e.g. [ fresse_homotopy_2017 , white_bousfield_2018 ]
). On the other hand, asking this additional local to global property on
prefactorization algebras obstructs the construction of a model category
presenting the homotopy theory of factorization algebras. In fact, it
was a question raised by Calaque in his habilitation thesis [
calaque_around_2013 ] if such a model category exists and to our
knowledge no satisfactory answer has been provided so far. Factorization
algebras do form a relative category, and this is relevant from a
theoretical viewpoint, but the lack of a model category presentation
seriously complicates computations.

We should comment that there are proposals to this respect. For
instance, in [ pavlov_admissibility_2018 , Subsection 9.7] and [
white_left_2020 , Example 5.14] , it is claimed without proof that a
natural left Bousfield localization of the projective model on
prefactorization algebras should work. We doubt that a left Bousfield
localization could serve to force codescent conditions; indeed, in the
present work we encode codescent in terms of a right Bousfield
localization. Moreover, note that our approach also produces weak
monadicity for factorization algebras (see Definition 2.2 ) with a right
Bousfield localization, while the comment just below [
pavlov_admissibility_2018 , Proposition 9.6.1] claims that may be found
by a suitable left Bousfield localization.

By dual analogy with sheaves, one should recognize two main sources of
problems to achieve this goal. On the one hand, cosheafification, as a
formal machine to force precosheaves to satisfy a local to global
principle, is much more elusive than sheafification. Delving into [
prasolov_cosheafification_2016 ] , one can find that usual categories
such as sets or Grothendieck abelian categories do permit
cosheafification, but we only know its existence by means of abstract
adjoint functor theorems, and hence there is no manageable expression
for it. On the other hand, one must ensure that, when existing,
cosheafification respects the additional algebraic structure that a
prefactorization algebra has, and this is quite unlikely.

Assuming that factorization algebras are blind to the size of discs
(Definition 2.2 ), we find a model category presenting the homotopy
theory of factorization algebras, answering in this way Calaque
question. This result (Theorem 6.12 ) which we now state, may be
considered the most important achievement of this paper.

###### Theorem 1.2.

The category of prefactorization algebras over a smooth manifold valued
on a suitable symmetric monoidal model category admits a model structure
such that every bifibrant object is a locally constant factorization
algebra.

Along the way, we have found a variety of different Quillen equivalent
model structures. The more remarkable one presents the homotopy theory
of what we have called enriched factorization algebras (Definition 2.13
and Theorem 5.5 ). They should be seen as factorization algebras whose
algebraic structure is sensible to the topology of embedding spaces.
Their introduction and study is the core of this work. For them, we
construct an explicit functorial cosheafification which forces codescent
with respect to Weiss covers.

Our construction follows the principle: factorization homology produces
fully extended Topological Quantum Field Theories, [
ayala_factorization_2019 , calaque_note_2019 ] . Indeed, we construct
enriched factorization algebras via a variant of factorization homology,
see Section 3 and more concretely Proposition 3.3 . For this purpose, we
need a technical lemma about factorization homology which appears
without proof in [ ayala_factorization_2017 ] , see Remark 3.1 . Our
approach replaces most of their conditions on the operads by a Weiss
codescent property for embedding spaces from a finite disjoint union of
discs (Lemma 2.16 ). All the technicalities arise when reducing every
computation to what happens on discs by means of the mentioned Weiss
codescent.

Mostly for simplicity in the exposition, we focus on smooth manifolds
without boundary, although the methods do apply to much more general
settings. Remarkably, they work for smooth manifolds with boundary,
conically smooth stratified manifolds, treated in [ ayala_local_2017 ] ,
or topological manifolds.

### Outline:

Let us summarize the content of this paper.

-   In Section 2 , there is a remainder of notions related to
    factorization algebras as well as fundamental lemmas about codescent
    properties of embedding spaces. We include nomenclature for
    continuous or enriched variants of factorization algebras and for a
    weaker notion, that of Weiss algebras.

-   Factorization homology (with context) is presented within Section 3
    , which culminates with Theorem 3.7 . This result gives a proof of [
    ayala_factorization_2017 , Theorem 2.15] in the setting of smooth
    manifolds only relying on the fundamental codescent property stated
    in Lemma 2.16 and the existence of good Weiss covers (Lemma 2.15 ).

-   Section 4 presents a summary of a general model categorical
    construction developed in [ carmona_aqft_2021 ] based on a
    generalization [ stanculescu_erratum_2009 ] of Bousfield-Friedlander
    Theorem [ bousfield_homotopy_1978 ] .

-   Enriched factorization (Weiss) algebras find on Section 5 model
    categories presenting their homotopy theory, see Theorem 5.5 (resp.
    Theorem 5.2 ). These models are constructed via the material in
    Section 4 .

-   The analogous model categories for locally constant factorization
    (Weiss) algebras, Theorem 6.12 (resp. Theorem 6.9 plus Proposition
    6.11 ), are the main goal of Section 6 . They are combinations of a
    left Bousfield localization (forcing local constancy) and a right
    Bousfield localization (forcing codescent conditions).

-   Section 7 is devoted to the discussion of different settings where
    our results hold. The exposition highlights what ingredients are
    required, separating them from general abstract arguments.
    Remarkably, our methods are suitable for topological manifolds or
    conically smooth stratified manifolds (developed within [
    ayala_factorization_2017 , ayala_local_2017 ] ).

-   Finally, Appendix A contains several technical lemmas which are
    employed in Section 3 and Appendix B contains a required
    generalization of [ ayala_factorization_2017 , Lemma 2.16] to the
    recognition of bifibrant objects in the factorization model (see
    Lemma 6.10 ).

### Conventions:

-   By homotopy cosmos we mean a closed symmetric monoidal model
    category @xmath equipped with a lax symmetric monoidal left Quillen
    functor @xmath where @xmath is considered with the Kan-Quillen
    model. We also ask that the unit in @xmath is cofibrant (slight
    assumption by [ muro_unit_2015 ] ).

-   We fix a homotopy cosmos @xmath and consider that everything is
    @xmath -enriched. In other case, it will be explicitly specified.

-   Recall that the category of symmetric -colored corollas, @xmath ,
    for a set , ( [ white_bousfield_2018 , Section 3] ) serves to define
    -colored symmetric sequences in @xmath

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Operads are @xmath -monoids in symmetric sequences, see [
    pavlov_admissibility_2018 ] or [ white_bousfield_2018 ] . For
    objects in @xmath we will employ the notation @xmath and @xmath for
    the obvious concatenation of objects in @xmath . For colored
    corollas, we use the notation @xmath and hence, for an operad @xmath
    , we refer to its @xmath -object of operations with inputs @xmath
    and output by @xmath .

-   @xmath denotes the category of @xmath -algebras in @xmath . When
    required, @xmath carries the projective model structure [
    white_bousfield_2018 , Section 6] , e.g. proj-cofibrant algebras
    refer to cofibrant objects in this model.

-   Let @xmath be an operad. We will denote by @xmath the underlying
    category of @xmath . In other words, @xmath is the suboperad on
    unary operations. The functor induced between algebras @xmath is
    denoted by @xmath .

-   @xmath and @xmath will refer to the initial and the terminal
    objects, always interpreted in the corresponding context.

-   We say that a functor, between homotopical categories, is
    homotopical if it preserves equivalences.

-   Given a cospan of categories @xmath , we denote @xmath the ordinary
    slice category associated to it.

-   All manifolds are assumed to be smooth except in Section 7 .

## 2 Preliminaries

Let us collect necessary notions and fix notation which will be
employed.

We fix once for all a natural number @xmath .

### Factorization algebras

We recall the definition of factorization algebras on @xmath , for
@xmath a smooth @xmath -manifold. The material presented here about
factorization algebras can be found in [ costello_factorization_2017 ] .

###### Definition 2.1.

The @xmath -operad of disjoint open subsets in @xmath , @xmath , is the
operad with colors the open subsets of @xmath and operations

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The full suboperad @xmath of @xmath is the one spanned by open subsets
diffeomorphic to finite disjoint unions of @xmath -discs. @xmath denotes
the full suboperad of @xmath spanned by open subsets diffeomorphic to
@xmath .

###### Definition 2.2.

Let @xmath be a space and @xmath an @xmath -algebra.

-   A Weiss cover of @xmath is a family of open subsets @xmath of @xmath
    such that any non-empty finite subset @xmath is contained in one of
    them, @xmath .

-   @xmath is a Weiss algebra if it satisfies homotopical codescent with
    respect to Weiss covers, i.e. for any Weiss cover @xmath of @xmath
    open, the map

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    is an equivalence, where the colimit runs over finite subsets @xmath
    of @xmath and we adopt the standard notation @xmath .

-   @xmath is a factorization algebra on @xmath if it is a Weiss algebra
    and satisfies weak monadicity , i.e. for any finite collection of
    disjoint open subsets @xmath of @xmath , the structure map

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    is an equivalence.

    The full subcategory of @xmath -algebras spanned by factorization
    algebras on @xmath is denoted @xmath . It is equipped with the class
    of colorwise equivalences between factorization algebras.

-   @xmath is locally constant if for any inclusion @xmath of open
    subsets diffeomorphic to @xmath , the associated map @xmath is an
    equivalence. More abstractly, @xmath sends unary operations in
    @xmath to equivalences. We denote by @xmath the category of locally
    constant factorization algebras on @xmath .

###### Remark 2.3.

ÄŒech type models for the homotopical codescent condition were given in [
costello_factorization_2017 ] . Moreover, in [ ginot_notes_2013 ,
Section 4] , G.Ginot presents a ÄŒech type diagram which combines weak
monadicity and homotopical codescent.

###### Remark 2.4.

The definition of (locally constant) factorization algebra can be
replicated for full suboperads of @xmath whose colors are a family of
open subsets @xmath in @xmath . One just has to ensure that @xmath is
closed under taking finite disjoint unions (and contains inclusions of
one disc into another for the locally constancy condition). For example,
@xmath could be the family of subsets homeomorphic to finite disjoint
unions of discs. We employ the notation @xmath for the resulting
category, e.g @xmath . See [ calaque_around_2013 , Section 2.1.2] .

We will also employ the notation @xmath . To make it meaningful note
that an @xmath -algebra @xmath can be extended to an @xmath -algebra
@xmath by setting

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then, @xmath refers to the full subcategory of @xmath -algebras which
belong to @xmath when seen as @xmath -algebras.

(Locally constant) factorization algebras have the same structure than
@xmath -algebras, but they enjoy more properties. In fact, these
properties permit the following simplifications.

###### Proposition 2.5.

The inclusions @xmath of operads induce equivalences of homotopy
categories

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The equivalences also hold for locally constant factorization algebras.

###### Proof.

Using the homotopical codescent condition together with the fact that
every smooth @xmath -manifold admits a Weiss cover by discs ( [
boavida_de_brito_manifold_2013 , Propisition 2.10] ) it is routine to
prove the first equivalence. See [ calaque_around_2013 , Theorem 2.1.9]
for the precise construction. Due to weak monadicity, the second functor
is an equivalence. âˆŽ

### Enriched factorization algebras

A little detour is in place to give the notion of enriched factorization
algebras. Essentially, we need the continuous counterpart of the
inclusion of operads

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Definition 2.6.

Let @xmath denote the symmetric monoidal @xmath -category on smooth
@xmath -manifolds and smooth embeddings with disjoint union as monoidal
structure (see [ horel_factorization_2017 , Sections 6-7] ). In order to
avoid set theoretic difficulties, we consider every manifold embedded in
@xmath .

@xmath denotes the full symmetric monoidal @xmath -subcategory of @xmath
spanned by finite disjoint unions of @xmath -discs.

@xmath denotes the full @xmath -suboperad of @xmath spanned by the color
@xmath .

###### Notation 2.7.

We follow the convention of using decorated initials to refer to
suitably enriched notions and plain initials for the discrete analogues,
e.g. @xmath versus @xmath or @xmath versus @xmath . This can be seen as
the higher categorical version versus its underlying ordinary
categorical version.

###### Remark 2.8.

We are interested in the algebraic structures that the above operads
(and variants of them) encode. For example, one should notice that
@xmath -algebras are just @xmath -algebras with additional orientation
data. More precisely, they present the framed little @xmath -disc
algebras appearing on [ salvatore_framed_2003 ] .

Fix a @xmath -manifold @xmath . We want to consider manifolds embedded
into @xmath .

###### Definition 2.9.

The @xmath -category of manifolds with context @xmath , @xmath , has
objects @xmath an embedding, and mapping spaces fitting into homotopy
pullback squares

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Composition and units are induced from those of @xmath . We often abuse
notation and refer to and object in @xmath by its underlying manifold.

###### Remark 2.10.

@xmath has to be seen as a homotopical version of the ordinary slice
construction. One has to be careful specifying what it means by homotopy
pullback above. Providing a strict composition law and strict units for
the mapping spaces appearing in a homotopy pullback is a technical
question that can be solved as in [ horel_factorization_2017 , Section
5] .

The main drawback of @xmath is that it does not inherit the symmetric
monoidal structure onf @xmath . However, it can be enhanced to an
operad.

###### Definition 2.11.

@xmath is the @xmath -operad which has the same objects than @xmath and
multimapping spaces fitting into homotopy pullback squares

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Composition and units are induced by those of @xmath and @xmath .

Analogously, one can define the corresponding notions:

  ----------------- -------- -------- --------
  Without context   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  With context      @xmath   @xmath   @xmath
  ----------------- -------- -------- --------

###### Remark 2.12.

The continuous and the discrete variants of the operads presented until
now are related by the canonical diagram of @xmath -operads

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let us turn to the enriched analogue of factorization algebras.

###### Definition 2.13.

An enriched Weiss algebra on @xmath is an @xmath -algebra satisfying
homotopical codescent with respect to Weiss covers (see Definition 2.2
). An enriched factorization algebra is an enriched Weiss algebra which
satisfies weak monadicity.

###### Remark 2.14.

We prefer to split the axioms for enriched factorization algebras since
the weak monadicity axiom for @xmath -algebras is subtle and it will
enjoy a distinguished treatment in the main results. It can be stated as
follows: For any pair of embeddings @xmath and @xmath with disjoint
images in @xmath , @xmath is again an embedding. Thus, @xmath is a color
of @xmath which comes with a preferred operation @xmath . An @xmath
-algebra @xmath satisfies weak monadicity if for any pair of embeddings
@xmath , @xmath into @xmath with disjoint images, the associated
morphism @xmath is an equivalence.

The fundamental idea is that, in close analogy with proposition 2.5 ,
one can exploit the chain of inclusions of @xmath -operads

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

to construct model categories presenting enriched factorization algebras
on @xmath . Our approach fundamentally lies on two important results
which permit reducing some assertions to their verification for discs
embedded in @xmath . We mention them for future reference.

###### Lemma 2.15.

Every (smooth) manifold admits a Weiss cover whose elements are finite
disjoint unions of discs and their finite intersections remain so.

###### Proof.

See [ boavida_de_brito_manifold_2013 , Proposition 2.10] . âˆŽ

###### Lemma 2.16.

Let @xmath be a finite disjoint union of discs in @xmath , i.e. a color
of @xmath . Then, the @xmath -functor of embeddings @xmath is a Weiss
cosheaf. That is, for any Weiss cover @xmath on @xmath , the canonical
map

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

is an equivalence.

###### Proof.

The result holds if we drop the context @xmath by [
boavida_de_brito_manifold_2013 , Equation (10)] , i.e.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is an equivalence. The claim for embeddings with context @xmath follows
by the homotopy pullback definition of @xmath . âˆŽ

###### Remark 2.17.

The above lemma can be also be deduced from Lurieâ€™s version of
Seifert-van Kampen theorem [ lurie_higher_2017 , Proposition A.3.1] ,
which is a source of broad generalizations for this result, such as the
following lemma.

###### Lemma 2.18.

Let @xmath be a color in @xmath . Then, for any @xmath , there is a
canonical equivalence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Note that @xmath is homotopy equivalent to the total space of a
principal bundle over @xmath , the configuration space of @xmath -points
in @xmath with @xmath the number of discs in @xmath . Hence, [
lurie_higher_2017 , Proposition A.3.1] applied to the subdiagram of open
subsets of @xmath which are diffeomorphic to finite disjoint unions of
discs, @xmath , gives rise to an equivalence of spaces

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

that, in turn, yields the corresponding equivalence for @xmath . Passing
to @xmath only requires a homotopy pullback, which respects homotopy
colimits. âˆŽ

## 3 Factorization homology

In this section, we discuss a variant of factorization homology (see [
andrade_manifolds_2012 , ayala_factorization_2015 ,
horel_factorization_2017 ] ) which introduces a manifold as context. Let
us explain this assertion. Factorization homology should be seen as a
homology theory for manifolds which uses @xmath -algebras as coefficient
systems. More concretely, given an @xmath -algebra @xmath and a manifold
@xmath , factorization homology is defined by the derived tensor product

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

where @xmath , which is the left derived functor of

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

It is well known that factorization homology computes the derived left
adjoint of the forgetful functor @xmath . Consult [
ayala_factorization_2017 , Lemma 2.15] .

Introducing a manifold @xmath as context means that we replace @xmath
with @xmath . More concretely, factorization homology with context
@xmath is defined analogously for a @xmath -algebra @xmath and @xmath an
object in @xmath as the derived tensor product

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

###### Remark 3.1.

It is claimed in [ ayala_factorization_2017 , Lemma 2.16] , using a
different language, that factorization homology with context @xmath
computes the derived left adjoint of the forgetful functor @xmath by a
similar argument than that given in the proof of [
ayala_factorization_2017 , Lemma 2.15] . We feel that such argument is
not fully complete as it stands. In fact, we doubt that as stated this
result holds due to several reasons. For instance, the finality
assumption (5) on [ ayala_factorization_2017 , Lemma 2.16] : given
objects @xmath and @xmath in @xmath , one may construct @xmath in @xmath
, but one cannot combine their structural maps into @xmath in a
canonical way to obtain an object in @xmath . Hence, the tensor product
functor appearing in (5) exists, but @xmath is no longer in @xmath and
hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

does not make sense. We are currently discussing these points with the
authors.

However, one could interpret their claim in two different, although
equivalent, ways: the first one says that one can produce an algebra
structure on the ordinary left Kan extension making it universal; the
second one says that there should be an equivalence between the ordinary
left Kan extension and the operadic left Kan extension. We show that
this second perspective holds in the case of interest. Our strategy
consists on an alternative computation showing that factorization
homology with context @xmath computes the derived left adjoint of the
forgetful functor

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which essentially uses Lemma 2.16 and some usual filtrations. The main
technical result is Proposition 3.3 whose proof is split in several
lemmas.

We need to compute the adjoint pair @xmath Our first simplification just
notes that it can be factored into two adjoint pairs. Since the map
@xmath is fully-faithful and injective on colors, the factorization of
@xmath corresponds to the factorization of @xmath through the @xmath
-colored operad, also denoted @xmath , with multimapping spaces

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Hence, @xmath involves an extension/restriction of colors and an
extension/restriction of operations. We will focus on the non-trivial
one; the extension/restriction of operations.

In order to distinguish the composite pair and the extension/restriction
of operations, we find useful to employ the @xmath -product [
pavlov_admissibility_2018 , Definition 3.3] to express the
extension/restriction of operations:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Analogously, one can produce the extension/restriction of unary
operations and both constructions sit into a commutative square of
adjoint pairs between categories of algebras

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Our computation of @xmath is based on an analysis of the natural
transformation

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

induced by the above commutative square, where @xmath is an @xmath
-algebra.

###### Remark 3.2.

By inspection of the colimit defining the @xmath -product,

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Hence, we are simply computing factorization homology with context
@xmath .

###### Proposition 3.3.

The natural transformation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is an equivalence for any proj-cofibrant @xmath -algebra @xmath .

As mentioned before, we split the proof of Proposition 3.3 into several
lemmas which correspond to the analysis of each step in the construction
of a cellullar projective @xmath -algebra, i.e. a cellular object in the
projective model of @xmath -algebras.

###### Lemma 3.4 (Free case).

The natural transformation in Proposition 3.3 evaluated on free @xmath
-algebras is an equivalence.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be a cofibrant object in @xmath and @xmath be a color of
@xmath . With these data, we can form the collection @xmath in @xmath ,
which is concentrated on the color @xmath . The free @xmath -algebra
spanned by @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Substituting @xmath by this free algebra, @xmath becomes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we have applied the commutation of the coproduct with the relative
@xmath -product on the left (which is possible since the operads
involved have unary morphisms only) and the natural isomorphism @xmath
In order to show that this map yields an equivalence, we analyze instead
for each @xmath

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (1)
  -- -------- -- -----

which just boils down to be induced by operadic composition on @xmath .
This morphism evaluated on colors of @xmath is an isomorphism, since
@xmath . In order to prove that it is an equivalence when evaluated on a
general manifold @xmath , we pick a Weiss cover @xmath on @xmath as in
Lemma 2.15 . Then, we obtain a commutative square

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We are interested on showing that the right vertical map is an
equivalence, so, using 2 out of 3, it is enough to check that the other
maps are equivalences. The left vertical map is an equivalence from
evaluation on @xmath . The lower horizontal arrow is an equivalence by
Lemma 2.16 . Checking our claim for the upper horizontal map requires
delving into more details.

We use the coequalizer presentation of the @xmath -product appearing in
[ pavlov_admissibility_2018 , Definition 3.3] to describe @xmath as the
coequalizer

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the actions of @xmath on @xmath and @xmath are forced to coincide.
Again Lemma 2.16 shows that replacing the coequalizer by its derived
version, one has an equivalence between diagrams

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Consequently, the right vertical map on the following commutative square
is an equivalence since the rest of the maps are so:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The free-algebra case is deduced from equivalence ( 1 ) just shown by
taking @xmath -coinvariants (which are homotopical in this situation)
and coproducts. âˆŽ

###### Lemma 3.5 (Pushout case).

Consider that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a pushout square in @xmath , where @xmath is proj-cofibrant and the
left vertical arrow is a free cofibration. If the natural transformation
in Proposition 3.3 evaluated on @xmath is an equivalence, then it is an
equivalence evaluated on @xmath .

###### Proof.

The natural transformation evaluated on the pushout in the statement
yields a commutative diagram

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

We have checked in Lemma 3.4 that the diagonal arrows on the left are
equivalences over free algebras. Assuming that the diagonal arrow for
@xmath is an equivalence, we now prove that the diagonal arrow for
@xmath too. Our strategy consists on providing a filtration for the
right square which allows us to conclude this claim. The filtration
before deriving is the content of Lemma A.2 . The derived statement,
assuming that @xmath is proj-cofibrant and that we derive the extension
of unary operations, just converts every strict notion into a
homotopical one, e.g. the pushouts defining the filtrations become
homotopy pushouts. Making use of such filtration, we must check that
provided the equivalence at @xmath , so is the map at @xmath . This
verification is argued over the analogous cube of the one that appears
in the proof of Lemma A.2 which corresponds to this particular case.
Inspecting it, one deduces that the claim will follow if

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

is an equivalence, by the same kind of argument given in Lemma 3.4 .

To check that the above map is an equivalence, we use an inductive
argument which lays on the filtration studied in Lemmas A.3 and A.4 .
Indexing the filtration by @xmath , the successive step fits into a
cubical diagram

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the front square represents the last square in Lemma A.4 and the
lateral squares are homotopy pushouts defining successive steps. Since
coproducts and tensor with cofibrant objects preserve equivalences
(between cofibrants), we conclude the lemma by induction over @xmath . âˆŽ

###### Lemma 3.6 (Transfinite case).

Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

be a @xmath -cotower of proj-cofibrations in @xmath such that @xmath is
proj-cofibrant. Then, if the natural transformation in Proposition 3.3
evaluated on @xmath is an equivalence for any @xmath , then it is an
equivalence evaluated on @xmath .

###### Proof.

The @xmath -cotower gives rise to a commutative diagram

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

and we have to prove that the right vertical map is an equivalence
provided all vertical maps except it are equivalences. The horizontal
chains can be taken to be towers of cofibrations whose initial vertex is
cofibrant. Therefore, the horizontal colimits are homotopical and the
induced arrow on colimits an equivalence. One concludes the claim
whenever the induced arrow on colimits coincides with the natural
transformation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This fact is just a commutation of sequential colimits with relative
@xmath -products and inspection of the natural transformation. âˆŽ

###### Proof of Proposition 3.3..

Since equivalences are closed under retracts, we have to check the claim
just for @xmath a cellular proj-cofibrant @xmath -algebra. This claim is
consequently reduced to show that it holds in each step in the
construction of a cellular algebra. The free case is treated in Lemma
3.4 , the pushout case in Lemma 3.5 and the transfinite one in Lemma 3.6
. âˆŽ

###### Theorem 3.7.

Factorization homology with context computes the left derived adjoint to
the forgetful functor @xmath In other words, there is a natural
equivalence of @xmath -algebras

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

It is a direct consequence of Proposition 3.3 since @xmath is left
Quillen between the projective model structures. âˆŽ

###### Remarks 3.8.

@xmath

1.  This computation subsumes the well-established result in the
    literature which says that factorization homology is equivalent to
    operadic left Kan extension along @xmath , see [
    ayala_factorization_2015 ] .

2.  In [ ayala_factorization_2017 , Lemma 2.17] it is claimed that this
    conclusion holds in a broader setting, under several assumptions on
    the operads. It can be proven from the coequalizer description of
    relative @xmath -products that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    is an isomorphism when @xmath and @xmath are (partial) symmetric
    monoidal categories and @xmath is any @xmath -algebra. In Lemma B.2
    (and Proposition B.6 its derived version), we discuss a different
    formulation more related to [ ayala_factorization_2017 , Lemma 2.16]
    , but the method is not clearly adaptable to broarder settings such
    as the one covered in Theorem 3.7 .

3.  In [ horel_factorization_2017 , Proposition 3.9] , it is computed in
    general the derived operadic left Kan extension using enveloping
    symmetric monoidal categories. Our result simplifies this
    presentation since we use the underlying category instead of
    enveloping symmetric monoidal categories.

## 4 Extension model structure

Local-to-global conditions for sheaves are treated by means of left
Bousfield localizations in homotopy theory [ dugger_topological_2004 ,
lurie_higher_2009 ] . By dual analogy, colocality principles for
cosheaves may be treated with right Bousfield localizations, although it
is not clear what right Bousfield localization could correspond to those
colocality principles. Furthermore, classical methods to find right
Bousfield localizations are rarely applicable. In [ carmona_aqft_2021 ]
, we give a general procedure to construct certain right Bousfield
localizations for model categories of operadic algebras which certainly
capture colocality principles. Because of their applicability in this
work, we include a brief discussion of the results obtained in the cited
reference.

Let @xmath be a map of @xmath -operads. This simple data already
determines a local-to-global principle: @xmath -algebras that are
completely characterized by their restriction to @xmath . A canonical
choice of reconstruction process from the restricted @xmath -algebra to
an @xmath -algebra is via operadic left Kan extension. More concretely,
@xmath induces an adjoint pair @xmath . An @xmath -algebra @xmath
satisfies the above local-to-global principle if @xmath is an
isomorphism, because @xmath is the restricted @xmath -algebra and @xmath
the operadic left Kan extension.

In order to introduce homotopy theory into the picture, the simplest
approach is to enhance the adjunction @xmath into a Quillen pair. Fixing
the projective model for operadic algebras on both sides, one achieves
such enhancement. Then, the derived functor @xmath gives a homotopy
meaningful reconstruction from @xmath -algebras to @xmath -algebras. To
refer to @xmath -algebras which satisfy the corresponding homotopical
local-to-global principle, we introduce the following notion.

###### Definition 4.1.

An @xmath -algebra @xmath such that @xmath is an equivalence is said to
be @xmath -colocal.

###### Remark 4.2.

The above discussion is quite trivial in nature and that is why is so
surprising that it has produced so deep mathematics. The formal idea is
the germ of chiral homology [ lurie_higher_2017 ] and recent
local-to-global constructions in algebraic quantum field theories [
benini_higher_2019 ] . Replacing operadic left Kan extension by right
Kan extension for categories, it appears in manifold calculus [
boavida_de_brito_manifold_2013 ] .

In [ carmona_aqft_2021 , Section 4] , it is discussed in detail how one
can produce a right Bousfield localization of the projective model on
@xmath whose colocal objects are @xmath -colocal algebras, i.e. algebras
that can be reconstructed from its restriction to @xmath . However, this
program requires some assumptions to work. We collect them together with
their raison dâ€™Ãªtre.

###### Hypothesis 4.3.

We assume the following list of conditions.

-   @xmath is cofibrantly generated and @xmath are admissible operads.
    Necessary to @xmath being a Quillen pair.

-   @xmath is fully-faithful. Essential to ensure that restricting
    @xmath and @xmath back to @xmath we get the same result.

-   @xmath is left-proper and sequential colimits of cofibrations are
    homotopical. Assumption that is needed for the application of [
    stanculescu_note_2008 , Theorem 1.1] .

Under Hypothesis 4.3 , we obtain the existence of the extension model .

###### Theorem 4.4.

The projective model on @xmath admits a right Bousfield localization,
called the extension model structure, which enjoys the following
properties:

-    The class of weak equivalences is that of maps of @xmath -algebras
    which are equivalences when restricted to @xmath .

-    A cofibrant object is a proj-cofibrant algebra which is also @xmath
    -colocal.

-    The extension model is cofibrantly generated.

Furthermore, the Quillen pair @xmath descends to a Quillen equivalence
between the projective model on @xmath and the extension model on @xmath
.

###### Proof.

[ carmona_aqft_2021 , Theorem 4.9 and Proposition 4.10] . âˆŽ

Under a slightly restrictive hypothesis on @xmath , one can prove that
the extension model on @xmath -algebras is left-proper. This fact is
useful for the construction of left Bousfield localizations of the
extension model.

###### Proposition 4.5.

The projective and the extension model on @xmath are left proper
whenever @xmath is symmetric h-monoidal and sequential colimits are
homotopical. ^(ii) ^(ii) ii Symmetric h-monoidality is discussed in [
pavlov_admissibility_2018 , Section 2] .

###### Proof.

[ carmona_aqft_2021 , Proposition 4.13] . âˆŽ

###### Examples 4.6.

The Kan-Quillen model on simplicial sets, the projective, injective and
local models on simplicial presheaves, the projective model on cochain
complexes over a ring containing @xmath or symmetric spectra with the
positive stable model all satisfy symmetric h-monoidality (see [
pavlov_admissibility_2018 ] ).

## 5 Enriched factorization algebras

Our goal in this section is constructing model structures on @xmath
which present the homotopy theory of enriched Weiss (resp.
factorization) algebras.

### Homotopical codescent and enriched Weiss algebras

Let us fix the operad inclusion @xmath along this subsection.

The main idea here is to describe a relation between the homotopical
codescent condition for Weiss covers with @xmath -colocality introduced
in Section 4 . Our main tool will be the computation of derived operadic
left Kan extension

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

given in Theorem 3.7 . The machinery of Section 4 will produce the
claimed model for enriched Weiss algebras.

Our main deduction from Proposition 3.3 in this subsection is the
recognition principle described in the following result.

###### Proposition 5.1.

Let @xmath be a proj-cofibrant @xmath -algebra. Then, @xmath is an
enriched Weiss algebra, i.e. satisfies homotopical codescent with
respect to Weiss covers.

Moreover, the following conditions are equivalent for an @xmath -algebra
@xmath :

-   @xmath is an enriched Weiss algebra (see Definition 2.13 ).

-   @xmath is @xmath -colocal (see Definition 4.1 ).

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be a proj-cofibrant @xmath -algebra and @xmath a Weiss cover
of @xmath . We claim that the canonical map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is an equivalence.

Note that @xmath decomposes as an extension of operations and an
extension of colors. More concretely, @xmath , where @xmath is the
extension of colors from @xmath to @xmath , i.e.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using this fact, our claim comes from the equivalence in Lemma 2.16 ,
due to 2 out of 3 applied to the commutative diagram

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

which is a consequence of Proposition 3.3 and consequent remarks.

Now, in order to prove the equivalent statements, fix an @xmath -algebra
@xmath . Observe that @xmath -colocality means that @xmath is an
equivalence. Moreover, by the previous argument, @xmath satisfies
homotopical codescent with respect to Weiss covers by the above argument
and hence @xmath satisfies it as well.

Conversely, we deduce @xmath -colocality of @xmath by evaluation on a
manifold @xmath in @xmath , i.e. showing that @xmath is an equivalence.
Lemma 2.15 provides a particular Weiss cover @xmath of @xmath which we
employ to obtain the above equivalence using the commutative square

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

since both @xmath -algebras coincide on colors in @xmath and satisfy
homotopical codescent with respect to Weiss covers. âˆŽ

The previous characterization of enriched Weiss algebras is the keystone
to the construction of the enriched Weiss model.

###### Theorem 5.2.

@xmath supports the enriched Weiss model characterized by:

-    The class of weak equivalences consists on those maps that are
    equivalences when evaluated on colors of @xmath .

-    The class of fibrations is that of proj-fibrations.

-    Cofibrant objects are proj-cofibrant enriched Weiss algebras.

###### Proof.

It is an immediate application of Theorem 4.4 together with the
recognition principle given in Proposition 5.1 . âˆŽ

### Weak monadicity and enriched factorization algebras

Now we work instead with the operad inclusion @xmath .

As we did with enriched Weiss algebras, we want to further relate weak
monadicity with @xmath -colocality.

###### Proposition 5.3.

Let @xmath be a proj-cofibrant @xmath -algebra. Then, @xmath is an
enriched factorization algebra, i.e. satisfies homotopical codescent
with respect to Weiss covers and weak monadicity.

Moreover, a colorwise flat @xmath -algebra @xmath is an enriched
factorization algebra if and only if it is @xmath -colocal.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be a proj-cofibrant @xmath -algebra. Noting that @xmath can
be factored through @xmath , it is clear that @xmath satisfies
homotopical codescent with respect to Weiss covers by Proposition 5.1 .
It remains to check weak monadicity, that is @xmath is an equivalence
for all @xmath and @xmath in @xmath disjoint. Unwrapping the
definitions, one sees that this operation is induced by disjoint union
of embeddings

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (2)
  -- -------- -- -----

where @xmath , i.e. each one is a disc embedded in @xmath ( @xmath and
@xmath being disjoint in @xmath ensure that this map exists). Since the
elements that conform the collection @xmath are all connected, the
definition of the multimapping-spaces of @xmath implies that ( 2 ) is an
equivalence. We should pursue the constructions involved to get @xmath
from ( 2 ) in order to deduce that weak monadicity holds. A somewhat
lengthy but straightforward analysis of the coequalizer that defines
@xmath shows that these constructions are just: taking homotopy colimits
over finite grupoids, tensor products with cofibrant objects and
homotopy coequalizers. Hence, @xmath is an equivalence.

Now, assume that @xmath is an @xmath -algebra. If @xmath is @xmath
-colocal, i.e. @xmath is an equivalence, we use the commutative square

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

to see that @xmath satisfies weak monadicity. The top arrow is an
equivalence by the above argument, @xmath is an equivalence by
definition of @xmath -colocality and @xmath is an equivalence since
@xmath is colorwise flat and @xmath is proj-cofibrant.

Conversely, we are going to prove that @xmath is an equivalence by
evaluation on each @xmath . The argument is an adaptation of the one
given in Proposition 5.1 . By definition, if @xmath belongs to @xmath ,
i.e. it is an embedded disc into @xmath , the claim holds. In general,
consider a Weiss cover @xmath of @xmath by finite disjoint unions of
discs whose intersections remain so, Lemma 2.15 . Combining homotopical
codescent with weak monadicity one can further decompose each finite
intersection @xmath of the Weiss cover into its constituent discs @xmath
and provide an equivalence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This is also valid for @xmath as well. Therefore, the commutative square

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

allows us to conclude the claim, where the top map is an equivalence due
to @xmath being colorwise flat and @xmath proj-cofibrant. âˆŽ

###### Remark 5.4.

The equivalence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

used above appears in the literature as descent for factorizing covers.
A clever organization of the diagram indexing the homotopy colimit is
given in [ ginot_notes_2013 , Section 4] together with the obvious
notion of factorizing cover.

Analogously to Theorem 5.2 , the former characterization permits the
construction of the so called enriched factorization model structure.

###### Theorem 5.5.

@xmath supports the enriched factorization model characterized by:

-    The class of weak equivalences consists on those maps that are
    equivalences when evaluated on colors of @xmath .

-    The class of fibrations is that of proj-fibrations.

-    Cofibrant objects are proj-cofibrant enriched factorization
    algebras.

###### Proof.

Immediate application of Theorem 4.4 together with Proposition 5.3 . âˆŽ

## 6 Locally constant factorization algebras

Next section is devoted to the discretization of the enriched
factorization model constructed in Theorem 5.5 . This goal will be
achieved after two steps. First, using the equivalence [
ayala_factorization_2015 , Subsection 2.4] , we construct a left
Bousfield localization which encodes local constancy; and then, a right
Bousfield localization will incorporate the local to global properties.

In this section, we perform left Bousfield localizations, see [
barwick_left_2010 ] , and so our fixed homotopy cosmos should be nice
enough to ensure this process. We choose to restrict ourselves to
symmetric h-monoidal homotopy cosmoi due to Proposition 4.5 and the
extense list of examples that fulfil such requirement (see examples
after the cited proposition).

###### Remark 6.1.

The recent preprint [ white_left_2020 ] deals with left Bousfield
localization of semi-model structures for which the left properness
assumption required by the classical theory is dropped. We have not
explored this path, but it seems sufficient to incorporate local
constancy into a semi-model structure and therefore construct a
factorization semi-model structure for more general homotopy cosmoi.

### Local constancy on @xmath-algebras

First, we will explain that a convenient choose of unary operations in
@xmath (or @xmath ) yields a left localization of the projective model
on algebras which is Quillen equivalent to that of @xmath -algebras
(resp. @xmath ). The Quillen equivalence is induced by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We will focus on @xmath , because the other case is similar.

Recall from [ ayala_factorization_2015 , Proposition 2.19] that @xmath
exhibits @xmath as the @xmath -localization of @xmath at the set of
isotopy equivalences @xmath in @xmath .

###### Definition 6.2.

A @xmath -algebra @xmath is locally constant if it sends @xmath to
equivalences. @xmath denotes the full subcategory of locally constant
@xmath -algebras.

The idea is to represent the set of unary operations @xmath as a set of
morphisms @xmath in @xmath to perform a left Bousfield localization
whose local objects are locally constant @xmath -algebras. Such
representation is explained in [ carmona_localization_2021 ] under an
additional hypothesis on the homotopy cosmos @xmath that we recall now.

###### Hypothesis 6.3.

There is a set of objects @xmath in @xmath which jointly detect
equivalences. That is, a map @xmath in @xmath is an equivalence if
@xmath is an equivalence @xmath , where @xmath denotes the homotopy
mapping space in @xmath .

Assuming Hypothesis 6.3 , one can make the following definition.

###### Definition 6.4.

The set of maps @xmath in @xmath that represents @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath means @xmath -tensoring in @xmath -algebras, is the left
adjoint of the restriction functor from @xmath -algebras to @xmath
-algebras and @xmath denotes the covariant enriched Yoneda functor for
@xmath .

###### Theorem 6.5.

Assume that @xmath satisfies Hypothesis 6.3 . Then, the projective model
on @xmath admits a left Bousfield localization at @xmath whose fibrant
objects are the locally constant proj-fibrant @xmath -algebras.
Moreover,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

establishes a Quillen equivalence between the localized model on @xmath
and the projective model on @xmath .

###### Remark 6.6.

For the details of this discussion see [ carmona_localization_2021 ] .

Proposition 2.19 in [ ayala_factorization_2015 ] also proves that @xmath
is the @xmath -localization of @xmath at all unary operations.
Therefore, the analogous left Bousfield localization for algebras over
@xmath models local constancy in Definition 2.2 .

###### Proposition 6.7.

Assume that @xmath satisfies Hypothesis 6.3 . Then, the projective model
on @xmath admits a left Bousfield localization at @xmath whose fibrant
objects are the locally constant proj-fibrant @xmath -algebras.
Moreover,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

establishes a Quillen equivalence between the localized model on @xmath
and the projective model on @xmath .

### Local constancy on @xmath-algebras

The content of this subsection subsumes a combination of two Bousfield
localizations which finally produce the factorization model for @xmath
-algebras. The idea is to replicate model categorically the equivalence
of categories that appears in Proposition 2.5 .

Since we need to make references to different model structures and
Quillen pairs between them, we adopt the following:

###### Notation 6.8.

A subscript decorating a category refers to its model structure, e.g.
@xmath represents the enriched Weiss model of Theorem 5.2 . Arrows in
diagrams of model categories represent left Quillen functors. The symbol
@xmath will denote a Quillen equivalence within these diagrams. LBL and
RBL are acronyms for left and right Bousfield localization respectively.

Let us denote

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the involved operads and maps between them on the subsequent
construction.

First, we perform a right Bousfield localization using Theorem 4.4 for
the inclusion of operads @xmath . This way we get the extension model,
@xmath .

Define the set of maps @xmath in @xmath as the image of @xmath along
@xmath . Using [ barwick_left_2010 , Theorem 4.7] (or [
hirschhorn_model_2003 , Theorem 4.1.1] ) as how it was employed in
Theorem 6.5 , we further produce the Weiss model on @xmath .

###### Theorem 6.9.

Assume that @xmath satisfies Hypothesis 6.3 . Then, @xmath supports the
Weiss model structure, which is the left Bousfield localization at
@xmath of the extension model constructed in Theorem 4.4 . Moreover, the
Weiss model sits into a commutative diagram of model categories

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

The existence of the Weiss model is justified by the sketch right above.
The only non trivial requirement is the left properness of the extension
model, which was given in Proposition 4.5 .

We also need to explain the Quillen equivalences that appear in the
diagram above. By Theorem 4.4 , both upper and lower horizontal arrows
are Quillen equivalences. The middle horizontal arrow is a Quillen
equivalence since it comes from left Bousfield localization of
equivalent model structures at essentially the same set of maps. Theorem
6.5 says that the right vertical map is an equivalence. The remaining
Quillen equivalence is so by 2 out of 3. âˆŽ

An important consequence of the Quillen equivalence between the enriched
Weiss model and the Weiss model is a recognition of bifibrant objects in
the Weiss model, Proposition 6.11 . Before stating it, we present a
lemma which is essential in our proof. Recall from Section 4 the notion
of @xmath -colocality.

###### Lemma 6.10.

A @xmath -algebra @xmath is @xmath -colocal if and only if for any
@xmath , the canonical map @xmath is an equivalence.

###### Proof.

Note that the endofunctor

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

can be described alternatively as:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the equivalence in the middle is the content of Proposition B.6 .
âˆŽ

Due to the above lemma, it is possible to produce a cosheafification
machine for the Weiss topology, i.e. a functorial construction that
turns precosheaves into cosheaves. Such cosheafification articulates the
recognition of bifibrant objects for the Weiss model and its existence
is important in its own. The reason is that in usual categories as sets
or abelian groups, the formal existence of cosheafification is only
known by means of general adjoint functor theorems (see [
prasolov_cosheafification_2016 ] ).

###### Proposition 6.11.

Every bifibrant object in the Weiss model is a locally constant Weiss
algebra. Consequently, every @xmath -algebra admits a functorial
replacement in the Weiss model which is a locally constant Weiss
algebra.

###### Proof.

Recall that the Weiss model is constructed by two Bousfield
localizations,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Right (resp. left) Bousfield localization does not affect fibrant (resp.
cofibrant) objects. Hence, on the one hand, Weiss-fibrant objects are
locally constant proj-fibrant @xmath -algebras by Theorem 6.5 while
Weiss-cofibrant objects are @xmath -colocal proj-cofibrant @xmath
-algebras.

Choose a Weiss-bifibrant object @xmath . We will show that @xmath is a
locally constant Weiss algebra by constructing one, @xmath , which is
colorwise equivalent to @xmath . The main idea is to make use of the
Quillen equivalence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

appearing in Theorem 6.9 .

Since @xmath is Weiss cofibrant, @xmath is cofibrant in the enriched
Weiss model and therefore it is enriched Weiss algebra by Proposition
5.1 . In particular, its restriction @xmath is a locally constant Weiss
algebra. Moreover, the unit of the Quillen equivalence evaluated at
@xmath yields a Weiss equivalence @xmath which is not, a priori, a
colorwise equivalence. However, the class of Weiss equivalences between
Weiss bifibrant objects is the class of colorwise equivalences, since
(co)local equivalences between (co)local objects are ordinary
equivalences in a (right) left Bousfield localization.

Thus, it will suffice to show that @xmath is Weiss bifibrant. This is
not always the case, but it will be after slightly modifying this
algebra.

Recall that Weiss bifibrant means proj-bifibrant locally constant @xmath
-colocal algebra as explained at the beginnig of this proof. Let us
focus on @xmath -colocality. By Lemma 6.10 , this property is equivalent
to the following codescent condition: for any @xmath , the canonical map

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is an equivalence. Taking into account that @xmath , this codescent
condition is deduced from @xmath -colocality in exactly the same way as
Weiss codescent in Proposition 5.1 replacing Lemma 2.16 by Lemma 2.18 .

It remains to add the projective conditions on @xmath . Denoting @xmath
(resp. @xmath ) a proj-fibrant (resp. proj-cofibrant) replacement in
@xmath , we get a diagram

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the lift exists by lifting properties in the projective model and
it is a Weiss equivalence by 2 out of 3. We conclude the proof since
@xmath is a Weiss bifibrant algebra which by construction is colorwise
equivalent to @xmath . âˆŽ

A trivial adaptation of the above arguments replacing @xmath by @xmath ,
leads to:

###### Theorem 6.12.

Assume that @xmath satisfies Hypothesis 6.3 . Then, @xmath supports the
factorization model structure, which is the enriched left Bousfield
localization at all unary operations in @xmath of the extension model
constructed in Theorem 4.4 . The factorization model sits into a
commutative square of model categories and Quillen equivalences

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Moreover, every bifibrant object in the factorization model is a locally
constant factorization algebra over @xmath .

## 7 Variations and generalizations

We have developed model structures that present different kinds of
factorization algebras for smooth manifolds, but our methods can be
applied in different situations. The choice of ordinary smooth manifolds
is due to its simplicity.

Let us summarize our constructions, results and what are the needed
requirements in each setting.

-    Enriched Weiss and factorization models: they are applications of
    the extension model machine (Theorem 4.4 ). We perform the pertinent
    analysis of @xmath , which requires a computation of factorization
    homology with context, Proposition 3.3 , that follows from the
    existence of good Weiss covers (Lemma 2.15 ) and a cosheaf condition
    on embedding spaces (Lemma 2.16 ). The description of @xmath and the
    codescent conditions of Weiss and factorization algebras are
    combined to recognize cofibrant objects in Propositions 5.1 and 5.3
    .

-    Weiss and factorization models: they come from a combination of the
    extension model machine together with a left Bousfield localization
    ( [ barwick_left_2010 , Theorem 4.7] or [ hirschhorn_model_2003 ,
    Theorem 4.1.1] ). Left Bousfield localization works under left
    properness, so we should restrict homotopy cosmoi to those which are
    symmetric h-monoidal. In addition, we need to identify certain
    @xmath -localization [ ayala_factorization_2015 , Proposition 2.19]
    ) which allows us to define the set of maps at which localize.

    On the other hand, one has to recognize the colocality condition for
    the extension model in this setting. This condition boils down to a
    codescent property (Lemma 6.10 ). Since embedding spaces satisfy
    that property (Lemma 2.18 ), enriched Weiss (resp. factorization)
    algebras satisfy this variant of codescent. Proposition 6.11 implies
    that this suffices to identify bifibrant objects as locally constant
    Weiss (resp. factorization) algebras.

Next, we collect some settings where one or both of these schemes are
valid. They consist on varying the @xmath -operad diagram

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

-    Factorization algebras without context ( [
    costello_factorization_2017 , Definition 3.0.2] ): the chain of
    fully-faithful inclusions of operads @xmath may be chosen to mimic
    the constructions in Section 5 . The needed ingredients are
    justified by the same reasons than the ones that appear in this work
    (see the mentioned section). Note that Section 6 could not be
    adapted without context.

-    Factorization algebras with tangent structures: Introducing tangent
    structures (with or without context) as in [
    ayala_factorization_2015 , Definition 2.7] everything can be done in
    exactly the same manner. Codescent conditions on embedding spaces
    are deduced from [ boavida_de_brito_manifold_2013 , Equation (10)]
    and the proof of Lemma 2.18 , since the @xmath -category of spaces
    is an @xmath -topos. As discussed in [ ayala_factorization_2015 ,
    Section 2.4] , adding tangent structures does not affect the
    localization result [ ayala_factorization_2015 , Proposition 2.19] .

-    Factorization algebras on topological manifolds: In [
    ayala_factorization_2015 ] , the authors prove that Lemma 2.15 holds
    if we replace smooth by topological and cover by hypercover. Hence,
    our models in this case present a variant of factorization algebras
    that satisfy homotopical codescent with respect to Weiss
    hypercovers. Using [ lurie_higher_2017 , Proposition 5.4.1.8] plus [
    lurie_higher_2017 , Proposition A.3.1] , one shows that embedding
    spaces of topological manifolds satisfy codescent properties of
    Lemma 2.16 (with respect to hypercovers) and Lemma 2.18 . The
    localization part is again [ ayala_factorization_2015 , Proposition
    2.19] .

-    Factorization algebras on manifolds with boundary: One can provide
    a Weiss cover by discs and half discs using [
    boavida_de_brito_manifold_2013 , Proposition 9.1] . Codescent is
    reduced to [ boavida_de_brito_manifold_2013 , Proposition 9.2] if we
    fix the boundary, or to a combination of [ horel_factorization_2017
    , Proposition 7.5] with [ lurie_higher_2017 , Proposition A.3.1]
    otherwise. The localization statement with boundaries allowed is
    also provided by [ ayala_factorization_2015 ] .

-    Factorization algebras on conically smooth stratified manifolds: By
    considering finite disjoint unions of basics ( [ ayala_local_2017 ,
    Definition 2.2.1] ) one can construct Weiss hypercovers due to [
    ayala_local_2017 , Proposition 3.2.23] . Codescent with respect to
    those hypercovers can be deduced from the proof of [
    ayala_local_2017 , Lemma 6.1.1] together with a configuration space
    argument, simply by evaluation on finite disjoint unions of basics.
    The localization theorem in this setting is discussed at [
    ayala_factorization_2017 , Proposition 2.22] .

## Appendix A Appendix: Pushouts of algebras by free maps

This appendix is devoted to a slight improvement of well known
filtrations of pushouts of operadic algebras by free maps ( [
white_bousfield_2018 , Proposition 4.3.17] and [
pavlov_admissibility_2018 , Proposition 5.2] ) that we use in the proof
of Proposition 3.3 ; more concretely in Lemma 3.5 .

### Filtration for algebras

###### Lemma A.1.

Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

be a pushout in @xmath where @xmath is concentrated on one color @xmath
. Then, the underlying arrow associated to @xmath in @xmath is the
@xmath -transfinite composite of a sequence @xmath defined by pushouts
in @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath denotes the enveloping operad of the pair @xmath .

###### Proof.

The result holds in @xmath , i.e. without functoriality over @xmath , by
[ white_bousfield_2018 , Proposition 4.3.17] . Our contribution is just
recognizing the functoriality with respect to @xmath . Due to the
pointwise-computation of colimits in functor categories, the proof
consists on showing that the above pushouts squares in @xmath also live
in @xmath . We notice that the vertices are functors with respect to
@xmath by induction and since @xmath is a @xmath -bimodule through the
canonical map of operads @xmath . So, it remains to show that the edges
of the squares live in @xmath , i.e.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

are compatible with @xmath -actions.

-   @xmath is compatible with @xmath -action because the structure comes
    from the first coordinate and the map on this coordinate is the
    identity.

-   @xmath is compatible with @xmath -action: the explicit description
    of the attaching map given in [ harper_homotopy_2010 , Proposition
    7.12] can be generalized to the colored-case yielding a
    decomposition of @xmath . First note that @xmath is the colimit of a
    punctured @xmath -cube diagram constructed out of @xmath , whose
    vertices are tensor products of @xmath -factors of @xmath and @xmath
    -factors of @xmath such that @xmath . With this remark in mind, it
    is easy to see that @xmath decomposes as

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    It suffices to check that each morphism in the composite is
    compatible with @xmath -action. The first ones does not involve the
    coordinate where @xmath -acts; the following involves the
    multiplication of @xmath on the right and hence, by associativity,
    commutes with its left multiplication (which is the one that defines
    the @xmath -action); the compatibility holds for the remaining maps
    by complete induction.

âˆŽ

###### Lemma A.2.

Let @xmath be a map of @xmath -algebras and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

be the naturality square of @xmath -algebras associated to it. Assuming
that @xmath is constructed as in Lemma A.1 , the vertical arrows in the
naturality square are @xmath -transfinite composites of their associated
filtrations. Then, both filtrations are compatible and they yield a
filtration of the naturality square. In other words, for any @xmath ,
there is an inductively defined commutative square

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that @xmath is the colimit of the horizontal arrows.

###### Proof.

Let us denote @xmath and @xmath , even for @xmath and @xmath , to make
more readable the proof.

The initial step, @xmath , is given by the top arrow in the naturality
square. We must construct the next step given @xmath . To do so, we use
that both filtrations are induced by Lemma A.1 and consequently they fit
into a cubical shaped diagram

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

We have to find the dashed arrow. The universal property of pushouts
determines it if we check the commutativity of the rest of the cube. For
that purpose, it is essential to understand the involved maps:

-   The attaching maps and the vertical maps on the back are those
    appearing in Lemma A.1 .

-   @xmath is the result of an extension of operations for the map
    between enveloping operads @xmath and the identity on the last
    coordinate.

-   @xmath is the same as @xmath but changing the last coordinate.

With these observations in mind, the back square commutes since vertical
maps and horizontal maps affect different coordinates. The top square
commutes by induction, because ultimately the attaching maps involve
making operations on the enveloping operads and @xmath is an operad map,
so it is compatible with these operations.

This way, we have defined inductively the stated squares and what
remains is proving that @xmath is the colimit of the horizontal arrows.
Since we already know that both source and target of this arrow are
colimits of the corresponding filtrations, it suffices to see that the
natural transformation restricts to the inductively defined family of
arrows at each @xmath . Again, the initial step is by definition. The
inductive step is ensured by the commutative diagram

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

âˆŽ

### Filtration for enveloping operads

###### Lemma A.3.

Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

be a pushout in @xmath where @xmath is concentrated on one color @xmath
. Then, there is an associated pushout square of enveloping operads in
@xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Evaluating the first variable on @xmath , the associated map to @xmath
in @xmath is the @xmath -transfinite composite of a sequence @xmath
defined by pushouts in @xmath :

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

###### Proof.

The argument given in Lemma A.1 can be adapted to this situation using [
muro_correction_2017 , Lemma 1.2] or [ pavlov_admissibility_2018 ,
Proposition 5.2] instead of [ white_bousfield_2018 , Proposition 4.3.17]
. âˆŽ

###### Lemma A.4.

Let @xmath be a map of @xmath -algebras and

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

be the naturality square of @xmath -algebras associated to it. Assuming
that @xmath is constructed as in Lemma A.3 , the vertical arrows in the
naturality square are @xmath -transfinite composites of their associated
filtrations. Then, for any @xmath , there is an inductively defined
commutative square

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that @xmath is the colimit of the horizontal arrows.

###### Proof.

Adaptation of the proof presented for Lemma A.2 to filtrations arising
from Lemma A.3 . âˆŽ

## Appendix B Appendix: Comparison of left Kan extensions

Let @xmath be a strong symmetric monoidal functor between partial
symmetric monoidal categories. We want to compare (derived) ordinary Kan
extension and (derived) operadic Kan extension along @xmath .

We are going to exploit the following result.

###### Lemma B.1.

The category of @xmath -algebras is equivalent to that of @xmath
-functors equipped with a (partial) lax monoidal structure.

###### Proof.

Unwrapping definitions, one finds that the claim reduces to the
recognition of nonunary operations in a (partial) symmetric monoidal
category;

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In other words, nonunary operations are completely described by the
universal operations @xmath . âˆŽ

With this in mind, the non-homotopical result is easy.

###### Lemma B.2.

Let @xmath be a strong symmetric monoidal functor between partial
symmetric monoidal categories. Then, the following square of decorated
functors commutes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In other words, there is a natural isomorphism @xmath

###### Proof.

By the universal property satisfied by @xmath , one could verify the
claim by equipping @xmath with a lax monoidal structure by Lemma B.1 and
showing that it is universal. The unit of such monoidal structure comes
from the composite

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the multiplication corresponds to the composite

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Checking that these choices fulfil the requirements is a lenghty but
straightforward computation. âˆŽ

Our goal becomes verifying that the natural isomorphism @xmath holds,
possibly as an equivalence, when replacing left adjoints by their
homotopical analogues. Equivalently, comparing derived Kan extensions
(Proposition B.6 ). We achieve this objective showing that in some
situations @xmath preserves cofibrancy (see Lemma B.5 ), but such result
requires a little detour into envelopes of operads.

Recall that the forgetful functor from symmetric monoidal categories to
operads admits a left adjoint called symmetric monoidal envelope, which
is denoted @xmath . See [ horel_factorization_2017 , Definition 1.7] for
a description of @xmath or [ lurie_higher_2017 ] for a thorough
treatment in the higher categorical context. This adjunction can be
enhanced to a categorical level.

###### Proposition B.3.

The canonical map of operads @xmath identifies the category of @xmath
-algebras with the full subcategory of @xmath -algebras spanned on
strong monoidal functors @xmath .

###### Proof.

By Lemma B.1 , we already know that @xmath is equivalent to the category
of lax monoidal functors @xmath (with monoidal natural transformations).
Thus, it suffices to satisfy that the forgetful functor @xmath admits a
retraction into the full subcategory of strong monoidal functors. Such
retraction is given by the functorial construction which associates to
an @xmath -algebra @xmath , the strong monoidal functor @xmath . âˆŽ

Using symmetric monoidal envelopes, we will deduce Lemma B.5 from the
particular case of symmetric monoidal categories.

###### Lemma B.4.

Let @xmath be a symmetric monoidal category which is @xmath -cofibrant
as an operad. Then, the forgetful functor @xmath preserves cofibrations
and cofibrant objects.

###### Proof.

The equivalence of Lemma B.1 and the Day convolution product allow us to
look at @xmath as the functor which sends a commutative monoid to its
underlying object in the symmetric monoidal category @xmath [
mandell_model_2001 , Proposition 22.1] . By [ white_model_2017 , Theorem
4.6] and its following discussion, @xmath carries the projective model
and the conclusion of the lemma holds if we check the strong commutative
monoid axiom ( [ white_model_2017 , Definition 3.4] ) and if the unit in
@xmath is cofibrant. Recall that we assume that the monoidal unit in
@xmath is cofibrant, and that implies that the unit in @xmath is
cofibrant as well. Hence, we need a explicit description of the pushout
product for generating (trivial) cofibrations in this case. A generating
set of (trivial) cofibrations for the projective model in @xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus, since the Day convolution makes the Yoneda embedding a strong
monoidal functor (see the proof of [ mandell_model_2001 , Lemma 3.7] ),
we have

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Therefore, the pushout product axiom for @xmath combined with the fact
that @xmath is assumed to be @xmath -cofibrant implies that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a (trivial) cofibration when is so. âˆŽ

###### Lemma B.5.

Let @xmath be a (partial) symmetric monoidal category which is @xmath
-cofibrant as an operad. Then, the forgetful functor @xmath preserves
cofibrations and cofibrant objects.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be the symmetric monoidal envelope of @xmath seen as an
operad. The strategy of the proof consists on looking at the forgetful
functor @xmath as the following composite

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

and analyze each component separatedly.

To see that the composite coincides with the forgetful functor, note
that @xmath coincides with the construction @xmath in the proof of Lemma
B.3 . Observe as well that @xmath is left Quillen for the projective
model structures, so it preserves cofibrations and cofibrant objects.

The preservation of cofibrancy for the middle forgetful functor is Lemma
B.4 .

Finally, @xmath preserves colimits, since they are computed pointwise,
and hence it suffices to check that it sends generating (trivial)
cofibrations to (trivial) cofibrations. A generating set of (trivial)
cofibrations for the projective model in @xmath was given in the proof
of Lemma B.4 . Therefore, the conclusion follows from the canonical
identification

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

that holds because the operad structure on @xmath comes from a partial
symmetric monoidal structure. âˆŽ

###### Proposition B.6.

Let @xmath be a strong symmetric monoidal functor between (partial)
symmetric monoidal categories which are @xmath -cofibrant as operads.
Then, the following square of decorated functors commutes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In other words, there is a natural equivalence @xmath

###### Proof.

Immediate combination of Lemmas B.2 and B.5 . âˆŽ

###### Remark B.7.

The conclusion of Lemma B.5 holds if instead of the @xmath -cofibrancy
assumption, we consider that @xmath is locally cofibrant and that @xmath
satisfies @xmath in [ white_bousfield_2018 , Definition 6.2.1] . Thus,
under these hypothesis, Proposition B.6 is also true.