Convolutional Gridding is a technique (algorithm) extensively used in
Radio Interferometric Image Synthesis for fast inversion of functions
sampled with irregular intervals on the Fourier plane. In this thesis,
we propose some modifications to the technique to execute faster on a
GPU. These modifications give rise to Hybrid Gridding and Pruned NN
Interpolation , which take advantage of the oversampling of the Gridding
Convolutional Function in Convolutional Gridding to try to make gridding
faster with no reduction in the quality of the output. Our experiments
showed that given the right conditions, Hybrid Gridding executes up to
@xmath faster than Convolutional Gridding, and Pruned NN Interpolation
is generally slower than Hybrid Gridding.
The two new techniques feature the downsampling of an oversampled grid
through convolution to accelerate the Fourier inversion. It is a
well-known approximate technique which suffers from aliasing. In this
thesis, we are re-proposing the technique as a Convolution-Based FFT
Pruning algorithm able to suppress aliasing below arithmetic noise. The
algorithm uses the recently discovered least-misfit gridding functions,
which through our experiments gave promising results, although not as
good as expected from the related published work on the stated gridding
functions. Nevertheless, our experiments showed that, given the right
conditions, Convolutional-Based Pruning reduces the Fourier inversion
execution time on a GPU by approximately a factor of @xmath .
