Gait analysis is the study of the systematic methods that assess and
quantify animal locomotion. The research on gait analysis has
considerably evolved through time. It was an ancient art, and it still
finds its application today in modern science and medicine. Gait finds a
unique importance among the many state-of-the-art biometric systems
since it does not require the subjectâ€™s cooperation to the extent
required by other modalities. Hence by nature, it is an unobtrusive
biometric . Gait is associated with three types of signals, viz.,
kinetic, kinematic and EMG. Kinesiological EMG is mostly used for
clinical purposes and kinetic measurement instruments are confined to a
limited space. The applicability of kinetic and EMG data for the purpose
of biometrics is thus constrained. Kinematic observation of gait is much
more efficient and successful in literature. Also, the cost of kinematic
measurement instruments such as a video camera and mobile accelerometer
are much more cost effective than the apparatus required for EMG and
kinetic observation.

There are two aspects to biometrics: hard and soft. Soft biometrics
include determination of height, weight, gender, or ethnicity with
gender recognition being the most common form associated with gait
research. The method proposed in this thesis, Pose-Based Voting employs
a scheme which delineates the gait instance as a sequence of poses which
is used to predict the gender of the respective subject through a voting
scheme.

Hard biometrics associate people with their innate traits that
identifies them. This data can be used either for identification or for
authentication. Gait identification, widely known as gait recognition,
is the process of mapping a given gait instance to a trained identity.
On the other hand, gait authentication shows how closely the given gait
instance matches to identity claimed. Recent advancements show that the
more favourable biometric accuracy is attained through the use of gait
templates. A gait template is a collation of silhouettes extracted from
a gait video sequence. Many templates are proposed till date aimed to
decrease the error of gait recognition. However, they still suffer from
the effect of covariate factors such as variation in clothing and
carrying conditions. Masking the templates to include only the
covariate-resilient regions improve the overall performance of the
recognition system. The proposed framework, the Genetic Template
Segmentation (GTS), automates the process of fitting the masking
boundaries to select the regions that correspond to the optimum
performance.

The gait templates are also used for authentication that follows a
similar procedure for feature extraction. The test instance and the
stored gallery instance is separated by a distance in a hyperplane. In
traditional gait authentication, if this Euclidean distance falls within
a permissible threshold, then the test sequence is said to be authorized
as claimed identity. However, Euclidean threshold-based methods trade
off a set amount of False Accept Rate (FAR) for an acceptable False
Reject Rate (FRR). This thesis proposes an intuitive technique called
Multiperson Signature Mapping (MSM) for gait authentication, which
converts a gait recognition system to a powerful authentication system.
The salient feature of this method allows to decrease the FAR in
proportion to the system population while still attaining an FRR equal
to the error rate of the base recognition system.

Though the MSM framework enhances the performance of any existing gait
authentication method, when the system population decreases, its
greatest strength becomes its weakness. To circumvent this problem
another framework, the Bayesian Thresholding , is designed. This method
measures the distance between the test and gallery instances in the form
of posterior probabilities. This drastically decreases the overall error
and can boost the power of any authentication system in general.
