A transition to a low-carbon electricity supply is crucial to limit the
impacts of climate change. Reducing carbon emissions could help prevent
the world from reaching a tipping point, where runaway emissions are
likely. Runaway emissions could lead to extremes in weather conditions
around the world - especially in problematic regions unable to cope with
these conditions.

However, the movement to a low-carbon energy supply can not happen
instantaneously due to the existing fossil-fuel infrastructure and the
requirement to maintain a reliable energy supply. Therefore, a
low-carbon transition is required, however, the decisions various
stakeholders should make over the coming decades to reduce these carbon
emissions are not obvious. This is due to many long-term uncertainties,
such as electricity, fuel and generation costs, human behaviour and the
size of electricity demand. A well choreographed low-carbon transition
is, therefore, required between all of the heterogenous actors in the
system, as opposed to changing the behaviour of a single, centralised
actor.

The objective of this thesis is to create a novel, open-source
agent-based model to better understand the manner in which the whole
electricity market reacts to different factors using state-of-the-art
machine learning and artificial intelligence methods. In contrast to
other works, this thesis looks at both the long-term and short-term
impact that different behaviours have on the electricity market by using
these state-of-the-art methods.

Specifically, we investigate the following applications:

1.  Predictions are made to predict electricity demand in the
    short-term. We model the impact that poor predictions have on
    investments in electricity generators and utilisation over the
    long-term. We find that poor short-term predictions lead to a higher
    proportion of coal, gas, and nuclear power plants.

2.  We devise a long-term carbon tax for the United Kingdom using a
    genetic algorithm approach. We find multiple strategies that can
    minimise both long-term carbon emissions and electricity cost.

3.  Oligopolies can have a detrimental effect on an electricity market
    by raising electricity prices without an increase in benefit to
    users. Reinforcement learning can be used to devise intelligent
    bidding strategies which are based upon forecasts and predictions of
    other agent behaviour to maximise revenues. These behaviours can not
    be modelled through traditional rule-based algorithms. We use
    reinforcement learning to model strategic bidding into the
    electricity market, and find ways to limit the impact of this
    strategic bidding through a market cap. We find that introducing a
    market cap can significantly reduce the ability for oligopolies to
    manipulate the market.

These studies require a number of core challenges to be addressed to
ensure our agent-based model, ElecSim, is fit for purpose. These are:

1.  Development of the ElecSim model, where the replication of the
    pertinent features of the electricity market was required. For
    example, generation company investment behaviour, electricity market
    design and temporal granularity. We find that the temporal
    granularity of the model has a large impact on accuracy of the
    model, but with suitably chosen representative days calibration is
    possible to accurately model a time period.

2.  The complexity of a model increases with the replication of
    increasing market features. Therefore, optimisation of the code was
    required to maintain computational tractability, to allow for
    multiple scenario runs. This enabled us to run multiple iterations
    to train different machine learning techniques.

3.  Once the model has been developed, its long-term behaviour must be
    verified to ensure accuracy. In this work, cross-validation was used
    to both validate and calibrate ElecSim. We are able to accurately
    model a historic period observed in the real-world with this
    approach

4.  To ensure that the salient parameters are found, a sensitivity
    analysis was run. In addition, various example scenarios were
    generated to show the behaviour of the model. We find that the input
    parameters, such as the cost of capital have a disproportionate
    effect on the long-term electricity mix.

The findings outlined previously demonstrate the ability for artificial
intelligence, machine learning and agent-based models to perform complex
analyses in an uncertain system. We find that solely focusing on the
accuracy of machine learning techniques, for instance, misses out on a
significant amount research potential. We instead argue, that by further
developing these research themes, we are able to better understand the
electricity market system of the United Kingdom.

LaTeX PhD Thesis Engineering University of Cambridge

\dept

School of Computing \university Newcastle University \crest []
\degreetitle Doctor of Philosophy \subject LaTeX

{dedication}

I would like to dedicate this thesis to my family and my loving parentsâ€¦

{declaration}

I hereby declare that except where specific reference is made to the
work of others, the contents of this dissertation are original and have
not been submitted in whole or in part for consideration for any other
degree or qualification in this, or any other university. This
dissertation is my own work and contains nothing which is the outcome of
work done in collaboration with others, except as specified in the text
and Acknowledgements. This dissertation contains fewer than 65,000 words
including appendices, bibliography, footnotes, tables and equations and
has fewer than 150 figures.
