## Abstract

This thesis is a study of two dimensional noncritical string theory. The
main tool which is used, is the matrix model.

There are several chapters. After a general introduction there follows
an introduction to the Liouville model where the fundamental issues of
its formulation are discussed. In particular, the special states are
introduced. Then, in chapter three, some calculations of partition
functions on genus one are given. These use field theory techniques. The
results are compared with the matrix model. In chapter four the matrix
model itself is introduced. Some of the concepts and relations which are
used in later chapters are explained. Chapters five and six include
comments on two important subjects: nonperturbative issues and string
theory at finite radius. Chapter seven is devoted to zero momentum
correlation functions as calculated in the matrix model. One important
result is a set of recursion relations. Chapter eight extends the
treatment to nonzero momentum. The main result is a clear identification
of the special states. The chapter also includes some comments on the
Wheeler de Witt equation. Chapter nine introduces the matrix model
@xmath algebra. This organizes the results of previous chapters. In
particular, a simple derivation of the genus zero tachyon correlation
functions is given. Chapter ten extends the results of chapter nine to
higher genus. It is seen how a deformation of the algebra is responsible
for much of the higher genus structure. Some very explicit formulae are
derived. Then, in chapter eleven, the Liouville and matrix model
calculations are compared. Finally, chapter twelve is devoted to some
general conclusions.

The advisor for this work has been Prof. David Gross.

### Preface

The thesis consists of several papers and also unpublished material. The
papers are listed in the references as [ 13 , 14 , 15 , 16 ] . [ 13 ]
is, strictly speaking, not a part of this thesis but some limited use of
it is made in chapter two. Chapter three consists of [ 14 ] and some
additional material. Chapters five and six include some unpublished
notes. Chapters seven and eight consist mainly of [ 15 ] with some minor
contributions from [ 16 ] to chapter eight. Chapter nine is most of [ 16
] . Chapter ten consists of material not published elsewhere. Chapter
eleven is the remainder of [ 16 ] . The work has in part been supported
by a Harold W. Dodds Fellowship.

There are several persons I would like to thank. First of all I want to
thank my advisor David Gross for all his invaluable help and all the
things I have learnt from him. I am also grateful to Igor Klebanov for
several discussions and explanations. Among others at Princeton
University who have been of great help to me are Curtis Callan, Mark
Doyle, Andrew Felce, Jose Gonzalez, David Lowe, Miguel Martin-Delgado
and Michael Newman.

At the University of Stockholm I would like to thank Patrik Johansson,
Anders Karlhede and Bo Sundborg.

Finally I would like to thank Hector Rubinstein at the University of
Uppsala for all his support and guidance during the past several years.
In particular I would like to thank him for the best advice of all, to
go to Princeton.

## Chapter 1 Introduction

The outstanding problem of todays physics is the unification of quantum
mechanics and general relativity, quantum gravity. It is widely believed
that such a theory would also provide a unification of all forces and
therefore give a unified picture of all physics. The putative new theory
would hopefully also predict a multitude of new and fascinating
phenomena. Needless to say, such a theory does not exist today.

During the past decade or two however, a very promising candidate, in
fact the only existing candidate, has been developed. This is string
theory. In string theory several of the problems inherent in quantum
gravity seem to be resolved. In particular the nonrenormalizability of
the perturbative expansion is taken care of by a Planck scale cutoff
given by the size of the string.

Unfortunately a phenomenologically acceptable string theory does not so
far exist. The heterotic string, the most promising candidate, gives a
reasonable gauge group which by symmetry breaking can be reduced to the
low energy @xmath which we see. However, there does not seem to be any
unique way of compactifying the 10 space time dimensions typical of a
critical super string, down to the four dimensions of the real world.
For a general introduction, see [ 34 , 35 ] and references therein.

If we believe in the promise of string theory, but are discouraged by
the lack of immediate success of the critical theories, we should
consider alternatives. Such an alternative is provided by the
noncritical string theories. These string theories rely on solving two
dimensional quantum gravity which in some cases turns out to be a
feasible exercise. This invalidates the reason for restricting oneself
to the critical dimensions. Unfortunately, technical obstacles stop us
from directly constructing a four dimensional string theory. The best we
can do so far, is to obtain a string theory describing a string moving
in a two dimensional space time. This theory lacks a lot of the
complications of higher dimensions but is complicated enough to contain
interesting physics.

Remarkably there also exists a new tool, the matrix models, which allow
us to solve these theories exactly to all orders of string perturbation
theory. This two dimensional string theory, in particular its matrix
model version, will be the subject of this thesis.

Given the simplicity of its formulation, it is very surprising that the
two dimensional noncritical string theory was not studied long ago.
While the precise connection between this theory and the Liouville mode
quantum gravity approach requires some technical machinery, there are no
difficulties establishing it as a perfectly consistent two dimensional
string theory.

The important point to realize is that a nontrivial background, in this
case a linear dilaton field, can change the effective central charge and
hence the critical dimension. This is of course just the string theory
way of describing the conformal field theory construction with a
background charge.

More generally from the string theoretic point of view, one needs to
solve the @xmath equations. These are precisely the requirement that the
world sheet theory is scale invariant, no conformal anomaly. Without a
dilaton field they reproduce the Einstein equations for the metric. This
is true at tree level for the world sheet @xmath model. In general,
there are corrections at higher orders in @xmath , where @xmath size of
the string. In two dimensions we really need the nontrivial dilaton
background to get a consistent theory. But as was shown in [ 55 , 79 ]
this is not the only possibility. There is a one parameter family of
solutions describing a black hole background, the parameter being the
mass of the black hole.

Clearly the two dimensional string theory can serve as a laboratory for
testing many of the ideas of string theory. It might give some insight
into the deeper issues of how string theory gets around the problems of
quantum gravity. In the end this could turn out to be the single most
important contribution of string theory. Even if string theory turns out
not to be the correct theory of quantum gravity realized in nature, we
might learn a lot by studying how it resolves the quantum gravity
enigma. If nothing else, this solution, even if it is wrong, can serve
as an important source of inspiration in the work towards the correct
theory.

There are many mysterious aspects of quantum gravity and it is so far
unclear in what sense they are resolved by string theory. One of the
most interesting ones is the problem of black holes and the loss of
quantum coherence. It appears as if important quantum phase information
can get lost without a trace into a black hole. After all, it is claimed
that a black hole has no “hair” [ 12 ] . As a result a pure state can
evolve into a mixed state. This breaks the unitary time evolution of
quantum mechanics. It is important to note that one cannot simply say
that the information is there somewhere inside of the black hole.
Eventually the black hole may evaporate due to the Hawking process
revealing nothing. The Hawking radiation is also supposed to be purely
random and thermal containing no information. How is this mystery
solved?

It has been proposed that black holes in fact do have a lot of quantum
hair [ 12 ] . This is not forbidden by the classical no hair theorems.
Clearly this would have the potential of solving the quantum coherence
problem. It has also been proposed, [ 29 ] , that there is extra hair in
the two dimensional string theory which we are about to study. The hair
would be associated with the @xmath symmetry which we will encounter at
several places throughout this thesis. If this is true also for higher
dimensional string theories as claimed in [ 29 ] , string theory would
have solved one more of the fundamental issues of quantum gravity. In
some sense this would be an even more remarkable and far reaching
achievement than just taking care of the nonrenormalizability.

However, so far none of these speculations have any secure basis. In
fact, it may very well be that the solutions to problems like quantum
coherence have nothing or very little to do with strings. In particular
it is conceivable that the loss of quantum coherence is just what it is.
A sign that quantum mechanics as we know it breaks down, as suggested by
Hawking [ 43 ] . Depending on taste, this could be an even more exciting
perspective. Before getting to deep into string theory, let us briefly
remind ourselves what this could mean.

We have come to accept the strange duality which exists in quantum
mechanics as a rather fundamental aspect of nature. The unitary time
evolution on the one hand, and the somewhat magical, certainly
nonunitary, collapse of the wave function at the moment of observation
on the other hand. The second process defies a well defined physical
description. When does it really take place? The philosophical
discussions about this seem endless. It would clearly be desirable to
have a physical understanding of this. Is it then too farfetched to
suggest that a nonunitary quantum mechanics, the nonunitarity supplied
by gravity as suggested by the loss of quantum coherence above, could
give a physical process for the collapse of the wave function? Rather
than just trying to device ways of getting rid of the apparent
nonunitarity, we should carefully ask ourselves whether we might not
need it after all. The point to be made is that it is very likely that
string theory may provide a solution to the problem of reconciling
quantum mechanics and gravity, but the question is whether that is what
we want to do! Is this really the solution which nature has chosen?

Clearly the quest for quantum gravity is a very open one. Even if string
theory is our best candidate for the moment, we should be open minded.
It is not obviously true that strings really have the capacity to solve
all deep conceptual problems which confronts us in e.g. quantum gravity.
However, string theory clearly deserves the attention it receives for
whatever clues it might give. With this in mind let us embark on the
careful study of two dimensional string theory which is the subject of
this thesis.

## Chapter 2 The Liouville Model

### 2.1 Introduction

In this chapter we will review the two dimensional noncritical string
from the field theoretic point of view. In a later chapter an
introduction to the matrix model approach will follow.

We will also consider the theory as a model of two dimensional world
sheet quantum gravity. For this we will briefly review some different
approaches. Historically this was also the way in which one first solved
the model. Only later the focus has been more on the string theoretic
interpretation. Ironically it is really only the quantum gravity
interpretation which need a nontrivial justification, as we will see.

Towards the end of the chapter we will discuss the “special states”.
These are probably one of the most interesting aspects of the theory.
Since they are remnants of the usual excited string modes in higher
dimensional theories, they could potentially tell us a lot about stringy
phenomena. We will encounter them again and again throughout this
thesis.

### 2.2 The Way to Solve it

Our focus will be on the gravity coupled @xmath model and its target
space interpretation as a two dimensional string theory. We will however
begin by considering the more general case of a minimal model with
central charge @xmath coupled to gravity. More precisely we will be
discussing induced Liouville gravity.

The action for a minimal model coupled to Liouville gravity, in complex
coordinates @xmath and conformal gauge @xmath , is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath is some matter field, while @xmath , as we will see in a moment,
is the gravitational field. Recall that in two dimensions the metric has
only one independent component. @xmath is the world sheet curvature
while @xmath and @xmath are background charges for matter and gravity
respectively. Due to the “ @xmath ” in the action, the model is unitary
only for some special values of @xmath . Good introductions to these and
other related issues in conformal field theory may be found in [ 11 ]
and [ 31 ] . @xmath is adjusted to give the appropriate value of the
central charge of the minimal model we are considering, while @xmath is
tuned in such a way that the total central charge of both matter and
gravity adds up to @xmath . Hence it is also possible to interpret this
as a consistent string theory. @xmath and @xmath are then some target
space coordinates. The curvature term describes the coupling to a linear
background dilaton field.

Given the action ( 2.1 ) the stress energy tensor, defined by @xmath ,
is easily seen to be

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

by varying the action with respect to the metric. The terms linear in
the fields come from varying the world sheet curvature and some
following partial integrations. From this the Fourier modes of @xmath ,
i.e. the Virasoro generators @xmath ’s, are extracted as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath and @xmath are the matter and gravity oscillators respectively.
In particular we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The energy momentum tensor can also give us the relation between @xmath
, @xmath and @xmath , which we need. For simplicity of notation let us
just consider the matter part. The propagator is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the corresponding expression for the antiholomorphic part. It is a
simple exercise using Wick contractions to derive the operator product

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

from which one can read

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Similarly one finds for the Liouville part

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Since we need @xmath , this fixes @xmath to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the original works, [ 21 , 27 , 52 , 68 ] , this action was mostly
interpreted as describing two dimensional world sheet quantum gravity
coupled to some matter. Only later it became fashionable to think of it
as a noncritical string theory. The latter interpretation is clearly
justified without further calculations. We have achieved quantum scale
invariance, the hallmark of a string theory, and later we will also see
how to construct scattering amplitudes. To really make the quantum
gravity connection, some further work is however needed. Let us briefly
review the different steps.

The starting point is to note that the classical scale, or Weyl,
invariance is broken quantum mechanically. The need to regularize
introduces a potential dependence on some scale which only goes away in
the critical dimension. The breaking of scale invariance is measured by
the trace of the energy momentum tensor, @xmath . Let us for simplicity
focus on @xmath where there is no background charge. Classically one
would certainly expect the trace of the energy momentum tensor to be
zero, but the quantum mechanical answer is in fact

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the world sheet curvature. Let us give a simple,
heuristic but perhaps illuminating derivation of this result.

The key point is the properties under coordinate transformations of
@xmath (or @xmath ). For @xmath the matter part of @xmath is just @xmath
Due to the normal ordering a coordinate transformation @xmath has the
following effect:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

The @xmath limit and subtraction is the conventional point splitting
version of normal ordering. Some simple algebra then leads to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

The last term is the Schwarzian derivative defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

We now try to reproduce this transformation property classically by
adding an extra term to @xmath . This term must be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

for some function @xmath . It is easy to show that indeed

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

We next need the conventional law of conservation of the energy momentum
tensor

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

The extra term in @xmath must be accompanied by a similar extra term in
@xmath . Otherwise ( 2.16 ) would in general hold not hold. It is easy
to see that an extra term in @xmath of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

would do the job. But this is just @xmath in conformal gauge where
@xmath with the conformal factor @xmath !

In the case of general @xmath the expressions are multiplied by the
central charge @xmath . This can be seen from ( 2.6 ) which upon contour
integration against the parameter @xmath produces the infinitesimal
version @xmath of the Schwarzian derivative. The net effect is that we
have generated gravitational contributions to the energy momentum
tensors given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

That @xmath is the only thing that @xmath can be proportional to is
really clear already from dimensional analysis and coordinate
invariance. The precise coefficient, however, is provided by the above
argument. We will come back briefly to the different expressions for the
energy momentum tensor above when discussing some different approaches
to two dimensional quantum gravity, but let us first see what to do with
( 2.10 ).

The central charge in ( 2.10 ) receive contributions both from the
matter fields and the ghost fields. This gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

To get scale invariance without @xmath we in some sense need @xmath .
The consistent way to achieve this is by thinking of @xmath as an
equation of motion for the two dimensional metric. As an aside one may
note that this “induced gravity” is different from ordinary Einstein
gravity. There the action is simply @xmath which in two dimensions is a
topological invariant, the Euler characteristic. The action of the
induced gravity is instead, in a general gauge,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence nonlocal! After some initial despair one finds that the action is
local in conformal gauge which therefore, clearly, is a very sensible
choice. We then get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath with the metric on the form @xmath . @xmath is some fixed
background metric, e.g. with constant curvature. For convenience, one
usually rescales the field @xmath to obtain a more standard kinetic term

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Henceforth we will drop the hats. In string theory language we have
fixed the @xmath for the Liouville coordinate as @xmath . So far so
good. Now the tricky part comes, which is the reason for why the model
was not solved until quite recently. The action above is the classical
action. To quantize we need to do the path integral. A path integral
needs a measure, and the measure needs the world sheet metric for its
definition. But the world sheet metric is a dynamical variable! Clearly
a very confusing situation. The trick is to make a change of variables
in the measure and define it with respect to a new fixed background
metric. The change of variables presumably leads to a Jacobian. The
assumption in [ 27 ] was that the only thing that happens is a
renormalization (finite) of the different couplings in ( 2.23 ). In
particular, one needs, for consistency, that @xmath as given by ( 2.24 )
renormalizes into @xmath as given by ( 2.9 ). This change of @xmath can
also be understood as coming from the new quantum contribution to the
central charge from the Liouville mode. Independence of the background
metric translates into the requirement of scale invariance in the theory
( 2.1 ).

From many points of view the argument above is purely hand waving,
although it is hard to imagine what else could happen. More rigorous
approaches however do exist and are described in the literature [ 23 ] .

Although this is the common way to do things nowadays, the first
solution was not formulated in the conformal gauge but in a peculiar
left-right asymmetric gauge in [ 52 , 69 ] . For completeness we will
give a short description of this. This will also throw some further
light on the expressions for the energy momentum tensor. The treatment
will be very brief and interested readers are referred to [ 52 , 69 ] .
The reasons for including this section are mainly historical.

### 2.3 Another Solution

As we already have seen the energy momentum tensor of the Liouville
theory is given by

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Both these expressions can be obtained by varying ( 2.22 ). We have
temporarily changed to a Minkowski metric to agree with the conventions
in [ 52 , 69 ] . If we write @xmath , the @xmath component is the
Schwarzian derivative of a new field @xmath . Some simple studies of the
coordinate transformations involved show that @xmath can be thought of
as a coordinate transformation which connects conformal gauge with a
gauge where the metric looks like

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is the left-right asymmetric gauge used in [ 52 , 69 ] where the
Liouville theory was solved for the first time.

A crucial ingredient in this solution is an apparent @xmath symmetry.
One way to see this symmetry is to note that @xmath is invariant under
precisely such coordinate transformations in @xmath , with coefficients
being arbitrary functions of @xmath , since it is a Schwarzian
derivative. In other words, invariance under

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

The @xmath structure gives rise to Kac-Moody currents which are helpful
when one attempts to solve the theory. They are the following components
of the metric field @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

subject to the equations of motion. Note that the equations of motion,
@xmath , imply, but are not equivalent to, @xmath . One can also show
that the components @xmath transform as they should under the symmetry.

The weights of the @xmath algebra is then related, through Ward
identities, to the gravitational dimensions. The results obtained agree
with the conformal gauge approach.

One way to understand the difference between the two different gauges is
to note the difference between constraints and equations of motion. In
conformal gauge, the equation of motion is @xmath . In the left-right
asymmetric gauge it is instead the less restrictive @xmath . @xmath is
in this case a constraint which we finally have to apply to get the
correct physical states. They are hence of highest weight with respect
to the @xmath .

The basic trick of [ 52 , 69 ] is not so much the different gauge
choice. The @xmath symmetry can be faked directly in the conformal gauge
[ 13 ] . One only needs to make a field redefinition of the form @xmath
. Substitutions like this are something one can contemplate in more
general theories. The resulting theory has higher derivatives and looks
very different from the original one. Equivalence is guaranteed in the
end only by applying appropriate constraints. Two dimensional gravity is
an example where the higher derivative theory in some sense is simpler
to study, thanks to the new symmetry appearing.

In the following we will leave this method of solution aside and stick
with the conformal gauge treatment which has become the standard way to
do things.

### 2.4 Correlation Functions

Let us now limit ourselves to the case of main interest in this thesis,
@xmath . From formulae ( 2.7 , 2.9 ) we see that @xmath is just zero
(obviously) and @xmath in the usual convention with @xmath . For
reference we write down the action again

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us now see how to construct the operators of the theory. As usual in
string theory, states are created by vertex operators sitting on the
surface. These need to be integrated to yield string scattering
amplitudes. Consistency therefore requires that they have conformal
dimension @xmath . We therefore need the @xmath generator in ( 2.4 ) for
@xmath .

If we apply this to a state without oscillators (the general case will
be studied later) i.e. a tachyon, we obtain the condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

with solutions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

Compared to ( 2.4 ) we have redefined @xmath . We see that there are two
solutions. Quite surprisingly these two different solutions are of very
different character [ 74 ] . We will come back to this later. For now we
simply choose the positive sign and denote this choice as the “right
dressing”. The “wrongly dressed” states will be briefly discussed
elsewhere.

The explicit calculations of tachyon correlation functions are really
very simple [ 36 ] . Essentially, one may borrow the well established
results from the critical string. Things are in fact even simpler here,
and a lot more explicit calculations can be done.

The main new ingredient, which also is responsible for many of the
peculiar features of two dimensional string theory, is the very
restrictive kinematics. Let us assume that we want to compute an N-point
tachyon correlation function. To do so, we need to impose momentum
conservation. The matter part is just the standard

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Liouville part receives a correction due to the coupling to the
world sheet curvature and becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

If we furthermore assume that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

The momentum of the single negative chirality tachyon is hence fixed!

An important complication arises if there is a world sheet cosmological
constant. In string theory we would say that there is a nontrivial
tachyon background which the string couples to. The form of this term is
determined by conformal invariance to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath for @xmath and @xmath for a general minimal model. This
follows from ( 2.31 ), the condition that the operator is (1,1).

This means that Liouville theory with a cosmological constant is not a
free theory on the world sheet, but in fact interacting with vertices of
infinite order. Even though a straightforward solution of the theory
which produces all amplitudes unambiguously has ,as yet, not been
obtained, there exist simple arguments and analytical continuations
which give all amplitudes. The best verification that these arguments
make sense is of course the agreement with the matrix model.

The basic effect of the cosmological term is that it can modify the
momentum conservation law ( 2.34 ) above. One insertion of the
cosmological term injects an amount @xmath of Liouville momenta. Hence,
if we break ( 2.34 ) by @xmath the amplitude can still be nonzero and
will be proportional to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

This makes perfect sense in the case of @xmath an integer. Provided we
by hand insert @xmath extra punctures we can make all computations in
the free @xmath (and @xmath ) theory. We must of course remember also to
do the zero mode integration

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

which give the dependence on @xmath . The left hand side is obtained
using @xmath . We note that for genus one, without any insertions,
Liouville momentum is conserved and the integration gives rise to a
volume

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

This will be used in the next chapter.

A serious problem, however, arises for noninteger @xmath . How do we
insert a fractional number of punctures? Luckily it is possible to
argue, as has been done in [ 33 ] , that the full answer can be obtained
by “analytically” continuing the integer answer.

Although we should be grateful, and perhaps surprised, that it is
possible to get away with a trick like this, it would clearly be more
satisfying if the calculation could be done directly. This, however,
would require an understanding of path integrals beyond the present
state of the art. Unless, of course, one uses the matrix model.

For future reference, let us give the explicit expression for the
tachyon correlation function as obtained in [ 24 , 36 ] . In principle
the calculation is very simple. Just compute the Veneziano like integral
with the N tachyons and the appropriate number of screening charges. The
answer is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

The general integral is in fact a bit tricky and one needs some
analytical argument to easily derive it.

In the above equation we have changed @xmath to its Legendre conjugate
@xmath . This means that we are considering 1PI rather than connected
amplitudes with respect to the puncture. In chapter 4 we will consider
this in more detail and find, among other things, that @xmath . For
generic momentum the transition is hence very simple. One simply absorbs
the external leg @xmath for each screener into @xmath and replaces it by
@xmath . The @xmath is provided by the @xmath associated with the zero
momentum punctures in analogy with ( 2.41 ). At zero momentum we should
also remember to amputate external zero momentum tachyon legs. For,
e.g., the two point function we then get @xmath rather than @xmath . We
will come back to this on several occasions where we also will see that
one must be much more careful when at zero momentum.

### 2.5 The Special States

If we regard the @xmath quantum gravity as a critical string theory in a
two dimensional space time with the Liouville field as the extra
dimension [ 39 , 65 ] , the naïve expectation would be that the massless
tachyon completely exhausts the spectrum. A simple light cone gauge
argument would indicate that, since there are no transverse dimensions,
there are no physical excitations except for the center of mass of the
string–the “tachyon”. Indeed, in the computation of the one loop
partition function (i.e. genus 1) using continuum methods as in the next
chapter, only the tachyon seems to contribute [ 5 , 14 ] . However it
turns out that for certain discrete values of the momenta there exists
new states and new nontrivial operators. In the context of the matrix
model these states were first seen in the calculation of the puncture
operator two point function [ 40 ] . They also appear in the external
legs of multi point puncture operators [ 36 , 69 ] . In conformal field
theory it is well known that such special states appear for @xmath . In
this section we review this story and show how the special states appear
in @xmath conformal field theory.

From the point of view of string theory it is not surprising that there
are other degrees of freedom. After all, if this theory is a two
dimensional theory of space time the two dimensional metric should be a
dynamical degree of freedom. In two dimensions there are of course no
propagating gravitons, yet there are global, or topological, degrees of
freedom associated with the metric. Also, in string theory the string
coupling is a dynamical degree of freedom. This corresponds to the zero
momentum component of the dilaton. The full set of special states, with
nonvanishing momentum as well, presumably correspond to topological
degrees of freedom of the two dimensional string theory. They are the
physical remnants of all the massive modes of the string in higher
dimensions. If we wish to be able to construct the most general solution
of two dimensional string theory we must be able to excite these modes.

A @xmath conformal field theory has extra primary states which are
closely related to the null states of this theory. Null states are zero
norm states that are created by descendents of the primary field @xmath
for special values of the momenta @xmath . These special values are
quantized in units of @xmath . The relevant primary fields are labeled
by two integers, @xmath and @xmath , as in the minimal models. The
momenta take the values @xmath , and the field @xmath has conformal
dimension

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

The null states are descendents at level @xmath , hence have conformal
dimension

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

The states have both a left and a right moving component, with @xmath ,
but we will usually suppress the left moving component. In the minimal
models all primaries have descending null states. This is not the case
for @xmath where the momenta, @xmath , in the uncompactified case, need
not be equal to the values given by ( 2.42 ), but can take any value.

The reason for the existence of new primary states is that the null
states are not only null (zero norm), but in fact vanish identically.
The map between states and conformal transformations, i.e. the Virasoro
generators @xmath , degenerates. Hence there exist new states which
cannot be obtained by conformally transforming the primaries above and
are therefore new primary states. Recall that the descendants of a
primary are precisely those states which can be generated by acting with
conformal transformations on the primary. One way of constructing the
new states explicitly is to use the following trick. For a given level
we solve the null state equation for a state with momentum @xmath .
Doing so we also obtain a relation between @xmath and the central charge
@xmath . Rather than choosing a @xmath such that @xmath and obtaining a
state which vanishes identically, we keep @xmath . Thereby we can
isolate the zero and extract the new primary. Let us illustrate the
procedure by two examples.

The simplest example is obtained by choosing @xmath and @xmath . The
relevant null state is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

which vanishes at @xmath . If we divide by @xmath and then set @xmath we
obtain the new level 1 primary,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

A slightly less trivial example is @xmath , @xmath with @xmath ( @xmath
). The null state is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the new level 2 primaries are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

The extra primary states can also be understood in terms of SU(2)
multiplets. If the @xmath CFT is compactified on a circle with radius
@xmath then the momentum will be quantized in units of @xmath . When
@xmath is equal to self dual radius, where the theory is invariant under
@xmath , there exists an extra SU(2) symmetry. The allowed values of the
momentum are precisely the ones discussed above, namely integer
multiples of @xmath . The primary states, with a given conformal
dimension, will arrange themselves into SU(2) multiplets. Thus in
addition to the discrete momentum tachyon states there will exist, for
these values of the momentum, additional states which fill these out to
full SU(2) multiplets. These states are primary then for any circle for
which the momentum is allowed, and certainly for the real line for which
all momenta are allowed. A state @xmath , with conformal dimension
according to ( 2.43 ), belongs to a multiplet of dimension @xmath . This
enables one to derive a systematic construction of the new primary
states. The states of the @xmath dimensional @xmath multiplet may be
constructed by acting on the highest weight state with the @xmath
lowering operator. The highest weight state is the tachyon @xmath and
the lowering operator is @xmath . As an example, the next to highest
state is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

Equations ( 2.45 ) and ( 2.47 ), with @xmath and @xmath respectively,
are easily verified. @xmath gives @xmath , corresponding to the state
@xmath . @xmath gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

corresponding to the state @xmath .

When we couple the CFT to quantum gravity the states will be
gravitationally dressed, [ 21 , 27 , 52 , 68 ] . This means that a state
with conformal dimension @xmath is multiplied by a factor @xmath where
@xmath is the Liouville field and @xmath is such that the overall
conformal dimension is one. The new gravitational scaling dimension and
@xmath are given by the well known formulae,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the background charge, @xmath for @xmath . The
expression for @xmath just comes from comparing the scaling of the
specific operator with the scaling of the metric according to @xmath .
From this we get the dressed dimensions @xmath for the tachyon primaries
and @xmath for the null descendants, of course still with the same
momenta @xmath . In the case of zero momentum which will be our main
concern chapter 7, @xmath , and we find @xmath for our new zero momentum
primary states. These are also the dimensions found in [ 37 ] by
considering the correlation functions of zero momentum operators on the
sphere using the matrix model.

As already mentioned, the special states can be classified using their
@xmath quantum numbers @xmath and @xmath . For example, the dilaton is
@xmath and the state in ( 2.47 ), @xmath . In figure 2.1 a schematic
picture of all special states is provided. The states at the edges with
@xmath are the special tachyons. The @xmath algebra clearly only
connects states with the same @xmath quantum numbers. An example was
given above in ( 2.48 ). However, there exists a much larger algebra ,
the @xmath , which connects all states and of which @xmath is only a
small subgroup. This was shown in [ 48 ] and [ 78 ] . In [ 48 ] with
similar methods as above for @xmath .

As we will see in later chapters there is also a @xmath algebra in the
matrix model. This we will use extensively in some explicit calculations
in later chapters.

### 2.6 Summary

In this chapter we have looked at some basic properties of the two
dimensional noncritical string. We have investigated its spectrum
discovering the special states. We have also considered some simple
correlation functions on the sphere and in that context noted the
peculiar conservation laws for Liouville momentum. In the next chapter
we will take a natural next step by making some calculations not on the
sphere but on the torus.

## Chapter 3 The Genus 1 Partition Function

### 3.1 Introduction

In this chapter we will use continuum methods to calculate the genus one
partition function for some low dimensional string theories. Genus one
is particularly simple since there are no need for any screening
charges. We will limit ourselves to @xmath and @xmath . From the
conformal field theory point of view the first one corresponds to pure
gravity while the second one describes gravity coupled to a single
bosonic field. In string theory we would say that we had a one
dimensional space time in the first case and a two dimensional space
time in the second case.

In [ 5 ] similar calculations were done for any minimal model. We will
however use a more physical approach and also clarify a few points
regarding @xmath , “The Theory of Nothing”.

While doing these calculations we will encounter some quite nontrivial
integrals involving @xmath functions. In the past such objects have
occurred in the theory for the critical bosonic string. Due to the
presence of the tachyon however, the particular integrals have all been
divergent and therefore no explicit evaluations have been possible. For
@xmath the corresponding integrals are convergent and hence it is
possible to really do all calculations. We will therefore provide some
details and examples of such calculations in two appendices.

One motivation for doing a calculation like this is to compare it with
the matrix model, we will do so and find perfect agreement. Details of
the matrix model calculations can be found in a later chapter.

### 3.2 String Regulation

Let us consider a scalar particle theory in @xmath dimensions. Starting
with the point particle theory we will construct a theory of strings. We
will calculate the one loop contribution to the vacuum energy. Later we
will be interested in @xmath and @xmath where we may compare with
calculations using matrix models. This is possible since what we are
calculating is, in fact, just the genus 1 partition function for two
dimensional gravity.

The one loop contribution to the vacuum energy is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the inverse propagator and @xmath the volume of space.

We will now regard this as the low energy limit of a string theory. The
embedding of the string world sheet in space time we take to be
described by matter fields of central charge @xmath and also, for
noncritical @xmath , the Liouville mode. The Liouville mode will appear
as an extra dimension, [ 39 , 65 ] . The volume will be the length of
space in the Liouville direction. As we have seen, the volume is finite
due to interactions governed by the cosmological constant and given by (
2.40 ). There are several problems with this expression. One is that the
momentum integral is obviously UV-divergent. Another problem is that it
is positive while the matrix models, as we will see in a later chapter,
give a negative answer. All of this is resolved by recalling that we
actually are doing string theory. By giving the particle a finite size
the integral is effectively cut off through the new symmetry which
appears: modular invariance.

If we rewrite:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath can be thought of as the length around the loop. Since we are
dealing with strings, the trace (and @xmath ) will include higher
excited states. For @xmath there are no extra field degrees of freedom
corresponding to such excitations. As we will see below in the case of
@xmath , they cancel in the path integral. This is consistent with a
naïve light cone argument where, for @xmath , there indeed are no
transverse degrees of freedom. However, as has already been explained,
there are some special states at discrete momenta.

As usual we must assure @xmath for the excited states and therefore:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . We have renamed @xmath and @xmath where @xmath . We have
used that @xmath is the closed string propagator. The only difference
from a particle is that we have several excitations to sum over. The
normalization is fixed by @xmath . The necessary background charges,
both for matter (if @xmath ) and for gravity, only contribute to the
zero mode parts of @xmath and @xmath , as is clear from ( 2.4 ). They
are responsible for giving an @xmath such that modular invariance is
obtained. Also, the infinite products are the usual contributions from
excited states, ghosts giving the exponent 2 and matter + gravity the
@xmath .

The region of integration is originally the infinite strip @xmath . The
integral is, however, modular invariant. Fixing this invariance may be
done by choosing just one fundamental region to integrate over. The
usual choice is @xmath . This will make the integrals finite. We may
therefore take the s-limit first:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

This term is the one coming from taking the derivative of @xmath , hence
the minus sign. The other term, from @xmath , is proportional to @xmath
and hence zero for any finite cutoff. We finally obtain

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

### 3.3 A Theory of Something

For @xmath we have @xmath and therefore according to ( 3.5 )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now @xmath , i.e. @xmath for matter and @xmath for gravity. We also
have, implicitly, @xmath to get correct dimensions. To be able to
compare with the matrix model results we put @xmath , @xmath and use the
result ( 2.40 )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the cosmological constant to get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

in agreement with [ 39 ] apart from a factor @xmath due to doubling of
the free energy not accounted for there, [ 5 ] . This will be explained
at the end of the next chapter.

This is probably the simplest example of how strings regulate a theory.
As already stated, the only physical state is a massless tachyon.
Furthermore, it’s only the tachyon which propagates around our loop.
Contrary to the critical string no excited states are needed to provide
modular invariance. We have a string regulation of a massless particle
in two dimensions.

This gives a possibility to give a hand waving argument for introducing
the string. The invariance which turns into modular invariance is
inversion of the length around the loop @xmath . We can consistently
omit @xmath . To get this invariance we must, however, introduce an
extra parameter @xmath describing the particle. It must transform as
@xmath to give invariance. The consistent way of putting this together
is modular invariance. The omission of small @xmath is identical to
restricting the integration to the fundamental region introduced
previously.

### 3.4 @xmath Function Integrations

This section is a mathematical interlude where we will consider the
integral ( 3.5 ) in more detail. The trivial case @xmath , where there
are no @xmath function integrations we have already done above. What
about other cases? Below we will show how to do the integral for @xmath
and @xmath .

Let us first consider @xmath . Our integral is then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

The trick is to rewrite the @xmath functions in the following way

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is proven in appendix 3A. Hence we need to consider

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

The next step is to use the method of [ 56 , 71 ] used in [ 5 ] . The
@xmath ’s and @xmath ’s in ( 3.11 ) may be thought of as describing
different windings around the torus. Since ( 3.11 ) is modular invariant
we can use modular transformations to put all the winding in each case
around one specific cycle. We effectively trade one of the sums for a
sum over modular transformations. These transformations, when operating
on the fundamental region, cover the full strip @xmath . We get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Putting everything together then gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

The next example @xmath is slightly more involved but the techniques are
the same. As shown in appendix 3B it is again possible to rewrite the
@xmath functions in such a way that the result ( 3.12 ) can be used. The
result is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

The details of the calculation may be found in appendix 3B.

In this section we have seen some examples of explicitly calculated
@xmath function integrations. Presumably there are other cases where a
similar method would work.

### 3.5 A Theory of Nothing

Let us now use the result of the @xmath calculation to obtain the vacuum
energy for the @xmath model, pure gravity. The volume in this case
equals @xmath as obtained from ( 2.40 ). Note that we have no factor of
@xmath here. The result is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

which again agrees with the matrix models apart from a factor 1/2.

Let us compare with the derivation in [ 5 ] for @xmath i.e. the @xmath
model. There a matter field was included and @xmath for finite radius
@xmath calculated. @xmath then give the @xmath models following [ 25 ] ,
in particular the @xmath one. In these cases the Dedekind @xmath
-functions cancel since we always calculate in @xmath . The complicated
integrals are instead due to having a finite @xmath .

For @xmath we have an alternative, as shown by our calculation above. We
may do without the matter field completely which is really the natural
thing for @xmath . In that case the Dedekind functions do not cancel (
3.9 ), on the other hand there are no finite radius to worry about. The
equivalence is illustrated by the identity ( 3.10 ).

So, for @xmath we may either have no matter at all, really pure gravity
(our version) or we may have a bosonic field with a background charge
giving a net @xmath (as in [ 5 ] ). The two approaches are completely
equivalent, and the physical content the same.

In other words, two variants of a theory of nothing.

### 3.6 Summary

In this chapter we have calculated the genus 1 partition function for
@xmath and @xmath . We have compared the answers with the matrix model
and found agreement. These calculations are basically the only ones
which have been done at genus 1. This illustrates the difficulties
associated with calculations using field theory. The more remarkable are
the achievements of the matrix model to which we turn in the next
chapter.

### Appendix 3A

We shall first prove

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

First we note that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

This may be obtained using the Jacobi triple product:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

setting @xmath and @xmath [ 31 ] . We then get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

We will prove ( 3.16 ) directly from this by identifying terms. We first
look for terms in ( 3.17 ) such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

We find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

or

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath even.

So we have found all terms with @xmath even in ( 3.17 ) represented. The
factor @xmath in ( 3.16 ) corrects for the existence of two solutions
above.

Analogously we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

or

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

for @xmath odd.

All terms in ( 3.17 ) are now accounted for. However, in the first term
of ( 3.16 ) we have only taken care of terms where @xmath is not even or
divisible by 3 (see ( 3.21 , 3.22 )) and in the second term, terms where
@xmath is odd and @xmath not divisible by 3. What about the rest? They
can be seen to cancel by considering the solutions to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

or

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

( 3.16 ) is now proven. Finally the formula for Poisson resummation is
needed

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

see e.g. [ 35 ] . A resummation on @xmath yields the desired result (
3.10 ).

### Appendix 3B

To calculate

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

we again appeal to the Jacobi triple identity as in appendix 3A. In this
case it yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

With @xmath this becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

and finally

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

We then need to prove

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

This can be proven in a similar way as in appendix 3A by identifying
terms.

Then we put @xmath and obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we in the last step performed a Poisson resummation.

From this we find

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us calculate

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

The only slight complication is that the sum is only over odd s. Under
modular transformations the measure is invariant and in the exponent we
see that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

We therefore realize

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can not, however, get @xmath in this way. But this sum is immediately
given by ( 3.12 ) to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

We therefore find

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

By insertion in ( 3.35 ) we then get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

## Chapter 4 The Matrix Model

### 4.1 Introduction

Matrix models are new and powerful tools which can be used to solve a
variety of different models for two dimensional quantum gravity. Hence
they provide solutions of noncritical string theory. To be honest,
matrix models have been around for quite some time as models for random
surfaces and two dimensional quantum gravity. In the beginning however,
one usually limited oneself to a large @xmath limit ( @xmath being the
dimension of the matrix) such that only surfaces of spherical topology
survived. It was a very important discovery when it was first realized
that an appropriate continuum limit, “the double scaling limit”, existed
which made it possible to retain all genus in a sensible fashion. The
first such matrix models [ 8 , 28 , 41 ] described various theories of
quantum gravity coupled to, not necessarily unitary, matter with central
charge @xmath . The model which will be of interest to us, however, is
the case @xmath , the topic of this thesis. While @xmath was basically a
problem of doing very complicated matrix integrals, something which may
be done using orthogonal polynomials, the @xmath case requires a
different method [ 9 , 32 , 42 ] . In this chapter we will review some
of these issues.

Unfortunately the applicability of the matrix model seems to stop at
@xmath . This is similar to the techniques of field theory in previous
chapters. It is presumably related to the fact that for higher values of
@xmath one gets new field degrees of freedom which cannot be encoded in
just a matrix. We should also recall that the presence of a tachyon
makes the @xmath theories quite ill behaved. A natural way to proceed
would therefore be to consider super symmetric theories. When this is
being written, however, the progress in such directions has been very
limited.

### 4.2 The Matrix Model

Let us start with the @xmath string partition function

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the string coupling. We have summed over all genus
@xmath . In the path integral we have included an integration over
@xmath , the two dimensional world sheet metric. Classically, the action
is of course independent of @xmath due to Weyl and reparametrization
invariance. Quantum mechanically, as we have seen, the measure @xmath
has a dependence due to the need of a regulator.

The basic idea of the matrix model approach is to represent the surface
by a triangulation. The triangulation, or rather its dual, is regarded
as a Feynman diagram of some scalar field theory. The reason to consider
the dual graph is of course that the order of all the vertices is then
the same. It is three in the case of a triangulation although any
polygon would do. The vertices correspond to interactions and the edges
to propagators in the scalar field theory. The matter, i.e. @xmath
field, part of the action becomes in this discretized version

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath is @xmath , @xmath means a sum over nearest neighbors.

In this picture the integration over all metrics, @xmath , turns into a
sum over all triangulations. From ( 4.2 ) it is clear that we need a
space time theory whose propagator is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Since the Fourier transform is given by @xmath , this requires the very
complicated kinetical term @xmath . Such a theory would be very
difficult to handle. Fortunately we do not need this. In the continuum
limit the lattice spacing is going to zero, and the space time momentum
is going to zero in units of one over the lattice spacing. In the
continuum limit we are indeed not supposed to see the discreteness of
the surface. This is precisely what we need. In this limit the
propagators @xmath and @xmath coincide. It may be noted that @xmath is
the Fourier transform of @xmath . Hence the model to investigate in the
continuum limit is simply

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we have added some interactions @xmath . A @xmath would give
triangulations. The argument above should not be thought of as a proof.
It is rather a heuristic argument which serves as a motivation for
further study. The models ultimate success and agreement with known
results from Liouville theory is the best justification.

Given a triangulation it is a classical result that the genus @xmath of
the corresponding surface is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the number of vertices, @xmath the number of edges and
@xmath the number of faces of the triangulation. It is important that
our scalar field theory can measure the genus, otherwise we could not
introduce the string coupling @xmath . The correct way to achieve this
is by letting @xmath be not just a single scalar field, but an @xmath
hermitean matrix. The partition function to study is then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is @xmath . From here we see that each face of the
triangulation is weighted by @xmath , from the Feynman diagram vertex,
each edge by @xmath from the propagator, and finally each vertex or
Feynman diagram loop by @xmath . This last point is the reason for
having matrices. Combining this we find

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

for the weight factor of some given triangulation. Clearly the string
coupling will be @xmath . If this is to describe a continuum string
theory there must be a continuum limit such that surfaces with infinite
number of vertices, or faces, dominate. From above we understand that
the partition function can be seen as a power series in @xmath . The
trick is to adjust @xmath to some critical value where this sum
diverges. This means that the @xmath surfaces dominate and we have a
continuum limit. However, we clearly want to extract some sensible,
finite answers. That this is possible is the single most remarkable
feature of the matrix model. By taking @xmath and @xmath to infinity in
such a way that the critical point is approached, the resulting
divergence may be cancelled against the @xmath behavior of the string
coupling, renormalizing everything to finite values. This is the double
scaling limit. It is a nontrivial fact that this is possible to do
simultaneously for all genus.

Now that we have established this equivalence of models, how do we solve
the matrix model? A hermitean matrix @xmath may be decomposed into a
diagonal piece with eigenvalues and a unitary part @xmath , i.e. @xmath
. The matrix model measure is similarly decomposed into these parts

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath are the eigenvalues, and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

the Jacobian of the change of variables. It is sometimes called the van
der Mond determinant.

If we integrate over the unitary part @xmath the remaining partition
function is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the eigenvalues @xmath are fermionic. This procedure is strictly
speaking only valid for the infinite real line (for the @xmath
variable). At finite radius the angular variables do not decouple. We
will come back to the finite radius case in a later chapter.

The double scaling procedure is controlled by introducing the critical
parameter

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

assuming that we have renormalized in such a way that @xmath is the
critical point. Since @xmath measures the area of the world sheet we
understand from

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

that @xmath must be the world sheet cosmological constant.

It is now time to attempt some more explicit calculations. A suitable
first object is the ground state energy @xmath of the system. First we
note that a small change in @xmath is the same as a change in the number
of fermions @xmath . Clearly, in the ground state, the fermions are
filling up the potential well up to some Fermi energy @xmath . Therefore

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

We have chosen the zero of the energy to be at the top of the potential,
see figure 4.1.

Since @xmath has a very clear matrix model interpretation, it is more
natural to work with @xmath than with @xmath . In this picture the
double scaling limit is obtained by taking @xmath while keeping @xmath
fixed. In this limit the only thing that matters is the top of the
potential. The top is magnified more and more as @xmath and @xmath .
Even so, it is clear that some kind of a cutoff is needed for the proper
definition of the theory. The Fermi sea must have a bottom and another
shore somewhere. The typical case is a potential of the form [ 40 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

When we expand around the top we find the leading contribution

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

We have redefined @xmath by a shift to the maximum of the potential.
Another type of cutoff which also is relevant for a precise
nonperturbative definition of the theory, is to put infinite walls on
both sides of the potential. In either case, as the double scaling limit
is approached all higher corrections to ( 4.15 ) become irrelevant and
the walls move off to infinity. This is important for a well defined
theory.

Let us now introduce the Legendre transform @xmath given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

By standard arguments @xmath is the generating functional for connected
diagrams, while @xmath generates 1PI (one particle irreducible) diagrams
with respect to the puncture. We will, unless stated otherwise, consider
the 1PI amplitudes. The notation will be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is very convenient at this point to introduce the density of states,
@xmath , clearly given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using this, the ground state energy can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that this is consistent with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

if we think of @xmath as @xmath . Also

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is a good point to introduce the Fermi liquid picture which uses
phase space to illustrate the system. In phase space each fermion
follows a trajectory @xmath , where @xmath is its energy. Hence the
system can be described, classically, by figure 4.2. A liquid rotating
in time. The excitations, i.e the tachyons, correspond to ripples on the
surface which rotate, and evolve, with time.

With phase space coordinates the puncture one point function can be
written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

The two point function follows from this as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

More generally for some operator @xmath consisting of polynomials in
@xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

The two point, or @xmath , can also be written as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

We see that there are several ways of approaching computations of matrix
model correlation functions. One way is to start with the first
expression in ( 4.25 ). One may then analytically continue to a right
side up oscillator. This was the way the original calculation, [ 42 ] ,
was done. The sum over the energy eigenvalues becomes a sum over the
imaginary energy eigenvalues in a continued right side up. This is also
the way in which we will do computations in this thesis. Another
approach is to use the path integral formulation, i.e. to use the last
representation in ( 4.25 ). This was, for nonzero momentum, first done
in [ 58 ] and extended in [ 18 ] .

For reference we give the genus expansion of the puncture two point
function as obtained in [ 42 ]

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath .

This is a good point to reconsider the results of the previous chapter.
From the relations derived earlier in this chapter, it follows that for
genus one

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

As we have pointed out this is twice as large as the field theory
answer. The explanation is however simple. Recall the matrix model
potential and the Fermi sea. The expression ( 4.26 ) really presupposes
that there are two Fermi seas. One on each side of the top of the
potential. Hence there are really two copies of the world,
perturbatively disconnected. Clearly this leads to a doubling of the
free energy. In the next chapter we will briefly consider a case where
there is only one world.

There are several additional comments to be made about the genus 1
partition functions. This will also, in fact throw some light on how
special the choice of an inverted harmonic oscillator is.

As discussed in chapter 3 the genus 1 partition function is basically
obtained just from the diagram of a single particle closed loop. This we
could write as @xmath , where @xmath is the propagator at equal times.
@xmath is a space coordinate. This certainly needs some regularization.
One possibility is a lattice cutoff @xmath in some finite volume @xmath
. The result would schematically be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

The second term is the @xmath function regularized sum of oscillators in
the volume @xmath . In the @xmath limit this term is dropped. It is only
this second term which is universal, the first one needs some new
physics, e.g. the scale of the cutoff, to be determined. The modular
invariance of the last chapter is precisely such a prescription. The
expression ( 4.28 ) looks rather symmetric. In fact, the first term can
also be thought of as a @xmath function regularized sum, but now in some
“internal” space of volume @xmath . We will see in a moment from where
this comes in the matrix model.

As noted in [ 22 ] , the @xmath can be thought of as arising from
insisting that the coincident propagator of the one loop diagram should
be defined by normal ordering in @xmath space. When we coordinate
transform to @xmath space, where @xmath is the time of flight for @xmath
, we pick up a Schwarzian derivative which precisely gives @xmath . The
map between @xmath and @xmath is @xmath in general. At the top it is
@xmath . But this reminds us about a similar situation in conformal
field theory where one maps from the plane to the cylinder. There it is
well known that the Schwarzian derivative of the map and an explicit sum
over modes on the cylinder give the same result. In our case the
circumference of the “cylinder” is the imaginary period of @xmath , i.e.
the time period for oscillations in the continued harmonic oscillator.
This is @xmath . As we will see later, this period is also related to
the quantized momentum of the special states.

This discussion began with a promise that it would say something about
the more general models with anharmonic potentials. It is clear that
@xmath , the characteristic size of the string, is independent of the
cosmological constant, either @xmath or @xmath , only for the harmonic
potential. Hence we have @xmath and @xmath . In general the period
depends on the amplitude and we have both @xmath and @xmath @xmath for
some positive @xmath .

Not only does the effective size of the string depend on the
cosmological constant, there is no natural way of keeping the scale of
the string and the scale of space very different. This is only one of
many strange features of the multi critical models.

### 4.3 The Special States

In the discussion of the Liouville theory in chapter 2, the special
states were introduced.

In the matrix model representation of the theory it is easy to see some
of these degrees of freedom. In particular, there exist special
operators of zero momentum, which are represented as time independent
perturbations of the matrix model potential. These are the analogs of
the scaling operators in the one dimensional matrix model. They have the
physical effect, in the matrix model, of moving one from one critical
point to another. Their correlation functions are easily computed on the
sphere and for a general genus surface. In chapter 7 we will investigate
these zero momentum correlation functions and show that they obey
certain recursion relations which relate all of them to the puncture two
point function. We will consider both one particle irreducible and
connected amplitudes. The recursion relations allow for computation of
any zero momentum correlation function for any genus. They are very
similar to the recursion relations for @xmath theories and suggest a
topological interpretation. We will also rewrite the recursion relations
in the form of constraints on the puncture one point function. These
constraints obey a Virasoro algebra.

We will then proceed, in chapter 8, to consider the operators of nonzero
momentum. The obvious candidate in the matrix model for these operators
are the time dependent perturbations of the matrix model potential. We
will calculate correlation functions both on the sphere and on a surface
of arbitrary genus of such time dependent perturbations. We find that
correlation functions of these operators have real poles in the
Euclidean momentum, conjugate to the target space variable, at precisely
the expected values of the momenta of the special states.

What is the meaning of these special operators in the matrix model? A
hint to their meaning is provided by the analysis, [ 37 ] , of the
discrete string. This is the model in which the string is mapped onto a
discrete set of points with equal spacing @xmath . It was shown that
this model was equivalent to the model where the string is mapped onto a
continuous line, as long as @xmath , at which point a transition appears
to take place. Now this model of triangulated surfaces is the dual of
the case where the string is mapped onto a circle of radius @xmath and
the transition is dual to the Kosterlitz-Thouless transition which
arises due to the condensation of vortices. We will discuss this a
little bit more in chapter 6. One explanation of the equivalence of the
continuous and discrete strings, given in [ 38 ] , is to note that the
discretized line can be replaced by a continuous variable @xmath with a
periodic potential, @xmath . The lowest dimension operator in this
potential, @xmath , has undressed conformal dimension @xmath and becomes
relevant (i.e. of undressed conformal dimension one), when @xmath . This
is where the phase transition of the discrete string took place. The
variable @xmath is forced to take values at the minima of @xmath and the
real line is effectively discretized. Now, these terms in the potential
correspond precisely to periodic time dependent perturbations of the
@xmath matrix model and the place where the transition takes place
corresponds precisely to one of the special values of the momenta at
which the special states occur. Thus we might conjecture that the
physical meaning of these operators is that they transform the
continuous line into a set of discrete points, with a period given by
the inverse of the special values of the momenta — spontaneous
punctuation .

As we will see later on, it is not enough to just consider the matrix
eigenvalues when identifying the special states. To really be able to
see the individual special states one needs to invoke the conjugate
momentum. The precise way in which this leads to the @xmath symmetry
will be discussed in chapter 9.

Finally it is useful to point out that one important advantage of the
analytical continuation approach advocated in [ 15 , 16 ] , is that the
special states are given a very clear interpretation. As we will see in
more detail in chapter 8, they correspond to resonances in the harmonic
oscillator. This is also a reflection of the fact that they are present
for Euclidean momenta. Hence to really see them in a Fermi liquid
picture, we must use the analytical continuation. This is illustrated in
figure 4.3. Now any special state is associated to some periodic ripple
on the Fermi surface.

### 4.4 Summary

In this chapter we have described the @xmath matrix model and how it
solves many of the problems of formulating a noncritical string theory.
Several formulas for calculating correlation functions have been
obtained which will be useful in later chapters. We have also
encountered the special states which will be of major importance in
coming chapters.

## Chapter 5 Nonperturbative Effects

### 5.1 Introduction

In this chapter we will discuss some of the nonperturbative issues of
two dimensional string theory. This is really the most remarkable
property of the matrix model solution, the possibility of obtaining
nonperturbative results. A general discussion of nonperturbative effects
in string theory [ 75 ] suggests that the @xmath behavior in ( 4.26 )
and the @xmath behavior we will find below are generic for closed string
theory. This was first observed for the @xmath model in [ 42 ] .

### 5.2 One World or Two

We will consider an explicit and very simple example as an illustration
of what happens nonperturbatively. An extensive treatment can be found
in [ 60 ] . For our limited purposes we will use other and simpler
methods.

Our starting point, as for most cases in this thesis, will be the
expression ( 4.26 ) for the puncture two point function. Perturbatively
each of the terms in the genus expansion can be obtained using the WKB
approximation. Since the expansion turns out not to be Borel summable,
the summation is not perturbatively determined. Additional information
is needed. Roughly speaking, we have the freedom to add terms of the
form @xmath , where @xmath is the string coupling. Such terms do not
show up in the small @xmath expansion. The two point function as given
by ( 4.26 ) therefore includes additional nonperturbative information
which seems to have been provided by the matrix model. However, as we
will see, the choice is not unique.

The following is a simple modification of the matrix model which leads
to a nonperturbatively different result. Instead of having just the
upside down harmonic oscillator potential, we imagine having an infinite
wall erected at the top of the potential. One might say that one has one
rather than two worlds. Clearly the WKB expansion, which only feels the
potential up to the classical turning point, will be insensitive to
this. The wall can only be felt nonperturbatively. The expression for
the puncture two point function can be easily adjusted to describe this
situation. The effect of the wall is to impose a new boundary condition
by forcing the wave functions to be zero at the position of the wall.
Hence, rather than summing over all energy eigenstates, we sum only over
the odd ones. Therefore, the two point function in the case of the wall
is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

By the above reasoning we know that this must perturbatively be
precisely half of the result without a wall. This can be checked
explicitly by using the same kind of expansion as in ( 4.26 ) and the
Bernoulli polynomial identity @xmath . However, nonperturbatively there
may be a difference. Let us calculate it. By using the @xmath function
identities:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

one easily shows

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

With @xmath imaginary it follows

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The nonperturbative nature of the difference is obvious. Expanding it
for small @xmath we find

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

This nonperturbative ambiguity can also be understood from an integral
representation point of view. We note that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

one can, by a change of variables @xmath , prove that for @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The integrands are the same, but the contours differ. One is the real
line from @xmath to @xmath , the other one the real line from @xmath to
@xmath . If we rotate one contour into the other, we pick up residues
from the poles along the imaginary axis, this precisely gives ( 5.5 ).

Hence we have established the nonperturbative nature of the difference
between one and two worlds.

### 5.3 Instantons

It would be nice to have a more physical picture of the nonperturbative
string theory. We will try to achieve this below.

Nonperturbative effects are in general associated with instantons. In
this case we have eigenvalue fermions at the Fermi surface tunneling
through the upside down potential. Without the wall, the instanton
action for one fermion tunneling through is obtained from the Euclidean
action @xmath evaluated for the classical tunneling solution of energy
@xmath . We also need to subtract the action for a fermion not doing any
tunneling, i.e. just sitting at @xmath . The result is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now, for two worlds the instantons correspond to tunnelings through the
potential and back again. The leading instanton contribution to the
propagator, @xmath , has then the weight

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

Considering the integral representation of @xmath we indeed note poles
leading to such contributions.

Let us turn to the case of one world. We write the two world propagator
as a sum over even and odd (i.e. one world) parts @xmath . Then @xmath
and from that @xmath . The leading contribution to @xmath is a tunneling
solution through the potential barrier, but not back again and hence of
order

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

This verifies and illustrates the calculations in the previous section.

### 5.4 Summary

Clearly much remains to be done concerning the nonperturbative aspects
of the two dimensional string. The important contribution of the matrix
models is a laboratory where we can check our understanding of
nonperturbative string physics. As we have seen above, the
nonperturbative effects have a rather simple interpretation in terms of
single eigenvalue tunneling. What remains to be obtained is a clear
picture of what happens in a string language. One possibility, which has
been raised in the past, is that by clarifying this issue, one could
eventually find the “real meaning” of string theory. Perhaps this will
involve concepts which transcend the traditional genus expansion.

## Chapter 6 String Theory at Finite Radius

### 6.1 Introduction

In this chapter we will consider the two dimensional string theory with
compactified time on some radius @xmath . In other words, string theory
at finite temperature. This has been extensively treated in [ 51 ] . We
will however use another and very simple approach to reproduce some of
these results. It is our feeling that the method below may provide some
useful insights into the basics of the matrix model description of
string theory.

As mentioned in chapter 4, it is not really correct to ignore the
angular parts of the matrix integral for finite @xmath , [ 37 , 38 ] .
The angular parts are related to vortices. These vortices are found to
cause a phase transition at a radius of twice the self dual radius, this
is the Kosterlitz-Thouless transition. As described in [ 37 , 38 ] the
transition is caused by operators @xmath , which create vortices and
become relevant at @xmath . Below this radius the vortices destroy the
string world sheet. Therefore, the calculation which we will consider
below, assumes automatically that vortices are excluded for some reason.
It is not clear if this is a physically reasonable assumption.

In the presence of vortices the target space duality of string theory
under @xmath is explicitly broken. One might comment, [ 64 ] , that
there is a dual object to vortices, “spikes”, which tend to condense for
large @xmath , more precisely @xmath . The spikes are created by @xmath
. This is the punctuation phenomenon we discussed at the end of chapter
4. If we include such spikes, duality is restored but to the price of
having an instable theory for any radius! Luckily, spikes may be
forbidden simply by imposing translational invariance since the
operators which excite them, break this invariance. This is not true for
the vortices.

The fact remains, however, that duality is broken. Clearly, this could
have far reaching consequences also for higher dimensional string
theories. The argument leading to the Kosterlitz-Thouless transition is,
after all, a very general one. It is just, as usual, a matter of
competition between energy and entropy. To see this, one has to
introduce a cutoff, like the triangulation of the matrix model. As the
cutoff is removed, the energy of a vortex goes to infinity but at the
same time the number of possible vortices also rises. The temperature
decides which one will win.

Hence we might learn from the matrix model two dimensional string theory
to be careful when we apply concepts like duality to draw general string
theory conclusions. We might be using a principle not realized in a
realistic theory.

With this in mind, let us now give a very simple finite radius
calculation.

### 6.2 A Simple Example

Let us derive a finite radius expression for the puncture two point
function. To do that, let us consider the fermionic field theory action
on finite radius

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

The path integral,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

is easily done by expanding @xmath in eigenfunctions of @xmath in time
and eigenfunctions of the harmonic oscillator in the @xmath coordinate.
The eigenvalues are @xmath for the time part since we need anti periodic
boundary conditions for the fermions. For the harmonic oscillator part
we have the standard @xmath . There is also the energy shift @xmath . A
standard evaluation of the logarithm of the path integral, giving a
logarithm of a determinant and hence a trace of a logarithm of the
eigenvalues, then yields the following expression for the two point
function

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

If the sum over @xmath is performed the result of [ 37 ] is recovered.
Using this expression a general correlation function can be obtained
through perturbation theory in the same way as for the @xmath case
extensively treated elsewhere in this thesis.

Once this is established, it is also easy to write down a recipe which
converts the ordinary @xmath two point function into the finite @xmath
case. The point of doing so is that this procedure, as is easily seen,
commutes with the variations giving other correlation functions. As we
will see, this procedure is precisely the one derived independently in [
51 ] .

In words, what one has to do is to take one @xmath derivative and then
sum over all shifts @xmath in the @xmath variable. The shift can be
written down using the identity

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

for any function @xmath . We get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Hence

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

This verifies the result of [ 51 ] using a different method.

There are some interesting features of this derivation. Duality is very
explicit in the expression ( 6.3 ). That is, if we do not care about the
vortices as discussed in the introduction. We can in fact learn a bit
about how it is realized in the matrix model. Apparently duality relies
on the fact that the eigenvalue spectrum of a harmonic oscillator is the
same as for a fermion with anti periodic boundary conditions in a box!
Clearly one cannot expect duality to hold in any matrix model. In
general a nonharmonic potential would have nonequally spaced eigenvalues
and hence break duality.

Curiously, by the same reasoning, many correlation functions will break
duality. This is not surprising for nonzero momentum correlation
functions. However, the above expressions suggest this to be the case
even at zero momentum for the special states.

### 6.3 Summary

In this chapter a simplified derivation of some results for finite
radius has been given. We have indicated how duality is realized in the
matrix model. An important observation is that naïve duality is not
expected to hold in a general matrix model.

## Chapter 7 Zero Momentum Correlation Functions

### 7.1 Introduction

A first exercise in the two dimensional string theory is the calculation
of zero momentum correlation functions. Clearly this is the simplest
thing to do. Such calculations will be described in this chapter. We
will, apart from some comments towards the end of the chapter, limit
ourselves to powers of the matrix model eigenvalue. The conjugate
momentum will be introduced in later chapters. One of the main results
of this chapter will be a set of recursion relations for these
correlation functions.

### 7.2 The Gelfand-Dikii Equation

Let us briefly recall the basics of the matrix model approach to @xmath
quantum gravity or two dimensional string theory as described in chapter
4. We will limit ourselves to the uncompactified case. The partition
function is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a hermitean @xmath matrix. As shown in [ 7 ] , the
angular variables may be integrated out to leave only the @xmath
eigenvalues. They correspond to @xmath fermions in the potential @xmath
. Below we will consider correlation functions of precisely these
eigenvalues.

As we have seen, the density of states, @xmath , in the potential, is
the same as the 1PI puncture two point function and hence a very
interesting and basic quantity in the theory. In the coordinate basis it
can be written as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

By investigating some properties of this expression, we will be able to
extract information about zero momentum correlation functions of the
matrix eigenvalue variable.

We begin by defining the function

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

i.e. the diagonal component of the resolvent. This function obeys the
nonlinear Gelfand-Dikii equation [ 30 ] :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath is shifted so that the maximum of the potential is at the
origin. We have also shifted @xmath by @xmath . In the double scaling
limit we expand @xmath around its maximum and rescale the coordinate. If
@xmath , then @xmath . In the following it is assumed that all
quantities are rescaled in the appropriate fashion.

The correlation functions we are going to calculate will be correlation
functions of time independent perturbations, @xmath , around the top of
the potential. The corresponding operators we call @xmath . They are
essentially the operators @xmath . To perform the calculations we
include in @xmath general perturbations @xmath coupled to sources @xmath
, which we later will vary. Taking one derivative of ( 7.4 ) gives the
linearized version of the Gelfand-Dikii equation,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

This formula is also easily verified by using @xmath , and the
Schrödinger equation for the energy eigenfunctions @xmath . Note that we
are dealing with an inverted potential and the @xmath ’s are therefore,
in general, complex. It is this linearized version of the Gelfand-Dikii
equation which we will exploit in the following in order to get
information about the correlation functions of the theory.

The resolvent @xmath determines the density of states,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is also the puncture two point function @xmath . Other two point
functions can be obtained by taking the moments of @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

These amplitudes are one particle irreducible (1PI) with respect to the
puncture.

Some comments on the integration region are in order. There are
essentially two different cases depending on whether we have one or two
worlds as explained in chapter 4. From the point of view of the WKB
approximation we should integrate only up to the top of of the
potential, i.e. from @xmath to zero in the case of one world. With two
worlds, we should integrate all the way from @xmath to @xmath . This is
effectively a doubling of the system. At a critical point, where we just
have a leading even power contribution to @xmath , @xmath is clearly
even. This immediately implies that, with two worlds, ( 7.7 ) is zero
for @xmath odd. For the quadratic critical point this is true also with
one world. The above integral for an odd operator turns out to be real
and therefore gives no contribution to the imaginary part.

### 7.3 1PI Recursion Relations

We will now use the linearized Gelfand-Dikii equation to derive
recursion relations for the 1PI amplitudes. We start with ( 7.5 ) for a
general potential

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The @xmath ’s will act as sources for the @xmath operators. We will
later restrict ourselves to the quadratic critical point

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

We then compute the @xmath moment of ( 7.5 ), obtaining

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

To obtain this, we have made repeated partial integrations and discarded
boundary terms at infinity which do not contribute to the singular part
of the correlation functions. In the case of one rather than two worlds,
one might worry about boundary terms at @xmath . However these are real,
as follows immediately from the WKB expansion of @xmath in terms of
@xmath . Hence, they do not contribute to the imaginary parts of the
integrals, which give the correlation functions. Using @xmath we may
take @xmath ( @xmath ) derivatives of ( 7.10 ) to derive

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

For simplicity we have chosen the quadratic critical point of ( 7.9 ).
When we take the derivatives, @xmath is kept constant. This is because
@xmath is the nonamputated puncture one point function and we are
considering 1PI amplitudes.

With this recursion relation any zero momentum correlation function for
arbitrary genus may be expressed in terms of the puncture two point
function. Using the fact that the genus g contribution to the
correlation function depends on @xmath according to @xmath , we can
write a formula where we exhibit the explicit genus dependence:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the first term is understood to be zero for @xmath .

These recursion relations are similar to the ones that exist for @xmath
. The genus mixing first term looks like a contribution from a pinched
handle, while the last term corresponds to contact terms between
operators. What is lacking are the quadratic terms which arise when the
surface is pinched into two separate surfaces. The reason these are
absent is that we have considered 1PI amplitudes with respect to the
puncture which precisely excludes such terms. The corresponding
recursion relations for connected amplitudes will be derived in the next
section.

It is straightforward to check that the results for the sphere, obtained
in [ 39 ] using different methods:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

for even @xmath ’s, satisfy ( 7.12 ), where @xmath . Note that the first
term of ( 7.12 ) does not contribute. The factors of @xmath assure that
@xmath derivatives generate @xmath insertions. Note that, in using the
recursion relations, we have to fix the normalization @xmath for @xmath
( @xmath ). The formula is also true for odd @xmath ’s, unless @xmath is
odd, in which case the correlation functions are zero. This follows from
( 7.11 ) for @xmath , @xmath which states that @xmath , as we discussed
in the previous section.

Let us explicitly evaluate a simple example of a correlation function at
arbitrary genus. We consider the operator @xmath . If we put @xmath in (
7.12 ) the first term vanishes, i.e. no genus mixing, and we are left
with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

This expression is similar to the dilaton equation obtained in [ 26 ]
for topological gravity. In particular

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that @xmath , which suggests that @xmath is almost, but not quite,
the dilaton.

### 7.4 Connected Recursion Relations

Let us now derive recursion relations for connected amplitudes. This is
not more difficult than in the 1PI case. In the case of the 1PI (with
respect to the puncture) amplitudes the generating functional, @xmath ,
depends on the nonpuncture sources @xmath ( @xmath ) and the
nonamputated puncture one point function @xmath . @xmath is kept
constant while the other @xmath ’s vary. The generating functional for
connected amplitudes, the vacuum energy @xmath , depends instead on the
@xmath ( @xmath ) and @xmath , the puncture source, i.e. the
cosmological constant. In this case @xmath is kept constant when the
@xmath ’s vary and @xmath is a function of the @xmath ’s. @xmath is also
the amputated one point function. @xmath and @xmath are related by the
Legendre transform

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

We have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

as a consequence of

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

The 1PI and connected two point functions are simply proportional to
each other. The same recursion relation is valid. The difference comes
when we take @xmath derivatives to obtain higher point functions. For
connected diagrams @xmath is no longer to be kept constant. The
resulting recursion relations are no longer linear but rather quadratic

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that @xmath . We recognize an extra term suggestive of a surface
pinching into two. If we extract the explicit genus dependence we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

This structure is very similar to the one encountered in @xmath theories
[ 26 ] .

All connected amplitudes may also be built by using the 1PI building
blocks. Let us consider a simple example. Consider

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

The @xmath prefactor simply adds an external propagator as it should.
Now take a @xmath derivative. We get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now use @xmath to obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is easily checked that this expression indeed obeys ( 7.21 ) using
the recursion relations for the 1PI amplitudes. The @xmath factors
provide external and internal propagators where needed.

### 7.5 Virasoro Constraints

There is an interesting way of rewriting the recursion relations ( 7.10
), which explains where they really come from. They are simply
equivalent to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is straightforward to verify that the @xmath ’s obey a Virasoro
algebra

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Virasoro generators can be understood as representing the algebra of
coordinate transformations in the Liouville coordinate, i.e. @xmath .
Let us see how this works. In the full quantum treatment, it is
convenient to use the matrix eigenvalue @xmath and its conjugate
momentum @xmath . The generator of the coordinate transformation is then
@xmath . One can convince oneself that one need not worry about
different orderings in this case. Acting on the Hamiltonian we find two
parts,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

When this is evaluated at the Fermi surface in accordance with the
variational prescription of ( 4.23 ) and ( 4.24 ), the @xmath gives a
@xmath . Hence

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is precisely equal to ( 7.10 ).

Unfortunately, the @xmath constraint for the quadratic critical point is
quite trivial

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

It does not seem to yield a string equation determining @xmath , unlike
the case for the @xmath models, [ 26 ] .

A natural generalization is obviously to consider general
transformations @xmath . As far as @xmath correlation functions goes,
this will not give anything new. The constraints one obtains are simply
linear combinations of the old ones. Although, of course, they represent
the full algebra not only the Virasoro part.

### 7.6 Summary

In this chapter we have seen how to obtain recursion relations for both
1PI and connected zero momentum correlation functions. With the help of
these, any zero momentum correlation function for any genus may be
calculated, once we know the puncture two point function. The recursion
relations were furthermore found to correspond to coordinate
transformations in the Liouville coordinate. This was the reason why our
recursion relations could be expressed as constraints obeying a Virasoro
algebra. The presence of the Virasoro algebra, and as we already have
noted, a full @xmath algebra, is of utmost importance. We will in
chapter nine and ten take full advantage of this algebra.

By adding time independent operators to the potential the critical
behavior may change. The recursion relations and their Virasoro
representation should be useful for studying such other critical points,
different from the ordinary quadratic. They should also describe the
flows between different critical points. Although it is not clear how to
identify these new theories, it is easy to extract some information
about them. The Virasoro constraints which we have derived are valid for
any potential and provide relations between different correlation
functions.

As we have seen, the recursion relations do not determine @xmath . This
has to be specified independently, before the recursion relations can
determine all other correlation functions. In general, when we consider
some nonquadratic potential, more data need to be specified. For a
theory with a @xmath as the leading term in the potential, we will need
to specify @xmath , @xmath ,…, @xmath . The correlation @xmath is always
zero. The scaling of @xmath can be derived directly from the WKB
approximation and is given by @xmath .

So much for zero momentum correlation functions. In the next chapter we
will generalize to nonzero momentum. While doing so, the importance of
the special states will become even clearer.

## Chapter 8 Nonzero Momentum Correlation Functions

### 8.1 Introduction

Let us now consider the matrix model and its special states, also for
nonzero momentum.

As we have seen the natural candidates for special state correlation
functions are correlation functions of powers of the matrix model
eigenvalues. Such objects were studied in [ 15 ] and the expected poles
for discrete momenta were found. In this chapter we will extend some of
the results of [ 15 ] and the previous chapter, for Ward identities. In
particular, we will find that the recursion relation ( 7.10 ) is in fact
the Wheeler de Witt equation for the two dimensional world sheet quantum
gravity.

The recent developments revealing the @xmath symmetries indicate however
that this is not the whole story. One should also consider correlation
functions involving powers of the conjugate momentum. This we will do in
the next chapter, where we will show the existence of this @xmath
symmetry which will greatly simplify the subsequent calculations.

### 8.2 The Wheeler de Witt Equation

Ward identities for correlation functions are in general obtained by
changes of variables in the path integral. Examples of such Ward
identities were obtained in the last chapter from simple coordinate
changes in the matrix eigenvalue. They can be thought of as generated by
commutators, or classically, i.e. on the sphere, Poisson brackets with
@xmath . They obviously obey a Virasoro algebra, which is part of a
@xmath algebra generated by all monomials @xmath . We may also introduce
time dependence and consider generators with certain momenta @xmath ,
i.e. @xmath . Let us, as an example, make a @xmath variation of the one
puncture function.

As we saw in chapter three, the two puncture function is schematically
given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the calculation is done at the Fermi surface. We will shift its
energy to zero, hence putting the Fermi energy as a constant term in the
potential. @xmath is the path integral given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

in Euclidean time, where @xmath is the potential. The variation of the
partition function would have involved a sum over all states in the
Fermi sea up to the Fermi level. By inserting a puncture, i.e. taking a
derivative with respect to the Fermi energy as in the last chapter, we
restrict ourselves to the Fermi surface. Next we perform the variation
of @xmath . The measure, as given by ( 8.2 ), is invariant under the
change of variables. (Clearly, we are not supposed to differentiate with
respect to @xmath when changing variables in the measure.) The change in
the action gives rise to the following identity among two point
functions

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The puncture is now a tachyon, T, carrying away the momentum. The piece
with a single @xmath is evaluated by integrating over @xmath in the path
integral, obtaining a @xmath which then is partially integrated. We then
switch to a Hamiltonian formulation, remembering that we should use Weyl
ordering. We finally obtain

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

to all genus at zero momentum, as in the last chapter, and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

on the sphere for nonzero momentum. The combined case is somewhat more
complicated due to the need of taking an imaginary part and an effective
imaginary shift @xmath in @xmath , relevant for higher genus. We will
not consider this any further. In these equations @xmath indicates
momentum and @xmath genus. We have introduced the notation @xmath for
@xmath . The different genus for the first term in ( 8.4 ) is due to a
@xmath , @xmath commutator which arises when we want to evaluate the
@xmath against the wave function of the Fermi surface. This gives an
@xmath , which is the same as the genus coupling constant. Following [
58 ] we may define the loop operator given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

It corresponds to cutting out a hole in the surface with a boundary of
length @xmath . The reason is the following. If we insert a power @xmath
of the original matrix variable @xmath on the surface this creates a
little hole, the length of the boundary being proportional to @xmath
(the number of legs) and the lattice spacing @xmath . For fixed @xmath
the length clearly shrinks to zero in the double scaling limit. To get a
finite length we must also take @xmath to infinity. Introducing @xmath
as the eigenvalues @xmath of @xmath expanded around the top of the
potential, we find in the double scaling limit

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

We may then Fourier transform to obtain a differential equation in the
loop length. We get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

at zero momentum and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

on the sphere. The @xmath term is of order one higher in the string
coupling and do not contribute on the sphere. @xmath is the Fermi energy
@xmath with the appropriate number of @xmath ’s absorbed. In the case of
the usual harmonic oscillator potential, where @xmath , the resulting
equations are in fact the Wheeler de Witt equations obtained in [ 58 ] .
There they were inferred from the explicitly computed two point
function.

On the sphere this is one of the most striking verifications of the
equivalence of the Liouville and matrix models. At zero momentum, the
Wheeler de Witt equation is just the Fourier transform of the
Gelfand-Diiki equation for the resolvent for the Schrödinger operator.
This was the way in which the zero momentum version of ( 8.4 ) was
derived in the last chapter. If we want to be careful we need to rescale
@xmath by @xmath to get a dimensionless @xmath , see section 9.4. This
is needed for the exact correspondence between the above result and the
mini super space canonical quantization of Liouville theory. Recall
that, [ 40 ] , @xmath . From ( 8.9 ) one might try to draw some
conclusions about the Liouville theory correspondence to the more
general potentials above. Clearly the last term, which corresponds to
the matter piece, does not change while we change potential. Instead, it
is the piece which would be expected to arise from a canonically
quantized kinetical term for the Liouville mode, which gets modified.
Hence one is led to the conclusion that these more general models
(however with @xmath independent potentials) may correspond, not to
modifications of the matter theory, but rather to different theories for
the Liouville part. This is also consistent with the point of view for
which this paper will argue, that the special states must be represented
using both @xmath ’s and @xmath ’s, not just the @xmath ’s.

### 8.3 Two Point Function on the Sphere

So far we have seen how to derive some simple recursion relations for
various correlation functions of the matrix eigenvalue. We will now turn
to some other methods for calculating correlation functions. We will
obtain results for all genus, but we will begin by deriving an
expression for the two point function of special operators with nonzero
momentum on the sphere.

We will use the same method as in [ 40 ] . The two point function is
then given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the period of the classical motion and @xmath . @xmath
is the classical time of flight variable, which for the present purposes
may be though of as the Liouville mode. We have chosen @xmath to be zero
at the classical turning point. This is the natural choice since the
critical behavior arises from this region. The classical equation of
motion at the Fermi surface is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

If we expand about the top of the potential, @xmath , keeping only the
quadratic term, we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

If we now tried to use ( 8.12 ) in ( 8.3 ) and perform the Fourier
transforms we would get in trouble. As @xmath and @xmath , ( 8.12 )
diverges at the limits of the integration. The reason is that our
approximation is good only up to @xmath and breaks down thereafter. One
way to take care of this is to simply put in a cutoff. The critical
behavior should not depend on the nature of the cutoff. Let us however
be slightly more careful and study the exact solution of ( 8.10 ) in
terms of elliptic functions. With our convention for @xmath , the
solution is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

The function @xmath is the same as @xmath translated a quarter of a
period, and can be written as @xmath , where for small @xmath the
elliptic functions @xmath and @xmath are given by [ 1 ] ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . Consider the expansion @xmath , valid to only first order
in @xmath . For @xmath , we may expand the denominator to get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

From this we recover ( 8.11 ), but now we see that it has limited
validity. As @xmath and @xmath go to zero, the expansion can not be
trusted above @xmath . Performing the Fourier transforms up to @xmath we
obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

for @xmath even and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

for @xmath odd. To compare with previous results, we assume the same
contribution from both tops of the potential (around @xmath and @xmath
). This doubles the Fourier transforms. We then need to rewrite the sum
over @xmath as a contour integral, i.e.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the contour wraps around the real axis. This is obtained by using

  -- -- -- --------
           (8.20)
  -- -- -- --------

and a rescaling @xmath .

We can rotate the contour in ( 8.19 ) to wrap around the imaginary axis
and evaluate the expression by picking out the poles. The @xmath poles
correspond to tachyon contributions while the other poles are associated
with the special operators we are concerned with. There are both simple
and double poles of this kind. The simple poles do not give rise to any
singularity in @xmath . From the double poles we get @xmath terms from
derivatives of the @xmath and @xmath factors. We finally obtain

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have assumed @xmath . Note that the @xmath term only
contributes at @xmath , where the above expression indeed agrees with
previous results for the zero momentum special operators. Indeed, when
@xmath we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

in agreement with ( 7.13 ) for @xmath . We will return later to a
discussion of ( 8.21 ) and in particular the significance of the poles.

One might note that the rotation of contours is precisely related to the
analytical continuation to a right side up oscillator which will be the
basis for the calculation in the next section.

### 8.4 Two Point Function for all Genus

We will now derive a formula for the special operator two point function
which is valid for all genus. The starting point will be the puncture
two point function

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the energy eigenvalues of the upside down potential and
hence imaginary. We will be especially interested in the quadratic case
where @xmath and @xmath . However, the following derivation is valid for
the general case. We will conclude this section with a few comments on
the changes that occur when we have an arbitrary potential.

Correlation functions of arbitrary, in general time dependent, operators
are obtained by adding these to the Hamiltonian and evaluating the
energy eigenvalues @xmath to the appropriate order in perturbation
theory. This is a well defined prescription even for time dependent
perturbations. To do this, we evaluate the Euclidean matrix element

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath with @xmath is the unperturbed inverted harmonic oscillator
Hamiltonian and @xmath is some time dependent perturbation which we will
take as @xmath . If we expand to second order in @xmath and @xmath we
get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

To do the integrals we extract a common factor @xmath and recall that
the @xmath ’s are imaginary. Dropping oscillating terms, we find in the
limit @xmath (for momentum conservation @xmath )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since we have two different time orderings we obtain for ( 8.24 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

Interpreting this as @xmath , we find the perturbation in @xmath .

The above result then allows us to evaluate the second order variation
of the two puncture correlation function to be

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

or after removing one puncture,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(Recall that the @xmath ’s are imaginary.) Let us now limit ourselves to
the quadratic critical point, i.e. the inverted harmonic oscillator, and
compare with our previous results for the sphere.

The matrix elements are polynomials in @xmath . On the sphere, only the
highest power of @xmath survives since this term will give the highest
power of @xmath after the sum is performed. Using @xmath the leading
terms of all the matrix elements form a Pascal triangle, hence

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

for @xmath , otherwise zero. In the spherical limit we can replace the
sum over @xmath by an integral. We get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

The integral is defined by taking a suitable number of derivatives and
keeping only the part singular in @xmath . With even @xmath we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

Odd @xmath give zero, confirming that odd-even correlators are zero.
Putting all of this together we recover ( 8.21 ).

As we have indicated ( 8.4 ) is valid for a general potential. The poles
have a simple explanation. They appear at the values of momenta that can
excite transitions between the energy levels in the upside down
potential. In the case of a quadratic maximum these are linearly spaced
and lead to integer values (in units of @xmath ) of the momentum. If we,
however, consider a critical theory generated by a potential whose
leading term at the maximum is higher than quadratic, the situation will
be more complicated. The energy levels in the upside down potential will
now no longer be linearly spaced. The resonant values of the momenta
will be differences of these levels, and in general we would expect a
strange transcendental set of discrete momenta. What conformal field
theory could produce such special physical states?

### 8.5 Correlation Functions from Path Integrals

In [ 58 ] , a generating functional for all correlation functions was
calculated using path integrals. In this section we will indicate how
our results for the special operators agree with this approach. We will
consider both the sphere and later all genus.

Let us first state the results of [ 58 ] . We write them as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

The derivation of this expression is very straightforward. One simply
needs the propagator of the harmonic oscillator. One then need to
Fourier transform to momentum space and also make an integration against
the loop operators, [ 58 ] .

The term which will be of interest to us is the last one. It corresponds
to the contribution from the special states. Let us first consider the
spherical case. We expand ( 8.32 ) for small @xmath and pick out the
term of order @xmath in @xmath and @xmath . A small @xmath expansion
will clearly give the string perturbation series. Doing so we obtain

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

The integral is defined by taking a suitable number of derivatives and
neglecting terms analytic in @xmath . For fixed powers of both @xmath
and @xmath we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence we find agreement with our results for the sphere apart from an
unimportant normalization factor. Let us also check the formula for
general genus in a few cases. For simplicity we will limit ourselves to
@xmath . In that case we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

We may identify the harmonic oscillator matrix elements by expanding the
inverse powers of @xmath in powers of @xmath using

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

For @xmath , which is the term with the highest momentum pole, we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

To relate this to our previous formulae we use the recursion relation
for Hermite polynomials @xmath , and also the expression for the
normalized wave functions @xmath . From which it follows that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

We then obtain (with @xmath ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

Similarly, for @xmath we find

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now using

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

which again is a result of the Hermite recursion relation, we can
rewrite ( 8.40 ) as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

To compare with the previous expression, we rewrite our formula ( 8.4 )
as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

which indeed, with @xmath , agrees with the examples above.

### 8.6 Identification of States

In this section we will compare the matrix model results with the
predictions of the continuum theory. We will try to identify the matrix
model operators which can be used to excite the continuum theory special
states.

Consider a correlation function @xmath in the matrix model. According to
( 8.21 ) the scaling dimension of the @xmath operator is @xmath .
Furthermore, we have noted the presence of poles at momenta @xmath ,
where @xmath . These combinations of scaling dimensions and momenta are
the same as those which we find in the continuum theory. As was
explained in the introduction, there exist in the continuum theory
operators with dimension @xmath and momenta @xmath corresponding to
level @xmath descendants of tachyons at that momentum. We are therefore
tempted to identify the @xmath pole of @xmath as coming from the level
@xmath descendant of the @xmath tachyon. It is reasonable to assume that
the matrix model operators @xmath with these momenta can be used to
excite the continuum special states according to the above
identification. The zero momentum states, however, differ from the above
scheme. There are no poles at zero momentum. On the other hand, it is
only for zero momentum which the term in ( 8.4 ) with diagonal harmonic
oscillator matrix elements contribute.

Let us illustrate the above procedure by a couple of examples. The
@xmath operator has scaling dimension @xmath and the @xmath correlation
function a pole at @xmath . In the continuum theory this combination of
dimension and momentum corresponds to the special tachyon operator
@xmath . A more interesting example is @xmath . It has scaling
dimensions @xmath and its two point correlation function poles at @xmath
and @xmath . The pole of highest momentum is again one of the tachyons
with descending null states, this time @xmath , but the other one would
seem to be related to the level 3 descendant of momentum @xmath . We can
also consider odd operators. @xmath has scaling @xmath and, in addition
to a tachyon pole, a pole at @xmath , which can be identified as the
level 2 special state given by (8).

We may also consider correlation functions between different matrix
model operators, i.e. @xmath with @xmath . The number of poles is now
determined by the lowest dimension operator. Since we have nonzero
correlation functions between different operators there is substantial
mixing. This means that the identification of matrix model operators and
continuum theory special states is not one to one. This problem will be
resolved in the next section where we introduce the matrix model
generators of the @xmath symmetry.

### 8.7 Summary

In this and the previous chapter we have studied the special operator
correlation functions of @xmath quantum gravity. For nonzero momentum,
the matrix model correlation functions of time dependent perturbations
of the potential about its maximum are found to have poles at the
special values of momenta predicted by Liouville theory. The operators
also have the correct scaling dimensions. This allow us to identify the
matrix model operators which may be used to excite any of the special
states in Liouville theory.

We have also derived expressions for the two point correlation functions
at nonzero momentum. The correlation functions which we have derived are
found to have poles which, for a general time independent potential, are
given by energy level differences in an anharmonic oscillator. In the
harmonic case the levels are equally spaced and precisely coincide with
the special momenta of Liouville theory. In the general case the meaning
of our results are not clear.

We could also imagine adding time dependent pieces to the potential.
Clearly, this will drastically change the physics if the time dependence
is such that we sit on top of one of the momentum poles. We have, in
chapter 4, speculated that this leads to models in which the target
space is punctuated– i.e. the continuous line is transformed into a set
of discrete points with spacing related to the special values of
momenta. It would be very interesting to explore the structure of these
theories.

## Chapter 9 The Matrix Model @xmath Symmetry

### 9.1 Introduction

In previous chapters we have seen how to compute certain correlation
functions of the matrix model eigenvalue. We have done both direct
calculations and derived recursion relations. There is nothing wrong
with deriving recursion relations in the way we have done. In
particular, one can certainly extend the results to correlation
functions involving powers of the conjugate momentum. However, it is
more convenient to make use of the large set of symmetries in the
theory, the @xmath . In this chapter we will see how this is realized in
the matrix model.

After we have done that we will use the algebra to calculate correlation
functions. We will also compare with the results obtained in previous
chapters.

The calculations will focus on the sphere. Higher genus are reserved for
the next chapter.

### 9.2 The @xmath Algebra

As shown by Witten in [ 78 ] it is convenient to change basis to @xmath
(at @xmath ) rather than dealing with the @xmath and @xmath separately.
For certain time dependent prefactors, we then obtain transformations
which leave the action invariant. These transformations are generated
by, in Minkowski time,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath . These obey the @xmath algebra

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

classically generated by the Poisson brackets @xmath . For a general
momentum @xmath in ( 9.1 ) we find, when acting on the Minkowski action
@xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Hence a symmetry for appropriate discrete values of imaginary momentum.
This is equivalent to saying that @xmath is a solution of

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Expressed in terms of the initial conditions, @xmath and @xmath , we
have @xmath , i.e. any time independent function of the initial
conditions. The generators ( 9.1 ) are then simply obtained through
evolution in time. Hence the transformations can be understood as time
independent canonical transformations of the initial conditions.

A more convenient way of labeling the generators is through their @xmath
quantum numbers @xmath and @xmath . With the definition

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

one gets

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

As in the previous chapter, we will continue to Euclidean time, i.e.
@xmath , and consider the system as a right side up oscillator continued
to imaginary frequency. The latter effectively means @xmath and an extra
@xmath in the structure constant of ( 9.6 ) and the eigenvalue of ( 9.3
). As already emphasized several times, this analytical continuation has
several advantages. Contrary to the case above the @xmath elements now
act like step operators capable of exciting the system. The operators (
9.5 ) however, make a step in imaginary energy and in fact take you out
of the Hilbert space. This has also been discussed in [ 19 ] .

The continuation also leads to the possibility of drawing pictures of
the special states. This was mentioned at the end of chapter 4. Recall
figure 4.3. With the identification of the special states above as
@xmath generators, let us consider a couple of examples. The actual
special state perturbations would look like

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Both signs of the momentum need to be included. In figure 9.1 we find
pictures of the @xmath and @xmath special tachyons.

### 9.3 Correlation Functions from @xmath

In this section we will calculate correlation functions involving the
operators @xmath as defined in the previous section. The @xmath
symmetries will help us organize the Ward identities. As an example, let
us start with the two point function. Using

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

and simple perturbation theory we get

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (9.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Since the @xmath ’s are of the form ( 9.5 ), continued to Euclidean
time, they are simply raising or lowering operators in the continued
harmonic oscillator. This means that only a few of the matrix elements
are nonzero. Since @xmath raises by @xmath we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

We have reduced the two point function to a one point function using the
commutation relations. If we restrict ourselves to the sphere, use the
algebra given by ( 9.2 ) and directly calculate the one point function
we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

or equivalently

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

The simplest way to obtain the one point function on the sphere is to
use the classical Fermi liquid picture introduced by Polchinski [ 67 ] .
As we saw in chapter three, we simply need to do the phase space
integral

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

This was also discussed in [ 19 ] . To make everything well defined, we
need to introduce an extra puncture, i.e. take a derivative with respect
to the cosmological constant. Doing that, the integral over the whole
Fermi sea becomes just an integral over the Fermi surface

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

The integral is to be performed along a hyperbola @xmath . Although the
answer is really infinite, we know that the piece nonanalytic in @xmath
is @xmath for @xmath , i.e. when we only integrate @xmath . The other
zero momentum operators simply involve integrations of @xmath , again
constants along the Fermi surface hyperbola, so we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

and from this ( 9.11 ) follows. Our conventions are such that @xmath .
Another approach, which is convenient when calculating correlation
functions of nonzero momentum, is to continue to the right side up
oscillator where the Fermi surface is a circle. In that case, however,
we need to remember to put the Liouville volume @xmath in by hand.
Parenthetically we may note how a general correlation function may be
obtained in this way. For instance, the two point function is obtained
by perturbing the Hamiltonian, and hence the Fermi surface by one of the
operators. If we integrate the other operator against the change in
Fermi surface we get the correlation.

Let us now consider the more complicated case of a three point function.
In this case there are six different time orderings. Again perturbation
theory gives us

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us make the sum over time orderings more explicit. We find three
terms of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

This may, after some straightforward manipulations, be rewritten as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

For the sphere, we now use the algebra ( 9.6 ) and the explicitly
calculated one point function to get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

The general higher point function can be obtained recursively from the
three point by use of ( 9.2 ) and ( 9.3 ). To get the @xmath point
function with an additional operator @xmath , we vary the @xmath point
function with @xmath knowing that the total variation is zero. The
variation consists of two terms. One from varying the action as given by
( 9.3 ) and a sum of terms from varying the other operators as given by
( 9.6 ). Each of the terms in this sum is obtained by shifting @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath . We also need to multiply with the Clebsch-Gordan
coefficient @xmath . It is an easy exercise to check that (25) is
obtained by applying this procedure to ( 9.11 ) or ( 9.12 ).

There is one subtlety in the variational procedure which should be
noted. Previously we derived recursion relations for zero momentum
correlation functions by varying @xmath . Recursion relations for @xmath
are obtained from these just by taking a @xmath derivative. Since the
@xmath recursion relations involve an explicit @xmath we find an extra
term, @xmath , in the @xmath recursion relations compared to naïve
expectations. The reason is that we insisted on rewriting any conjugated
momentum @xmath in terms of @xmath ’s. The relation involves the
potential @xmath and hence depends on the coupling constants, in
particular @xmath . The statement is that although @xmath , we have in
fact @xmath . In the @xmath recursion relations we are discussing, we
never perform any evaluations like this and hence need not to worry
about these issues. For instance, if we want to include extra punctures
in the correlation functions we are free to do so without extra terms in
the @xmath relations.

Using this method one can write down several different recursion
relations. One simple example is:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

We will come back to this relation later, when we compare with the
Liouville model results.

Rather than considering these general expressions, let us look at a
couple of important examples where the form of the general @xmath point
function is particularly simple.

The first example is the @xmath point function of special tachyons. It
is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

The quantum numbers have been chosen as @xmath for @xmath and @xmath .
This is just the pole part of the general tachyon correlation function
as computed both in the matrix model [ 36 , 58 ] and in the Liouville
theory [ 36 , 24 ] , up to a factorized normalization factor. The proof
is by varying the three point. We cannot just vary the three point
tachyon correlation function, since some of the @xmath ’s are really
@xmath ’s in disguise and @xmath and @xmath vary differently. Instead we
start with the general three point and make an arbitrary number of
tachyon variations. A simplification is that we at each step only have
to vary the single negative chirality tachyon. It is only from there we
will get a nonzero Clebsch-Gordan coefficient. Following the
prescription above, performing @xmath variations we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

The product in the denominator is the product of all the Clebsch-Gordan
coefficients of the variations. Note that each get shifted by the
successive variations. By the use of momentum conservation and
evaluating the @xmath ’s as @xmath ’s, the formula ( 9.21 ) is proved.
This derivation shows how the combinatorial factor from the @xmath
derivatives is a consequence of the @xmath symmetry.

Since this derivation is quite illuminating, it might be reasonable to
consider a particular example which is more transparent than the general
derivation above. Let us consider a four point tachyon correlation
function. A sketch of the relevant setup with three vertices and a one
point is given in figure 9.2. The vertices give rise to the factor

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

The last factor is then cancelled by the one point function. The
remainder, apart from a factorized part, is the well known @xmath found
by many other methods.

If we want to consider the zero momentum operators, we have to be
careful. The Clebsch-Gordan coefficients are zero in this case but these
zeroes precisely cancel the momentum poles and leave a finite result. We
get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

We will use induction for the proof. We find

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

If we then put @xmath and use that the sum of all @xmath ’s must be zero
the result follows. This can also be checked by an explicit phase space
calculation.

### 9.4 Some Consistency Checks

Let us now study the results of the previous section more closely. In
particular we will compare the two point correlation functions with the
results derived in the last chapter. These were correlation functions of
pure powers of the matrix eigenvalue, without any momentum powers. In
terms of the W’s they are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

From this follows that the two point function is given by

  -- -- -- --------
           (9.27)
  -- -- -- --------

Using ( 9.12 ) and some simple algebra we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

In precise agreement with [ 15 ] and the result ( 8.21 ) of the previous
chapter, recalling our convention @xmath . We can now understand why the
@xmath operators gave correlation functions with sets of poles and were,
depending on momentum, capable of exciting several special states [ 15 ]
. They were, in fact, linear combinations of all special operators of a
given gravitational dimension i.e. spin @xmath . The above construction
with the generators ( 9.1 ) of the @xmath disentangles the correlation
functions. This means that the matrix model operators to be identified
with the Liouville model special states are those defined in ( 9.5 ).

Let us briefly comment on the meaning of the momentum poles. As
emphasized in [ 49 ] we should not treat the poles and the @xmath in the
correlation functions asymmetrically since the source of the @xmath is
also a momentum pole. In fact, all the poles should be thought of as cut
off by @xmath . A general @xmath point function (without zero momentum
operators) would then have @xmath . This proliferation of logarithms was
also noted in [ 24 ] .

Let us make some further tests of the correlation functions in ( 9.12 )
and ( 9.19 ). This will illustrate some very simple consequences of the
@xmath algebra. In fact, the seemingly innocent representation of the
puncture and the dilaton as @xmath and @xmath derivatives respectively
is a reflection of the @xmath . Let us give a formal argument for this.
First the puncture. Write the @xmath quantum numbers of the puncture as
@xmath and @xmath , which both will be taken to zero. Choose one of the
operators in ( 9.19 ) to be a puncture. We get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

which, by comparing with the two point function ( 9.11 ), shows how the
puncture is represented as a @xmath derivative. The case of the dilaton
is equally simple. Proceeding as above we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

If we introduce explicit @xmath ’s in the two point function we can
write it as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

Taking a @xmath derivative, we arrive at

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

which indeed reproduces ( 9.30 ). We must now return to the issue of how
precisely the dilaton is defined. Recall the original matrix model
action

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath dimensionless, @xmath having the dimension of energy
squared, and @xmath and @xmath the dimensions of energy and one over
energy respectively. To obtain ( 9.31 ) as a generating functional for
dilaton insertions with the above definition of the dilaton we should
rescale @xmath and @xmath to make them dimensionless. We find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence the matrix model dilaton should be represented by @xmath
derivatives. This is the rescaling eluded to in chapter seven, in the
context of the Wheeler de Witt equation.

Let us give some further illustrations in the case of puncture and
dilaton insertions from the field theoretic point of view. We begin with
the puncture. Starting with a general correlation function and inserting
a puncture does not change the Veneziano-like integral which has to be
calculated. When we insert a puncture, we also must remove one of the
screening insertions. The only thing which changes is the zero mode part
of the calculation. We recall the result

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

If we start with @xmath we end up with @xmath when we remove a screening
insertion. Comparing with ( 9.29 ) this shows the origin of the @xmath
related factor in the tachyon correlation function. It is a consequence
of the changing number of puncture screening operators needed.

For the tachyons the issue of connected or 1PI amplitudes is trivial for
our case with just one tachyon of differing chirality. There can not be
any internal punctures just from kinematics. This is no longer the case
when we turn to the dilaton. The crucial point is that the dilaton can
be represented as a @xmath derivative. Usually, this is precisely
equivalent to using the ordinary free field contractions, giving
Veneziano-like correlation functions. Inserting a dilaton in some
tachyon correlation function means taking derivatives with respect to
@xmath (i.e. @xmath ). For dimensional reasons, all tachyon momenta are
accompanied by a @xmath . Without explicit @xmath ’s one could write
@xmath for the dilaton. For a dilaton insertion in a nonzero momentum
correlation function, the dominating pole contribution comes from
letting the @xmath derivative act directly on the poles. All other terms
are clearly less singular. This gives the second term in ( 9.32 ). At
zero momentum we must also consider the dependence from the @xmath ’s
which go together with the @xmath ’s. The latter is a consequence of
dealing with 1PI rather than connected correlation functions. One could
in fact obtain the result by considering the explicit combinations of
1PI amplitudes into connected ones. To be more precise, if we want to
obtain the 1PI amplitude from the connected amplitude, we must amputate
external puncture legs but also subtract of the diagrams with internal
puncture propagators. In particular, we need to subtract a diagram where
a puncture goes off and converts into a dilaton. This diagram,
therefore, involves a puncture insertion and gives a contribution
corresponding to a @xmath derivative. The procedure is illustrated in
figure 9.3. This is then simulated by an explicit @xmath accompanying
the @xmath ’s to assure the proper subtraction, which corresponds to the
first term in ( 9.32 ) and only becomes relevant compared to the second
term at zero momentum. Otherwise we will get one power less of @xmath
’s. We need not restrict ourselves to a dilaton among special tachyons.
The same reasoning works for a dilaton inserted in a general correlation
function.

From these two examples we can conclude that the 1PI nature of the
correlation functions is very important in the case of zero momentum.

Finally, it is useful to think of the correlation functions from a group
theoretic point of view. The symmetry can be used to determine all
correlation functions given the special tachyon correlation functions
which may be computed by other means. The reason is that all @xmath and
@xmath dependence of any correlation function is given by some
combination of Clebsch-Gordan coefficients. For given @xmath ’s we need
the Clebsch-Gordan coefficients of @xmath , the @xmath symbols, to get
the @xmath dependence. To be more explicit let us however look at an
example, the three point function, to see how the invariance properties
determine the correlation functions.

The three point function is obtained by considering coupling @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath (with @xmath ) to @xmath . A complication is that
there are in general several different channels to sum over. This is
true already for the three point function. The reason, as we have seen,
is that we actually should think of the three point function as a four
point function. The fourth leg carries the excess Liouville momentum,
i.e. @xmath quantum number, into the vacuum. This is a consequence of
the nonconservation of Liouville momentum. Let us use the tachyon three
point function for normalization. It is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have kept the normalization choice of ( 9.21 ). Tachyons 2 and
3 are of positive chirality, while tachyon 1 has negative chirality.
There are two possible channels corresponding to either @xmath or @xmath
, i.e. 1 and 2 coming together or 1 and 3 coming together. The group
theoretic factor in each case is simply proportional to a product of
@xmath symbols. One for each vertex. For the 1-2 channel the factor is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (9.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath . Just retaining the @xmath dependence and
adding the two channels we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (9.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

which agrees with (25) after using ( 9.36 ) to fix the normalization and
@xmath dependence. This should come as no surprise since we have just
rephrased the previous calculation slightly.

Another convenient way to obtain more general correlation functions is
through factorization. This is actually already implicit in our previous
calculations. In fact, if we look at ( 9.22 ), we see the complete
factorization of the tachyon correlation function into a product of
three point functions, each given by a @xmath symbol times a single zero
momentum one point function. This last piece represents the extra leg in
any correlation function which absorbs excess Liouville momenta. One may
note that these three point functions in fact involve states of the
wrong dressing. This was also pointed out in [ 71 ] . Strictly speaking,
the expression in ( 9.22 ) is just for one channel, the one where 1
fuses with 2 then with 3 etc. All channels,however, give identical
contributions and can not be distinguished. Clearly, the tachyon
correlation function is consistent with the single @xmath factorization
result.

### 9.5 Summary

In this chapter we have exploited the matrix model @xmath algebra to
derive correlation functions. The methods we have used provide a
substantial simplification compared to previous calculations. Also, the
correct association of special states and @xmath elements disentangles
the correlation functions in a neat way.

So far we have just looked at the sphere. In the next chapter we will
see how the picture generalizes to higher genus.

## Chapter 10 Higher Genus Correlation Functions

### 10.1 Introduction

In the previous chapter we showed how to use the @xmath algebra of the
@xmath matrix model to derive correlation functions of special states.
In particular, the method is applicable to the special tachyons. In this
chapter we will treat the higher genus case more explicitly. The
motivation is that by deriving the results using the @xmath , rather
than just brute force calculations, the crucial physics will be more
apparent. Hopefully one can in this way obtain useful guidelines for
constructing a field theory approach to higher genus. In [ 18 ] ,
similar results as in the previous chapter were obtained independently.
The authors combine the @xmath properties of the system with the
powerful path integral methods of [ 58 ] to calculate correlation
functions. This is an useful approach for studying the matrix model. We
feel however, that the approach advocated in previous chapters and used
in this chapter, will prove very useful for field theory purposes.
Furthermore, there are certain subtle issues like ordering in the matrix
model definition of the special states which can not be addressed in the
path integral approach.

An important feature of the matrix model higher genus calculations is a
deformation of the classical, genus zero @xmath algebra with Planck’s
constant, i.e. the genus coupling, as parameter. This is simply a result
of replacing the Poisson brackets with commutators.

As mentioned above, at higher genus we must also face the problem of
ordering when we define the special state operators. For the special
tachyons there is no ambiguities, but for the general special state
there are. However, in the very explicit calculations we will be doing,
the question of ordering will be important even in the case of tachyons.
Not for the final results, but for the intermediate steps. We will
choose Weyl ordering. Weyl ordering means that one takes an average over
all possible orderings with equal weights. The reasons for this choice
are several. It is from many points of view the most “natural” ordering
prescription. In a path integral approach it would be the automatic
choice. This is of course connected with another reason, that there
exist simple formulas for calculations involving Weyl ordering. An
important question is of course whether this is the ordering
prescription which will be relevant in the comparison with field theory.
It is conceivable that there will not exist an unique choice but rather
that we have to live with this ambiguity which, after all, only amounts
to a linear transformation.

### 10.2 The Algebra

We begin our discussion by considering the @xmath algebra of the @xmath
matrix model. Our conventions throughout this chapter are such that
@xmath . As explained in the previous chapter, the theory is organized
by a @xmath algebra generated by the matrix eigenvalue and its conjugate
momentum. Classically, it is given through the Poisson brackets by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (10.1)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (10.2)
  -- -------- -- --------

For convenience, we have introduced the step up and down operators
@xmath and @xmath . As shown in the previous chapter this algebra may be
used to organize the special state correlation functions in the theory.
Parallel work has revealed a similar structure in the field theory [ 50
] , although the precise connection between the two approaches is not
yet clear. The great advantage of the matrix model is of course that we
may extend the calculation to arbitrary genus. The main new ingredient
at higher genus is the deformation of the algebra mentioned in the
introduction. At higher genus, i.e. quantum mechanically, we must also
be careful and choose an ordering prescription. As explained above we
choose Weyl ordering where the new algebra is simply given by the Moyal
brackets

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (10.3)
  -- -------- -- --------

which allow for simple calculations. The proof is elementary, but we
provide it for completeness.

A Weyl ordered operator can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (10.4)
  -- -------- -- --------

If we take the commutator of two such Weyl ordered operators, @xmath and
@xmath , we encounter the expression

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (10.5)
  -- -------- -- --------

The @xmath is then rewritten as @xmath by partial integration. The
@xmath and @xmath integrations give @xmath functions which fixes @xmath
and @xmath respectively. From this the result follows.

An equivalent way of exhibiting the quantum deformation is to focus on (
10.5 ), which in fact is a very old result, [ 62 ] , and inspired by
this introduce a generalized loop operator [ 19 ] . Instead of ( 8.6 )
we define

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (10.6)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the conjugate variables. We then have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (10.7)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath giving back a @xmath . Interestingly, it can be shown [ 4 ]
that ( 10.7 ) is a representation of @xmath with @xmath . This is
reminiscent of the original unitary symmetry of the matrix model.

Let us give a simple example of a higher genus commutator. Using the
Moyal bracket it immediately follows that, for @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (10.8)
  -- -------- -- --------

The continuation to the upside down harmonic oscillator gives an extra
factor of @xmath and an extra @xmath . This result will be extensively
used in a later section where we calculate tachyon N-point functions.

For clarity, let us calculate explicitly a two point function to all
genus. We choose the correlator between spin @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
, @xmath . To do that we need to calculate @xmath . This is easy. We
have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (10.9)
  -- -------- -- --------

The extra term @xmath comes from Weyl ordering and will be thoroughly
discussed in the next section. If we keep only terms nonanalytic in
@xmath this reduces to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.10)
  -- -------- -- ---------

To evaluate our two point we use the Moyal bracket continued to the
upside down harmonic oscillator to calculate

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.11)
  -- -------- -- ---------

( 9.10 ) and ( 10.10 ) then finally give

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.12)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The same procedure may be used to calculate arbitrary correlation
functions.

In the previous chapter, it was shown how to calculate special state
correlation functions using this algebra. The number of operators in the
correlation functions are reduced one by one using the algebra. The last
step, however, involves the calculation of a remaining zero momentum one
point function. This is where the cosmological screening charges sit.
Let us therefore turn to the issue of calculating such objects.

### 10.3 The One Point Functions

To obtain the zero momentum special state one point functions at higher
genus, we need to be careful. From the algebra we understand that they
are given in terms of @xmath . These are just powers of the Hamiltonian.
But it is important to remember the Weyl ordering. This will make the
one point functions quite complicated. We need to rewrite the Weyl
ordered powers in terms of something simpler. The objects with simple
correlation functions are clearly the @xmath , which give

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.13)
  -- -------- -- ---------

since the resulting @xmath in the trace can be replaced by @xmath up to
terms analytic in @xmath . To obtain the @xmath one point functions we
therefore need to perform the Weyl ordering and express the result as a
polynomial in @xmath . One way to do this is to use the standard formula

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.14)
  -- -------- -- ---------

See e.g. [ 54 ] . If we put @xmath and take the expectation value in the
eigenstate @xmath we get

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.15)
  -- -------- -- ---------

and finally

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.16)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This is unfortunately a very complicated polynomial. In the next section
we will explicitly calculate some tachyon correlation functions. To do
so we need explicit expression for the coefficients in ( 10.16 ). By
some tedious algebra, which is greatly simplified if Mathematica is
used, the following expression can be obtained

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.17)
  -- -------- -- ---------

The continued case is obtained by sending @xmath . This is enough up to
genus 3 for the general correlation function. In appendix 10A, the
expansion is shown up to genus 7. These expressions are really
remarkably complicated, and responsible for the complicated structure of
the higher genus correlation functions. The piece coming from the @xmath
algebra is much simpler.

For clarity, let us give an example. We choose @xmath . We find

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.18)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where we note resonance contributions up to genus 2, but no higher. The
same general structure is clearly found for the tachyon correlation
functions. Poles are present only up to some genus. The precise value
depends on the scaling (i.e. momentum).

### 10.4 Tachyon Correlation Functions

We now need to combine these results with those given by the deformed
@xmath algebra to get the tachyon correlation functions. This is, in
principle, rather simple. In fact, one can write down a set of
diagrammatic rules which give the correlation functions.

By the variational procedure introduced in the last chapter one can show
that in the case of @xmath amplitudes it is possible to arrange things
in such a way that only one basic graph is needed. There exist other
choices too, involving sums over several graphs, but this one is clearly
the simplest. The graph, shown in figure 9.2, has a @xmath at one end
and the necessary one point function at the other. In between are the
@xmath distributed in some order. The order does not matter, but we
should pick just one ordering, no sum. To see this, one can start with
the two point function of a @xmath and a @xmath . All subsequent @xmath
variations will only give a nonzero value when they hit the @xmath leg.
If we are considering a genus @xmath correlation function, we must
partition the handles in all possible ways among the vertices and the
one point function. Each such diagram is then given a certain factor
according to the following rules.

For each vertex write down a factor @xmath given by

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.19)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath is the momentum of the @xmath ’th (positive) tachyon and
@xmath the genus of the corresponding vertex. This is obtained from (
10.8 ). Strictly speaking the formulae are only valid when @xmath , i.e.
for special tachyons. The one point function is given a factor @xmath
according to

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.20)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where the argument @xmath is

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.21)
  -- -------- -- ---------

@xmath is the genus associated with the one point function. Clearly,
@xmath . Some additional @xmath polynomials may be read off from
appendix 10A while the general case is generated by ( 10.16 ). In both (
10.19 ) and ( 10.20 ) we have extracted a common factor depending only
on the momentum of the single negative chirality tachyon.

Using this technique, the two point function would be calculated as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.22)
  -- -------- -- ---------

up to genus @xmath . In particular, if we concentrate on genus 2 the
relevant calculation involves

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.23)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Although the algebra is somewhat tedious, the generalization to higher
genus and N-point functions is straightforward. As an example the three
point function at genus 3 is computed in appendix 10B. Here, we will
simply state the results for N-point functions up to genus @xmath .

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.24)
  -- -------- -- ---------

This is to be multiplied with the appropriate factorized pole factor.
The result may be compared to other calculations of the correlation
functions. Clearly this is a very complicated expression which practical
application is probably very limited. The main point is, however, not
this expression in itself, but rather the way in which we have derived
it.

### 10.5 Summary

We have seen how to calculate special tachyon correlation functions in
the matrix model using the deformed @xmath algebra. The algebra nicely
organizes the correlation functions even at higher genus.

A natural challenge to the field theory approach is to reproduce this
deformation of the algebra, which we have described and found to be
important for the structure of the correlation functions. One would
expect that the deformation is related to contour integrals of the
currents which when pulled back over the surface, away from any
insertions, fail to yield zero since they get caught up around handles
and cannot be contracted to points.

### Appendix 10A

Weyl ordering of powers of the Hamiltonian for computations up to genus
7:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

### Appendix 10B

In this appendix we calculate the tachyon three point function at genus
3. As explained in the main text we should write down all possible
partitions of the three handles among the vertices and the one point.
This gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.25)
  -- -------- -- ---------

Using the expressions ( 10.19 ) and ( 10.20 ) we find

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.26)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which is nothing else than, if we use momentum conservation,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (10.27)
  -- -------- -- ---------

which indeed is a special case of ( 10.24 ).

## Chapter 11 Comparison with Liouville Theory

### 11.1 Introduction

In this chapter we will make some simple comparisons between the matrix
model and field theory calculations. The first and most obvious
observation is of course the presence of the special states in both
theories. This is in fact one of the main results of the previous
chapters. Furthermore, there is a @xmath -algebra organizing the
correlation functions in both cases. All of this lend support to the
accepted view that the theories are, in fact, identical. A very nice and
explicit connection at the level of the algebra was given in [ 78 ] .

Clearly, one would also like to have a precise comparison of the
correlation functions. As far as tachyons go, we have seen the agreement
to be perfect. At least on the sphere, the only case for which field
theory calculations in general exist. When comparing results for the
special states, additional care must be taken since we are automatically
sitting on the discrete momentum poles. This can be especially tricky in
the field theory approach.

An important issue to decide is whether the correlation functions one is
calculating are correlation functions of states

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (11.1)
  -- -------- -- --------

or currents

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (11.2)
  -- -------- -- --------

The @xmath ’s are ghost number zero spin zero fields needed for well
defined closed string currents. They build up the “ground ring”. For a
discussion see [ 78 , 80 ] . As for @xmath there cannot be any
disagreement. Clearly, they give correlation functions of tachyon states
. After all, as explained in [ 78 ] , there are no currents
corresponding to the special tachyons! The needed elements @xmath of the
ground ring do not exist. With this identification for the tachyons it
would be very unnatural to associate anything else than special states
to the other correlation functions of chapter 8.

Let us try to be more explicit. We will first look at a very simple
example involving the dilaton, and then proceed to a more general case.

### 11.2 A Dilaton Comparison

There are some very simple examples of correlation functions easily
computable just using Liouville notions and no matrix model techniques.
These are correlation functions involving the dilaton. We will in fact
be able to obtain some results to all genus simply from dimensional
arguments. Consider the Liouville partition function (or space time free
energy)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (11.3)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath is the radius of the target
space for the matter field @xmath . @xmath is the world sheet
cosmological constant, dimensionless from the point of view of space
time. The only dimensionful quantities are @xmath and @xmath . In the
noncompact case we have in fact only @xmath at our disposal. From
dimensional grounds and KPZ scaling we must have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (11.4)
  -- -------- -- --------

at genus g. @xmath is the generator of connected amplitudes (in space
time). Let us perform a Legendre transform, as we did in chapter seven,
to obtain a generating functional for 1PI amplitudes with respect to the
puncture, i.e. the zero momentum tachyon. This means taking away any
pinches. We have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (11.5)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (11.6)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath has the dimensions of energy. Hence

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (11.7)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the 1PI generator @xmath we should of course regard @xmath as
independent of @xmath . Since @xmath derivatives should generate dilaton
insertions we find the following 1PI amplitude relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (11.8)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is identical to what was obtained in chapter seven, using the
matrix model recursion relations (generalizations of the zero momentum
Wheeler de Witt equation). As noted there the dilaton one point function
involves a factor @xmath rather than the expected @xmath . From the
above it is clear that this discrepancy is simply due to including the
overall @xmath in ( 11.4 ).

In general we cannot get away with a simple trick like this, more work
is needed!

### 11.3 More General Correlation Functions

To obtain the general special operator correlation function in the
Liouville theory one would like to use the group theoretic information
provided by the @xmath or, for given spin @xmath , the @xmath symmetry.
The states in the Liouville theory are given by combinations @xmath of
the Liouville theory version of the special states @xmath . Given this
it is tempting to believe that we have a representation of a @xmath
symmetry (left times right). However, this is in general not correct. In
the uncompactified case the left and the right moving states must be the
same. The symmetry group is broken down to just the diagonal subgroup.
This is achieved in two steps. First the gravitational dressing must be
the same for left and right, otherwise we would be unable to screen
using the cosmological constant which treats left and right in the same
way. This means that we always must have the same spin @xmath for left
and right. We get a reduction to the diagonal of the piece transverse to
@xmath . This is true even for the compactified case. If we in addition
are considering the uncompactified case, the left and right moving
momenta must be the same and therefore also the @xmath quantum numbers.
Consequently, we just have a representation of the diagonal @xmath .
This is in precise agreement with the matrix model, where we indeed only
see one @xmath .

There is however an apparent paradox here. If we would use the free
field contractions in computing the correlation functions the results
would seem to disagree since from this point of view left and right are
still independent. From such a calculation you would expect to get a
different result, all Clebsch-Gordan coefficients squared, one from the
left and one from the right. We will however show that the results in
the end turn out to be consistent.

Let us begin by considering the tachyon correlation function as computed
in [ 24 ] . As we have seen the result is in complete agreement with the
matrix model results. On the other hand we have seen how the matrix
model organizes its correlation functions using a single @xmath . Let us
consider the Liouville calculation more carefully. The result of [ 24 ]
is obtained through arguments of analyticity and symmetry. In particular
the by now well known factorized product of gamma functions is found [
24 , 36 ] with a certain unknown coefficient independent of the
particular momenta. This coefficient is then determined by sending all
the momenta, except three, to zero. This reduces the expression to a
three point function with @xmath extra punctures. Since the three point
function is possible to evaluate directly, the general result follows.
The extra @xmath punctures is simply represented as @xmath derivatives.
This is the Liouville derivation of the expression ( 9.21 ). The
important point is that the use of a @xmath derivative for inserting a
puncture is a consequence of having just one @xmath , see ( 9.29 )! This
means that the calculation in [ 24 ] automatically incorporates this
feature.

For the more general case with nontachyonic special states, we return to
the recursion relation ( 9.20 ). Let us redefine the fields according to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (11.9)
  -- -------- -- --------

The recursion relation then takes the form

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (11.10)
  -- -------- -- ---------

In [ 47 ] these very same recursion relations were obtained in the case
@xmath using Liouville methods. The coefficient in front of the right
hand side was shown to be of the form @xmath , where @xmath stands for
the appropriate Clebsch-Gordan coefficient. The first factor comes from
comparing with the purely tachyonic case where the answer is obtained
from a simple Veneziano like integral. To see the agreement one uses the
Clebsch-Gordan coefficients of the special operator algebra as obtained
in [ 48 ] .

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (11.11)
  -- -------- -- ---------

where

  -- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath      (11.12)
  -- -------- -- ---------

At @xmath one finds @xmath which then leads to ( 11.10 ). This is an
important check on the equivalence between the Liouville and matrix
model approaches. An everywhere present difficulty in these comparisons
is, however, the fact that we are really sitting right on the momentum
poles. Clearly one needs to carefully regularize all expressions.

### 11.4 Summary

We have investigated the structure of special operator correlation
functions in @xmath quantum gravity. Due to the presence of a @xmath
symmetry the calculations become very simple. We have also investigated
the connection between the Liouville and the matrix model, indicating
the agreement for the correlation functions.

An important point is the existence in the uncompactified Liouville as
well as matrix model formulation of c=1 of just one @xmath . From the
Liouville point of view this is somewhat obscure since the operator
product expansion and its Clebsch-Gordan coefficients seem to give a
structure corresponding to two @xmath ’s. Fortunately, the final outcome
of the explicit calculations are identical. Further work is however
needed to establish the full equivalence.

A part of the problem is that many of the calculations are so ill
defined. The reason is that we are sitting right on the discrete
momentum poles. Especially in the Liouville theory this is a big
technical problem. Often we must rely on guesswork concerning ill
defined analytical continuations. It is very doubtful if many of the
results would have been obtained correctly without knowing the answers
in advance, given by the much more powerful matrix model.

## Chapter 12 Conclusions

In this thesis we have studied the two dimensional noncritical string.
It is a remarkable example of a string theory where we are capable of
calculating everything. This is, of course, thanks to the matrix models.

The study of the two dimensional string theory has so far been of a
quite technical nature. The matrix model has been used at length to
extract all possible correlation functions and to study the spectrum.
One of the main results of this thesis is in fact a clear verification
of the presence of the special states in the matrix model.

Clearly, this should not be a goal in itself. After all, the reason why
we are studying this model in the first place, is that we want to learn
something about string theory and quantum gravity. There are several
different ways to do that. So far, the most important contribution of
the matrix model has been rather indirect. It has been to act as a
source of inspiration for new developments in field theory. As is clear
from many recent works, [ 46 , 50 , 77 , 78 , 80 ] , there has been
considerable progress in the understanding of the field theory
techniques. Perhaps, eventually, this will help us in the study of
higher dimensional theories. A somewhat rebellious mind would perhaps
argue that it is instead time to abandon the old fashioned customs and
stick with the matrix model. Unfortunately, this is clearly not possible
since the matrix models seem to have a rather limited range of
applicability. In particular there is the @xmath limit. It is however an
important lesson to be learned, that there, in some cases, can exist
totally novel techniques which might lead to exciting breakthroughs.

On the other hand, in the study of the specific two dimensional string
theory, remarkably little has been done with respect to the
understanding of the target space picture. Not only is the relation
between the Liouville mode and the matrix model eigenvalue rather
obscure (recall the relation through the loop length in the Wheeler de
Witt equation) we have in addition very little control over the target
space background. In the field theory approach we can choose to put in a
black hole etc. We would like to be able to exercise a similar control
in the matrix model. Only after we have learnt how to do this, we can
truly use the matrix model to learn about stringy quantum gravity.

There are also several issues regarding the back reaction of the
background geometry against the loop corrections to the vacuum energy.
The naïve loop corrected @xmath functions clearly indicate that there
should be a highly nontrivial influence. From this point of view it is
not clear how a flat space time can remain a solution at loop level.
However, arguments in [ 73 ] seem to indicate that the two dimensional
background geometry is quite rigid and not influenced in this way, but
rather frozen. If this is true, there is a risk that the things we might
learn which are relevant for higher dimensions, where this certainly is
not the case, are rather limited.

Other work point in a perhaps more promising direction, [ 3 , 10 , 44 ,
70 , 76 ] . There, a one loop corrected string inspired field theory is
studied for black hole solutions with subsequent Hawking evaporation. An
interesting elaboration would clearly be to assume an underlying string
theory and to study its consequences. A better understanding of the
matrix model could be of invaluable help in this respect.

Clearly, there are still a lot of things which remain to be done in the
matrix model approach to the two dimensional string. We need to take
advantage of its simplicity and learn everything we can. But it is also
important to look forward, to more physical models. Although the matrix
model techniques as they are now seem to be insufficient for such a
task, there could clearly exist generalizations which might help us in
our quest.

The most important lesson we might learn from the matrix models is the
importance of keeping an open mind. The field theory formulation might
not be the only way of dealing with strings or whatever it is that we
feel deserves our attention. Finally, however, it is important to keep
the remarks made in the introduction in mind. We should not become too
carried away with the progress made. Even if our mathematical capacity
is continuously increasing, this does not mean that our understanding of
physics is any deeper.

String theory is an exciting possibility, but whether it is the right
answer only nature itself can tell.