in the previous two sections; in particular the extra term ( 2.28 ) is
again recovered.

Next I study the behaviour of the new fields under gauge
transformations. With ( 2.8 ), ( 2.47 ), and ( 2.48 ) one finds that all
physical fields are invariant under the action of SU(2) and transform
under U(1) as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.52)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Introducing, in analogy to ( 2.12 ), the mass and charge eigenstates
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath and rescaling the gauge parameter @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

(with @xmath being the electromagnetic coupling constant @xmath ) one
finds

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.54)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the fermion charge matrix

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is just an electromagnetic gauge transformation ⁷ ⁷ 7 On the first
look this result seems surprising since I made a @xmath transformation
to derive ( 2.54 ). However, due to the field transformation ( 2.48 ),
this acts differently on the transformed fields than on the original
ones; so it becomes a @xmath transformation. . Thus, after the fields
have been parametrized such that all pseudo-Goldstone bosons decouple,
the action of the whole gauge group on the physical fields reduces to a
gauge transformation belonging to the unbroken subgroup. The remaining
gauge freedom is only connected to the unphysical scalars and has been
“removed” by dropping ( 2.50 ). Finally, the @xmath gauge freedom has to
be fixed by adding the g.f. term

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

while the corresponding ghost field decouples. Thus, one finally finds
the same quantized Lagrangian as in the previous two sections.

This derivation of the U-gauge is similar to the classical procedure,
i.e. the removal of the pseudo-Goldstone scalars by a means of a gauge
transformation. In fact the Stueckelberg transformation ( 2.48 )
formally acts as an SU(2) gauge transformation on the vector and fermion
fields with the gauge parameters @xmath being replaced by the the
pseudo-Goldstone fields @xmath . But there remains a principal
difference between a gauge transformation and a Stueckelberg
transformation; namely the gauge transformation which maps the @xmath
identically to zero depends on the numerical values of these fields at
the various space-time points and thus it is not the same transformation
for different functions @xmath . The Stueckelberg transformation ( 2.48
), however, decouples the pseudo-Goldstone fields independently of their
functional form from the physical fields and thus it can be applied to
the PI, where an integration over the @xmath at each space-time point
@xmath is carried out. The only effect of quantum physics on the above
discussion is the need of transforming the functional integration
measure, too. The corresponding Jacobian determinant gives rise to the
extra term ( 2.28 ).
