## Chapter 1 Introduction

The aim of elementary particle physics is the discovery of new
fundamental laws of nature and their classification within a theoretical
framework which arranges the observed elementary particles into simple
patterns and describes their interactions in a unified way.

The stage for this theoretical description is the Relativistic Quantum
Field Theory incorporating both Einstein’s theory of Special Relativity
and Heisenberg’s, Pauli’s and Schrödinger’s Quantum Mechanics. Its story
of success started in 1947, when the experiment of Lamb and Retherford [
1 ] gave unambigous evidence for the splitting of the @xmath and the
@xmath energy levels of the hydrogen atom by @xmath . At the same time
Dirac, Feynman, Tomonaga, Schwinger and others [ 2 ] developed the
theory of Quantum Electrodynamics, which explains the Lamb shift by
quantum fluctuations of the photon field. Since then many more actors
have joined the electron and the photon field on the stage: Starting
with the works of Gell-Mann and Zweig the partonic constituents of
hadrons were successfully described by quark fields, whose strong
interaction is mediated by gluons as encoded in the Lagrangian of
Quantum Chromodynamics [ 3 ] . And with the unification of the
electromagnetic and weak interaction by Glashow, Salam and Weinberg [ 4
] the scene was entered by three more vector bosons, which are massive
owing to their interaction with the Higgs particle [ 5 ] . These
elements form what is now called the Standard Model of elementary
particle physics. It is the most successful theory of physics: It covers
energy scales between those of the Lamb shift and the center of mass
energy of today’s particle colliders such as LEP at CERN, which are
separated by 17 orders of magnitude! No experiment has yet contradicted
its quantitative predictions, although many of them have been tested to
an extraordinary precision (e.g. an accuracy of @xmath for the anomalous
magnetic moment of the electron on both the experimental and the
theoretical side).

On the other hand some sectors of the standard model are poorly verified
at present. One of them is the quark mixing sector, which describes the
coupling of quark fields to the charged electroweak vector bosons in
terms of the Cabibbo–Kobayashi–Maskawa (CKM) matrix [ 6 ] . Here the
non–perturbative nature of the long–distance strong interaction prevents
an easy extraction of the CKM parameters.

Further we know that the Standard Model cannot be true for another 17
orders of magnitude in energy, as we then would reach the Planck scale,
where gravitation becomes important requiring a new theoretical concept.
Yet we know from other considerations such as vacuum stability that
there must be new physics much below the Planck scale. How can we detect
new physics apart from building accelerators with higher and higher
energy?

First one can look at rare processes which are forbidden in the tree
level approximation. Since they are suppressed in the standard model new
physics can contribute sizeably to their transition rates. Moreover,
even low–energy rare hadronic processes are sensitive to the masses of
heavy particles appearing in intermediate states. This allows to derive
bounds on the mass of the recently discovered top–quark [ 7 ] from these
processes [ 8 , 9 ] . When the experimental determination of the top
mass improves, these bounds provide a consistency check of the Standard
Model quark sector over more than two orders of magnitude in energy.

Second one can look for violations of symmetries which are respected or
weakly broken by the Standard Model. Here the CP symmetry is of utmost
importance, because the only possible source of its violation in the
Standard Model is a single parameter, the phase @xmath in the CKM
matrix. ¹ ¹ 1 We do not consider a possible @xmath –term in the QCD
lagrangian here. The CP transformation exchanges particles and
antiparticles and reflects the spacial coordinates. If in the future we
cannot fit all CP violating observables with this single phase, we will
have discovered new physics. Further in the calculation of these
observables the difficulties with the long–distance strong interaction
are sometimes reduced, as the strong (as well as the electromagnetic)
interaction respects CP symmetry indicated by the smallness of the
neutron electric dipole moment.

All these aspects make the study of hadronic physics mandatory. Here a
key object is the K–meson system, to which we owe a significant part of
our present day knowledge about the Standard Model quark sector: In 1964
Christenson, Cronin, Fitch and Turlay have found the first evidence for
CP violation by observing decays of the long–lived neutral K–meson
@xmath into the CP even two–pion state [ 10 ] . There are two potential
sources for this phenomenon: The @xmath state is not a pure CP odd state
but has admixtures of the CP even neutral Kaon state or the weak
interaction triggering this decay violates the CP symmetry thereby
allowing transitions from the CP odd neutral Kaon state to CP even final
states. In the first case we speak of indirect CP violation in contrast
to direct CP violation in the second case. The CKM mechanism of the
Standard Model predicts both types, if the phase @xmath is not equal to
0 or @xmath . While precise measurements are available for the parameter
@xmath [ 11 ] characterizing the size of the indirect CP violation in
the neutral Kaon system, there is still a controversy about the direct
CP violation [ 11 ] . Then in 1970 the suppression of flavour–changing
neutral current (FCNC) decays of K–mesons lead Glashow, Iliopoulos and
Maiani (GIM) to postulate the existence of the charm quark [ 12 ] . We
finally mention the prediction of the charm–quark mass from the observed
@xmath –mass difference by Gaillard and Lee in 1974 [ 13 ] . On the
other hand the theoretist’s work to relate the measured quantities to
the Standard model parameters is made difficult by the presence of the
strong interaction: Its long range interaction confines the quarks into
K–mesons and it modifies the weak CP violating amplitudes of interest.
Since these transitions take place on short distance scales of the order
of the inverse W–boson mass @xmath , the QCD corrections can be reliably
calculated perturbatively. The long–range effects, however, must be
treated by other methods such as @xmath –expansion, sum rule techniques
or lattice gauge theory.

The Technical University of Munich has already largely contributed to
the theoretical understanding of short distance QCD corrections to
various rare hadronic processes [ 43 , 15 , 44 , 46 , 62 , 66 , 41 , 17
, 49 , 8 , 61 ] .

In this work we will focus on short distance QCD calculations to the
mixing of the flavour eigenstates @xmath and @xmath of the neutral
K–meson. Since the mass eigenstates @xmath and @xmath are linear
combinations of them, @xmath –mixing encodes the information on the
indirect CP violation.

The hamiltonian describing this mixing reads:

  -- -------- -- -- -------- -------
     @xmath                  (1.1)
                             
                    @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -- -------- -------

Here @xmath denotes the change in the strangeness quantum number in the
transition between @xmath and @xmath , @xmath is the Fermi constant,
@xmath comprises the CKM–factors, and @xmath is the local four quark
operator (see fig. 5.3 on p. 5.3 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

with @xmath and @xmath being colour indices. The Inami–Lim functions
@xmath and @xmath [ 14 ] depend on the masses of the charm– and
top–quark and describe the @xmath –transition amplitude in the absence
of strong interaction. They are obtained by calculating the lowest order
box diagrams depicted in fig. 5.1 on p. 5.1 . The short distance part is
included in the coefficients @xmath , @xmath and @xmath with a common
factor @xmath split off.

Here @xmath and @xmath are most important for the size of @xmath , while
@xmath gives the dominant contribution to the short distance part of the
@xmath –mass difference. When this work was begun, a next–to–leading
order (NLO) calculation for @xmath had been performed [ 15 ] , but no
QCD corrections beyond leading logarithms had been known for @xmath and
@xmath . The leading log (LL) approximation is very unsatisfactory,
because it is plagued with huge renormalization scale uncertainties and
no use of the QCD scale parameter @xmath can be made. In this thesis the
complete @xmath –hamiltonian in the NLO will be presented [ 67 ] .

As the importance of @xmath has been stressed already, let us now
discuss the @xmath –mass difference: Its measured value is @xmath ,
which, by the way, is of the same order of magnitude as the Lamb shift
mentioned in the beginning of this chapter. The prediction of the
charm–quark mass, @xmath , from the @xmath –mass difference in [ 13 ]
was surprisingly good for an analysis which neglected strong interaction
effects. The inclusion of the latter, however, made the theoretical
prediction worse, as estimates of the hadronic matrix element @xmath by
various nonperturbative methods resulted in a significant reduction of
the naive vacuum insertion value used in [ 13 ] . Further the
leading–log calculation of the short distance QCD corrections gave an
additional suppression of the predicted @xmath –mass difference due to
@xmath , so that the calculation reproduced less than half of the
measured @xmath –mass difference. On the other hand one also expects
additive long–distance contributions corresponding to light meson poles
which are not contained in ( 1.1 ). These contributions are poorly
calculable, but should be suppressed with respect to the short distance
part by power counting arguments. Therefore the low result of the short
distance calculation is somewhat surprising and in fact triggered some
speculation to assign the deficit to new physics. Our NLO calculation
for @xmath [ 17 ] , however, together with present day values for the
input parameters such as @xmath has established @xmath implying a
sizeable increase of the short distance contribution to the @xmath –mass
difference, which is now roughly of the order of 70% of the observed
value. This fits much better with the expectation, especially when
contrasted with an earlier incorrect NLO calculation [ 18 ] finding a
drastical decrease of the short distance part.

In the following chapter we will summarize some field theoretic basics
needed for the subsequent chapters. Chapter 3 will discuss the operator
product expansion and renormalization group techniques. Here we will
also develop the renormalization group formalism for Green’s functions
with two operator insertions. Chapter 4 contains new results about
evanescent operators [ 19 ] . They comprise the correct treatment of
bilocal structures involving evanescent operators, which had to be
developed for the calculation of @xmath . Further a new scheme
dependence associated with the definition of the evanescents is
discussed. In chapter 5 the operator basis involved in the NLO @xmath
lagrangian will be analyzed. In chapter 6 the NLO calculation of @xmath
and @xmath will be described in detail, and chapter 7 is devoted to the
phenomenological analyses. Here we will analyze the consequences of the
new NLO prediction for @xmath on the Standard Model parameters. We will
also look at the new prediction of the short distance contribution to
the @xmath –mass difference.

## Chapter 2 Quantum Field Theory and the Standard Model

Our today’s knowledge about the rich field of elementary particle
physics is the result of many decades of research probing the laws of
nature at small distances. The experimental effort has been paralleled
by a similarly successful development of the theoretical framework to
understand the guiding principles of the observed phenomena.

Clearly we cannot summarize all results of this development here, so
that we instead focus on those aspects of modern quantum field theory
which are relevant for the actual calculations concerning the @xmath
–mixing performed for this thesis.

### 2.1 Lagrangian Field Theory

A classical field theory like electrodynamics contains a set of
functions @xmath of the space–time variable @xmath ¹ ¹ 1 Throughout this
thesis we use natural units @xmath . as its basic building blocks. The
dynamics of these fields @xmath is encoded in a scalar functional, the
lagrangian (density) @xmath , from which the field equations of motions
can be obtained. Here we have collectively summarized indices related to
intrinsic properties like spin or charge quantum numbers and those
distinguishing different physical fields into the single multi–index
@xmath .

When passing from classical to quantum field theory the functions @xmath
are replaced by field operators @xmath . Hence one has to deal with a
quantum mechanical system with an uncountable infinity of degrees of
freedom labeled by the space–time coordinate @xmath . Its hamiltonian
density @xmath is a polynomial in the elementary fields @xmath . For
non–interacting fields the field theory can be solved, i.e. one can
construct a Hilbert space (the Fock space) whose elements are
eigenfunctions of the Fourier–transformed hamiltonian density @xmath . A
short glimpse on the simple structure of the lagrangian and on the
variety of particle phenomenology shows that it is hopeless to try to
solve the interacting quantum field theory exactly.

### 2.2 Symmetries

Before discussing the dynamics of field theory it is useful to look for
underlying patterns which may possibly restrict the particle spectrum
and the interactions. This is indeed the case, if the total action

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

is invariant under some group of transformations of the arguments of
@xmath .

Consider first some group G of linear transformations of the space–time
variable:

  -- -------- -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------- -- -------

If we can find a (possibly multivalued) representation @xmath of @xmath
such that with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

the action ( 2.1 ) satisfies @xmath , we speak of an external symmetry.

A symmetry group which only transforms the fields according to ( 2.3 )
but leaves the space–time coordinate unchanged is likewise generating an
internal symmetry.

The key importance of symmetries for a classical field theory is due to
Noether’s theorem: If a symmetry Lie group leaves @xmath invariant, one
can construct a conserved current from the fields and find a globally
conserved charge. These charges can be used to label different solutions
of the equations of motion. A quantized theory may or may not enjoy a
certain symmetry of the corresponding classical theory. In the second
case one terms the symmetry to be broken. Otherwise the operator
corresponding to the conserved charge commutes with the hamiltonian so
that we can find a common eigenbasis of both operators. We can use the
quantum numbers of the conserved charge to label the eigenstates of the
hamiltonian and transitions between states with different quantum
numbers are forbidden. In fact this property also applies to discrete
symmetries.

#### 2.2.1 External Symmetries

##### Poincaré–Invariance

When probing the laws of nature at distance scales at which gravitation
is unimportant they turn out to be invariant with respect to

-   translations in space and time,

-   rotations
    and

-   boosts into uniformly moving coordinate systems.

The last two types of transformations generate the proper Lorentz group
@xmath , all of them generate the Poincaré--group. We can test the
abovementioned symmetries in a twofold way: First we can repeat the
experiments in different transformed coordinate frames ² ² 2 Theorists
are allowed to neglect the technical problems, if this is tried for the
boosts. and second we can check the associated conservation laws
predicted by Noether’s theorem. They include the conservation of energy,
momentum and angular momentum.

The fact that nature is invariant under ( 2.2 ) with @xmath greatly
simpifies the theorist’s work to guess the correct lagrangian describing
the non–gravitational interactions: @xmath must not explicitly depend on
@xmath and all fields must transform as in ( 2.3 ) according to some
(possibly multivalued) representation of the proper Lorentz group. Since
with ( 2.2 ) @xmath , these fields must combine to @xmath –singlets in
@xmath .

The proper Lorentz transformations leave the Minkowskian scalar product
@xmath invariant. Yet there are more transformations which have this
property: We may extend @xmath by

-   the parity transformation P : @xmath
    and

-   the time reversal transformation T : @xmath .

@xmath is the full Lorentz group. Unlike the transformations of @xmath
we cannot carry out the discrete symmetries P and T by any active
transformation of our experimental device, but still we can test them
via the conservation or nonconservation of the associated charges. Since
@xmath and @xmath are two–element groups, the associated charges P and T
can only assume two different values. We may choose P and T as
multiplicative quantum numbers being @xmath or @xmath .

There is no reason why nature should respect these discrete symmetries.
Nevertheless it was not before 1956 that Lee and Yang discovered the
nonconservation of parity [ 20 ] . In the following we will need the
transformation property of Dirac fields under P and T . They transform
as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

with an arbitrary phase @xmath in any representation of the Dirac
algebra. The current @xmath is easily found to transform as a vector
field, i.e. like @xmath , under P . With @xmath the axial current @xmath
likewise transforms with an extra factor of @xmath compared to @xmath .
In the standard representation of the Dirac algebra one further finds:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

with @xmath also being an arbitrary phase factor.

##### Scale Transformations

In the early 1950’s Stückelberg and Peterman as well as Gell-Mann and
Low for the first time studied the behaviour of a quantum field theory
under dilatations of the space–time variable:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

or equivalently in momentum space

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

One might expect that for large @xmath masses in @xmath become
negligible and any physical quantity scales according to its naive
dimension determined by power counting. But this is not the case for a
quantized theory due to the subtleties of renormalization to be
discussed in sect. 2.4.3 . Here we find the powerlike scaling behaviour
modified by so called anomalous dimensions. In the context of
renormalization the symmetry under scale transformations becomes a
powerful calculational tool which will be looked at in detail in chapter
3 .

#### 2.2.2 Internal Symmetries

##### Gauge Symmetries

In view of the discussion of Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD) we first look
at an SU(N)–symmetric theory containing Dirac fermions, which are chosen
to transform according to the defining representation of SU(N):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Here the @xmath ’s span the Lie algebra su(N). They satisfy

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

with the structure constants @xmath . Continous internal symmetries are
called gauge symmetries. If the gauge parameters @xmath in ( 2.8 ) are
independent of @xmath , one speaks of a global symmetry. Local gauge
symmetries, where the @xmath ’s are allowed to depend on @xmath , play a
key role in field theory: They incorporate a natural description of
interactions between the fermions mediated by a vector field @xmath .
The lagrangian

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

is invariant under local SU(N) transformations, if the vector field
@xmath transforms as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

##### Charge Conjugation

Charge conjugation is a discrete global internal transformation. The C
operation exchanges particles and antiparticles. In the standard
representation of the Dirac algebra a Dirac field transforms as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with the usual arbitrary phase @xmath .

Soon after the discovery of parity non–conservation the charged weak
lepton current was proposed to be of the type @xmath . This interaction
also violates charge conjugation symmetry, but it is invariant under the
combined transformation CP . Finally in 1964 it became clear that the
weak charged hadronic current violates CP invariance [ 10 ] .

#### 2.2.3 CPT Theorem

After quantizing a theory one wishes to find a representation of the
symmetry transformations of interest in the space of state vectors on
which the field operators @xmath act. A theorem of Wigner states that
one can always find such a transformation, the corresponding operator is
either unitary or anti–unitary and commutes with the hamiltonian. We
have already alluded to this theorem in the discussion before sect.
2.2.1 . In the case of C and P this operator is unitary, while it is
anti–unitary for T .

According to our present knowledge the electromagnetic and the strong
interaction respect C , P and T separately, while the weak interaction
violates all of them. Nevertheless Lüders and Pauli [ 21 ] have proven
that any Poincaré–invariant field theory must respect the combined
anti–unitary transformation CPT . This has the consequences that
particles and antiparticles have the same mass and spin and that
particles with zero quantum numbers are identical to their
antiparticles. The implications of the CPT theorem are experimentally
confirmed.

### 2.3 Standard Model

In the Standard Model the electromagnetic and the weak interaction are
unified in a @xmath gauge invariant lagrangian @xmath [ 4 ] . The strong
interaction is comprised in the SU(3) invariant lagrangian of Quantum
Chromodynamics, @xmath [ 3 ] . Both combine to the Standard Model
lagrangian @xmath .

The weak sector is the richest field of the Standard Model. First the
electroweak gauge group @xmath is chiral, because left–handed fermion
fields transform differently from the right–handed ones implying parity
violating couplings. Second the @xmath gauge symmetry is spontaneously
broken to the electromagnetic gauge group @xmath . This means that the
physical vacuum state does not have the @xmath –symmetry of the
lagrangian. In the Standard Model the symmetry breaking is provided by
the Higgs–Kibble mechanism [ 22 ] introducing a scalar potential in
@xmath with degenerate minima which transform into each other under
@xmath transformations instead of being individually invariant. As a
consequence three gauge bosons become massive due to their interaction
with the Higgs field. The chiral structure of the Standard Model forbids
explicit mass terms for the fermions. Fermion masses are therefore
generated through Yukawa interactions with the Higgs field. After
diagonalizing the resulting quark mass matrix the coupling between the
mass eigenstates of the quarks and the weak charged vector bosons @xmath
is found to be of the form:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath is the weak coupling constant and @xmath is the weak charged
current:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath denotes the up–type quarks of the three families, u,c,t,
and @xmath stands for the down–type quarks d,s,b. The Yukawa
interactions in @xmath do not only induce fermion masses, but also allow
for family–changing couplings in ( 2.14 ) described by the unitary
Cabibbo–Kobayashi–Maskawa (CKM) matrix @xmath [ 6 ] . A unitary @xmath
–matrix can be parametrized by nine parameters, five of which are
redundant in ( 2.14 ), as they correspond to physically irrelevant
redefinition of the quark fields by U(1) phase transformations. The
other four correspond to a complex phase @xmath and three rotation
angles, i.e. @xmath is real for @xmath . If @xmath is real the charged
current interaction @xmath in ( 2.13 ) is CP –conserving. A non–zero
@xmath corresponds to CP violation. This can easily be seen by recalling
from sect. 2.2.3 that the latter is equivalent to T violation which is
an antiunitary transformation involving a complex conjugation. Hence
since @xmath is T invariant for real @xmath , it must in general
transform under T into an expression with complex conjugate @xmath .
Since further @xmath this is different from the untransformed @xmath .
Yet only a non–zero @xmath is not sufficient for CP violation, we must
also ensure that it cannot be absorbed into a redefinition of the quark
fields. This means that the three up–type quarks as well as the three
down–type quarks must have different masses. In the lepton sector any
mixing matrix can likewise be absorbed into a redefinition of the
neutrino fields, if the neutrinos are massless.

For the weak neutral current such flavour–changing vertices do not occur
as a consequence of the unitarity of @xmath . This phenomenon is called
GIM mechanism [ 12 ] implying the suppression of flavour changing
neutral current (FCNC) processes.

The QCD lagrangian enjoys an unbroken SU(3) gauge symmetry. It is
obtained by adding a flavour label @xmath to the fermion field in ( 2.10
):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with the colour indices now being suppressed. In ( 2.15 ) the fermion
fields @xmath correspond to quarks with mass @xmath and the vector
fields @xmath correspond to gluons.

### 2.4 Perturbation Theory

When quantizing a theory we want to preserve the symmetries of the
classical theory. I.e. we wish to have the vectors of the Hilbert space
on which our field operators act transform according to a representation
of the symmetry group. E.g. for some internal symmetry Lie group with
generators @xmath and structure constants @xmath one seeks to find a set
of operators @xmath satisfying

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Here the second condition implies the consistency between the symmetry
transformation in the Hilbert space (LHS) with the corresponding
transformation of the fields (RHS). In ( 2.17 ) an additional unphysical
phase factor is allowed, too. Further microcausality requires that the
operators corresponding to the Noether currents commute, if the distance
of their arguments is spacelike. All these conditions are fulfilled, if
one postulates canonical commutation relations for boson field operators
and canonical anticommutation relations for fermion field operators:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The operators @xmath are then obtained by simply replacing the classical
fields @xmath by @xmath in the expressions for the classical Noether
charges @xmath . Finally for an unbroken symmetry the vaccuum state
@xmath is chosen to be invariant with respect to the symmetry
transformations.

#### 2.4.1 Green’s Functions, S–Matrix

In this section we consider for simplicity a theory with a single real
scalar field @xmath . The vacuum–to–vacuum amplitude of a product of
@xmath field operators is called @xmath –point Green’s function:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath means time ordering of the fields such that the time
coordinates increase from right to left. For a noninteracting theory all
Green’s functions can be easily expressed in terms of the simplest
nonvanishing Green’s function

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with the Stückelberg–Feynman propagator

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

( 2.18 ) implies that the Fourier components of a free field @xmath
satisfy the commutation relations of annihilation and creation
operators. Hence one can use them to create @xmath –particle states from
the vacuum state @xmath . These @xmath –particle states form the
canonical basis of the Fock space @xmath .

For an interacting field theory we neither know the form of @xmath in (
2.20 ) nor can we relate the @xmath –point function in ( 2.19 ) to the
two–point function ( 2.20 ). On the other hand we empirically know that
largely separated particles essentially behave as free particles.
Further in a scattering experiment the relevant distances @xmath and
@xmath are large. The Riemann–Lebesgue lemma states that for @xmath only
non–integrable singularities of @xmath can give a contribution to the
integral in ( 2.20 ). Hence one assumes that also for an interacting
theory @xmath develops a pole as in ( 2.21 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

This makes the concept of asymptotic states and fields plausible: One
assumes that the Hilbert space of the interacting field theory contains
some subset of state vectors which for @xmath develop into states which
correspond to @xmath –particle momentum eigenstates of the free
hamiltonian. I.e. for @xmath any of these in–states tends to an element
of the canonical basis of a Fock space @xmath . These states describe
the incoming particles in scattering experiments. The in–states are
created and annihilated by the Fourier components of a free field
operator @xmath . On the subspace spanned by the in–states one has

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

in the weak sense. Here one has to allow for a real constant factor
@xmath , because ( 2.18 ) fixes an overall normalization of @xmath .
Next one postulates a field @xmath and a set of out–states which have
the described property for @xmath corresponding to the outgoing
particles in the particle collider. It is reasonable to assume that
every particle species which can be used to prepare the incoming beam
can possibly be observed in the final state and vice versa, thus the
out–states span the same Fock space @xmath as the in–states. Lorentz
invariance implies the invariance of the vaccuum, @xmath , and of
one–particle states, @xmath . Hence with ( 2.23 ) one finally obtains an
interacting two–point function which behaves asymptotically for @xmath
in accordance with ( 2.22 ).

The scattering experiment is described by the transition amplitude or
S–matrix element

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

With the concept of asymptotic fields and states it is now possible to
relate the S–matrix elements to the Green’s functions. This relationship
is given by the reduction formula of Lehmann, Symanzik and Zimmermann
(LSZ) [ 23 ] . It is particularly simple in terms of the Fourier
transformed @xmath –point Green’s function @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -- -------- --------
     @xmath                  (2.25)
                             
                    @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -- -------- --------

where we have for simplicity assumed that @xmath for all @xmath . In (
2.25 ) the truncated Green’s function @xmath is defined by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

If vector bosons or fermions are scattered the fields in ( 2.25 ) carry
indices which are contracted with spinors or polarization vectors of the
external particles.

From ( 2.25 ) and ( 2.26 ) one realizes that Green’s functions carry a
lot of redundant information, only their on–shell values are related to
physical observables.

Finally one is left with the evaluation of the Green’s functions @xmath
. They can be most conveniently expressed in terms of the path integral:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In perturbation theory one expresses @xmath by a power series in the
coupling constants of the lagrangian. In ( 2.27 ) this is done by
expanding the kernel

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with @xmath being the interaction lagrangian. The individual terms of
this perturbation series are usually depicted in a collection of Feynman
diagrams . With ( 2.28 ) and ( 2.27 ) one realizes that one can formally
write for the S–matrix in ( 2.24 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Within perturbation theory the assumption ( 2.22 ) is indeed verified:
In any finite order of perturbation theory the interacting two–point
function is of the form given in ( 2.22 ). @xmath and the residue @xmath
of the single particle pole are also power series in the couplings.

In gauge theories the path integral ( 2.27 ) includes the integration
over field configurations which are related to each other by gauge
transformations. Further even the free propagator ( 2.20 ) of a gauge
boson when derived from ( 2.10 ) does not exist. A remedy is the
addition of a gauge fixing term @xmath with gauge parameter @xmath and
the introduction of Faddeev–Popov ghost fields @xmath via @xmath [ 24 ]
. The graphs with FP ghosts correct for the unphysical polarizations of
the gauge fields corresponding to gauge degrees of freedom. FP ghosts
are scalar Grassmann fields meaning that they anticommute.

Hence the QCD lagrangian suitable for perturbative calculations reads:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

One terms quantities which do not depend on the arbitrary gauge
parameter @xmath gauge independent . S–matrix elements and physical
observables are gauge–independent. In contrast a field polynomial or
Green’s function is called gauge invariant , if it is invariant with
respect to the gauge transformation ( 2.8 ) and ( 2.11 ).

After all in the case of QCD the standard reduction procedure sketched
above does not seem very useful, because in the very beginning the
assumption ( 2.22 ) is in contradiction with the observed confinement
property. The poles in the Green’s functions are not related to the
particles described by the elementary fields in the lagrangian as
suggested by ( 2.25 ), but rather by bound states, hadrons, formed by
them. The asymptotic states are hadron states which we cannot simply
relate to quark and gluon fields. We may then ask how to make use of
perturbative QCD at all. To answer this questions one has to mention a
further property of perturbative quantum field theory discovered by
Wilson [ 25 ] : It is possible to expand a Green’s function in terms of
some ratio of mass parameters and each term of this expansion is the
product of a Green’s function involving a composite operator and a
coefficient being independent of the external states. This Wilson
coefficient comprises the short distance physics whose scale is set by
the inverse heavy mass parameter. Further QCD enjoys the feature of
asymptotic freedom ensuring that the QCD coupling is small when probed
at small distances. Hence for the calculation of the Wilson coefficients
one can use perturbation theory and can further take external quark
states rather than hadron states.

Sometimes people try to describe hadron properties in terms of off–shell
quark Green’s functions. They, however, are unphysical, as mentioned in
the discussion after ( 2.25 ), e.g. they are gauge dependent. This point
will be relevant in the discussion of the use of the field equation of
motion in sect. 3.10.1 .

#### 2.4.2 BRS Invariance

The lagrangian ( 2.30 ) is no more gauge invariant due to the
gauge–fixing term and the Faddeev–Popov term. It seems as if we have
lost all the nice features of local gauge symmetry. This is not so,
because ( 2.30 ) is still invariant under Becchi–Rouet–Stora (BRS)
transformations [ 26 ] . They are constructed by factorizing the gauge
parameter in ( 2.8 ) and ( 2.11 ) into the product of the FP field and a
Grassmann parameter @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The infinitesimal transformations of the various fields read:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The basic QCD lagrangian ( 2.15 ) is clearly BRS invariant, because for
the quark and gluon fields the BRS transformation is just a gauge
transformation. The ghost fields transform such that @xmath is
invariant. The BRS symmetry is a global supersymmetry, because it
involves an @xmath –independent anticommuting parameter @xmath . Its
magic is that it encodes the original local gauge symmetry which had to
be destroyed by adding @xmath to @xmath .

A global symmetry of @xmath induces relations between Green’s functions
called Ward–Takahashi identities [ 28 ] . The Ward–Takahashi identities
implied by BRS invariance are Slavnov–Taylor identities [ 29 ] . We will
need them in the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are product of fields whose arguments may
coincide. When making use of ( 2.32 ) one has to anticommute @xmath to
the right (or to the left) thereby picking up a relative “–”–sign
between the terms involving @xmath and @xmath , if they contain an odd
number of Dirac fields.

#### 2.4.3 Renormalization

The perturbative evaluation of Green’s functions involves integrations
over loop momenta. Some of these integrals diverge when the loop momenta
get large, they are UV divergent . To give a meaning to these divergent
expressions one first has to regularize the divergence: An additional
parameter @xmath is introduced in the lagrangian such that the latter
coincides for @xmath with the original lagrangian. The loop integrals
are finite in some range for @xmath and analytic functions in @xmath .
For @xmath one rediscovers the divergence in the form of some
singularity. Throughout this paper we use dimensional regularization
which conserves most of the interesting symmetries. Here @xmath is the
space–time dimension and @xmath . The appearance of UV divergences
originates in the fact that quantum field operators are singular
distributions, see ( 2.18 ). In general their product is ill-defined
when their arguments coincide. The renormalization process gives a
meaning to the field products in the interaction lagrangian.

The renormalization process is carried out recursively in the power of
the coupling constant @xmath or equivalently in the number of loops. It
is encoded in Zimmermann’s forest formula [ 27 ] . Starting from the
one–loop order one finds that one can absorb all divergences into a
multiplicative redefinition of the parameters of the lagrangian such as
masses, couplings and the normalization of the fields which is connected
to the quantity @xmath in ( 2.23 ). These multiplicative renormalization
constants are Laurent series in @xmath in dimensional regularization. In
the n–th order all divergences of 1– to (n–1)–loop subdiagrams are
already remedied by the earlier renormalization steps. The remaining
overall divergence can then be absorbed into new n–th order terms in the
renormalization constants. For this to work it is crucial that after the
subtraction of subdivergences the divergences are local, i.e. polynomial
in the external momenta of the Green’s function under consideration.
Further the renormalization constants must be universal meaning they
must remove the divergence of some subloop in whatever diagram it
occurs.

Yet for a predicative theory we must also ensure that the
renormalization process does not induce new couplings in any new order
of perturbation theory, because then we would end up with a theory with
infinitely many undetermined parameters. This can be ensured, if the
lagrangian contains only couplings with non–negative dimension. In this
case we term the theory to be renormalizable by power counting . This
criterion applies to the Standard Model.

In the following we will also be confronted with effective field
theories which contain couplings with negative dimension. The parameters
of such effective field theories, however, will be fixed by a matching
procedure in which the effective theory Green’s functions are related to
Standard Model Green’s functions, so that the theory is predicative.

Since we will always work to lowest nonvanishing order in the weak
coupling constant, we will only have to discuss renormalization of the
QCD lagrangian. First we define

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The QCD Lagrangian now reads in terms of the unrenormalized ( bare )
parameters:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.33)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The bare fields and parameters are related to the renormalized ones by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here an arbitrary dimension–1 parameter, the renormalization scale
@xmath has been introduced to keep the renormalized coupling constant
@xmath dimensionless. In dimensional regularization the @xmath –loop
diagrams involve poles in @xmath up to order @xmath . Hence the
renormalization constants are of the form:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Now the renormalized lagrangian reads:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.36)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Sometimes it is useful to decompose @xmath in ( 2.36 ) into a sum @xmath
, where @xmath has the form of ( 2.33 ) with the bare quantities
replaced by renormalized ones. @xmath is called counterterm lagrangian .

Gauge invariance has implied that all interaction terms in @xmath
involve the same coupling constant @xmath . Dimensional regularization
has the advantage that it manifestly preserves gauge invariance in the
unrenormalized Green’s functions. As shown by ’t Hooft the subsequent
renormalization procedure does not spoil gauge invariance, so that
@xmath is the same in all these interaction terms [ 30 ] . Finally also
renormalized Green’s functions obey the Slavnov–Taylor identities, but
with a renormalized parameter

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (2.37)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

## Chapter 3 Renormalization Group and Operator Product Expansion

### 3.1 Renormalization Schemes

When determining the renormalization constants in ( 2.36 ) one
calculates Green’s functions obtained from @xmath and adjusts the
renormalization constants such that the result is finite. The Green’s
function to some fixed order in @xmath involves @xmath –loop diagrams
with interaction vertices only from @xmath and subloop counterterm
diagrams with fewer loops and with vertices also from @xmath . The
individual contributions contain divergent terms which depend
non–polynomial on the external momenta @xmath , but they cancel in the
sum of every @xmath –loop diagram and its sub–loop counterterm diagrams
[ 27 ] . Since these non–local poles cancel, one can absorb the
remaining divergences into @xmath –loop counterterms.

Now one is free to subtract any momentum–independent constant @xmath
together with the divergences order by order in perturbation theory. Any
such choice of the @xmath ’s in ( 2.35 ) corresponds to a different
renormalization scheme. In the minimal subtraction scheme (MS) [ 31 ]
one picks @xmath . All schemes in which the @xmath ’s do not depend on
the masses are called mass independent . Due to Weinberg’s theorem [ 32
] they enjoy the property that also the divergent parts of the @xmath ’s
are independent of the masses (see e.g. [ 33 ] ). In other words in mass
independent schemes the divergences are not only polynomial in the
momenta but also in the masses. The main advantage of these schemes,
however, is that they allow for the solution of the renormalization
group equations to be discussed in sect. 3.2 .

Since in every renormalization scheme the divergences are removed, any
two schemes can at most differ by a finite renormalization, for example
an arbitrary scheme is related to the MS scheme via

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

From this one sees that the @xmath ’s are scheme–independent while the
other Laurent coefficients in ( 2.35 ) depend on the lower order @xmath
’s. In fact the @xmath ’s are simply related to the one–loop @xmath ’s.
The finite renormalization @xmath in ( 3.1 ) may be viewed as a
perturbative redefinition of the fields, masses and coupling constants
in @xmath in ( 2.36 ).

In dimensional regularization all loop integrals involve an additive
term @xmath with @xmath being Euler’s constant. It is reasonable to
subtract this term in every order of perturbation theory. The resulting
scheme is called @xmath scheme [ 34 ] . There is a simple way to relate
the @xmath scheme to the MS scheme: One first replaces the
renormalization scale @xmath in ( 2.34 ) by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Recalling that @xmath resp. @xmath has been introduced into ( 2.36 ) to
maintain integer dimensions for the renormalized parameters one realizes
that each loop integral @xmath comes with a factor of @xmath . Then one
expands ( 3.2 ) to the desired order in @xmath and multiplies this power
series with the Laurent series in @xmath of the unrenormalized diagrams.
In this way one modifies the pole part of the unrenormalized Green’s
functions such that @xmath and @xmath vanishes. Finally one simply
applies minimal subtraction to the remaining expression. This method,
which will be used in this thesis, has the advantage that one can avoid
Euler’s constant and @xmath in intermediate steps of the calculation.
Further one can easily translate relations proven in the MS scheme into
the @xmath scheme.

Yet there is another aspect of ( 3.2 ): When inserted into ( 2.36 ) one
may view ( 3.2 ) as a redefinition of @xmath by a @xmath –independent
power series in @xmath , @xmath , or alternatively as a redefinition of
the field monomials multiplied by @xmath . Here in ( 3.2 ) this series
reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Clearly multiplying with such a power series does not commute with the
renormalization process, so that it corresponds to a change of the
renormalization scheme. Let us call this procedure evanescent
redefinition of the coupling or of the field monomial. Such evanescent
redefinitions appear naturally in the context of effective four–fermion
couplings. We will investigate them in chapter 4 [ 19 ] . One task will
be to translate an evanescent redefinition into a finite renormalization
( 3.1 ). We finally remark that the change from the MS to the @xmath
scheme is equivalent to a change of the scale @xmath as evidenced from (
3.2 ).

Any S–matrix element and any physical observable is independent of the
chosen renormalization scheme to the calculated order. This means, if
one calculates some observable in scheme I to order @xmath and
afterwards expresses @xmath and the other parameters such as masses in
terms of the coupling @xmath and the parameters of some other scheme II,
the result differs at most by terms of order @xmath from the calculation
of the observable in scheme II.

### 3.2 Renormalization Group, @xmath

The invariance of the S–matrix with respect to the change of the
renormalization prescription implies a continous symmetry of the
quantized theory as noticed first by Stückelberg and Petermann [ 35 ] .
The group associated to this symmetry is the renormalization group (RG).
Its power roots in the fact that it links different orders of the
perturbative series: By applying a renormalization group transformation
to some @xmath –th order Green’s function we can add some logarithmic
term of all uncalculated higher orders to the result. When the RG is
applied properly, these logarithms are the dominant contribution of the
higher orders and they are summed to all orders by the RG
transformation.

In mass independent schemes renormalized Green’s functions depend on the
renormalization scale @xmath . Changing @xmath corresponds to a very
simple way of modifying the renormalization prescription as discussed
after ( 3.2 ). The S–matrix is independent of @xmath , if the bare
quantities in ( 2.33 ) are chosen @xmath –independent. Hence the
renormalization scale invariance is a special case of the
renormalization scheme invariance.

#### 3.2.1 Renormalization Group Functions in QCD

In this section we will collect the important RG functions of QCD in the
@xmath scheme (see e.g. [ 36 ] ). From the @xmath –independence of the
unrenormalized parameters in ( 2.34 ) one easily finds:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

with the beta–function

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

and the anomalous dimensions of quark mass and quark field

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

@xmath in ( 3.4 ) is the current mass appearing in the lagrangian ( 2.36
). It is also called running mass, because it depends on @xmath . The
renormalization group functions in mass independent schemes depend on
@xmath only through @xmath as indicated in ( 3.4 ). This feature allows
to solve the renormalization group equation, which reads for a
renormalized truncated connected n–quark Green’s function:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath means

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where the partial derivatives are performed with the bare quantities
kept fixed.

Let us briefly sketch the relation of ( 3.7 ) to the scale
transformations alluded to in sect. 2.2.1 : Recalling that @xmath has
been introduced to maintain an integer dimension @xmath for @xmath one
easily finds (see e.g [ 36 , p. 199] ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

which may be used to eliminate @xmath in ( 3.7 ) in favour of the
scaling factor @xmath of the external momenta.

Now @xmath enters Green’s functions only in powers of @xmath , thus
after expanding in @xmath only in powers of logarithms. Since @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath , ( 3.7 ) connects the @xmath ’s of different
orders in @xmath of @xmath to each other.

We will need the renormalization group functions up to the next–to
leading order (NLO) [ 36 ] . The beta–function reads:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath is the number of colours, @xmath and @xmath is the number of
quark flavours. For the anomalous mass dimension one finds:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Whenever we discuss leading order (LO) expressions, only the first term
is kept in ( 3.9 ) and ( 3.11 ). The anomalous dimension of the quark
field will only be needed in the leading order:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

With these definitions it is easy to write down the solutions of the RG
equations ( 3.4 ) for @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The mass parameter @xmath has entered ( 3.14 ) as a constant of
integration. Hence the massless coupling @xmath of the classical
lagrangian has become a function of the dimension–one parameter @xmath
in the quantized theory. ( 3.14 ) also exhibits the property of
asymptotic freedom, @xmath for @xmath . By inverting ( 3.14 ) one can
define @xmath . For @xmath defined in the @xmath scheme one has

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In the limit @xmath this is a precise definition of @xmath . Since the
NLO coefficient @xmath appears in an overall factor rather than in a
radiative correction, one realizes that it is mandatory to go to the NLO
to define @xmath . Conversely only in NLO expressions for some physical
observable of interest one can make use of @xmath . This is an important
reason to perform perturbative calculations beyond the leading order.
@xmath has been defined in the MS scheme by Buras, Floratos, Ross and
Sachrajda [ 37 ] and the @xmath scheme has been introduced by Bardeen,
Buras, Duke and Muta [ 34 ] .

Solving the RG equation ( 3.4 ) for the running quark mass yields for
the mass at some scale @xmath expressed in terms of @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In ( 3.16 ) @xmath and @xmath are defined by

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

If @xmath only contains a single mass parameter apart from @xmath , for
example some spacelike external momentum @xmath , @xmath must
necessarily appear in the form @xmath To make sense of a perturbative
calculation we must choose @xmath in order to avoid a large logarithm
multiplying the expansion parameter @xmath . One may solve ( 3.7 ) to
obtain @xmath at any other scale @xmath . This RG improved expression
differs from a standard perturbative result such that it includes the
terms involving @xmath to all orders in perturbation theory. The LO RG
improved perturbation theory is therefore called leading log (LL)
approximation.

### 3.3 A First Look at @xmath–Mixing

Yet in most physical processes more than one mass scale is involved. To
make use of RG improved perturbation theory more field theoretic tools
are needed. To motivate the following sections let us have a first look
at the main subject of this thesis, the @xmath transition inducing
@xmath –mixing.

Fig. 5.1 on p. 5.1 shows the lowest order @xmath transition amplitude in
the Standard Model. One–gluon radiative corrections are depicted in fig.
5.2 on p. 5.2 . Now this amplitude is not useful to describe physical
@xmath processes for the following reasons:

-   The diagrams of fig. 5.2 incorporate QCD corrections perturbatively.
    While this is appropriate for short distance effects, the long
    distance QCD interaction is non–perturbative and cannot be described
    by the exchange of gluons.

-   There are largely separated mass scales involved: The radiative
    corrections of fig. 5.2 contain large logarithms such as @xmath , so
    that the radiative corrections have the same order of magnitude as
    the leading term. One would like to sum this logarithm to all orders
    in perturbation theory. RG techniques applied to the Standard Model
    amplitude, however, will not achieve this, because with them only
    logarithms of @xmath can be summed to all orders.

-   For the same reason it is not clear at which scale the running
    coupling should be evaluated. Between @xmath and @xmath the coupling
    @xmath changes roughly by a factor of three.

-   The real external states are mesons rather than on–shell quarks.
    Off–shell quarks are an even worse description of mesons, because
    off–shell amplitudes are unphysical as mentioned in the end of sect.
    2.4.1 .

Hence to tackle the problem one wishes to separate short distance
effects from the long distance physics. This separation is provided by
Wilson’s operator product expansion [ 25 ] discussed in the following
section.

### 3.4 Operator Product Expansion

In weak processes involving hadrons one is confronted with two
couplings: While ordinary perturbation theory in the weak coupling
@xmath works well, we have already seen in sect. 3.3 that we need a
framework to include all–order effects in the strong coupling @xmath and
possibly non–perturbative features of QCD.

For this we expand the kernel of the path integral @xmath in terms of
the electroweak (and Higgs) interaction lagrangian, but keep the QCD
interaction in the exponential. I.e. we expand as in ( 2.28 ), but with
the QCD action added to @xmath instead of being kept in @xmath . Hence
with ( 2.13 ) a four–quark Green’s function corresponding to a weak
charged current tree level process is found as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.17)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Here the quark fields are free fields with respect to the electroweak
interaction, but interacting fields with respect to QCD. ( 3.17 )
represents all diagrams with one W–boson exchange and an arbitrary
number of gluons. The index 2 in @xmath means second order in the weak
coupling constant. The weak current @xmath is the first example of a
composite operator , as it contains interacting fields at the same
space–time point.

Now Wilson has shown that one can expand a product of field operators in
a series of composite operators with increasing dimension. For the
product of the two currents in ( 3.17 ) this reads ¹ ¹ 1 sum on repeated
indices :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with the @xmath ’s being local four–quark operators as depicted in fig.
5.7 on p. 5.7 . The Green’s functions on the RHS of the operator product
expansion (OPE) ( 3.18 ) are the matrix elements of @xmath . The Wilson
coefficients @xmath are functions which are singular at @xmath . The
coefficient multiplying the operator with the lowest dimension is the
most singular one by power counting. They comprise the short distance
behaviour of the current product in ( 3.18 ) when @xmath approaches
@xmath . After inserting ( 3.18 ) into ( 3.17 ) one performs the path
integration over the W–boson fields. By this the open Lorentz indices in
( 3.18 ) are contracted with a W propagator @xmath . With

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

one realizes that ( 3.18 ) turns into an expansion in the (inverse) W
mass @xmath . With ( 3.19 ) one finally obtains for ( 3.17 ):

  -- -------- -- -- -------- --------
     @xmath                  (3.20)
                             
                    @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -- -------- --------

Here we have absorbed the weak coupling constant into @xmath . When we
pass to the operator basis for @xmath –mixing in chapter 5 we will
extract a factor of

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

out of @xmath to show that the operator product expansion in weak decays
replaces the Standard Model weak interaction by a four–fermion
interaction with the Fermi constant @xmath as the coupling constant. We
will also sometimes leave out the integral over the space–time
coordinate @xmath of the composite operator in ( 3.20 ). This merely
leaves out an overall momentum conserving @xmath –function when ( 3.20 )
is Fourier transformed into momentum space.

In momentum space ( 3.20 ) corresponds to an expansion in @xmath , where
@xmath stands collectively for the light ² ² 2 lighter than @xmath quark
masses and the small external momenta and Mandelstam variables. The
local operators in ( 3.18 ) may be obtained by expanding the momentum
space W propagator ³ ³ 3 We use the Feynman rules of [ 36 ] . :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

While it is trivial from ( 3.22 ) that ( 3.20 ) works for tree level
diagrams with @xmath , it is not obvious that ( 3.20 ) can be extended
to diagrams with gluon loops, in which @xmath in ( 3.22 ) is a loop
momentum. From Wilson’s work we know that ( 3.18 ) holds to any order in
perturbation theory. Clearly for small loop momenta ( 3.22 ) is a good
expansion, and the contributions from small loop momenta on each side of
( 3.20 ) will match with the tree level coefficient @xmath . The
contributions from large loop momenta, however, will modify @xmath by
adding terms @xmath …to @xmath . Yet these UV momenta are not sensitive
to the small internal masses and small external momenta.

When the heavy top quark is involved in the amplitude of interest, it
must also be integrated out like the W–boson.

In the discussion above we have made plausible the following properties
of the operator product expansion:

-   The @xmath ’s do not depend on the infrared structure of the
    Standard Model amplitude.

-   The Wilson coefficients @xmath depend only on the heavy mass scales
    @xmath and @xmath and on @xmath , while the matrix elements contain
    the light masses. Large logarithms such as @xmath are split into
    @xmath . The former logarithm resides in the Wilson coefficient and
    the latter is contained in the matrix elements.

-   RG methods are applicable to @xmath allowing for the summation of
    the logarithm in all orders of perturbation theory. With the
    boundary conditions of the RG evolution being @xmath and @xmath one
    sums the large logarithm @xmath of the Standard Model amplitude.

-   The @xmath ’s are independent of the external states.

Hence we have overcome the problems i) to iv) mentioned in sect. 3.3 .
The short distance coefficients @xmath are physically sensible
quantities, which can be obtained in perturbation theory. Clearly in the
end one has to cope with hadronic matrix elements, which must be
evaluated by nonperturbative methods such as lattice gauge theory,
@xmath expansion or sum rule techniques. Yet one can sometimes find them
from experimental data and insert the obtained values into predictions
for other observables of interest. The dimensions of the @xmath ’s in (
3.18 ) now manifest themself in powers of the hadronic scale @xmath .

The price paid for the factorization of short and long distance effects
in ( 3.18 ) is the inclusion of only finite powers of @xmath . These
powers are modified by logarithms which come with powers of @xmath and
can be summed to all orders in @xmath by use of the RG. Since the light
quark masses are much smaller than @xmath in most cases only the
operator with the smallest dimension in ( 3.18 ) is sufficient. When
@xmath passes the flavour thresholds @xmath or @xmath , however, we
repeat the factorization process. Below @xmath the OPE is an expansion
in @xmath and higher dimension operators may become important.

#### 3.4.1 Renormalization of Composite Operators

Since composite operators involve products of interacting fields at the
same space–time point, they require a renormalization in addition to
that of the fields they are composed of. This operator renormalization
has been worked out by Zimmermann [ 38 ] , who called renormalized
operators normal products.

The unrenormalized field product composed of unrenormalized fields will
be denoted by the superscript bare . We will frequently be concerned
with four–fermion operators:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are strings of Dirac matrices. We will only need
four–fermion operators which are Lorentz singlets or pseudosinglets,
i.e. all Lorentz indices in @xmath are contracted. Colour and flavour
indices are suppressed in ( 3.23 ), we will make them explicit where
necessary. Next in the matrix elements the fields creating the external
states are conventionally not displayed. After expressing the bare
fields in ( 3.23 ) in terms of renormalized fields as in ( 2.34 ), the
matrix elements are still divergent. The necessary operator
renormalization of @xmath can require counterterms proportional to other
operators @xmath . This phenomenon is called operator mixing. We say
that @xmath mixes into @xmath , if @xmath requires a counterterm
proportional to @xmath . Hence the multiplicative renormalization
involves matrices renormalizing vectors of operators @xmath . The
renormalized operator reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

As in ( 2.36 ) a quantity without superscript is understood to be
renormalized. In cases where this may be confusing (such as in chapter 4
) we will mark renormalized quantities with ren . In the
phenomenological sections also the caret on the operators will be
omitted.

A set of operators which renormalize each other in ( 3.24 ) is said to
close under renormalization .

In ( 3.24 ) the standard definition of @xmath has been given. It would
be more useful to include the field renormalization into the defintion
of @xmath , so that @xmath would be expressed in terms of renormalized
fields instead of bare fields. Again, in ambiguous places completely
renormalized (i.e. finite) Green’s functions will get a superscript ren
:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We will also have to discuss the mixing of four–fermion operators with
operators containing only two external quark lines, but additional gluon
or ghost legs. They involve the product of the corresponding field
renormalization constants in ( 3.25 ) instead of four quark field
constants @xmath .

### 3.5 Effective Field Theories

The operator product expansion in terms of some inverse heavy mass
described in the previous section has a complementary interpretation in
terms of an effective field theory: Since the Wilson coefficients @xmath
on the RHS of ( 3.20 ) are independent of the external states we may
consider them as coupling constants multiplying four–fermion couplings
in some effective Lagrangian:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.26)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Clearly the S–matrix

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

derived from ( 3.26 ) yields to first order in the effective coupling
constants @xmath and to all orders in the QCD coupling constant @xmath
the RHS of ( 3.20 ). We may compare the effective Lagrangian ( 3.26 )
with the QCD Lagrangian ( 2.36 ): The last line in ( 3.26 ) corresponds
to a renormalized interaction vertex expressed in terms of renormalized
fields. We may view @xmath as renormalizing the effective coupling
constant @xmath instead of the composite operator. Yet the concept of an
effective field theory must allow for going beyond the first order in
the effective interaction in ( 3.27 ). This is possible as we know from
the work of Witten [ 39 ] .

The Green’s functions of second order in the effective interaction
involve

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

These bilocal structures are in general divergent even in the absence of
QCD interactions as can be seen from fig. 5.4 . Hence one must add
counterterms proportional to local operators to @xmath in order to
obtain a finite result. Although the effective theory is not
renormalizable by power counting, this is possible in all orders of both
the effective and the QCD interaction, because after subtracting
subdivergences the remaining divergences are polynomial in the momenta.
The non–renormalizable interaction, however, forces us to introduce new
counterterms in every order of perturbation theory. Hence we cannot
include all–order effects in the effective action as we can do with the
RG summation of the QCD interaction. Yet ordinary perturbation theory
works well for the weak interaction, so that working to finite order in
the effective coupling is perfectly sufficient.

In this thesis we will work up to the second order in the effective
couplings. After adding the local operator counterterms to @xmath one
ends up with:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.28)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

with @xmath , @xmath , being the local operators needed as counterterms
to the bilocal structures. In @xmath –mixing the @xmath ’s are @xmath
operators and the @xmath ’s are @xmath operators. In ( 3.26 ) and ( 3.28
) we have for simplicity only displayed four–fermion operator
counterterms. If none of the quark fields in @xmath , @xmath has the
same flavour quantum number as one of the antiquark fields, only
four–quark counterterms appear in @xmath . Yet in the general case so
called penguin diagrams lead to a mixing of four–quark operators into
other operators as depicted in figs. 5.8 (p. 5.8 ) and 5.11 (p. 5.11 ).

From ( 3.28 ) we realize the advantage of the effective lagrangian
picture: The extra terms in ( 3.28 ) exactly look like renormalization
factors for the effective couplings @xmath , but now both in terms of
the effective interaction and of QCD:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

This form resembles the QCD coupling renormalization in ( 2.36 ).
Further the effective lagrangian form allows for a simple inclusion of
the correct wave function renormalization, which is simply taken into
account by the corresponding counterterm Feynman rules derived from
@xmath . Finally the renormalization group equations for the @xmath ’s
and @xmath ’s to be discussed in sect. 3.8 are very easily found from (
3.26 ) and ( 3.28 ).

### 3.6 Appelquist–Carrazone Theorem

The decoupling theorem of Appelquist and Carrazone [ 40 ] deals with the
effect of heavy virtual particles on low energy processes: If we can
remove some heavy particle field from the lagrangian without spoiling
the renormalizability ⁴ ⁴ 4 We will use the term renormalizability for
two different properties: It either refers to the locality of
counterterms, in this sense we also call an effective theory
renormalizable, or it means renormalizability by power counting such
that all couplings have non–negative dimension. , the loop effects of
the heavy particle can be absorbed in the renormalization constants of
the low energy lagrangian (without the heavy particle field) and into
additive terms which are suppressed by powers (times logarithms) of the
heavy particle mass.

The Appelquist–Carrazone theorem puts some hierarchical order into field
theory: It has allowed to discover QED without knowing about its
embedding into the Standard Model and it allows to study Standard Model
predictions at LEP energies without knowing the physics at, say, @xmath
.

We will be concerned with the Appelquist–Carrazone theorem in a twofold
way: First we will use that quark fields and clearly also the W field do
decouple with respect to the strong interaction: QCD works with 5
flavours as well as with 6, hence we can remove the top quark from the
lagrangian when passing with the renormalization scale @xmath below its
mass. We repeat this with the W mass and then when crossing the b– and
c–threshold. We could even incorporate these inverse power corrections
by taking into account operators with higher dimension in ( 3.28 ) and
we can use the RG to sum the logarithms accompanying these powers
together with powers of the strong coupling constant.

The weak interaction, however, is a prominent example for
non–decoupling: The heavy top–quark is clearly needed as an isospin
partner of the bottom quark and after removing the W–boson we are faced
with non–renormalizable effective four–fermion couplings. The
non–decoupling allows to study the weak interaction in hadronic
processes, although their energy scale @xmath is much lower than the
scale @xmath , at which the weak transition takes place.

### 3.7 Initial Condition for the Wilson Coefficients

RG improved perturbation theory starts with the definition of the
initial condition for the Wilson coefficients. This is done by matching
the Standard Model amplitude to the effective theory as prescribed in (
3.20 ). For definiteness we will consider some weak four–fermion
amplitudes.

#### 3.7.1 Single Operator Insertion

Let’s look at some weak tree level process such as a @xmath transition,
which is mediated by the exchange of one W boson. The corresponding
Standard Model amplitude factorizes order by order in @xmath into a
Wilson coefficient vector @xmath and matrix elements @xmath . For
illustration we only display the dependence on the renormalization scale
@xmath , the W mass @xmath and a light quark mass @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

A @xmath four–quark operator is depicted in fig. 5.7 on p. 5.7 .

To obtain ( 3.29 ) one has to calculate the Standard Model amplitude and
the matrix element in perturbation theory to the desired order in the
QCD coupling @xmath . By comparing both results one finds @xmath . For a
meaningful perturbative result for @xmath the factorization scale @xmath
must be chosen to be of the order @xmath to keep the logarithm @xmath in
@xmath small. Thereby one obtains the initial value for @xmath with
respect to the RG evolution. With the RG evolution of @xmath from @xmath
down to @xmath described in the following section we want to sum @xmath
present in the LHS of ( 3.29 ) to all orders. As indicated one is not
forced to choose @xmath exactly. The two large logarithms @xmath and
@xmath differ by a small logarithm of the order of magnitude of the
remaining non–summed radiative correction. Changing @xmath and @xmath
modifies the result by terms of the order of the uncalculated higher
order corrections. These scale dependences are inherent to RG improved
perturbation theory and may be viewed as an estimate of the accuracy of
the truncated perturbation series. For the rest of this section we
choose @xmath and @xmath for clarity.

From the matching procedure one can count the powers of the summed
logarithms: In LO the matching is done in the order @xmath , and the LO
RG will sum

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In NLO we will sum the log’s with one additional power of @xmath . Hence
the matching is done in the order @xmath , which requires the
calculation of the one–loop diagrams of fig. 4.1 on p. 4.1 .

#### 3.7.2 Double Operator Insertion

Next we will look at a process which appears in the second order of the
effective couplings. Clearly we have in mind the @xmath transition with
light internal quarks. Its Standard Model amplitude is described in LO
by fig. 5.1 (p. 5.1 ) and the effective theory matrix element is shown
in fig. 5.4 (p. 5.4 ). We will often refer to fig. 5.4 as the prototype
for a matrix element with two insertion of four–fermion operators,
although we will later also discuss matrix elements containing one other
operator such the one depicted in fig. 5.9 (p. 5.8 ) or 5.11 (p. 5.11 ).

Here the matching condition reads

  -- -------- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath         (3.30)
  -- -------- -------- -- -- --------

Here the square brackets around the two operators shall denote the
inclusion of the local operator counterterms in @xmath in ( 3.28 ).

Next let us comment on the powers of the logarithm. There are two
different cases, both of which appear in @xmath –mixing:

Case I:

This generic case is the following situation:

The diagram in fig. 5.4 is divergent and requires local operator
counterterms depicted in fig. 5.3 (p. 5.3 ). In the example of @xmath
–mixing these local operators @xmath are @xmath operators. With the
divergence comes @xmath in the finite part even in the absence of QCD
corrections. Its twin in the Standard Model amplitude is @xmath . In the
LO we can simply do the matching from these logarithms and the leading
log summation comprises

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Consequently in NLO we can still do the matching from the one–loop
graphs figs. 5.1 and 5.4 , but now from the @xmath parts. Here we must
also take into account the coefficients of the @xmath ’s.

Case I will appear in the calculation of @xmath in ( 1.1 ) in chapter 6
. Cf. also the NLO calculation of rare K decays in [ 41 ] .

Case II:

The insertion of two local operators into the diagram of fig. 5.4 is
convergent. This situation appears when there are several contributions
of the form in fig. 5.4 combining such that the divergences of the
individual contributions cancel. With the cancellation of the
divergences also the @xmath ’s will disappear, so that there is no large
log in the corresponding one–loop amplitude of fig. 5.1 . Hence the
leading log summation will comprise

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the matching has to be done in the order @xmath . Consequently we
are forced to perform the NLO matching in the order @xmath . This
requires the calculation of the finite parts of the diagrams of fig. 5.2
(p. 5.2 ) and of those of fig. 5.5 (p. 5.5 ).

Case II appears in the calculation of @xmath . The cancellation of the
large logs in the corresponding Standard Model amplitude is caused by
the GIM mechanism: The divergence of the diagram in fig. 5.4 is
multiplied with the product of two columns of the CKM matrix, which is
zero due to the unitarity of the latter. The finite part is of the order
@xmath and one speaks of a hard GIM suppression. One could even term
this suppression superhard , because there is even no @xmath multiplying
@xmath and the RG enhancement is thereby suppressed by one power of
@xmath compared to case I.

### 3.8 Renormalization Group for Operators and Coefficients

#### 3.8.1 Single Operator Insertion

In this section we will set up the RG formalism for matrix elements with
single insertions of composite operators, which can be derived from
@xmath in ( 3.26 ).

##### Anomalous Dimension Matrix

The anomalous dimension matrix @xmath is defined by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.31)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

From ( 3.24 ) one simply obtains the RG equation for the renormalized
operator:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.32)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We expand @xmath as usual in @xmath and @xmath as shown in ( 2.35 ). The
anomalous dimension matrix

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.33)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

is related to @xmath as follows:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.34)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In ( 3.33 ) and in ( 3.34 ) we have only kept the terms relevant for NLO
calculations. We have allowed for a finite renormalization @xmath as
well. The structure of ( 3.34 ) reveals that one obtains the correct
@xmath by inserting the finite one–loop counterterms with a factor of
1/2 instead of 1 into the one–loop counterterm diagrams. ( 3.34 ) can be
easily derived from the insertion of ( 3.33 ) into ( 3.31 ), see e.g. [
43 ] . Alternatively one can recall that @xmath is related to the
coefficient of @xmath in @xmath . In dimensional regularization the
@xmath ’s enter the finite parts of Green’s functions via

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where the @xmath stems from counterterm diagrams. Hence e.g. in lowest
order the coefficient of @xmath is simply twice the coefficient of the
divergence.

In the same way one finds for @xmath in ( 3.9 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.35)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

As mentioned before, the different coefficients of @xmath are not
independent. In NLO one has the relation

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.36)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

( 3.36 ) is a consequence of the renormalizability, i.e. of the locality
of the counterterms [ 42 ] . Since in mass independent schemes the
divergence of each diagram plus its subloop counterterm diagrams is
polynomial in the momenta and masses, any dependence on @xmath also
cancels from the divergent parts. The two–loop diagrams involve @xmath ,
while the one–loop counterterm diagrams involve @xmath times either
@xmath or @xmath . The vanishing of @xmath enforces ( 3.36 ). We will
use this argument in a different context in a formal proof on evanescent
operators, which vanish in @xmath dimensions, in chapter 4. Relation (
3.36 ) is tightly related to the finiteness of anomalous dimensions,
which has been used for an elegant proof of ( 3.36 ) in [ 43 ] .

##### Solution of the RG Equations

Let us first derive the RG equation for the Wilson coefficients: From
@xmath in ( 3.26 ) one immediately obtains:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.37)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

thus the RG equation for the Wilson coefficient vector @xmath involves
the transpose of @xmath . The solution of ( 3.37 ) is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.38)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the evolution matrix :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.39)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath means that the matrices @xmath in the expanded exponential
are ordered such that the couplings @xmath

The LO solution of ( 3.39 ) is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.40)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.41)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In the diagonal basis of @xmath the LO evolution matrix @xmath is simply
a diagonal matrix with diagonal elements @xmath , where the @xmath ’s
are the eigenvalues of @xmath .

The NLO solution of ( 3.39 ) reads:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.42)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Here clearly the NLO running @xmath has to be used in @xmath . @xmath in
( 3.42 ) is a solution of the matrix equation [ 44 ] :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.43)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In practical calculations it is not useful to solve ( 3.43 ) by
transforming into the diagonal basis. On better solves ( 3.43 )
directly: Since it is a system of linear equations for the elements of
@xmath , the entries of @xmath are simply rational functions of @xmath
and @xmath .

For the LO evolution matrix it is useful to transform to the diagonal
form, as this saves computation time, because @xmath has to be
calculated newly for every new pair @xmath . In our phenomenological
analysis of chapter 7 , however, we have simply exponentiated the matrix
in ( 3.40 ), because the computer algebra system Mathematica provides a
fairly fast numerical matrix exponentiation algorithm.

#### 3.8.2 Double Operator Insertion

The local operator counterterms @xmath in @xmath do not influence the RG
evolution of the coefficients @xmath , but they modify the running of
@xmath . We will investigate this in the following.

Often one does not insert the full set of operators in @xmath into both
places in fig. 5.4 , but limits oneself to a subset which closes under
renormalization. Hence @xmath and @xmath in @xmath may run over
different ranges. This will be so in the case of @xmath .

##### Anomalous Dimension Tensor and RG Equations

The evolution of the Wilson coefficients in @xmath is fixed with ( 3.38
). Now @xmath contains new local operator counterterms with coefficients
@xmath . It has become standard to define the operators @xmath with two
inverse powers of @xmath , e.g. @xmath , to avoid operator mixing in the
order @xmath . Then @xmath and the mixing matrices start in the order
@xmath .

From @xmath and @xmath one finds with ( 3.28 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

This can be compactly rewritten as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.44)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with the anomalous dimension tensor

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The analogue of ( 3.34 ) is found as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath                     
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.45)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

##### Solution of the RG Equations

The solution of the inhomogeneous RG equation ( 3.37 ) for the running
Wilson coefficient @xmath reads:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.46)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Here @xmath and @xmath are the RG quantities related to single
insertions of @xmath as defined in ( 3.40 ) and ( 3.43 ). Further the
Wilson coefficients and evolution matrices have been labeled with @xmath
rather than @xmath to comply with the integration variable @xmath . The
coupling at the scale @xmath at which the initial condition is defined
is denoted by @xmath .

The first term in ( 3.46 ) is solely related to matrix elements with
single insertions of @xmath . There are no factors involving @xmath
here, because the initial coefficients @xmath start at the order @xmath
.

( 3.46 ) nicely reveals the structure of the RG in bilocal matrix
elements: First the two Wilson coefficients @xmath and @xmath run from
@xmath down to the intermediate scale @xmath with @xmath . Then they are
linked by the anomalous dimension tensor to a single coefficient @xmath
, which runs further down with the NLO evolution matrix @xmath . The
integral sums over all intermediate scales @xmath .

For formal analyses as those in chapter 4 the form ( 3.46 ) is well
suited. In a practical calculation, however, the solution of the
integral in ( 3.46 ) requires to transform the @xmath ’s to the diagonal
basis of @xmath . The same must be done for the @xmath ’s of at least
one of the two operator bases corresponding to the double operator
insertion.

Consider the case that the two operator bases feeding fig. 5.4 (p. 5.4 )
have @xmath and @xmath elements, while @xmath linearly independent
operators @xmath are needed as counterterms to fig. 5.4 . In the
calculation of @xmath we will have @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . The
simplest way to solve ( 3.44 ) is to label the product @xmath with a
single index running from 1 to @xmath . We obtain the form as in ( 3.37
) and can proceed as in the case of single operator insertions. The
evolution matrix has @xmath rows and columns. Yet this method hides the
different sources of RG admixtures to @xmath .

Next one can transform to the diagonal basis for one set of operators
@xmath : The RG evolution then decomposes into @xmath separate sectors
each involving @xmath matrices. This is similar to the method used in
the LO analysis of @xmath –mixing of Gilman and Wise [ 45 ] . If this
method is used beyond the leading order, however, the mixing matrices of
different orders must commute , if the standard formalism of sect. 3.8.1
shall apply: Only if @xmath , the NLO matrix @xmath does not induce a
mixing of the different sectors of the LO evolution. In the calculation
of @xmath , where @xmath , this is indeed the case for the relevant LO
and NLO mixing matrices given in the literature [ 43 ] .

The discussion above stresses the advantage of commuting LO and NLO
mixing matrices, especially for the case of multiple operator
insertions. It is noticeable that one can indeed always achieve this
situation by a finite renormalization, because @xmath is scheme
dependent. In the context of four–fermion operators scheme
transformations involving a set of continuos real parameters naturally
enter the scene due to the presence of evanescent operators. We will
look at this in chapter 4 .

Of course one can further decompose the RG evolution by transforming the
remaining operator sets to the diagonal basis, too. Yet this does
neither significantly improve the algorithm nor does it provide more
insight into physics.

The @xmath sectors each having a @xmath evolution matrix contain some
redundancy, because all @xmath of them encode the running of the @xmath
other operators. This redundancy can be removed by replacing the @xmath
’s by @xmath ’s which are obtained by dividing the @xmath ’s by the
@xmath ’s of the diagonalized basis. This results in a matrix evolution
for a coefficient vector with @xmath components. We have used this
method in the calculation of @xmath thereby reducing the problem to a
single @xmath evolution matrix instead of using four such matrices as in
[ 45 ] .

We finally remark that the evolution matrix has a block–triangular form,
because the coefficients @xmath of the local operators @xmath cannot mix
into the products @xmath . Since such block–triangular matrices appear
in many contexts, their discussion deserves a separate section.

#### 3.8.3 Block–triangular Mixing Matrix

We will frequently encounter block–triangular anomalous dimension
matrices:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.47)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with submatrices @xmath and @xmath . This form leads to a
block–triangular LO evolution matrix:

  -- -------- -- -- -------- --------
     @xmath                  (3.48)
                             
                    @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -- -------- --------

with @xmath defined analogously to ( 3.41 ). Hence the diagonal blocks
of the LO evolution matrix exponentiate separately. The RG evolution of
the Wilson coefficients of the subspace @xmath corresponding to @xmath
is not affected by the coefficients of the other subspace @xmath . The
Wilson coefficient vectors in @xmath , however, satisfy a RG equation to
which an inhomogeneous term is added involving the solution of the RG
equation of subspace @xmath .

This invariance of @xmath persists in NLO: ( 3.47 ) leads to a
block–triangular @xmath matrix in ( 3.43 ) protecting @xmath from
admixtures.

We will be confronted with the case that @xmath is a @xmath matrix. Then
one can also solve @xmath in terms of @xmath , the submatrix @xmath
matrix @xmath and the column vector @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.49)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

which is a row vector due to @xmath . @xmath is the @xmath unit matrix.

A similar relation for

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

can be derived from ( 3.43 ) for the case that @xmath is just a number:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.50)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The relations ( 3.49 ) and ( 3.50 ) are useful to check the RG evolution
in the calculation of @xmath in chapter 6 , because the subspace @xmath
is related to the Wilson coefficients for @xmath transitions which is
known to NLO from [ 44 ] .

### 3.9 Scheme Dependence of Coefficients and Anomalous Dimension

General aspects of renormalization scheme dependences have already been
discussed in sect. 3.1 . In the framework of effective field theories
scheme dependences appear in a new context: Even when keeping the scheme
in the full Standard Model lagrangian fixed there is still the freedom
to invoke a finite renormalization on the operator renormalization
matrix ( 3.24 ) in analogy to ( 3.1 ). From now on we will only discuss
such scheme dependences related to the effective theory.

Collecting some results of [ 44 ] let us write the matrix element in the
form:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.51)
              @xmath   @xmath      (3.52)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

If the matrix @xmath obtained in two schemes @xmath and @xmath differs
by @xmath , one finds the corresponding finite renormalization as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.53)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

This leads to the scheme independence of @xmath , while @xmath
transforms as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.54)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

This yields for @xmath defined in ( 3.43 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.55)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

so that @xmath is scheme independent.

From ( 3.51 ) also the scheme transformation of the Wilson coefficient
is clear:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.56)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

With ( 3.38 ),( 3.42 ),( 3.56 ) and ( 3.55 ) one finds the scheme
dependence related to the upper end @xmath of the RG evolution canceled
in the RG improved Wilson coefficient ( 3.38 ). The scheme dependence of
the lower end @xmath has to cancel with a corresponding dependence in
the hadronic matrix element.

Now one is often confronted with the situation that one calculates the
matrix element ( 3.51 ) with different renormalization prescriptions .
This is related to the fact that in many cases mathematical structures
such as the Dirac algebra defined in 4 dimensions cannot unambiguosly be
extended to @xmath dimensions. This phenomenon is related to the
evanescent redefinitions mentioned in sect. 3.1 : A priori one can
modify any @xmath –dimensional quantity by terms of order @xmath without
changing its limit for @xmath . One then has to check which of the
@xmath –dimensional definitions leads to a consistent renormalizable
theory complying with the observed symmetries of the described physics.
Hence one has to prove that two different renormalization prescriptions
leading to different @xmath ’s in ( 3.51 ) really correspond to
renormalization schemes. A necessary condition is that the change in the
renormalization prescription is equivalent to a finite renormalization
as in ( 3.53 ). This has been done for the important question of how to
treat @xmath in @xmath dimensions in e.g. [ 43 ] , [ 44 ] and [ 46 ] and
will be done in chapter 4 for the question of how to define evanescent
operators.

### 3.10 Unphysical Operators

Effective lagrangians also contain unphysical operators. We have already
alluded to the presence of evanescent operators, which will be analyzed
in detail in chapter 4 .

#### 3.10.1 Equation of Motion and BRS Exact Operators

Another set of unphysical operators is related to the Euler–Lagrange
equation of motion (EOM) derived from the lagrangian. In classical
physics one can simply drop terms which vanish by the field equation of
motion. In a quantized field theory the issue is more difficult, because
the path integral involves the integration over all field
configurations, not just those which obey the EOM. The second subtlety
stems from the fact that in Green’s functions of operators containing
derivatives the latter must always be understood to act on the time
ordering @xmath as well. This is necessary for the Green’s function to
be a correctly defined operator–valued distribution. (Otherwise it could
not be Fourier–transformed to momentum space giving the familiar @xmath
for each @xmath .) The third difficulty concerns the renomalization
process, as two operators whose difference vanishes by the EOM may have
bare Green’s functions with a different forest structure.

The correct implementation of the EOM in quantum field theory also
depends on the regularization, in BPHZ renormalization the use of the
EOM requires oversubtractions, while this is not so for dimensional
regularization.

First analyses of the subject used the EOM derived from the lagrangian (
2.15 ). Yet for perturbative calculations the lagrangian ( 2.36 )
containing a gauge fixing term and Faddeev–Popov (FP) ghosts should be
used. In the following we will collect the results obtained with this
modern approach [ 58 , 53 , 51 , 52 ] . We recommend [ 54 ] for a nice
explanation of the subject. Hence the EOM we use will always include the
terms from @xmath and @xmath

The necessary theorems we will be exemplified with operators of the
forthcoming calculation of @xmath –mixing. We will be confronted with
the following @xmath operator:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.57)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . This operator with the EOM of the gluon field attached to
the @xmath current contains the couplings depicted in fig. 5.9 (p. 5.9
), and in the right pictures of fig. 5.10 (p. 5.10 ) and fig. 5.11 (p.
5.11 ). Four–fermion Green’s functions with one insertion of @xmath
vanish [ 52 ] . This statement holds for both bare and renormalized
Green’s functions. If external gluons are involved, the matrix element
of @xmath equals a sum of matrix elements of @xmath in each of which one
of the external gluon fields is missing. These contact terms vanish
after the LSZ reduction ( 2.25 ), because they miss a gluon pole. Hence
@xmath is termed on–shell equivalent to the zero operator. The same, of
course, is true for any operator vanishing by the EOM for the fermion
fields.

Another class of unphysical operators is related to @xmath and the BRS
invariance discussed in sect. 2.4.2 . We will involve the following
operator:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.58)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

@xmath is the BRS variation of some other operator:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.59)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

i.e. it is BRS–exact . From ( 2.32 ) one obtains:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.60)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

which also does not survive LSZ reduction thereby being zero on–shell.

From the discussion it is clear that @xmath and @xmath do not contribute
to the matching of Green’s functions with single operator insertions,
because the matching can (though need not) be done on–shell.

#### 3.10.2 Mixing

In order for the coefficients of @xmath and @xmath to be irrelevant one
has to verify the block–triangular form of the mixing matrix to ensure
that @xmath and @xmath do not mix into physical operators.

To discuss the mixing it is useful to introduce three classes of
operators:

@xmath : The set of gauge invariant operators which do not vanish by the
EOM. Hence P contains physical and evanescent operators.

@xmath : The set of operators vanishing by the EOM such as @xmath .

@xmath : The set of BRS–exact operators. The operator @xmath belongs to
this class.

Now the renormalization matrix has the following form [ 52 , 58 ] :

  -- -------- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath         (3.61)
  -- -------- -------- -- -- --------

i.e. the renormalized version of ( 3.60 ) involves operators from @xmath
as counterterms.

The block–triangular form of ( 3.61 ) allows to ignore the operators
from @xmath and @xmath , because they neither contribute to the matching
nor do their coefficients mix into the coefficients of the operators
from @xmath . The lagrangian with the renormalized operators of @xmath
removed is sometimes called reduced lagrangian. In a calculation beyond
one–loop, however, the operators of @xmath appear in subloop counterterm
diagrams. On can even avoid operators from @xmath altogether by using a
background field gauge . In our case of @xmath –mixing the use of a
background field gauge does not simplify the calculation.

Of course there are other non–gauge invariant operators which belong to
none of the three classes. But since the initial values of their
coefficients are zero and none of the operators from @xmath mixes into
them, they clearly do not affect any physical coefficient.

#### 3.10.3 Double Insertions

For double insertion the issue is more complex, because now the
operators in @xmath give a non–zero contribution. For a four–fermion
matrix element containing one insertion of @xmath one finds [ 52 ] :

  -- -------- -- -- -------- --------
     @xmath                  (3.62)
                             
                    @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -- -------- --------

Here the sum extends over all gluon field derivatives present in @xmath
. @xmath means the number of derivatives in @xmath . The main point in (
3.62 ) is that the variation of @xmath with respect to @xmath is
proportional to @xmath . Hence the matrix element in ( 3.62 ) is
identical to the matrix element of a single local operator @xmath .
Since this holds for both bare and renormalized operators, we can reduce
the effective lagrangian @xmath by substituting @xmath for @xmath . If
we kept both of them, the anomalous dimension tensor defined in sect.
3.8.2 would have a degenerate eigenvalue. The product of the two Wilson
coefficients corresponding to the operators of the RHS of ( 3.62 ) would
evolve parallely to the coefficient @xmath of @xmath under the RG flow,
and we could do the reduction of the effective lagrangian at any scale.
The method to perform the reduction, i.e. to construct the local
operator @xmath is decribed e.g. in [ 54 ] . In a practical calculation,
however, it is sufficient to know that we can drop @xmath from the
operator basis, because we have to do the matching and mixing
calculation anyway with all operators of the desired dimension in @xmath
, including the @xmath ’s.

Next for the operators from @xmath one finds with ( 2.32 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.63)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Here the RHS immediately vanishes, if @xmath , because gauge–invariant
operators are BRS–invariant. For @xmath we involve @xmath on the RHS,
which is either zero or yields an operator vanishing by the EOM of the
ghost field. Recalling further that the renormalized version of ( 3.63 )
involves only operators from @xmath one finally realizes that one can
also trade the renormalized operators from @xmath for suitable @xmath
’s.

## Chapter 4 Evanescent Operators

### 4.1 Motivation

When effective field theories containing four–fermion interactions are
regularized dimensionally, evanescent operators, which vanish for @xmath
, enter the scene. A prominent example is connected to the Fierz
transformation: Since it is allowed only for @xmath , the difference of
some @xmath –dimensional operator and its Fierz transformed one is an
evanescent operator. Since the lagrangian is a D-dimensional object, it
also contains these evanescent operators. The whole issue would be
trivial, if the evanescent sector was decoupled from the physical sector
in the matching and mixing process.

Yet when calculating radiative corrections in a SU(N) gauge theory to
some matrix element of a physical operator one has to face evanescent
operators both in the matching procedure ( 3.29 ) and among the operator
counterterms in ( 3.24 ). Let us exemplify this with the current–current
operator @xmath corresponding to the Dirac structure

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

We will use this example frequently in this section together with an
anticommuting @xmath (NDR scheme). The consistency of this scheme in NLO
QCD short distance calculations has been demonstrated in [ 43 ] , [ 44 ]
and [ 46 ] for cases without closed fermion loops. In the diagrams of
the effective field theory the latter can be avoided by passing to a
Fierz transformed operator basis. The use of an anticommuting @xmath in
a renomalizable field theory has been justified in [ 47 ] . The general
arguments in this chapter, however, are not restricted to the NDR
scheme.

Now consider the one–loop matrix elements of @xmath depicted in fig. 4.1
. The Dirac structure of the result is easily expressed in terms of a
linear combination of @xmath and an evanescent Dirac structure:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

From the basis decomposition of the four–dimensional Dirac algebra we
know that ( 4.2 ) vanishes in four dimensions. Nevertheless ( 4.2 )
appears with a factor of @xmath in bare matrix elements and therefore in
counterterms to physical operators. Depending on the flavour structure
of @xmath one must take into account also the penguin–type diagrams of
fig. 5.10 (p. 5.10 ). They do not contribute to the coefficients of
evanescent operators in the one–loop order. Hence @xmath mixes into some
evanescent operator @xmath . After inserting @xmath into the diagrams of
fig. 4.1 another evanescent operator @xmath with five Dirac matrices in
each string comes into play. Hence one realizes that one must deal with
an infinite set of evanescent operators, because the Dirac algebra is
infinite dimensional in dimensional regularization. With the real
parameter @xmath in ( 4.2 ) we have displayed the arbitrariness in the
definition of @xmath . One can a priori add @xmath times any physical
operator (not only proportional to @xmath ) to any evanescent operator.
Indeed, in the literature one finds different definitions of the
evanescents.

Let us display the evanescent operators in the effective lagrangian (
3.26 ) in the following way:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.3)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Here and in the following we will distinguish the renormalization
constants related to some evanescent operator @xmath by denoting the
corresponding index with @xmath .

Buras and Weisz were the first to recognize that evanescents cannot
simply be neglected but influence physical quantities [ 43 ] . They
focused on the evanescent operators’ contribution to the matching ( 3.29
) and found that the one–loop matrix elements of @xmath involve finite
components proportional to physical operators. In [ 43 ] it has been
proposed to cancel these components, which are local, by a finite
renormalization of @xmath . By this the evanescent operators do not
contribute to the matching in ( 3.29 ) anymore and their undetermined
coefficients @xmath are irrelevant at the matching scale @xmath . From (
3.34 ) the authors of [ 43 ] found the influence of this finite
renormalization on the physical part of the NLO anomalous dimension
matrix @xmath .

To insure that evanescent operators remain irrelevant at any scale one
must insure that the evanescents do not mix into physical operators. As
discussed in sect. 3.8.3 such a block–triangular anomalous dimension
matrix protects the physical coefficients @xmath in ( 4.3 ) from
admixtures of the @xmath . This has been noticed first by Dugan and
Grinstein in [ 48 ] . They, however, have used a definition of the
evanescents different from that of [ 43 ] , i.e. a different @xmath in (
4.2 ). We do not need to repeat the definitions used in [ 43 ] and [ 48
] in this introductory section to understand the issue. The authors of [
48 ] proved that the anomalous dimension matrix indeed has the desired
block–triangular form using their special definition of the evanescents,
if the finite renormalization of [ 43 ] is performed. Yet it is not
clear at all that these features holds for any definition of the
evanescents: An evanescent redefinition of e.g. @xmath in ( 4.2 ) by
adding @xmath to it modifies the components of the divergent parts of
the bare two–loop matrix elements proportional to physical operators.
Hence we are immediately confronted with the question:

Does the definition of the evanescents employed in [ 43 ] also yield a
block–triangular anomalous dimension matrix?

We will answer this question affirmatively in sect. 4.3 . There we will
also generalize the method of [ 43 ] . Especially one is not forced to
use the definition of the evanescent operators proposed in [ 48 ] ,
whose implementation is quite cumbersome.

Then the next point to discuss is:

Is the dependence on @xmath in ( 4.2 ) spurious or does it influence the
physical Wilson coefficients @xmath and the physical portion of the
anomalous dimension matrix @xmath ?

We will find in sect. 4.4 that the latter is the case. Here we will also
find that evanescent redefinitions corresponding to a change of @xmath
in ( 4.2 ) imply a renormalization scheme dependence in the physical
sector, i.e. we will be able to find a quantitity @xmath such that the
Wilson coefficients and the mixing matrix transforms as in ( 3.56 ) and
( 3.54 ). This touches a non–trivial aspect: It is not clear from the
beginning that the change of the definition of the evanescents does not
spoil renormalizability of the theory, i.e. the locality of the
divergences. Yet in NLO it is trivial that renormalizability holds for
any definition of the @xmath ’s, because a redefiniton as in ( 4.2 )
only reshuffles local terms in the divergences of the bare matrix
elements. When going beyond NLO terms of order @xmath , etc., in ( 4.2 )
become important, and these terms might be constrained by the condition
of maintaining renormalizability. We will not discuss this point. In
fact we will extend the discussion only beyond NLO when addressing the
all–order argument of [ 48 ] for the block–triangular mixing matrix.

A main subject of this thesis is the correct renormalization of bilocal
structures with two coloured operators. Clearly for this we have to
answer the question:

What is the correct method to handle evanescent operators in matrix
elements with two operator insertions?

This point will be the subject of sections 4.5 and 4.6 , where
four–fermion processes and inclusive decays will be discussed.

### 4.2 Preliminaries and Notation

Let us consider a set of physical four–quark operators @xmath as shown
in ( 3.23 ). For simplicity we restrict the basis to dimension-six
operators. As usual we are interested in the Green’s functions of a
SU(N) gauge theory with insertions of @xmath renormalized in a
mass-independent scheme. For simplicity of the notation we pick minimal
subtraction ( @xmath ). The arguments are easily generalized to other
schemes like @xmath . The dirac structures @xmath corresponding to
@xmath are considered to form a basis of the space of Lorentz singlets
and pseudosinglets for @xmath . Neither the Lorentz indices of @xmath
and @xmath are displayed nor any flavour or colour indices, which are
irrelevant for the discussion of the subject. @xmath means @xmath .

For the purpose of this chapter we define the perturbative expansion of
the matrix elements of @xmath differently from ( 3.51 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

We have extracted the wave function renormalization here, because it is
not related to the issue of the mixing of evanescent operators.

Now the insertion of @xmath into the one-loop diagrams of fig. 4.1
yields a linear combination of the @xmath ’s and a new operator with the
Dirac structure @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath denote tree level matrix elements. Both coefficients have a
term proportional to @xmath and a finite part. @xmath is now decomposed
into a linear combination of the @xmath ’s and an evanescent operator:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Here the @xmath ’s are uniquely determined by the Dirac basis
decomposition in @xmath dimensions. The @xmath ’s, however, are
arbitrary, and a different choice for the @xmath ’s corresponds to a
different definition of @xmath . When going beyond the one-loop order
new evanescent operators @xmath will appear. Their precise definition is
irrelevant for the moment and will be given after ( 4.16 ).

Now in the framework of dimensional regularization the renormalization
of some physical operator @xmath requires counterterms proportional to
physical and evanescent operators: From ( 4.3 ) we find

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

( 4.5 ) and ( 4.6 ) imply that @xmath depends on the @xmath ’s, while
@xmath is independent of them. The definition of the coefficients in the
expansion of @xmath in terms of the gauge coupling constant @xmath has
been given in ( 2.35 ).

Next we describe the method of Buras and Weisz [ 43 ] for the treatment
of evanescent operators: They have determined the @xmath ’s by choosing
some set of Dirac structures @xmath , which forms a basis for @xmath ,
and contracting all elements in @xmath with @xmath and @xmath in ( 4.6
):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.8)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

The solution of the equations ( 4.8 ) uniquely defines the @xmath . In
other words, @xmath obeys the equations:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are Dirac indices.

Our arguments will not depend on the scheme used for the treatment of
@xmath . The use of a totally anticommuting @xmath does not cause any
ambiguity in the trace operation in ( 4.8 ), because all Lorentz indices
are contracted, so that the traced Dirac string is a linear combination
of @xmath and the unit matrix.

E.g. the choice of

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.10)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

gives for @xmath in ( 4.1 )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

as in [ 43 ] . We remark that this choice @xmath respects the Fierz
symmetry, which relates the first to the second diagram in fig. 4.1 .

A basis different from @xmath in ( 4.10 ) yields the same @xmath ’s, but
different @xmath ’s. For example by replacing the sixth and eighth
element of @xmath in ( 4.10 ) by @xmath and @xmath one finds

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

instead of ( 4.11 ), i.e.  a different evanescent operator. The Dirac
algebra is infinite dimensional for non-integer @xmath and is spanned by
@xmath and an infinite set of evanescent Dirac structures. Hence one can
reverse the above procedure and first arbitrarily choose the @xmath ’s
and then add properly adjusted linear combinations of the evanescent
structures to the elements of @xmath such as to obtain the chosen @xmath
’s.

Yet the so defined evanescent operators do not decouple from the physics
in four dimensions: In [ 43 ] it has been observed that their one-loop
matrix elements generally have nonvanishing components proportional to
the physical operators @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.12)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Here a second evanescent operator @xmath , which will be discussed in a
moment, has appeared. Clearly no sum on @xmath is understood in ( 4.12 )
and in following analogous places. In ( 4.12 ) @xmath is local, because
it originates from the local @xmath –pole of the tensor integrals and a
term proportional to @xmath stemming from the evanescent Dirac algebra.
For the same reason there is no divergence in the term proportional to
@xmath . Now in [ 43 ] it has been proposed to renormalize @xmath by a
finite amount to cancel this component:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.13)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

With ( 4.13 ) the renormalized matrix elements of the evanescent
operators are @xmath , so that they do not contribute to the one-loop
matching of some Green’s function @xmath in the full renormalizable
theory with matrix elements in the effective theory:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

i.e. the coefficients @xmath are irrelevant, because they multiply
matrix elements which vanish for @xmath . In [ 43 ] it has been further
noticed that @xmath in ( 4.13 ) influences the two-loop anomalous
dimension matrix of the physical operators, so that the presence of
evanescent operators indeed has an impact on physical observables.

Next we discuss @xmath , which has entered the scene in ( 4.12 ): When
inserting @xmath defined in ( 4.6 ) into the one-loop diagrams of fig.
4.1 , one involves

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.15)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath            (4.16)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

which defines @xmath . Only the last term in ( 4.15 ) can contribute to
the new coefficients @xmath . If the projection is performed with e.g.
@xmath defined in ( 4.10 ), one finds @xmath ¹ ¹ 1 This is the case for
any basis @xmath in which for each @xmath the quantity @xmath is a
linear combination of the elements in @xmath . . In our discussion we
will keep @xmath arbitrary. Clearly, one has a priori to deal with the
mixing of an infinite set of evanescent operators @xmath for each
physical operator @xmath , where @xmath denotes the new evanescent
operator appearing first in the one-loop matrix elements of @xmath .

With the finite renormalization of @xmath in ( 4.13 ) the evanescent
operators do not affect the physics at the matching scale, at which (
4.14 ) holds. In order that this will be true at any scale @xmath ,
however, one must also ensure that the evanescent operators do not mix
into the physical ones, as noticed first by Dugan and Grinstein in [ 48
] . In their analysis they have introduced another way to define the
evanescent operators, which is also frequently used: It is easy to see
that one can restrict the operator basis @xmath to the set of operators
whose Dirac structures @xmath are completely antisymmetric in their
Lorentz indices. Dirac strings being antisymmetric in more than four
indices vanish in four dimensions and are therefore evanescent.
Operators with five antisymmetrized indices correspond to @xmath in our
notation, and @xmath would be expressed in terms of a linear combination
of Dirac structures with seven and with five antisymmetrized indices.
Clearly this method also corresponds to some special choice for the
@xmath ’s and @xmath ’s in ( 4.6 ) and ( 4.16 ). Now in [ 48 ] the
authors have proven that with the use of those definitions and a finite
renormalization analogous to ( 4.13 ) the anomalous dimension matrix
indeed has the desired block-triangular form, so that the evanescent
operators do not mix into the physical ones. While the anomalous
dimension matrix is trivially block-triangular at one-loop level, the
proof for the two-loop level was given in [ 48 ] by the use of the
abovementioned special definition of the evanescent operators. The
latter, however, has some very special features, which are absent for
the general case with arbitrary @xmath ’s and @xmath ’s, e.g. the
definition used in [ 48 ] automatically yields an anomalous dimension
matrix which is tridiagonal in the evanescent sector.

This immediately raises the question whether the more general method of
[ 43 ] also yields a block-triangular anomalous dimension matrix for any
chosen projection basis, i.e. any chosen set @xmath . In the following
section we will prove that this is indeed the case and, more generally,
that one may also choose the @xmath ’s in ( 4.16 ) completely arbitrary.

### 4.3 Block Triangular Anomalous Dimension Matrix

Consider some set of physical operators @xmath which closes under
renormalization together with the corresponding evanescent operators
@xmath . Their @xmath –parts @xmath are chosen arbitrarily. We want to
show that the block of the anomalous dimension matrix describing the
mixing of @xmath into @xmath equals zero,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

provided one uses the finite renormalization described in ( 4.13 ).

Our sketch will follow the outline of [ 48 ] , where ( 4.17 ) has been
proven by complete induction. At the one-loop level ( 4.17 ) is trivial,
and the induction starts in two-loop order: The next-to-leading order
contribution to the anomalous dimension matrix has been stated in ( 3.34
). The nonzero contributions to ( 4.17 ) in two-loop order are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.18)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Here ( 4.18 ) contains terms which are absent when the special
definition of the evanescent operators in [ 48 ] is used: In [ 48 ] one
has @xmath for @xmath contrary to the general case, where any evanescent
operator can have counterterms proportional to physical operators.

Next we look at @xmath , which stems from the @xmath –term of the @xmath
–matrix elements of @xmath . As discussed in [ 48 ] , these @xmath
–terms originate from @xmath –poles in the tensor integrals multiplying
a factor proportional to @xmath stemming from the evanescent Dirac
algebra. Now in each two-loop diagram the former are related to the
corresponding one-loop counterterm diagrams by a factor of 1/2, because
the non-local @xmath –poles cancel in their sum [ 42 ] . For this it is
crucial that the one-loop counterterms are properly adjusted, i.e. that
they cancel the @xmath –poles in the one-loop tensor integrals. In the
one-loop matrix elements of evanescent operators the latter are
multiplied with @xmath originating from the Dirac algebra. Hence the
proper one-loop renormalization of the evanescent operators must be such
as to give matrix elements of order @xmath , as shown for @xmath in (
4.13 ).

From the one-loop counterterm graphs one simply reads off:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

which yields the desired result when inserted into ( 4.18 ). Here the
first two terms stem from insertions of physical and evanescent
counterterms to @xmath , while the term involving the coefficient of the
one-loop @xmath –function @xmath originates from the diagrams with
coupling constant counterterms. The terms involving the wave function
renormalization constants cancel with those stemming from the factor
@xmath in ( 4.7 ).

The inductive step in [ 48 ] proving ( 4.17 ) to any loop order does not
use any special definition of the evanescent and therefore applies
unchanged here.

### 4.4 Evanescent Scheme Dependences

In this section we will analyze the dependence of the physical part of
@xmath given in ( 3.34 ) and of the one-loop Wilson coefficients on
@xmath and @xmath . In practical next-to-leading order calculations one
often has to combine Wilson coefficients and anomalous dimension
matrices obtained with different definitions of the evanescent operators
and it is therefore important to have formulae allowing to switch
between them (see e.g. appendix B of [ 49 ] ).

We start with the investigation of the dependence of @xmath on @xmath .
The bare one-loop matrix element

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.19)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

is independent of @xmath , which is evident from ( 4.5 ). @xmath depends
linearly on @xmath through its definition ( 4.6 ) with the coefficient

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

so that ( 4.19 ) gives:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.21)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

while @xmath is independent of @xmath .

In the same way on can obtain the @xmath –dependence of @xmath . ( 4.7 )
reads to two-loop order (cf. ( 4.4 )):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.22)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

From ( 4.16 ) we know

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

and from ( 4.19 ) one reads off:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

These relations and ( 4.21 ) allow to calculate the derivative of ( 4.22
) with respect to @xmath . Keeping in mind that the evanescent matrix
elements are @xmath the @xmath –part of the derivative yields:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.25)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

We pause here to stress that ( 4.25 ) is local showing that an
evanescent redefinition does not spoil the renormalizability of the
physical sector in NLO.

Next we extract @xmath from the one-loop counterterm diagrams as
described in the preceding section:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                       @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.26)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

After inserting ( 4.26 ) into ( 4.25 ) we want to substitute the last
term in ( 4.25 ). For this we derive both sides of ( 4.12 ) with respect
to @xmath giving:

  -- -------- -- -- -------- --------
     @xmath                  (4.27)
                             
                    @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -- -------- --------

Finally one has to insert the expression for ( 4.25 ) obtained by the
described substitutions into

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

which follows from ( 3.34 ). The result reads:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.28)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Since the quantities on the right hand side of ( 4.28 ) do not depend on
@xmath , one can easily integrate ( 4.28 ) to find the desired relation
between two @xmath ’s corresponding to different choices for @xmath in (
4.6 ). To write the result in matrix form we recall the expression for
the physical one-loop anomalous dimension matrix

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and introduce the diagonal matrix @xmath with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.29)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Hence

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.30)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where the summation in the row and column indices only runs over the
physical submatrices.

( 4.30 ) exhibits the familiar structure of the scheme dependence of
@xmath as given in ( 3.54 ). The matrix @xmath in ( 3.55 ) consequently
reads:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.31)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Hence we have found a scheme dependence which is caused by an evanescent
redefinition of a bare operator basis (i.e. of the bare evanescent
operators).

The dependence of the one-loop matrix elements on @xmath can be found
easily from ( 4.24 ) and ( 4.21 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.32)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Since in ( 4.14 ) @xmath does not depend on @xmath and the evanescent
matrix element is @xmath , the corresponding relation for the Wilson
coefficients at the matching scale reads:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.33)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Thus also the Wilson coefficient transforms correctly as in ( 3.56 ) and
the scheme dependence cancels between coefficients and anomalous
dimension matrix.

In the same way one can investigate the dependence of @xmath on @xmath
given in ( 4.16 ): While @xmath and @xmath depend on @xmath , this
dependence cancels in ( 3.34 ). Hence neither @xmath nor the one-loop
Wilson coefficient are affected by the choice of @xmath . Thus in NLO
the @xmath ’s do not induce a scheme dependence. By keeping @xmath
arbitrary in a practical calculation one has a non–trivial check of the
correct handling of the evanescents: The @xmath ’s disappear from the
result only after inserting the evanescent counterterms with a factor of
1/2.

The nice feature of ( 4.32 ), ( 4.33 ) and ( 4.30 ) is that the summed
matrix indices only run over the physical subset. From ( 3.54 ) and (
3.56 ) we could have expected a formula where the summation runs over
the whole operator basis including the evanescents. This is why we could
not simply deduce ( 4.30 ) from ( 4.32 ) using ( 3.53 ) and ( 3.54 ).
Possible contributions from summations over evanescent operator indices
cannot be inferred from ( 4.32 ), because there they would multiply
vanishing matrix elements.

We have already stressed in the end of sect. 3.8.1 that it is
advantageous to have a @xmath which commutes with @xmath . Now one can
use ( 4.30 ) to simplify @xmath : By going to the diagonal basis for
@xmath one can easily find solutions for @xmath in ( 4.30 ) which even
give @xmath provided that all @xmath ’s are nonzero and all eigenvalues
of @xmath satisfy @xmath . We will exemplify this in a moment.

A choice for @xmath which leads to a @xmath commuting with @xmath has
been done implicitly in [ 43 ] : There the mixing of the two operators
@xmath and @xmath has been considered, where @xmath and @xmath denote
colour singlet and antisinglet and @xmath was introduced in ( 4.1 ). Now
@xmath is self-conjugate under the Fierz transformation, while @xmath is
anti-self-conjugate, so that @xmath is diagonal to maintain the Fierz
symmetry in the leading order renormalization group evolution. As
remarked after ( 4.11 ), the definition of @xmath in ( 4.11 ) is
necessary to ensure the Fierz symmetry in the one-loop matrix elements.
Consequently with ( 4.11 ) also @xmath has to obey the Fierz symmetry
preventing the mixing of @xmath and @xmath , i.e. yielding a diagonal
@xmath . A different definition of @xmath would result in
non-Fierz-symmetric matrix elements, but in renormalization scheme
independent expressions they would combine with a non-diagonal @xmath
such as to restore Fierz symmetry.

Let us consider the example above to demonstrate that one can pick
@xmath such that @xmath : In [ 43 ] the definitions

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

i.e. @xmath , were adopted yielding a diagonal @xmath diag @xmath . From
the insertion of @xmath and @xmath into the diagrams of fig. 4.1 one
finds @xmath . Hence if we pick @xmath and @xmath , ( 4.30 ) will imply
@xmath .

### 4.5 Double Insertions

#### 4.5.1 Motivation

From the preceding sections we know that the coefficients @xmath of
properly renormalized evanescents in ( 4.3 ) are irrelevant for physical
quantities and remain undetermined. In the following we will extend
these results to 4-fermion Green’s functions with two insertions of
local operators.

For the discussion of Green’s functions with insertion of two local
operators as depicted in fig. 5.4 we first display the evanescents in
@xmath in ( 3.28 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.34)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.35)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Since the @xmath ’s have dimension six, the @xmath ’s are
dimension–eight operators. For simplicity, we assume the @xmath ’s to be
linearly independent from the @xmath ’s, e.g. the @xmath ’s represent
@xmath operators and the @xmath ’s denote @xmath operators. The @xmath
in ( 4.35 ) are defined analogously to ( 4.6 ) with new coefficients
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , etc. Hence new arbitrary constants @xmath ,
@xmath potentially causing scheme dependences enter the scene.

Clearly the following questions arise here:

1.  Are the coefficient functions @xmath irrelevant also for the double
    insertions; i.e. do

      -- -- -- --------
               (4.36)
      -- -- -- --------

    contribute to the matching procedure and the operator mixing?

2.  Does one need a finite renormalization in the evanescent sector of
    double insertions; if yes, how does this affect the anomalous
    dimension tensor?

3.  How do the @xmath and anomalous dimension matrices depend on the
    @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ?

4.  Are the RG improved observables scheme independent?

#### 4.5.2 Scheme Consistency

In this section we will carry out the program of section 4.3 for the
case of double insertions to answer questions 1 and 2 of page 1 .

We have mentioned already in sect. 3.7.2 that two cases have to be
distinguished: The matrix element of the double insertion of the two
local renormalized operators can be divergent or finite:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.37)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Therefore we need or do not need a separate renormalization for the
double insertion

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us start the discussion with the matching procedure 3.30 :

  -- -------- -------- -- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath               (4.39)
                          @xmath   
                          @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -- -------- --------

where @xmath corresponds e.g. to the box–function shown in fig. 5.1 and
the radiative corrections depicted in fig. 5.2 .

Since the coefficients @xmath must be irrelevant for this matching
procedure, one must have

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

and the analogous relation for two insertions of evanescent operators.
Recall from sect. 3.7.2 that in case 1 the LO matching is performed by
the comparison of the coefficients of logarithms of the full theory
amplitude and the effective theory matrix element (
LABEL:CondMatchDouble ) (the latter being trivially related to the
coefficient of the divergence), while the NLO matching is obtained from
the finite part and also involves the matrix elements of the local
operators. In case 2 the matching is performed with the finite parts in
all orders. In both cases the condition ( LABEL:CondMatchDouble ) is
trivially fulfilled in LO, because the evanescent Dirac algebra gives an
additional @xmath compared to the case of the insertion of two physical
operators. Therefore a finite renormalization for the double insertion
turns out to be unnecessary at the LO level. This statement remains
valid at the NLO level only in case 2, in case 1 condition (
LABEL:CondMatchDouble ) no longer holds if one only subtracts the
divergent terms in the matrix elements containing a double insertion.
With the argumentation preceding ( 4.13 ) one finds that in this case
the finite term needed to satisfy the condition ( LABEL:CondMatchDouble
) is local and therefore can be provided by a finite counterterm.

The operator mixing can be analyzed analogously to section 4.3 . Using
the finite renormalization enforcing ( LABEL:CondMatchDouble ) and the
locality of counterterms, one shows for the anomalous dimension tensor (
3.45 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.41)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

i.e. a double insertion containing at least one evanescent operator does
not mix into physical operators. Together with the statement that
evanescent operators do not contribute to the matching this proves our
method to be consistent at the NLO level. As in the case of single
insertions one can pick the @xmath , @xmath ,…completely arbitrary and
then has to perform a finite renormalization for the double insertions
containing an evanescent operator in ( 4.36 ). This statement remains
valid also in higher orders of the SU(N) interaction, which can be
proven analogously to the proof given by Dugan and Grinstein [ 48 ] for
the case of single insertions.

Now we use the findings above to show the nonvanishing terms in ( 3.45 )
explicitly for the physical submatrix:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The last equation encodes the following rule for the correct treatment
of evanescent operators in NLO calculations: The correct contribution of
evanescent operators to the NLO physical anomalous dimension tensor is
obtained by inserting the evanescent one-loop counterterms with a factor
of @xmath instead of @xmath into the counterterm graphs. Hence the
finding of [ 43 ] for a single operator insertion generalizes to Green’s
functions with double insertions. Here the second term in (
LABEL:physdoub ) corresponds to the graphs with the insertion of a local
evanescent counterterm into the graphs depicted in fig. 4.1 , while the
last to terms correspond to the diagrams of fig. 5.4 with one physical
and one evanescent operator.

#### 4.5.3 Double Insertions: Evanescent Scheme Dependences

In this section we will answer questions 3 and 4 on page 3 . Let us
first look at the dependence of the anomalous dimension tensor @xmath on
the coefficients @xmath . First one notices, that the LO @xmath is
independent of the choice of the @xmath . Similarly to the procedure of
section 4.4 one derives the following NLO relation:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.43)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with the diagonal matrix @xmath from ( 4.29 ). Note again that the
indices only run over the physical subspace.

The variation of the anomalous dimension tensor @xmath with the
coefficients @xmath again vanishes in LO, in NLO we find the
transformation

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.44)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

As in the case of single insertions, up to the NLO level there exists no
dependence of @xmath on the coefficients @xmath and also no one on the
@xmath . This provides a nontrivial check of the treatment of evanescent
operators in a practical calculation, when the @xmath , @xmath are kept
arbitrary: the individual renormalization factors @xmath each exhibit a
dependence on the coefficients @xmath , @xmath but all this dependence
cancels, when the @xmath ’s get combined to @xmath . This has been done
in the calculation of @xmath in chapter 6 .

Next we verify the scheme independence of RG improved physical
observables. From the solution of the inhomogeneous RG equation ( 3.46 )
we find the local operators’ Wilson coefficients @xmath independent
under the transformations ( 4.33 ), ( 4.31 ) and ( 4.43 ).

In a similar way one treats the scheme dependence stemming from the
coefficients @xmath . Here some work has been necessary to prove the
cancellation of the scheme dependence connected to @xmath and @xmath in
( 3.46 ): Although it is not possible to perform the integration in (
3.46 ) without transforming some of the operators to the diagonal basis,
one can do the integral for the scheme dependent part of ( 3.46 ),
because the part of the integrand depending on @xmath ’s is a total
derivative with respect to @xmath . There is one important difference
compared to the dependence on the @xmath ’s: A scheme dependence of the
Wilson coefficient related to the lower end of the RG evolution @xmath
in ( 3.46 ) still remains. This residual @xmath dependence must be
canceled by a corresponding one in the hadronic matrix element. If the
matrix elements are obtained in the parton model, the dependence of the
@xmath ’s on @xmath cancels due to ( 4.32 ). Finally, as in the case of
single insertions [ 44 ] , one can define a scheme–independent Wilson
coefficient for the local operator

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

which multiplies a scheme independent matrix element defined
accordingly. It contains the analogue of @xmath in ( 3.52 ) for the
double insertion

  -- -- -------- -------- -- --------
        @xmath   @xmath      (4.46)
  -- -- -------- -------- -- --------

### 4.6 Inclusive Decays

Inclusive decays are calculated either by calculating the exclusive
process and performing a subsequent phase space integration and a
summation over final polarizations etc. (referenced as method 1) or by
use of the optical theorem, which corresponds to taking the imaginary
part of the self-energy diagram depicted in fig. 4.2 (method 2). This
figure shows that inclusive decays are in fact related to double
insertions, but in contrast to the case of section 4.5 they do not
involve local four-quark operators as counterterms for double
insertions. In fact, even local two-quark operator counterterms would
only be needed to renormalize the real part, but the imaginary part of
their matrix elements clearly vanishes. The only scheme dependence to be
discussed is therefore the one associated with the @xmath ’s, @xmath ’s,
etc., as there are no @xmath ’s @xmath ’s, etc. involved.

To discuss the dependence on the @xmath ’s it is nevertheless
advantageous to consider method 1, i.e. the exclusive process plus the
subsequent phase space integration. From section 4.4 we already know
most of the properties of the exclusive process: At the upper
renormalization scale the properly renormalized evanescent operators do
not contribute and the scheme dependence cancels. Further we know from (
4.31 ) the scheme dependence of the (RG improved) Wilson coefficients at
the lower renormalization scale. What we are left with is the
calculation of the properly renormalized operators in perturbation
theory, i.e. with on-shell external momenta. Clearly the form of the
external states does not affect the scheme dependent terms of the matrix
elements, they are again given by ( 4.32 ) and therefore cancel
trivially between the Wilson coefficients and the matrix elements,
because the scheme dependent terms are independent of the external
momenta. Since we now have a finite amplitude which is scheme
independent, we may continue the calculation in four dimensions and may
therefore forget about the evanescent operators. The remaining phase
space integration and summation over final polarizations does not
introduce any new scheme dependence, therefore we end up with a rate
independent of the @xmath ’s, @xmath ’s, etc. ² ² 2 We discard problems
due to infrared singularities and the Bloch-Nordsiek theorem. At least
in NLO one can use a gluon mass, because no three-gluon vertex
contributes to the relevant diagrams

Alternatively one may use the approach via the optical theorem
(method 2). Then one has to calculate the imaginary parts of the diagram
in fig. 4.2 plus gluonic corrections.

Of course the properly renormalized operators have to be plugged in:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

One immediately ends up with a finite rate. What is left to show is the
consistency of the optical theorem with the presence of evanescent
operators and with their arbitrary definition proposed in ( 4.6 ), (
4.16 ): The result must not depend on whether the evanescent operators
are kept in the basis inserted into the diagram of fig. 4.2 or whether
they have been removed knowing the above result of method 1. This means
that evanescent operators must not contribute to the rate, i.e. diagrams
containing an insertion of one or two evanescent operators must be of
order @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      @xmath      (4.48)
  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------

As in the previous sections one can discuss tensor integrals and Dirac
algebra separately leading to ( 4.48 ).

### 4.7 Summary and Outlook

Let us list the results of this chapter:

-   It is allowed to redefine any bare evanescent operator by @xmath
    times any physical operator without affecting the block-triangular
    form of the anomalous dimension matrix, which ensures that properly
    renormalized evanescent operators (as described in [ 43 ] ) do not
    mix into physical ones.

-   We have analyzed the renormalization scheme dependence associated
    with the redefinition transformation in the next-to-leading order in
    renormalization group improved perturbation theory. The formulas
    transforming between different schemes have been derived. It is
    meaningless to give some anomalous dimension matrix or some Wilson
    coefficients beyond leading logarithms without specifying the
    definition of the evanescent operators used during the calculation.
    In physical observables, however, this renormalization scheme
    dependence cancels between Wilson coefficients and the anomalous
    dimension matrix. One may take advantage of this feature by defining
    the evanescent operators such as to achieve a simple form for the
    anomalous dimension matrix.

-   We have extended the work of [ 43 ] and [ 48 ] and the results of i)
    and ii) to the case of Green’s functions with two operator
    insertions. This analysis is necessary for the correct treatment of
    evanescents in particle–antiparticle mixing and rare decays.
    Scheme-independent Wilson coefficients have been defined.

-   Finally we have analyzed the role of evanescents in inclusive decay
    rates.

The issue of the renormalization of composite operators in dimensional
regularization is not restricted to four–quark operators. We suggest
that one may investigate to what extent evanescent redefinitions are
useful to gain insight into the renormalization scheme dependences of
other operators. If, for example, some current @xmath is handled with
two renormalization prescriptions denoted by @xmath and @xmath , one
could try to reabsorb the scheme dependence by an evanescent
redefinition @xmath . I.e. @xmath yields with prescription 1 the same
finite parts of physical amplitudes as @xmath renormalized with
prescription 2.

## Chapter 5 Effective Lagrangian for Flavour Changing Processes

In this chapter we will set up the operator basis needed for the
calculation of the @xmath –mixing described in chapter 6 . We will also
explain the general structure of the effective lagrangian and of the
calculations which are necessary to obtain its RG improved coefficients.
The basic framework is very similar for the general case of
particle–antiparticle mixing. We will sometimes comment on differences
between the considered @xmath transitions and @xmath or @xmath
amplitudes.

First the Standard Model diagrams contributing to the @xmath –mixing
will be analyzed. Since @xmath transitions involving light quarks
contain @xmath processes as substructures, sect. 5.3 will discuss them
in detail. Here we will notice that the definition of the correct @xmath
operator basis involved in @xmath amplitudes is much more complicated
than the one needed to describe the four quark amplitudes appearing in
@xmath weak decays. The analysis of the operator basis requires the
careful application of the theorems of sect. 3.10 on the use of the
field equations of motion and on BRS–exact operators.

### 5.1 @xmath transition in the Standard Model

The @xmath transition is a flavour–changing neutral current (FCNC)
process and therefore forbidden at tree level. The lowest order
contribution to it is depicted in fig. 5.1 .

#### 5.1.1 Notations and Conventions

Before writing down the result for the diagram of fig. 5.1 , we set up
the notations used in the following.

The different contributions from the internal quarks involve different
CKM factors @xmath . The GIM mechanism @xmath allows for the elimination
of @xmath . Hence we can split up the Standard Model Green’s function as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

which is understood to be truncated, connected and Fourier–transformed
into momentum space. We will sometimes use the abbrevation @xmath for
the squared ratio of some quark mass and the W mass. For the W
propagator the ’t Hooft–Feynman gauge will be used, while we keep the
QCD gauge parameter @xmath arbitrary. As only open fermion lines appear
in the calculation, we can safely use a naive anticommuting @xmath (NDR
scheme) with @xmath and @xmath . @xmath is the number of colours, and
and @xmath denote colour singlet and antisinglet ¹ ¹ 1 This is clearly a
misnomer from a group theoretical point of view. , i.e. @xmath stands
for @xmath with @xmath and @xmath being colour indices. The @xmath
Casimir factor involved will be @xmath .

The result of fig. 5.1 is proportional to the tree–level matrix element
of

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

shown in fig. 5.3 . In four dimensions the Fierz transformation maps
@xmath onto an operator with the same Dirac structure, but replaced by
@xmath . Hence if we substituted by @xmath or by @xmath in the
definition ( 5.2 ), we would redefine @xmath by an evanescent operator
proportional to @xmath . If the evanescent operator @xmath is defined as
in ( 4.11 ), the Fierz symmetry is maintained on the loop level and the
replacement @xmath does not change the two–loop anomalous dimension.

The expansion of matrix elements in terms of @xmath has already been
defined in ( 3.51 ). Analogously we will expand the @xmath ’s in ( 5.1
),

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

and the Wilson coefficients:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The @xmath ’s involve infrared (mass) singularities, which will be
regularized by small quark masses.

Finally the weak coupling constant @xmath will be traded for the Fermi
constant @xmath according to ( 3.21 ).

#### 5.1.2 Zeroth Order Amplitude

In the leading order of @xmath , where @xmath stands for @xmath or
@xmath and @xmath denotes any other massive parameter, one can neglect
the external momenta in ( 5.1 ).

One finds for the mixed top–charm contribution in ( 5.1 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Here the Inami–Lim function [ 14 ] @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where the result of the box diagram with internal quarks @xmath and
@xmath is denoted by @xmath and the u–quark mass is set to zero. For
@xmath one finds:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.7)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

with @xmath . Here one realizes that the effect of the GIM mechanism is
not only to forbid FCNC’s at tree level, but also to cancel the constant
terms in the @xmath ’s and to nullify @xmath –mixing in the case of
degenerate quark masses.

The reminder of the thesis will deal with RG improved short distance QCD
corrections in ( 5.1 ), which are parametrized by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

I.e. we want to derive the low energy hamiltonian given in ( 1.1 ).

Let us first look at the three contributions ( 5.5 ) and ( 5.7 ) to (
5.1 ) with emphasis on large logarithms:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

clearly involves no large logarithm because of @xmath . After
multiplying with @xmath this is of the order @xmath .

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.9)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Here we have only kept terms which are larger than those of order @xmath
neglected by setting the external momenta to zero. As we will see in the
following section one would naturally expect a large logarithm @xmath
multiplying @xmath here. Its absence is due to the GIM mechanism.

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Here we encounter a large logarithm @xmath . According to our discussion
in sect. 3.7.2 we can sum @xmath with the help of factorization and RG
techniques.

@xmath is much larger than @xmath and @xmath , but it is CKM suppressed
in ( 5.1 ). Yet this is not so in @xmath transitions, where @xmath and
its radiative corrections comprised in @xmath are clearly dominating.

#### 5.1.3 @xmath Radiative Corrections

Since we are worried about the absence of the logarithm in @xmath , let
us look at the one–loop radiative corrections to @xmath depicted in fig.
5.2 .

These diagrams have been calculated for arbitrary internal quark masses
in [ 15 ] :

  -- -------- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath         (5.11)
  -- -------- -------- -- -- --------

In ( 5.11 ) new operators have emerged:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.12)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

We have written @xmath and @xmath in a manifestly Fierz self–conjugate
way. The functions in ( 5.11 ) are:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                       @xmath      
                       @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.13)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Let us discuss ( 5.11 ) in more detail: First ( 5.11 ) is obviously
unphysical, because it is gauge dependent. This is an artefact of the
use of small quark masses to regularize the infrared singularities while
at the same time using zero on–shell quarks for the external states. For
the same reason we encounter the new operators @xmath and @xmath . When
factorizing ( 5.11 ) to extract the Wilson coefficients @xmath , these
unphysical parts will match their counterparts in the effective theory
with the zeroth order coefficient @xmath . Hence they do not contribute
to the @xmath ’s. Yet we can anticipate this by noticing that the terms
involving @xmath and @xmath are independent of @xmath , which sets the
scale for the short distance physics. An alternative method to treat the
infrared singularities is to keep the quark masses exactly equal to zero
and to rely on dimensional regularization to cope with both IR and UV
singularities. This gives a different result, as the limit @xmath is
non–uniform owing to the fact that @xmath has a zero mass limit, while
the expanded version @xmath diverges in this limit. If we had used such
an on–shell IR regularization, the additional operators @xmath and
@xmath would be absent. Since further the wave function renormalization
constant @xmath equaled zero then, ( 5.11 ) would turn out to be gauge
independent, too. The use of small quark masses for regularization has
the advantage that the vanishing of the otherwise invisible IR terms
from the @xmath ’s provides a check of the calculation. Yet one may
argue that this method requires a more complicated calculation. In fact
this is not so as we will see in chapter 6 .

Having in mind the RG evolution down to scales @xmath of order @xmath we
have arranged the logarithms in @xmath in ( 5.13 ) such that one can
easily distinguish those which are small for @xmath from the large
logarithm @xmath . For this we have abstinated from using @xmath , but
have turned to @xmath . We will do this again without warning. Due to
the magic of factorization the coefficient of @xmath is a linear
combination of the anomalous dimensions of composite operators of some
effective field theory.

Let us finally remark on the @xmath –dependent terms in @xmath : The
colour octet term proportional to @xmath is @xmath -independent. In the
colour singlet part proportional to @xmath one identifies @xmath as the
coefficient of @xmath , which stems from the running charm quark mass in
( 5.7 ). Likewise @xmath originates from the wave function
renormalization.

### 5.2 General Structure of the RG Improvement

After integrating out the heavy top quark and the W–boson one is left
with an effective field theory containing a lagrangian of the form (
3.28 ). Now we extract the Fermi constant out of the Wilson coefficients
to render them dimensionless:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.14)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath and @xmath stand for products of CKM elements and @xmath is
a flavour index. The light internal quarks in fig. 5.1 and fig. 5.2
require to match the corresponding parts of @xmath to matrix elements
with two insertion of @xmath operators @xmath . Fig. 5.4 and fig. 5.5
show such diagrams for the case of two insertions of current–current
operators.

The @xmath ’s in ( 5.14 ) correspond to @xmath operators. In general
their matrix elements also participate in the matching at the initial
scale @xmath . We will be interested in the contribution of the lowest
dimension operators: The @xmath ’s in ( 5.14 ) have dimension six and
the @xmath ’s are dimension–eight operators. The remaining sections of
this chapter will concern the correct reduced operator basis needed in (
5.14 ).

Next one has to carry out the program of sect. 3.10 , 3.7 and 3.8
consisting of the following steps:

-   Find a reduced operator basis for ( 5.14 ), from which renormalized
    operators of the types described in sect. 3.10 and properly
    renormalized evanescent operators have been removed.

-   Match the Standard Model Green’s function @xmath in ( 5.1 ) to the
    matrix elements derived from ( 5.14 ) as shown in sect. 3.7 . This
    is to be done at a scale @xmath satisfying @xmath , but being
    arbitrary within this range.

-   Follow sect. 3.8 to perform the RG evolution down to @xmath thereby
    summing @xmath to all orders. When passing the b–quark threshold
    remove this degree of freedom from the calculation. This simply
    modifies the running coupling and trivially changes the penguin
    operators to be introduced in sect. 5.3.2 . Strictly speaking one
    matches ( 5.14 ) to another lagrangian with the b–quark integrated
    out, but the structure of both lagrangians is essentially that of (
    5.14 ).

Hence @xmath in ( 5.14 ) describes the physics between the scales @xmath
and @xmath . At the scale @xmath one has to match the matrix elements
derived from ( 5.14 ) to those of a new effective lagrangian @xmath with
the c–quark integrated out and to repeat steps i) to iii). This amounts
to the matching of diagrams of the type of fig. 5.4 , fig. 5.5 to those
with a single local four–quark operator as depicted in fig. 5.3 and fig.
5.6 .

In fact the reduced @xmath contains only a single physical dimension–six
operator, which we have already met in ( 5.2 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.15)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In the matching we equate dimension–eight Green’s functions derived from
@xmath with dimension–six Green’s functions from @xmath . Hence by power
counting the @xmath ’s in ( 5.15 ) pick up two powers of @xmath . The
subsequent RG improvement of the @xmath ’s from @xmath down to some
scale @xmath will sum @xmath . The final scale @xmath must be large
enough to trust into perturbation theory, this is roughly of the order
of @xmath . The matrix element of @xmath must be evaluated between
neutral K–meson states. The calculation of such QCD binding effects can
be done in the framework of lattice gauge theory, @xmath –expansion or
with sum–rule techniques.

The observation that we need two powers of @xmath in the matching
greatly simplifies the finding of the correct set of dimension–eight
operators @xmath needed in @xmath . The only candidate is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.16)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

which we already know from an example in sect. 3.8.2 . To understand
this recall that any other dimension–eight operator lacks the factor of
@xmath and involves derivatives and/or gluon fields instead ² ² 2
Operators containing only one power of @xmath can be removed by the use
of the EOM for the fermion field according to the procedure described in
sect. 3.10 giving @xmath . . The matrix elements between s–quarks and
d–quarks evaluated for the matching at @xmath cannot produce a factor of
@xmath : The c–quark can only enter matrix elements with single
insertions of such operators through loops in gluon propagators, but the
result is always proportional to @xmath rather than @xmath , where
@xmath is the momentum flowing through the propagator. Hence the QCD
gauge structure keeping the gluon massless provides us with unexpected
help here. For the same reason other dimension–eight operators cannot
mix into @xmath during the RG evolution from @xmath to @xmath . In
principle operators with @xmath multiplying other Dirac structures can
also appear, but we will see that this is not the case due to the
flavour structure of the problem. Let us drop some words on the factor
@xmath in ( 5.16 ): Bare quantities must not depend on @xmath .
Therefore the bare operator reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

With ( 2.34 ) and ( 3.2 ) one is therefore lead to ( 5.16 ). It is also
clear from fig. 5.4 that the dimension of @xmath is larger than the
dimension of the @xmath ’s by @xmath , because the loop integration
gives a power of @xmath . We have refrained from defining powers of
@xmath into the @xmath ’s, because this would lead to an unnecessary
complication in the RG equations ( 3.44 ).

The origin of these simplifications of @xmath in ( 5.14 ) is the fact
that the internal c–quark is heavier than the external s–quarks and
d–quarks. The situation is therefore completely different for the case
of the c–quark contributions to @xmath transitions or the effect of
internal s–quarks in @xmath amplitudes. Here the external quarks are
heavier and the dimension–eight operators containing derivatives
dominate over the effect of @xmath in @xmath amplitudes resp. @xmath in
@xmath amplitudes. Fortunately the former are phenomenologically
uninteresting, as they are suppressed with @xmath , and in the case of
@xmath transitions there are other badly controllable long–distance
effects in the game which most likely make short distance calculations
of @xmath –mixing useless.

### 5.3 @xmath –Operator Basis

Let us now find a basis for the @xmath operators @xmath in ( 5.14 ),
which closes under renormalization.

#### 5.3.1 Current–Current Operators

Consider first the matching procedure for the LO diagram fig. 5.1 with
only light quarks in the intermediate state. Contracting the W boson
lines yields the diagram of fig. 5.4 with two insertions of the
current–current operator of fig. 5.7 :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.17)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are @xmath or @xmath .

For @xmath @xmath only mixes with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.18)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The corresponding diagrams are shown in fig. 4.1 on p. 4.1 . The @xmath
mixing matrix in LO and NLO has been derived in [ 15 ] . If the
corresponding evanescents are defined as in ( 4.11 ), the NLO anomalous
dimension matrix commutes with the LO one. These matrices are diagonal
in the basis containing the operators @xmath and @xmath defined by

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Their anomalous dimensions in the NDR scheme with ( 4.11 ) are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.19)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

#### 5.3.2 Penguin Operators

We will focus first on the LO operator mixing. For @xmath the
current–current operators mix with penguin operators. The simplest
divergent one–particle irreducible penguin diagrams, into which @xmath
can be inserted, are depicted in fig. 5.8 .

These diagrams require the gluon–foot penguin operators @xmath and
@xmath of fig. 5.9 as counterterms.

We will encounter the basic penguin diagram @xmath later as a
subdiagram, so that we comment on it here: Although it is a
dimension–two diagram, its result contains no term proportional to the
square of the internal mass. One has instead

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.20)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the open Lorentz and colour indices of the
gluon line and @xmath is the momentum flowing into the gluon vertex. (
5.20 ) holds to all orders in @xmath . Especially the inserted operators
@xmath do not mix into an operator of the form @xmath . Likewise the
dimension–one diagram @xmath does not give a positive power of the
internal mass.

In order to find a closed operator basis one now has to investigate into
which operators @xmath , @xmath and @xmath mix. One readily finds that
e.g. @xmath mixes via box diagrams into new four–fermion operators. A
box diagram with two fermion lines containing one @xmath vertex and
three QCD gluon–fermion vertices is divergent, because @xmath involves
two powers of the loop momentum due to ( 5.20 ). These new operators are
fermion–foot penguin operators:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.21)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We will be more interested in the mixing of @xmath into them, which is
shown in fig. 5.10 .

At this point we realize that our simple minded approach to the operator
mixing leads to problems, as we could renormalize the divergence in fig.
5.10 either by a counterterm proportional to @xmath or by one involving
fermion foot operators. Further we obtain mixing into a third type of
operator as depicted in fig. 5.11 :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.22)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Fortunately we can put order into the penguin zoo with the theorems of
sect. 3.10 . For this we first construct the dimension–six operators
(with total ghost number zero) from class @xmath : The only possibility
is given by @xmath from ( 3.58 ). It is related to @xmath via

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is the term on the LHS of ( 3.57 ) stemming from the gauge
fixing part of the QCD lagrangian:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.23)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Next we arrange the operators found so far into combinations belonging
to class @xmath . Here only the EOM for the gluon field can give
dimension–six operators related to the penguin zoo. The relevant
operator has been introduced in ( 3.57 ). In terms of the operators
defined in ( 5.21 ), ( 5.22 ) and ( 5.23 ) it reads:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.24)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Now all other operators involved in the mixing must combine to gauge
invariant operators, because they belong to class @xmath . We have
already listed @xmath , the only other gauge invariant dimension–six
operator is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.25)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

which we can drop from the basis, because it is a linear combination of
@xmath , @xmath and the other physical operators.

Hence the unreduced @xmath operator basis consists of @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath and of course of evanescent operators. This structure implies
that the mixing of any operator into @xmath and @xmath must be the same.
Indeed, the divergent parts of @xmath and @xmath all involve the same
coefficient, as required by ( 5.25 ). The theorems of sect. 3.10 also
explain the observation of ( 5.20 ), because there is no dimension–six
operator in @xmath involving @xmath .

Due to sect. 3.10.2 and chapter 4 the reduced lagrangian for @xmath
transitions is simply obtained by dropping the renormalized @xmath ,
@xmath and the renormalized evanescents from the effective lagrangian.

The on–shell vanishing of @xmath can be easily understood in terms of
diagrams [ 54 ] . The Feynman rule for the one–gluon piece of @xmath
depicted in @xmath of fig. 5.9 involves an inverse gluon propagator:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence in any diagram in which the gluon line of @xmath ends up in an
internal vertex the gluon line is effectively shrunk to a point, because
( 5.26 ) is contracted with a gluon propagator. The resulting diagram is
identical with a diagram containing one of the other operators in ( 5.24
) and these contributions cancel. If the gluon of @xmath is an external
line, the diagram vanishes after LSZ reduction. Care is necessary,
however, if renormalization constants are calculated off–shell, because
then @xmath and @xmath give non–zero contributions, which must be
properly taken into account. For example in fig. 5.10 one finds
off–shell terms involving @xmath which require a counterterm
proportional to @xmath .

Now for the case of the @xmath substructure of @xmath diagrams the
situation is more complicated, because here the gluon of @xmath can end
up in another @xmath –vertex. Then we have one propagator hitting two
inverse propagators and the result is non–vanishing. But from sect.
3.10.3 we know that this contact term is identical to the matrix element
of a local dimension–eight @xmath operator @xmath . Hence we can still
restrict the renormalized @xmath ’s in ( 5.14 ) to the set @xmath .

### 5.4 Operator Basis for @xmath transitions

Let us now assign the correct CKM factors to the effective lagrangians
@xmath in ( 5.14 ) and @xmath in ( 5.15 ).

#### 5.4.1 Above @xmath

The reduced @xmath lagrangian can be taken from [ 44 ] :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.27)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Here the coefficient @xmath originates from the fact that the matching
of the penguin operators and the mixing of any four–quark operator into
penguin operators involves the diagram of fig. 5.10 and radiative
corrections to it all being proportional to @xmath .

With the findings of sect. 5.2 the effective lagrangian @xmath of ( 5.14
) is found as

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

We may ask where the contact terms from the reduction of the @xmath
lagrangian have gone. Since diagrams with two insertions in which the
two @xmath vertices are connected by a gluon line or by a ghost–loop
cannot produce a factor of @xmath , these terms are absorbed into other
dimension–eight operators not containing @xmath , which have been found
to be irrelevant in sect. 5.2 .

Since there are no more derivative couplings involved, we can pass to
the more common hamiltonian formalism by simply flipping the sign:
@xmath . We will do further and define the @xmath hamiltonian such that
it only contains terms of order @xmath . For this we equate the first
order term of the Gell-Mann–Low series @xmath with the corresponding
series involving @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath                     
                                
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

This notation is a bit sloppy, but useful. Let us write

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

One then obtains

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.28)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                       @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath               (5.29)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The structure of ( 5.28 ) requires some explanation:

##### The top–top contribution @xmath

First there is only a @xmath operator involved in @xmath . We have only
listed the terms relevant for the leading term in the expansion in
@xmath . In the case of @xmath this contribution comes from the internal
top–quarks in fig. 5.1 , which are matched at @xmath to the local
operator @xmath . From ( 5.7 ) and ( 5.8 ) we know that @xmath is
proportional to @xmath , while the double penguin contributions can at
most give a factor of @xmath . Also the dimension–eight operators
stemming from the contact terms in ( 3.62 ) and ( 3.63 ) can only give
contributions proportional to @xmath , because there is no more
top–quark in the effective theory. The calculation of @xmath therefore
only requires the consideration of matrix elements with a single @xmath
operator. Yet the NLO matching has to be done from the finite parts of
the two–loop diagrams in fig. 5.2 . This calculation has been carried
out by Buras, Jamin and Weisz [ 15 ] .

##### The charm–charm contribution @xmath

Second there is no local @xmath operator involved in @xmath . This
feature is related to the absence of a large logarithm in ( 5.9 ). The
GIM combination in @xmath in ( 5.29 ) leads to the cancellation of the
divergences and thereby of the @xmath ’s in the diagrams ( 5.4 ). The
same holds true for the diagrams of ( 5.5 ) after the inclusion of
counterterms for the @xmath operators and in fact to all orders in
perturbation theory. This has been first observed by Witten [ 39 ] .
Hence @xmath belongs to case II of sect. 3.7.2 . Yet we may conclude
from sect. 3.7.2 only that there is no mixing into a local operator, but
there could be a local operator involved in the matching at @xmath ,
which could evolve down to @xmath unaffected by the presence of the
bilocal structures @xmath . But in the case at hand the matching at
@xmath can be made by the replacement @xmath in the diagrams of fig. 5.1
and fig. 5.2 . This is allowed, if the renormalized Standard Model
diagram does not become UV–divergent by shrinking the W line to obtain
the effective diagrams of fig. 5.4 and fig. 5.5 , because then the
contribution of the UV momenta is suppressed. In @xmath the GIM
mechanism cancels the UV divergences in the effective theory, so that
there is no room for a non–zero coefficient of @xmath . This fact
becomes very clear if one splits the loop integral connecting the two
@xmath vertices into a part with momenta smaller than @xmath and an UV
part comprising loop momenta above @xmath . For the first part we can
use the factorization of the @xmath substructure yielding ( 5.29 ) up to
terms of order @xmath , and the UV momenta cannot give non–negative
powers of @xmath to spoil this factorization, because the integral from
@xmath to @xmath vanishes in the limit @xmath after forming the GIM
combination @xmath . Hence we only need to know the @xmath coefficients
@xmath and @xmath , which have been determined in [ 43 ] . No extra
@xmath matching in necessary. From sect. 3.7.2 , however, we know that
we need the finite parts of the diagrams of fig. 5.5 for the NLO
matching at the scale @xmath , so that we can check the absence of a
local operator in @xmath in ( 5.29 ) by comparing the matrix element of
@xmath in ( 5.28 ) with ( 5.7 ) and ( 5.11 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.30)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

On the other hand the operator mixing is simple and does not require new
calculations. We have put the current–current operators in @xmath into
the diagonal basis to simplify the RG evolution. The @xmath Wilson
coefficients @xmath and @xmath in ( 5.30 ) simply evolve down to @xmath
according to [ 44 ] .

##### The charm–top contribution @xmath

@xmath involves the familiar large logarithm in ( 5.10 ), so that it
belongs to case I of sect. 3.7.2 . Hence both the LO and the NLO
matching can be done from the one–loop graphs fig. 5.1 and fig. 5.4 .
Again we have chosen the diagonal basis in @xmath for the
current–current vertex. For the other vertex we have chosen the operator
basis @xmath to use the results of [ 44 ] . Now the LO matching at
@xmath is performed from the large logarithm @xmath in @xmath . In NLO
we also equate the nonlogarithmic part of @xmath to the diagrams of the
effective field theory to obtain the initial value @xmath . Since the
initial value of the @xmath coefficients @xmath are of order @xmath for
@xmath and @xmath for @xmath , the matching at the scale @xmath reads

  -- -------- -- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath                        (5.31)
                                   
                 @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- -------- --------

Here we have accounted for the fact that @xmath starts in order @xmath
due to the inverse power in the definition in @xmath giving @xmath .
Hence in LO there is nothing to adjust in ( 5.31 ) and the coefficients
of the large logarithms must be the same on both sides. This is indeed
the case. Further for the NLO matching only the diagrams in fig. 5.1 and
the current–current diagrams of fig. 5.4 are needed. For later
convenience we split @xmath up:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

@xmath and @xmath evolve independently under the RG flow. Also @xmath is
split into @xmath , both of which receive different admixtures during
the RG evolution. It is arbitrary which part of @xmath is put into
@xmath , as long as their sum fulfils the matching condition ( 5.31 ).
We will choose @xmath

The RG evolution is much more involved than in the case of @xmath . With
the well–known initial values of the @xmath coefficients [ 43 , 44 ] and
with @xmath obtained from ( 5.31 ) one knows

  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      @xmath      (5.32)
  -- -------- -- -------- -- --------

to order @xmath . These are the initial conditions for the NLO RG
evolution. We will give the relevant expressions for @xmath and @xmath
in chapter 6 , where the actual calculation is described.

In NLO all coefficients in @xmath have a non–zero initial value. The
structure of the RG evolution has been described in sect. 3.8.2 . In (
3.46 ) the summation indices @xmath and @xmath assume the values @xmath
and @xmath and @xmath and @xmath run from 1 to 6. The two terms of the
summation over @xmath correspond to @xmath and @xmath and the two
coefficient vectors in ( 5.32 ). The first term in ( 3.46 ) involving
the initial value @xmath can obviously be arbitrarily distributed over
@xmath and @xmath .

The structure of the RG evolution is probably more transparent from (
3.44 ): The anomalous dimension tensor @xmath describing the mixing of
@xmath coefficients into the @xmath coefficient @xmath contains 12
elements @xmath , @xmath , which we summarize into the row vectors

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.33)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Now ( 3.44 ) reads in the case at hand:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.34)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

which is split into

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Here @xmath is the anomalous dimension of @xmath . This yields the RG
equation for @xmath defined in

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.35)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the @xmath @xmath anomalous dimension matrix and @xmath
and @xmath are the anomalous dimensions of @xmath and @xmath . ( 5.35 )
leads to a block–triangular evolution matrix of the form ( 3.48 ) and
one again recognizes that @xmath does not depend on how the initial
value @xmath is distributed over @xmath and @xmath .

The solution of ( 5.35 ) involves two @xmath evolution matrices. They,
however, encode redundant information, because each of them contains the
full @xmath @xmath evolution matrix. Now one can do better: Define the
vector

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.36)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the @xmath coefficient vector. From ( 5.34 ) one finds
the RG equation for the seventh and eighth component of @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Hence @xmath satisfies the following RG equation:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.38)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

After obtaining the @xmath RG evolution matrix in the standard way one
gets @xmath which has to be multiplied with @xmath to obtain @xmath and

  -- -------- -- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath                        (5.39)
                                   
                 @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- -------- --------

Hence we have switched from a @xmath representation to an @xmath
representation of the renormalization group. We have programmed both the
solution of ( 5.35 ) and ( 5.38 ) and checked that we obtain the same
result. Of course, the program for ( 5.38 ) is much faster. Further the
upper left @xmath block–submatrix of the @xmath evolution matrix is the
@xmath evolution matrix of [ 44 ] , which provides an additional check
of the RG evolution.

Now the calculation of the elements @xmath of the LO and NLO anomalous
dimension tensor has required the calculation of the divergent parts of
the diagrams of fig. 5.4 and fig. 5.5 , but now with insertions of
@xmath for @xmath rather than @xmath and of the diagrams of fig. 5.12
and fig. 5.13 corresponding to matrix elements of @xmath for @xmath .

Further there are diagrams in which the s–quark foot of the penguin
operator is connected with the current–current vertex and likewise
diagrams with the d–quark foot involved. An example is shown in fig.
5.14 . For insertions of @xmath and @xmath these diagrams vanish by
chirality. For insertions of @xmath and @xmath the diagrams are
nonvanishing, but their sum cannot give a factor of @xmath in the
divergent part. This follows from a subtle analysis exploiting ( 5.20 )
and the theorems on the mixing into gauge invariant operators.

#### 5.4.2 Below @xmath

At the scale @xmath we remove the c–quark from the theory. Hence we are
left with the single local operator @xmath . We have listed the low
energy hamiltonian already in ( 1.1 ) and ( 5.15 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.40)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The only effect of the charm threshold for @xmath is the transition to
the three–quark running @xmath .

The coefficient @xmath in ( 5.40 ) is determined by the matching of the
matrix element of @xmath in ( 5.28 ) to those of @xmath in ( 5.40 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.41)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

This yields @xmath in terms of the RG improved @xmath Wilson
coefficients @xmath . Here we verify the findings of sect. 3.7.2 that in
the NLO the finite parts of fig. 5.6 and of the two–loop diagrams in
fig. 5.5 are necessary.

The determination of @xmath requires the same procedure with @xmath of (
5.28 ) and ( 5.40 ). Consider first the LO matching: The coefficient
@xmath is nonzero due to admixtures from @xmath picked up during the RG
evolution from @xmath to @xmath . Hence the LO matching is done from the
inverse power of @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.42)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In the NLO matching all coefficients participate. We define

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.43)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Here the definition of @xmath differs from the one of @xmath given in (
4.46 ) by a factor of 2. In NLO one therefore finds:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.44)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

On the side corresponding to the three–quark theory one expects the
diagrams of fig. 5.3 and fig. 5.6 corresponding to @xmath and @xmath to
be necessary. They, however, cancel with the terms accompanying @xmath
on the side of the four–quark theory.

Now one is left with the RG evolution from @xmath down to some scale
@xmath at which the hadronic matrix element @xmath is obtained. The RG
evolution of @xmath is well–known [ 43 , 15 ] , its anomalous dimension
is @xmath given in ( 5.19 ). In terms of ( 3.41 ) and ( 3.43 ) the NLO
solution for @xmath , @xmath , reads:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.45)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Finally we can express the NLO @xmath ’s in ( 5.40 ) in terms of the
coefficients:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath               
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.46)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The @xmath –dependence in ( 5.45 ) is absorbed into @xmath , which
equals

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.47)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

in the NLO. The index @xmath denotes that one has to set @xmath in the
corresponding quantities.

From ( 5.46 ) it is evident that the @xmath ’s depend on the definition
of the masses. We will adopt the convention of [ 15 , 17 ] that the
running masses in ( 5.46 ) are evaluated at the scale at which they are
integrated out, i.e. @xmath . Whenever the @xmath ’s are defined such
that they multiply @xmath , @xmath and @xmath in the effective
hamiltonian in ( 5.40 ) we mark them with a star: @xmath .

The hadronic matrix element @xmath is parametrized as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.48)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath and @xmath are mass and decay constant of the neutral K
meson. In ( 5.48 ) @xmath measures the deviation from the vacuum
insertion approximation @xmath . It must combine with @xmath in ( 5.47 )
to the RG invariant

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.49)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

because physical observables are scale independent.

### 5.5 Why Working Beyond Leading Logarithms?

After all we may ask whether it is necessary to do the effort of a NLO
calculation of @xmath –mixing instead of contenting oneself with the
leading log approximation. Let us therefore close this chapter by
listing the compelling reasons for passing to the next–to–leading order:

-   Only in NLO calculations it is possible to use the NLO quantity
    @xmath defined in ( 3.15 ).

-   The dependence of @xmath on the top–quark mass first enters in the
    NLO.

-   The LO results show a huge dependence on the scales @xmath and
    @xmath at which particles are integrated out. Such scale dependences
    are inherent to any RG improved calculation working with truncated
    perturbation series. It is caused by the fact that we can always
    subtract an arbitrary small logarithm (such as @xmath ) from the
    summed large logarithm. By this one pushes small terms from the LO
    summation into the NLO. In the NLO the scale dependences therefore
    diminishes.

-   One must go to the NLO to judge whether perturbation theory works,
    i.e. whether the radiative corrections are small. Further the
    corrections can be sizeable.

## Chapter 6 Calculation of @xmath and @xmath

The following chapter is devoted to the description of some details of
the NLO calculation of @xmath and @xmath and to the presentation of the
analytical results.

### 6.1 The LO Analysis

The problem of RG improved short distance QCD correction to @xmath
–mixing has been first addressed by Vaĭnsteĭn, Zakharov, Novikov and
Shifman and by Vysotskiĭ [ 55 ] . They did not use the operator product
expansion approach, but extracted the coefficients of the leading
logarithms in a complicated way from the Standard Model amplitudes.
Pioneering work in the development of the factorization method has been
done by Gilman and Wise [ 45 ] . Their leading log results for @xmath
and @xmath agreed with those of Vysotskiĭ, but they found his result for
@xmath to be incorrect. In these early works the top–quark has been
treated as light. Later Flynn [ 56 ] has redone the calculation for the
case of a heavy top–quark. A good approximation neglecting flavour
thresholds has been derived by Datta, Fröhlich and Paschos [ 57 ] .

Let us comment on the LO calculation of @xmath of Gilman and Wise here:
Their approach to the RG evolution is equivalent to the one described
first in the paragraph on @xmath in sect. 5.4.1 , i.e. they consider the
mixing of @xmath into @xmath and work with coefficient vectors similar
to ( 5.32 ). Yet their bilocal structures are defined in an inconvenient
way, so that they need four evolution matrices instead of two. Further
their operator basis is overcomplete resulting in @xmath matrices rather
than @xmath ones. Indeed, the evolution matrices in [ 45 ] have a double
eigenvalue.

With ( 3.45 ) we can simply read off the LO anomalous dimension tensor
from the divergent parts of @xmath depicted in fig. 5.4 and fig. 5.12 .
One finds

  -- -------- -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      @xmath      (6.1)
  -- -------- -- -------- -- -------

We have expressed the result of [ 45 ] in terms of ( 6.1 ) and found
agreement.

### 6.2 NLO Strategy

From the discussion of chapter 5 we know that we need the divergent
parts of two–loop diagrams for the calculation of the NLO anomalous
dimension tensor needed for @xmath and the finite parts of two–loop
diagrams for the matching calculations in @xmath . According to sect.
3.7 and 3.8 we can use any external state to perform the calculation and
we choose massless external quarks with zero momentum. The QCD gauge
parameter @xmath is kept arbitrary. Its absence from the anomalous
dimension tensor and the Wilson coefficients provides a check of the
calculation. The same has to be true for the IR regulators, which are
small masses @xmath and @xmath for the internal quarks. The problem
therefore requires the calculation of the diagrams of fig. 5.5 and fig.
5.13 . We remark here that the insertion of the right–handed penguin
operators @xmath and @xmath into the diagrams of fig. 5.13 involves
different integrals than that of the left–handed ones @xmath and @xmath
.

A further check of the result will be the absence of non–local terms
involving @xmath after the inclusion of subloop counterterm graphs.

Yet an incorrect treatment of the evanescent operators would pass all
the checks mentioned above. In the calculation of @xmath we will
therefore keep @xmath and @xmath parametrizing the order– @xmath term in
the definition ( 4.6 ) and ( 4.16 ) of @xmath and @xmath arbitrary.
While the individual @xmath –factors in ( 4.18 ) depend on @xmath ’s in
( 4.16 ) this dependence cancels in @xmath . We will insert the
evanescent counterterms with a factor of @xmath and with @xmath the
dependence on @xmath correctly vanishes. Conversely the non–local terms
in the two–loop renormalization constants @xmath responsible for the
mixing of physical operators into evanescents vanish for @xmath .

Clearly the task at hand is simplified by an algorithm for the
calculation of the two–loop diagrams. For the Dirac algebra the computer
package Tracer [ 58 ] has been used. Further two–loop tensor vacuum
bubble integrals up to rank six are involved. An algorithmic way to
calculate them is described in the following section.

### 6.3 Master Formula for the Two–loop Integrals

We define the general two–loop vacuum bubble tensor integral as

  -- -------- -- -- -------- -------
     @xmath                  (6.2)
                             
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -- -------- -------

Here the @xmath ’s and @xmath ’s are arbitrary masses, while the @xmath
’s are small masses to regulate IR singularities. This is the most
complicated two–loop integral which can appear in the calculation of QCD
corrections in light hadron systems. In our case of @xmath –mixing all
cases with @xmath show up in the two–loop diagrams. Let us set @xmath
small masses exactly to zero while keeping @xmath of them nonzero. In
practice one chooses @xmath just as large that all the remaining @xmath
masses suffice to regulate the IR singularities. In our calculation we
needed at most two nonzero light masses, which were quark masses @xmath
and @xmath . But also the case of on–shell dimensional IR regulators
will be contained in the result, it simply corresponds to @xmath . The
heavy masses @xmath and @xmath in ( 6.2 ) correspond to the remaining
masses in the problem, i.e. @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath in the
Standard Model diagrams and @xmath and @xmath in the effective theory
diagrams. We have only needed the latter, but for different combinations
for the internal masses, so that we also keep them arbitrary.

For the scalar case @xmath the result for ( 6.2 ) is known for all
masses being arbitrary [ 59 ] , it involves a @xmath function and is not
very useful for the situation at hand.

Finally the prefactor in ( 6.2 ) has been introduced for later
convenience.

Let us now sketch the solution of ( 6.2 ): The first step consists of a
decomposition into partial fractions of the propagators involving heavy
masses:

  -- -------- -- -------- --
     @xmath               
                          
                 @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- --

For equal heavy masses one finds derivatives of @xmath with respect to
@xmath or @xmath instead. @xmath is depicted in fig. 6.1 . We refrain
from using partial fractions also in the line flown through by the
loop–momentum @xmath , because this would yield inverse powers of the
infrared regulators @xmath .

The first step to solve @xmath is the expression of the sub–loop
integral over @xmath in ( 6.2 ) in terms of a Feynman parameter
integral. The corresponding expression for a general one–loop tensor
integral has been derived first by Davydychev [ 60 ] . Clearly only one
Feynman parameter @xmath is involved. Now one is faced with a sum of
tensor integrals corresponding to all possibilities to build a rank–s
tensor out of @xmath copies of the metric tensors and @xmath copies of
the other momentum @xmath . Each of the remaining integrals over @xmath
is proportional to the totally symmetric tensor

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a subset of @xmath . The result reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Here the second sum runs over all @xmath possibilities to select @xmath
numbers from the set @xmath . Further @xmath and the integration over
@xmath is contained in

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Here the original IR singularities show up at the lower end @xmath of
the integration in the limit @xmath . We have put @xmath masses exactly
to zero with @xmath , so that the remaining masses regulate the IR
singularity at @xmath . We can disentangle the IR regulators from the
integral by noticing that the integration path in ( 6.3 ) connects two
branch points of the integrand. Hence we can express the integral in (
6.3 ) by a contour integral

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where the contour @xmath starts below the real axis at @xmath ,
encircles the point @xmath clockwise and returns to @xmath above the
real axis. Here @xmath is arbitrary as long as the poles @xmath and the
third branch point @xmath are to the left of @xmath . Next one deforms
@xmath such that it encircles the other branch cut in ( 6.3 ) connecting
@xmath with @xmath along the negative real axis. When doing this one has
to pull @xmath over the poles thereby picking up @xmath times the sum of
the residues of the integrand at @xmath . One then obtains:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.4)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

In the first integral we can safely set the small masses to zero and
express the integral in terms of Euler’s beta–function. This integral
represents the result for the case of dimensional IR regularization. All
IR regulators @xmath are contained in an additive term. This must be so,
because we know that IR terms in the full and effective theory factorize
with the LO Wilson coefficient. If one kept small external momenta as IR
regulators, they would appear in the same way in an additive term to the
first integral (with @xmath ) in ( 6.4 ). Now we can do the final
integration over the Feynman parameter @xmath yielding:

  -- -------- -- -- -------- -------
     @xmath                  (6.5)
                             
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -- -------- -------

Here @xmath is the part comprising the IR regulators. In ( 6.5 ) @xmath
is the Pochhammer symbol. The function @xmath in ( 6.5 ) reads:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.6)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

The second expression in terms of Gauß’ hypergeometric function is
useful for the case of one small mass @xmath , e.g. @xmath , in which
case one can use Kummer’s relations to transform to @xmath . In general
the integral representation is more useful, because it can be more
easily expanded in terms of @xmath . It further exhibits more symmetries
and functional relations such as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (6.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

For equal masses one simply has

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

For different masses the expansion of the integral in ( 6.6 ) in terms
of @xmath turns out to be the only cumbersome task to be done. One finds
the familiar dilogarithm in the finite part and higher polylogarithms in
the higher order terms in @xmath . Yet one only has to expand a few of
the @xmath ’s and one can obtain the others by the use of the functional
equations ( 6.7 ). The expanded @xmath –functions have been stored in a
Mathematica program to build a database.

Now for a dimensional regularization of the IR singularities one finds
@xmath . For the use of small masses as done by us one obtains:

  -- -------- -- -- -------- -------
     @xmath                  (6.8)
                             
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -- -------- -------

In practice the summation indices only run over a small range, in the
calculation of @xmath and @xmath only situations with @xmath and @xmath
appeared.

We remark that the master formula ( 6.5 ) is a good investment into the
future of short distance QCD corrections: First the formula holds in
@xmath dimensions. It can therefore be used for the matching
calculations in a NNLO calculation and also for the two–loop counterterm
diagrams in a @xmath –loop calculation, which requires two–loop
integrals up to the order @xmath in @xmath , if the divergent part is
needed. Probably all calculations beyond NLO involve so many diagrams
that a complete computerization is unavoidable. Then formulas of the
type ( 6.5 ) also for higher loop integrals are indispensable. Further (
6.5 ) can simply be extended to more powers in the small masses. Such
integrals are needed in NLO calculations for the coefficients of higher
dimension operators.

### 6.4 Result for the NLO Anomalous Dimension Tensor

In this section we list the result for the NLO anomalous dimension
tensor @xmath .

From ( 5.28 ), ( 5.29 ) and ( 3.28 ) one readily finds the relation
between the two–loop renormalization tensor @xmath and the bare @xmath
matrix elements of @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -- -------- -------
     @xmath                  (6.9)
                             
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -- -------- -------

where we have used the notation ( 3.52 ) and ( 2.35 ) for the expanded
matrix elements and @xmath –factors. Now one has to take into
consideration that

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Hence

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.11)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Now the divergent parts of the diagrams of fig. 5.13 and fig. 5.5 and
the corresponding subloop diagrams yield the terms in the first line of
( 6.9 ) and the last term in ( 6.11 ). The remaining divergences
therefore correspond to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence we can simply read off @xmath from the @xmath –divergences of the
diagrams of fig. 5.5 and fig. 5.13 after the inclusion of subloop
counterterms. We have also found that the dependence on @xmath vanished
from the @xmath –terms in ( 6.12 ) after subtracting the term involving
@xmath . Further it has been checked that @xmath fulfills the relation
to the @xmath divergences of the one–loop renormalization constants.

Now @xmath is related to @xmath via ( 3.45 ), i.e. the evanescents must
be inserted with a factor of @xmath .

To show the scheme dependence found in chapter 4 we keep the definitions
of some evanescents arbitrary:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.13)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Insertions of @xmath and @xmath into the diagrams of fig. 5.5 also
involve

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.14)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Now one finds for @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (6.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

The dependence on @xmath cancels from ( 6.15 ), although it is present
in the individual contributions to the first two components of @xmath .
Yet we discover a dependence on the @xmath ’s and @xmath as stated in (
4.43 ) and ( 4.44 ).

For the numerical analysis we will use

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.16)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The first two choices have to made to comply with [ 44 ] , from which we
have taken the @xmath anomalous dimension matrix and the initial
condition for the @xmath coefficient vector.

### 6.5 @xmath

We describe the initial condition and the RG evolution for the formalism
of sect. 5.4.1 using @xmath according to ( 5.36 ) and ( 5.38 ). All
formulas refer to the NLO. The LO expressions can be simply obtained
from them by only keeping the leading terms and using the LO running
@xmath .

#### 6.5.1 Initial Condition

The initial condition for the @xmath coefficient vector can be taken
from [ 44 ] :

  -- -------- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath         (6.17)
  -- -------- -------- -- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

In ( 6.17 ) we have introduced a term involving the second row of the LO
@xmath anomalous dimension matrix @xmath to allow for the choice @xmath
.

Further @xmath in ( 5.36 ) involves the initial coefficients of the
operators @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.18)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

For the initial coefficient of @xmath we have to perform the matching
calculation with the diagrams of fig. 5.1 and fig. 5.4 . If the
evanescent operator of @xmath is defined as in ( 6.13 ), one easily
finds:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.19)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath is the top–dependent part of @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

#### 6.5.2 RG Evolution between @xmath and @xmath

The @xmath anomalous dimension matrix @xmath has been introduced in (
5.38 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.20)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

While the @xmath mixing matrix @xmath can be taken from [ 44 ] and
@xmath and @xmath have been given in ( 5.19 ), ( 6.1 ) and ( 6.15 ), we
still have to list the anomalous dimension @xmath of @xmath . Here one
has to take into account the running of the mass and coupling in its
definition:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.21)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The anomalous dimension @xmath of the mass has been given in ( 3.11 ).

Now one can build the matrices @xmath and @xmath as described in ( 3.40
) and ( 3.43 ). The NLO evolution matrix ( 3.42 ) from @xmath down to
@xmath reads:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.22)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Here the matching correction at the b–threshold has been taken into
account, @xmath coincides in the upper left @xmath submatrix with the
result of [ 44 ] . The 7th and 8th row and column are zero, because
there is no b–quark involved in the diagrams of fig. 5.5 and fig. 5.13 .

Now after obtaining @xmath in ( 6.22 ) we can find the coefficient
@xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.23)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

#### 6.5.3 Matching at @xmath

The matching condition at @xmath has been given in ( 5.44 ). Now both
the diagrams of fig. 5.4 and those of fig. 5.12 have to be calculated.
One finds for the quantities @xmath defined in ( 5.43 ):

  -- -------- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath         (6.24)
  -- -------- -------- -- -- --------

with the colour factors

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Finally with ( 5.46 ) we write down the NLO result for @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.26)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Order @xmath terms should be consistently removed here.

In most cases it is more useful to define @xmath such that it multiplies
@xmath in the hamiltonian, where @xmath and @xmath . We then mark @xmath
with a star:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.27)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

I.e. one has

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

( 6.26 ) has been checked by expanding all evolution matrices to the
first order in @xmath to verify that the leading logarithm in @xmath is
correctly reproduced. Indeed it has been found that @xmath , when the RG
improvement is switched off in this way. Further @xmath has been
expanded around @xmath to check whether the logarithm in ( 6.24 )
cancels the dependence of the LO term on @xmath in the calculated order.
This is also the case.

### 6.6 @xmath

As discussed in sect. 5.4.1 the RG factors in @xmath only involve the
known RG evolution of @xmath and @xmath . The only complicated task is
the matching at the scale @xmath shown in ( 5.41 ), which requires the
finite parts of the diagrams of fig. 5.5 and fig. 5.6 . We will be
sketchy here, for more details on the calculation we refer to [ 17 ] and
[ 61 ] .

The LO matrix element of @xmath reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.28)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with the colour factors

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

In the NLO one obtains:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.29)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The coefficients multiplying the unphysical matrix elements are of
course the same as those of the Standard Model amplitude given in ( 5.13
). We split @xmath in ( 6.29 ) into its physical part @xmath and those
parts which depend on the infrared regulators or involve the gauge
parameter:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.30)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The desired physical parts in ( 6.30 ) are found as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
                       @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
                       @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.31)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The matrix element of @xmath can be found in [ 15 , 43 ] . Writing

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.32)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

the coefficient @xmath reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
                       @xmath      
                       @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.33)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Now we can solve the matching condition ( 5.41 ) for @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.34)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.35)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Again the unphysical terms have canceled from the Wilson coefficient.

Hence ( 5.46 ) gives for @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.36)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

@xmath is simply given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.37)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

We close the section on @xmath by looking back to the matching at the
scale @xmath as displayed in ( 5.30 ) to analyze the findings of [ 39 ]
and sect. 5.4.1 :

Consider first the diagrams @xmath and @xmath . They can only be divided
into their @xmath substructures by a three-particle cut. This cut
separates two @xmath subdiagrams with four external (anti–) quarks and
one external gluon. The cut is flown through by two integration momenta,
but both refer to loop integrals which are finite after using the GIM
mechanism, which reduces the UV behaviour of the integral involving the
internal up–type quark propagators. Hence these diagrams match their
counterparts in fig. 5.2 with the tree–level Wilson coefficients @xmath
. The same reasoning applies to the self–energy insertion in diagram
@xmath . Now the remaining diagrams can be divided by a two–particle cut
into their @xmath substructures. Again the divergences of the loop
integration associated with the momentum flowing through the cut are
canceled by the GIM mechanism. But now the cut separates a tree–level
@xmath vertex from a dressed one, which involves an UV–divergent loop.
These UV divergences are responsible for the @xmath corrections to the
@xmath coefficients @xmath . In fact the colour singlet diagram @xmath
does not contribute to the @xmath Wilson coefficient. We have verified
that only @xmath , @xmath and @xmath contain terms requiring @xmath to
match their Standard Model counterparts. Finally only @xmath gives a
term involving @xmath , which appears in the NLO matching to compensate
the LO scale ambiguity. This can be traced back to the fact that @xmath
involves diagram (3) of fig. 4.1 as a subdiagram, which is the only
source of the LO anomalous dimension of the @xmath operators.

## Chapter 7 Numerical Results and Phenomenology

### 7.1 @xmath

At first we will investigate the dependence of @xmath and @xmath on the
various physical parameters and on the scales at which particles are
integrated out.

Recall the relevant part of the effective low–energy hamiltonian from (
5.40 ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.1)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

We will start with the discussion of the scale dependence: @xmath and
@xmath depend on the initial scale @xmath and on @xmath , at which the
c–quark is removed from the theory. There is also a dependence on the
scale @xmath , at which we pass from a five–quark theory to a four–quark
theory. But @xmath only appears in the running @xmath and the dependence
is so small that one could even set @xmath . Now @xmath in ( 7.1 )
multiplies @xmath , which also depends on the scales, and ideally the
product is scale independent. Clearly for the discussion of this issue
the notion of @xmath is more useful, because it multiplies a scale
independent function and should therefore also be independent of @xmath
and @xmath . In sect. 6.5 we have mentioned that the LO scale
dependences of @xmath are analytically canceled by the NLO terms within
the calculated order. Hence we can use the remaining scale dependence as
a measure of the accuracy of the calculation. Since W–boson and
top–quark are simultaneously integrated out at @xmath , the range for
@xmath is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We expect the dependence of @xmath on @xmath to be larger than the one
on @xmath because of the larger coupling constant involved.

Next consider the dependence on the QCD scale parameter @xmath : In the
following @xmath is understood to be defined with respect to four active
flavours, the corresponding quantities in the three– and five–flavour
theory are obtained by imposing continuity on the coupling at @xmath and
@xmath . The world average for @xmath [ 11 ] correspond to @xmath for
@xmath and @xmath for @xmath . The leading order @xmath , however,
differs from @xmath by an overall @xmath –dependent factor, see ( 3.15
). If one equates the LO coupling and the NLO @xmath –coupling constant
at the scale @xmath , one finds that @xmath corresponds to @xmath . If
the relation is imposed at the low scale @xmath , one finds @xmath .
This shows one contribution to the error bar in LO calculations. It is,
however, more pronounced in @xmath than in @xmath .

Let us therefore pick the following set of parameters:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

The value for @xmath corresponding to this set reads:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Hence the NLO calculation has enhanced @xmath by @xmath . From the
difference of @xmath between the two values in ( 7.3 ) 0.019 originates
in the change from the LO to the NLO running @xmath . The smallness of
this contribution is of course caused by the adjustment of @xmath to fit
the NLO running coupling as described in the previous paragraph. The
explicit @xmath –corrections from the NLO mixing and matching contribute
0.084. Let us list the dominant sources of the enhancement: At the
initial scale @xmath the coefficients @xmath , @xmath and @xmath have a
size of the order 1, while all other coefficients are almost negligible.
The RG evolution from @xmath to @xmath enhances the coefficient @xmath
by roughly 75 % because of the negative sign of the anomalous dimension
of @xmath , while the coefficient @xmath is damped by 25%. Now the
penguin coefficients @xmath to @xmath are still negligible at @xmath ,
only @xmath and @xmath are important. In the matching at @xmath the
contribution of @xmath numerically cancels the one of @xmath , because
the RG damping of the former is compensated by a larger colour factor
@xmath having the opposite sign of @xmath . Finally @xmath has become
large due to the RG admixtures from @xmath . Hence only @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath are important. In LO only @xmath enters @xmath . Keeping only
@xmath in the NLO expression, however, overestimates the NLO enhancement
by a factor of roughly 1.5, because @xmath contributes with a negative
sign to @xmath (for the standard definition of the evanescents: @xmath
), see ( 6.26 ).

Next we will display the dependence of @xmath and @xmath on the various
parameters. In all plots we take the fixed quantities from the standard
data set ( 7.2 ). First consider the dependence of @xmath on the initial
scale @xmath as depicted in fig. 7.1 . We find a sizeable scale
dependence of @xmath in the LO result. It is almost totally removed in
the NLO, where we find less than @xmath change in @xmath , when @xmath
is varied between @xmath and @xmath .

The situation is not so nice in the case of the dependence on @xmath .
To show the large effects related to the running c–quark mass in ( 7.1 )
we first display the running of @xmath with @xmath . In ( 7.1 ) it
multiplies @xmath , which grows with increasing @xmath and therefore
falls off with increasing @xmath . Hence @xmath has to grow with
increasing @xmath .

From fig. 7.2 one realizes that the LO result for @xmath worsens the
effect of the running mass in @xmath , while the NLO @xmath correctly
grows with increasing @xmath .

The corresponding plot for @xmath is shown in fig. 7.3 .

We have intentionally extended the range for @xmath to the unphysically
low value of @xmath to visualize the breakdown of perturbation theory.
Varying @xmath within the range @xmath yields the following estimate of
the scale uncertainty:

  -- -------- -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      @xmath      (7.4)
  -- -------- -- -------- -- -------

This corresponds to a reduction of the scale uncertainty from @xmath to
@xmath . One reason for the poor improvement is the fact that the NLO
running of the mass is stronger than the LO one. One realizes from ( 7.4
) that the scale ambiguity alone is not always a good measure of the
accuracy of the calculation, because the central value for @xmath is not
in the range quoted for @xmath . Yet in the NLO order one may also judge
the contribution of the uncalculated @xmath –terms by squaring the
calculated @xmath corrections. By this one is lead to the same interval
as in ( 7.4 ), so that we may consider ( 7.4 ) as a realistic estimate
for @xmath .

Let us now look at the dependence of @xmath on the physical parameters.
From the smallness of the initial coefficient @xmath we expect the QCD
correction to be almost independent of @xmath . The relevant quantity to
be discussed is the product @xmath which enters ( 7.1 ) and physical
observables. It is shown in fig. 7.4 .

Clearly the LO curve is flat. We also display the dependence of @xmath
alone on @xmath , see fig. 7.5 . One cannot get much physical insight
from this plot, it only serves to verify that we can treat @xmath as a
constant function of @xmath in phenomenological analyses.

On the other hand there is a sizeable dependence of @xmath on @xmath as
shown in fig. 7.6 . In @xmath alone, however, the LO dependence on
@xmath happens to be washed out in the NLO as can be seen in fig. 7.7 .

We close this section with a plot of the dependence of @xmath on @xmath
. fig. 7.8 reveals a very moderate dependence on the QCD scale
parameter. Recall that the actual measurements of @xmath corresponds to
LO values for @xmath close to the left edge of the plot, while the NLO
scale parameter @xmath is close to the highest values displayed.

Now we can easily summarize the result: The largest uncertainty of our
estimate of @xmath is due to the the scale ambiguity stemming from
@xmath and we obtain:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.5)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

### 7.2 @xmath

Again we only sketch the NLO result for @xmath and refer to [ 17 , 61 ]
for more details. The part of the effective hamiltonian involving @xmath
has been found to be

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.6)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

For the set of parameters given in ( 7.2 ) one finds:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.7)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

For @xmath one likewise finds

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.8)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Here the the dominant source of the error is again the dependence on
@xmath , which has also been varied between @xmath and @xmath in ( 7.7 )
and between @xmath and @xmath in ( 7.8 ). Now the dependence on @xmath
is more pronounced than in the case of @xmath . Therefore we have
included the variation with @xmath for @xmath in the error bar for the
LO result. The dependence on @xmath is displayed in fig. 7.9 . The NLO
calculation has therefore yielded a reduction of the theoretical error
from @xmath to @xmath for @xmath and from @xmath to @xmath for @xmath .

( 7.7 ) reveals a much larger scale dependence for @xmath than we have
found for @xmath in ( 7.5 ). Let us therefore investigate the origin of
this uncertainty: There are three different contributions to @xmath in (
6.36 ) stemming from the products @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . The last
one is clearly the largest, because of the negative anomalous dimension
of @xmath . These different sources are displayed in fig. 7.10 : One can
easily see, that the NLO curves related to @xmath and @xmath are almost
flat as they should be, but they contribute with opposite sign to @xmath
and therefore almost cancel in the sum. On the other hand the part
stemming from @xmath contains a large residual scale dependence and is
identified as the source of the large theoretical error in ( 7.7 ).

We have already noticed in ( 7.7 ) and ( 7.8 ) that @xmath exhibits a
sizeable dependence on @xmath . We therefore plot @xmath as a function
of @xmath in fig. 7.11 . Physical quantities involve @xmath , which is
shown in fig. 7.12 .

### 7.3 Indirect CP–Violation in @xmath–Mixing

Here we briefly describe the indirect CP–violation in the neutral Kaon
system (cf. e.g. [ 62 ] ).

The immediate consequence of @xmath –mixing is that the weak interaction
eigenstates @xmath and @xmath do not coincide with the mass eigenstates.
Yet if the CP symmetry were conserved, the latter would be identical to
the CP eigenstates @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Now the mass eigenstates @xmath and @xmath differ from @xmath and @xmath
by small admixtures of the other CP eigenstate:

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The decay of @xmath into the CP–even two–pion state may proceed via a
CP–conserving decay of the small admixture of @xmath or via a
CP–violating decay of the dominant contribution of @xmath . These
possibilities are termed indirect and direct CP–violation and are
compactly explained by the following picture:

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

A measure of the indirect CP–violation which is independent of phase
conventions is given by the ratio of the amplitudes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.9)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

In terms of the off–diagonal element of the mass matrix

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

@xmath reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is a small quantity involving the amplitude of @xmath
transitions and @xmath is the @xmath –mass difference. Experimentally
@xmath is very well measured [ 11 ] :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.11)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

#### 7.3.1 Parametrization of the CKM–Matrix

Since one may redefine the quark mass eigenstates by an arbitrary phase
factor, there are many physically equivalent forms of the CKM–matrix. We
adopt the standard convention, in which @xmath and @xmath are real and
positive. It is further advantageous to have a simple parametrization of
the CKM–matrix. Here we use the improved Wolfenstein parametrization,
which is used in [ 8 ] . It reads

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.12)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- -------- --
     @xmath      @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- --

( 7.12 ) is an expansion in the parameter @xmath . ( 7.12 ) is exact to
order @xmath and contains the phenomenologically important terms up to
the order @xmath . One of the relations provided by the unitarity of
@xmath is

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

When expressed in terms of the parameters introduced above, this
relation corresponds to a unitarity triangle in the @xmath –plane with
edges @xmath and @xmath .

One finds to an accuracy of @xmath [ 8 ] for @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.13)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

CP–violation occurs for @xmath . Because of ( 7.13 ) we may use @xmath
to parametrize all CP–violating quantities in the Standard Model.

#### 7.3.2 @xmath--Phenomenology111for more details see [67]

Inserting ( 5.40 ), ( 5.48 ) and ( 7.11 ) into ( 7.9 ) yields the
following relation between @xmath and @xmath [ 8 ] :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.14)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

When @xmath is fixed, ( 7.14 ) defines a hyperbola in the @xmath –plane.

Now from ( 7.12 ) we notice that @xmath is simply related to @xmath via
@xmath . We remark here that much progress has been made in the recent
past to determine @xmath . Exclusive tree–level @xmath decays allow the
extraction from the endpoint of the spectrum, where heavy quark symmetry
reduces the problem to the determination of a single form factor. Here
typically values in the range @xmath are stated [ 63 ] . The theoretical
predictions for inclusive analyses still suffer from large scheme and
scale dependences, because they are proportional to the fifth power of
the bottom quark mass [ 64 ] . The latter can be determined from @xmath
spectroscopy [ 63 ] or by the use of heavy quark symmetry from inclusive
D–decays [ 65 , 64 ] . The different lifetimes of the charmed hadrons,
however, make the use of heavy quark symmetry troublesome here.
Inclusive analyses give lower central values for @xmath than the
exclusive method.

To fix the third edge @xmath of the unitarity triangle, we need a
further input. It is straightforward to verify that the knowledge of
@xmath fixes a circle in the @xmath –plane:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.15)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

If the phase @xmath in the CKM–matrix is the only source of indirect
CP–violation in the @xmath –system, the equations ( 7.14 ) and ( 7.15 )
must have a common solution @xmath . In general the hyperbola will
intersect the circle in two points to give two solutions. Yet there is a
critical set @xmath , @xmath , for which the hyperbola only touches the
circle. This set encodes a lower bound on any of the four quantities as
a function of the other parameters [ 66 , 8 ] .

Fig. 7.13 shows the hyperbola for the LO and the NLO result for @xmath .
One can see that the hyperbola has moved downwards. Therefore the NLO
value for @xmath allows for a wider range of @xmath and @xmath than the
older imprecise LO result. In this sense the Standard Model mechanism
for CP–violation has been vindicated. For example a future determination
@xmath would have been interpreted as a signal of new physics, if the LO
values @xmath , @xmath had been used. With the NLO results @xmath ,
@xmath , however, the hyperbola ( 7.14 ) intersects the circle ( 7.15 )
and there is no conflict with the CKM mechanism of CP–violation.

The effect of the NLO calculation for @xmath on the bounds on @xmath and
@xmath is shown in fig. 7.14 and fig. 7.15 .

##### Table of @xmath

Since @xmath enters all CP–violating quantities, we now give a table of
the two solutions for this quantity for various values of @xmath and
@xmath . The fixed quantities are as in ( 7.2 ). The corresponding
@xmath ’s are

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Both solutions are listed, the entries have to be multiplied by @xmath .
n.s. means that there is no solution.

###### @xmath and @xmath:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### @xmath and @xmath:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### @xmath and @xmath:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### @xmath and @xmath:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### @xmath and @xmath:

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

###### @xmath and @xmath:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### @xmath and @xmath:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### @xmath and @xmath:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### @xmath and @xmath:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

### 7.4 @xmath–mass difference

We will now discuss the short distance contribution to the @xmath –mass
difference: Neglecting the small imaginary parts of the CKM elements,
one finds

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.16)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Here the relative size of the three terms in the brackets is roughly
@xmath . Hence the @xmath –mass difference is dominated by @xmath . This
contribution has already been tabulated in [ 17 , 61 ] , so that we
comment on the corrections stemming from the second term involving
@xmath here: Since

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.17)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

to an accuracy of @xmath , the term with @xmath depends on @xmath and
@xmath . Its average contribution to @xmath is about 0.06. Hence one can
obtain the full @xmath from the tabulated values for the first term in (
7.16 ) in [ 17 , 61 ] by multiplying with 1.1. With the central value
for @xmath listed in ( 7.8 ) our short distance calculation therefore
reproduces @xmath of the observed mass difference for @xmath and @xmath
of @xmath for @xmath , if the @xmath –result @xmath is used. Taking into
account the large theoretical error in ( 7.8 ) the short distance
contribution from ( 7.16 ) is between @xmath and @xmath .

In most textbooks the @xmath –mass difference is termed to be dominated
by poorly calculable long–distance effects. Indeed, with the old LO
result for @xmath and with the old smaller values for @xmath the short
distance part of @xmath is less than @xmath . Long distance effects come
from the operators with only light quarks in ( 5.28 ), which are also
present below the charm threshold and may generate meson poles in the
low–energy matrix elements. But a long distance dominance is clearly a
puzzle, because by power counting these contributions are suppressed
with @xmath with respect to the short distance part, because the
coefficient of the leading dimension–six operator in ( 5.40 ) is
proportional to @xmath (for a discussion see e.g. [ 68 ] ). This fact
has even stimulated speculations about new physics contributing to the
@xmath –mass difference (e.g. in [ 69 ] ). With the new NLO result for
@xmath the short distance part is well above potential long distance
contributions. Keeping in mind the large uncertainties in the problem it
appears to be hopeless to find evidence of new physics in the @xmath
–mass difference.
