## 4.5 Twisted affine Lie algebras

Twisted affine Lie algebras can be obtained in much the same way as the
untwisted ones and they are, for example, realized as slightly
generalized centrally extended loop algebras. Recall that the loop
algebras were obtained when considering analytic maps from @xmath onto
some finite Lie algebra @xmath . We have the general loop algebra
element realized as @xmath where @xmath and @xmath is a Laurent
polynomial in the coordinate @xmath of @xmath .

The generalization we can allow for is to take the twisted boundary
condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a finite automorphism of @xmath . Finiteness means that
there exists a finite integer @xmath such that @xmath . This induces a
gradation of @xmath in the way that defining @xmath we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

This shows that c.f. ( 4.49 ) we have to take

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

for the polynomial multiplying @xmath . Proceeding exactly as for
untwisted case we find the natural bracket structure

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

Not all twisted algebras obtained in this way are mathematically
distinct from the untwisted algebra. If the automorphism is what is
known as an inner automorphism then we may regain the untwisted algebra
by a redefinition of the generators.

Inner automorphisms are of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

fore some groupelement @xmath with Lie algebra @xmath . We may now take

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

for some vector @xmath and @xmath denoting the Cartan sub-algebra of
@xmath . @xmath is constrained by @xmath which transforms into

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is not difficult to check that @xmath leaves the Cartan sub-algebra
invariant while

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

for a generic root generator @xmath of the affine Lie algebra @xmath .
This implies that if we introduce the new generators

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.57)
  -- -- -- --------

then they satisfy an untwisted affine Lie algebra.

For inner automorphisms there thus exists an isomorphism between the
twisted and untwisted algebras. Physically there may, however, be a
difference between the two ways of representing the algebra. In
particular, the vacuum of the untwisted algebra, i.e. the state of
lowest @xmath eigenvalue will transform in some representation of @xmath
. The vacuum state of the twisted algebra, corresponding to lowest
@xmath eigenvalue, on the other hand, transforms in some representation
of @xmath the subalgebra which commutes with @xmath . Choosing the
twisted way of representing the algebra thus breaks the symmetry from
@xmath to @xmath .

The outer automorphisms gives a non-isomorphic algebra and corresponds
to the Dynkin diagrams presented in fig.(4.3) with superscripts
different from one. For construction of root systems, a non-trivial
matter, we refer to the literature quoted at the end of this chapter.

It is important to note that there exists two different notations for
twisted affine Lie algebras. Referring to their respective subalgebras
@xmath we have here denoted the possible twisted cases @xmath and @xmath
. The upper index is the order of the automorphism denoted @xmath above.
More common in the literature is to denote the twisted cases by letters
referring to @xmath the finite Lie algebra that underlies the particular
realization in terms of centrally extended loop algebras. Here we then
have @xmath and @xmath respectively.

### 4.6 Generalizations of affine Lie algebras

We will here briefly mention two possible generalizations of the affine
Lie algebra structure, both introducing fermionic degrees of freedom.
The two generalizations will in what follows be called affine Lie
superalgebras and superaffine Lie algebras. Affine Lie superalgebras are
related to Lie superalgebras in much the same way as affine Lie algebras
are related to finite Lie algebras. Superaffine Lie algebras, on the
other hand, is the supersymmetric generalization of affine Lie algebras.

The affine Lie superalgebra has the following bracket structure

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are even elements and @xmath are odd elements with respect
to a @xmath gradation. @xmath and @xmath are structure constants and
@xmath and @xmath are bilinear forms. Under certain restrictions it is
possible to obtain a Virasoro algebra via a Sugawara construction. In
this context the algebra is the symmetry algebra of a supergroup valued
WZNW model.

The bracket structure of superaffine Lie algebras is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath are generators of an affine Lie algebra, @xmath is a
fermionic generator. @xmath are structure constants and @xmath the
Killing form of the underlying finite dimensional Lie algebra.

This is the symmetry algebra of the supersymmetric WZNW model c.f.
chapter seven which is @xmath superconformal. Indeed by introducing the
shifted affine current

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

which obeys an affine Lie algebra of level @xmath , @xmath being the
quadratic Casimir in the adjoint representation of @xmath , we can
realize the @xmath superconformal algebra generators @xmath and @xmath
as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath for Ramond and @xmath for Neveu-Schwartz boundary
conditions.

-   J.F. Cornwell, Group theory in physics: Volume III Supersymmetries
    and infinitedimensional algebras , Academic Press 1989

-   J. Fuchs, Affine Lie algebras and quantum groups , Cambridge
    University Press 1992

-   P. Goddard and D. Olive, Kac-Moody and Virasoro algebras in relation
    to quantum physics Int. J. Mod. Phys. 1 (1986) 303-414

-   J. Humphreys, Introduction to Lie algebras and representation theory
    , Springer-Verlag 1980

-   V.G. Kac, Infinite dimensional Lie algebras , Cambridge University
    Press 3’d ed. 1990

## Chapter 5 Verma modules over affine Lie algebras

In the models which we discuss in the papers contained in this thesis
the affine Lie algebra appears as the constraint algebra, and the state
space consists of what is known as Verma modules over the affine Lie
algebra. In the Verma module there appears null-vectors in much the same
way as for the case of Virasoro algebras. The structure and presence of
null-vectors is of considerable importance when studying the BRST
cohomology over complexes including Verma modules. Due to their presence
there may arise new states in the BRST cohomology of non-zero ghost
number. I will discuss those aspects in more detail at the end of
chapter seven when the necessary ingrediences have been introduced.

We will here discuss modules which are diagonal with respect to the
Cartan sub-algebra @xmath . If a module @xmath over an affine Lie
algebra @xmath is diagonalizable with respect to the Cartan sub-algebra
it allows for a weight space decomposition

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

for weights @xmath h @xmath . More precisely

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

for @xmath h . @xmath is called the weight space, @xmath is a weight if
@xmath , and dim @xmath is known as the multiplicity of @xmath .

### 5.1 Highest weight modules

One important sub-class of weight modules are so-called highest weight
modules. We call a @xmath module @xmath , highest weight module if there
exists an element @xmath such that @xmath is annihilated by all
generators of the algebra corresponding to positive roots, @xmath @xmath
h , and all elements of the module may be obtained by applying
generators of the algebra, corresponding to negative roots on @xmath .
It follows from the algebra that highest weight modules allow for a
weight space decomposition.

The eigenvalues of the Cartan sub algebra on the highest weight vectors
are known as highest weights. We denote them by @xmath , where @xmath is
the eigenvalue of the Cartan sub algebra of the underlying finite Lie
algebra, @xmath is the eigenvalue of @xmath the central element, and
@xmath the eigenvalue of the derivation @xmath . We can always shift
@xmath to zero and we take this as our convention.

From the fact that @xmath is in the center we see that all vectors of a
module @xmath have the same eigenvalue @xmath of @xmath , as the highest
weight vector. Furthermore, by representing a vector @xmath as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

we see from

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath is called the level of the weight and @xmath is known as the
grade.

Of particular interest are the highest weights, known as dominant
weights, and their corresponding modules, known as integrable highest
weight modules. Dominant weights are defined to obey

  -- -- -- -------
           (5.5)
  -- -- -- -------

which, expressed in terms of quantities related to the finite Lie
algebra, means

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the highest root of the finite dimensional algebra
@xmath .

These conditions can be obtained by demanding that the sub-modules of
the irreducible module of the @xmath sub-algebra generated by @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath are finite dimensional. Using the fact that
finite-dimensional representations of @xmath have integer weights, and
in addition, that for a highest weight this integer is non-negative, we
find

  -- -- -- -------
           (5.7)
  -- -- -- -------

Here @xmath is any weight of the representation. Only a finite number of
these conditions are independent corresponding to the simple roots
@xmath . Furthermore, the first condition in ( 5.7 ) follows from the
second which means that this is enclosed in eq.( 5.5 ).

The condition for a weight to be dominant is equivalent to what is known
as local nilpotency, which is what must be required in order to be able
to exponentiate a representation of the algebra to a representation of
the group. Hence the name integrable modules or integrable
representation.

Fundamental weights @xmath @xmath are for the case of semi-simple affine
Lie algebras, defined to be dual to the simple co-roots.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

From this we deduce, using the known vectors @xmath , that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . This can be used to define the analogue of the quadratic
Casimir for affine Lie algebras. We take the Weyl vector @xmath as twice
the sum of the fundamental weights

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the quadratic Casimir of the adjoint representation of
the finite Lie algebra @xmath . Note that this coincides with our
previous definition. As remarked above, the usual definition of the
quadratic Casimir in terms of operators does not make sense, since it
includes an infinite sum over positive roots. We take the eigenvalue
definition using the Weyl vector. We then have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is independent of the level of the module.

### 5.2 Affine Weyl group

We define the Weyl group @xmath to be generated by the identity element
and the reflections

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that for light-like roots this definition would not make sense
since we would divide by zero. To justify the notion reflection we note
that, as for the finite case,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

The Weyl group is generated by the simple reflections @xmath for simple
roots @xmath @xmath . The positive roots other than @xmath are permuted
by these simple reflections. We also have, as usual, that @xmath . What
is new compared to the finite case is the action on light-like roots
which are invariant under the Weyl reflections since @xmath for any root
@xmath and @xmath .

Take an arbitrary weight @xmath . Its Weyl reflection with respect to a
root @xmath becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Introducing the translation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

we se that we can write @xmath as @xmath translations followed by a
finite Weyl transformation of the first entry

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

which we may represent as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we define @xmath to act as a finite Weyl transformation on the
component @xmath of @xmath and as the identity on the two other
components.

Defining the co-root lattice as the lattice spanned by the co-roots we
see that it generates translations on this lattice and obviously

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is also possible to show that

  -- -- -- --------
           (5.19)
  -- -- -- --------

so the translation group is a subgroup of @xmath . Thus @xmath is the
semidirect product of the finite Weyl group @xmath and the group of
translations on the co-root lattice.

All affine weights are generated by the set of dominant weights @xmath
and the Weyl group, where the dominant weights are defined from

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that this definition is slightly different to the usual one ( 5.5
). Furthermore, the Weyl group is generated by the elements
corresponding to simple roots. This will be useful when we consider the
structure of singular vector in Vema modules over affine Lie algebras.

### 5.3 Verma modules

Take a @xmath module @xmath of highest weight @xmath . We call it a
Verma module if every highest weight @xmath module over @xmath is a
quotient of @xmath .

Some important properties of Verma modules @xmath are i) @xmath is
unique up to isomorphisms for every @xmath . ii) @xmath contains a
unique proper maximal submodule @xmath . iii) There exists a unique
irreducible submodule @xmath . Obviously iii) follows from ii). In ii)
proper means that @xmath cannot be identical to @xmath , but the trivial
submodule without any elements is allowed.

An irreducible module is a module that contains exactly one proper
maximal submodule namely the trivial submodule. A fully reducible module
is a module which is a direct sum of irreducible modules. To get the
irreducible submodule @xmath one must divide out any elements of the
form

  -- -- -- --------
           (5.21)
  -- -- -- --------

where @xmath is defined from the weights space decomposition of @xmath
@xmath and @xmath is a submodule of @xmath . @xmath is called a
primitive vector and @xmath a primitive weight. Note that the vectors
@xmath of the type @xmath are primitive. We denote this set of primitive
vectors singular vectors. The singular vectors and descendants of
singular vectors will be denoted null-vectors. The reason for this is
that null-vectors decouple from all vectors in the Verma module
including its conjugate. In the irreducible module they must, therefore,
be identified with the zero element, (although they have a non-zero
weight).

The singular vectors @xmath satisfy the condition of a highest weight
vector, and thus the Verma module @xmath contains Verma modules @xmath
as submodules. Verma showed, for finite dimensional Lie algebras, that
there is exactly one Verma submodule for each distinct singular vector [
17 ] . In general, a Verma module is not generated by its Verma
submodules due to prescence of primitive vectors that are not singular,
and this fact will obscure the structure of Verma modules. This was
first discovered in [ 18 ] .

For finite Lie algebras a necessary condition for existence of primitive
vectors that are not singular were given by Conze and Dixmier [ 19 ] .
If @xmath contains a sub-module which is not engraded by its Verma
sub-modules then there exists three elements @xmath of @xmath , the set
of Weyl reflected weights, all different such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

The notation here is; @xmath means that one may obtain @xmath from Weyl
reflections of @xmath while @xmath means that @xmath can be written as a
sum of positive roots with positive integers.

Choose a series of sub-modules @xmath such that @xmath . If all
quotients of the type @xmath are irreducible we call this a
Jordan-Hölder series. We define the multiplicity @xmath of a irreducible
submodule in a Verma module as the number of times @xmath appears in the
Jordan-Hölder series.

The multiplicity is in general different from one for at least one
submodule if the rank is larger than two. Jantzen see for example [ 20 ]
showed that the multiplicity for simple finite dimensional Lie algebras
is one for rank @xmath and this was generalized by Rocha-Carridi and
Wallach to affine Lie algebras [ 21 ] . For the finite dimensional case
one may, in fact, state that if @xmath contains k simple factors of
@xmath @xmath , @xmath @xmath , @xmath @xmath @xmath @xmath or @xmath
then for a regular dominant weight @xmath , @xmath contains an
irreducible sub-module @xmath with multiplicity @xmath [ 22 ] .

We illustrate the existence of primitive non-singular vectors in a
simple example for finite Lie algebras. We choose @xmath as our algebra,
with Dynkin diagram as given in fig.(5.1).

With a suitable choice of numbering the positive roots are @xmath . We
choose a highest weight @xmath such that @xmath , @xmath . The singular
vectors of this module are @xmath which gives rise to sub-modules of
Verma type in @xmath , and we will denote these @xmath , respectively.
This exhausts the possible singular vectors. The singular vectors of
@xmath are given by the elements @xmath and @xmath where @xmath is the
highest weight vector, and @xmath are generators corresponding to simple
roots. Take the element

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

of weight @xmath . Obviously @xmath but @xmath and all singular vectors
of @xmath except @xmath are also singular vectors i.e. contained in
@xmath . A simple calculation now shows that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

and we thus find that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus @xmath cannot be in irreducible sub-module @xmath and the
sub-module generated by @xmath is not a Verma module.

### 5.4 Structure of singular vectors in Verma modules

We would here like to establish when singular vectors appear in the
Verma module and their generic form. The ocurrence of singular vectors
in Verma modules @xmath is given by the Kac-Kazhdan determinant [ 23 ] ,
which is proportional to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath is as usual the sum of fundamental weights, @xmath is a
grading of the module with respect to positive roots, and @xmath is the
Kostant partition function which is the number of distinct sets of
positive integers @xmath such that @xmath for the positive roots @xmath
. We thus have the gradation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where elements in @xmath differ from the highest weight @xmath by @xmath
. Intuitively we may think of the Kac-Kazhdan determinant as the
determinant of the matrix of all inner products of states at a certain
weight @xmath .

The Verma module @xmath will be irreducible if and only if @xmath for
any @xmath and positive integer @xmath . If, on the other hand, @xmath
for any @xmath and positive integer @xmath there exists a singular
vector at weight @xmath in the Verma module @xmath .

We note that if we restrict ourselves to real roots i.e. that @xmath
then we may put the equation @xmath in the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the @xmath -centered Weylreflection defined as @xmath .
For light-like roots the conditions for singular vectors all reduce to
@xmath .

We may represent the @xmath -centered Weyl reflection of a weight @xmath
with respect to the simple root @xmath by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the power @xmath is defined from @xmath , and @xmath is the affine
algebra generator corresponding to @xmath .

We may now convince ourselves that @xmath is a singular-vector simply by
acting on it by @xmath . It is sufficient to check the generators
corresponding to simple roots i.e. to check with @xmath . The generators
of @xmath are given by @xmath and @xmath corresponding to @xmath and
@xmath for @xmath . The creators @xmath are given by switching the sign
of the affine roots. If we choose @xmath in ( 5.29 ) the non-trivial
check will correspond to @xmath and becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

We have thus a singular vector if @xmath or @xmath , and the latter
condition exactly corresponds to the definition of @xmath from the Weyl
reflection. It is not difficult to find the corresponding result for the
choice of another simple root.

Following this prescription we may thus represent a singular vector in
the module @xmath as @xmath . If we do this for two singular vectors
@xmath and say @xmath we may eliminate @xmath to find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

All such expressions like ( 5.31 ) do not make sense, since the total
power of each @xmath for arbitrary choices of @xmath and @xmath may be
negative. It may be shown [ 24 ] that @xmath is a singular vector in the
module @xmath if one may obtain the sequence @xmath from the sequence
@xmath by deleting @xmath @xmath ’s. We may then of course rewrite (
5.31 ) in a form with only positive powers using analytically continued
commutation relations.

We will take the example of @xmath to shed some light on this
construction. For convenience we take @xmath for the rest of this
chapter. In this case we have the fundamental weights @xmath and @xmath
. We may parametrize an arbitrary weight by the spin @xmath and level
@xmath as @xmath . The simple roots are @xmath and @xmath and @xmath
where @xmath . We parametrize an arbitrary positive real root as @xmath
@xmath and @xmath @xmath .

We then have that for the two cases that if there exists solutions to
the equations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

we have a singular vector of weight @xmath and @xmath respectively and
total mode number @xmath in the module @xmath .

The structure of embedding of Verma modules can be visualized as in
fig.(5.2).

The dots correspond to Verma modules and the arrows point towards
modules in which the module is embedded in. They are of two types
corresponding to solid and dashed arrows, respectively. The solid arrow
indicates that the highest weight vector of the embedded module @xmath
may be written as @xmath where @xmath is the highest weight of the
module which contains the embedded module. The dashed lines corresponds
to more complicated expressions.

The discussion above refers to the case when @xmath For the opposite
case when @xmath the analysis is analogous with one essential
difference, the corresponding embedding diagram terminates as is shown
in fig.(5.3).

This in not the whole story. If we begin at a weight which is an
integral power of @xmath we get the following embeddings depicted in
fig.(5.4). The top one refers to @xmath while the bottom one to @xmath .

We hence see that modules over affine algebras with central extensions
@xmath will contain infinitely many singular vectors, while in the
opposite case @xmath there is always a finite number of singular
vectors.

For the case of @xmath the module on which the diagram is terminating is
obviously irreducible and the weights are known as anti-dominant
weights. The corresponding representations play an important r @xmath le
in paper I. The structure of the singular vectors for arbitrary
representations will be one of the fundamental ingrediences in paper IV.

-   V.G. Kac, Infinite dimensional Lie algebras , Cambridge University
    Press 3’d ed. 1990

-   J. Fuchs, Affine Lie algebras and quantum groups , Cambridge
    University Press 1992

-   P. Goddard and D. Olive, Kac-Moody and Virasoro algebras in relation
    to quantum physics Int. J. Mod. Phys. 1 (1986) 303-414

## Chapter 6 Becchi-Rouet-Stora-Tyutin Quantization

Many, if not all, of the most important physical theories are known as
gauge theories. The best known example is ordinary electrodynamics
governed by Maxwells equations. A gauge theory is a theory which is
described by more variables than there are physically independent
degrees of freedom. The physical degrees of freedom are invariant under
gauge transformations. One gets constraint equations in addition to the
ordinary equations of motion which reduces the number of degrees of
freedom to the appropriate physical ones.
History provides us with several ways of quantizing constrained systems.
In fig.(6.1) [ 25 ] we have tried to indicate the main steps and
differences of three different ways towards a quantum theory. The one
passing the lower left corner, BRST quantization, will be the subject of
this chapter. The diagonal way is Dirac and Gupta-Bleuler kind of
quantization, which will be briefly mentioned. Considering route three,
canonical quantization, we will here only comment that the ”Standard
theory” is often a non-linear theory.

We will make explicit and extensive use of the BRST quantization
technique in papers I, IV and V. It proves to be a most convenient tool
for analyzing the issues of the papers contained in this thesis. Other
quantization techniques, such as canonical quantization, prove to be
much less powerful at least for the known example of the gauged WZNW
model. This model has been analyzed using canonical quantization in [ 26
] , and using BRST in a number of publications and pionered in [ 27 , 28
] .

### 6.1 Constrained Hamiltonian Systems

We will start by reviewing the basic ingrediences of the global
formulation of dynamics and the action principle. The starting point is
the action functional

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the Lagrangian of the system under consideration and
@xmath are the coordinates and velocities of the space considered, (dot
denotes as usual derivative with respect to the parameter @xmath ). The
classical equations of motion are derived by requiring that the
variation of @xmath with respect to @xmath vanishes. Performing this
calculation renders us the Euler-Lagrange equations of motion

  -- -- -- -------
           (6.2)
  -- -- -- -------

We see that the accelerations @xmath are uniquely determined as
functions of @xmath and @xmath if and only if we can invert the matrix

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

i.e. if its determinant does not vanish.

In order to make the transition to the Hamiltonian formulation we
substitute each velocity @xmath by its conjugate momenta

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

and define the Hamiltonian of the system as the Legendre transform

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

If the matrix in eq.( 6.3 ) is not invertible, i.e. we have a singular
Lagrangian, it is not possible to invert all velocities as functions of
coordinates and momenta. This means that we have some constraints

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

that will relate the momenta that are not independent. These equations
define a submanifold of phase space which is assumed to be smoothly
embedded.

The Hamiltonian is a function of only @xmath and @xmath as can be seen
from the variation of ( 6.5 ) which yields

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath is not an independent variation but ( 6.7 ) tells us that the
dependence of @xmath on @xmath enters only via the dependence of @xmath
.

A simple, yet illuminating, example of a system with singular Lagranian
is depicted in fig.(6.2) [ 29 ] . We here have the Lagrangian @xmath
with momenta @xmath . The primary constraint is @xmath . All of @xmath
-space is mapped onto a line in @xmath -space and, furthermore, all
lines for which @xmath are held constant are mapped onto a single point
of the line @xmath in @xmath -space. This means that the transformation
@xmath is neither one-to-one nor onto.

When we have systems with singular Lagrangians, which will be the ones
we consider in the following, the Hamiltonian ( 6.5 ) is not uniquely
determined off the submanifold defined by the constraints. We could thus
replace the Hamiltonian with the total Hamiltonian

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are arbitrary functions of @xmath , referred to as Lagrange
multipliers.
The constraints of eq.( 6.6 ) must of course be zero for all times. The
time evolution of those primary constraints,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

may yield other constraints, known as secondary constraints, which may
be independent of the primary constraints. This process must be repeated
until no more independent constraints are obtained.
The distinction between primary-, secondary-, tertiary- etc. constraints
are of little importance. It is, however, important to classify
constraints according to whether their Poisson bracket algebra closes or
not. First class constraints @xmath satisfy

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

with all constraints, and second class constraints (in the following
denoted @xmath ) do not. We thus have two sets of constraints. The first
class constraints that satisfy a closed Poisson bracket algebra

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

among themselves, and the second class constraints whose most important
property, proven by Dirac [ 30 , 31 ] , is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

The presence of all constraints means that there are some degrees of
freedom which are physically redundant. For the case of second class
constraints we have one redundant degree of freedom for each constraint,
while for first class constraints there are two redundant degree of
freedom for each constraint. (In field theory those statements are taken
to be valid at each point in the space.)
In order to quantize a system one may first try to get rid of the second
class constraints. One method was invented by the ubiquitous Dirac. One
introduces a new bracket, the Dirac bracket, to replace the Poisson
bracket, defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . It can be shown that the Dirac bracket has the essential
features of the Poisson bracket. Furthermore, the Dirac bracket fulfills
the important identity @xmath . Using the Dirac bracket, and imposing
@xmath , we now only have first class constraints that satisfy a closed
Dirac bracket algebra.
The quantization now proceeds following one route or the other indicated
in fig.(6.1). The canonical way usually means that one introduces new
constraints, known as ”gauge choices”, one for each first class
constraint. These pairs now constitute second class constraints and
using these a Dirac bracket is constructed in order to eliminate them.
We thus end up with a true physical system, which is quantized by
letting dynamical variables turn into operators and letting Dirac
brackets become commutators. This is, however, not a straightforward
task, for a general system. Furthermore, quantization is usually not
performed in a covariant way.
The other two ways of fig.(6.2) are both covariant in the sense that one
quantizes before imposing the constraint. One difference is if
Grassmann-odd variables, ghosts, are introduced or not. In the diagonal
way, the one without ghosts, one quantizes the original Hamiltonian
system. Then one projects out the physical quantum theory, both
operators and states. There are two different prescriptions how to
project out states, one by Dirac

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

and one by Gupta-Bleuler concerning quantum electrodynamics,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is somewhat weaker than Dirac’s. One may note that the consistency
condition of the Dirac projection allows no quantum anomalies to appear
in the quantum constraint algebra, since this would ruin the projection
condition.

In favour of BRST quantization one must mention that it has so far have
always coincided with other quantization techniques except for the cases
where other techniques have proven to be insufficient. For those cases
the BRST quantization have turned out to be consistent.

With these sketchy remarks we now turn to the main point of interest,
the BRST quantization.

### 6.2 The BRST Quantization Method

As mentioned above, one essential feature of BRST quantization is the
introduction of ghosts. Ghosts are scalar objects of opposite Grassmann
parity to the constraints, where Grassmann even means bosonic and
Grassmann odd fermionic. The basic difference between odd and even
Grassmann parity is the utilization of anti-commutators between two odd
objects and commutators otherwise.
Ghosts appears in for example the concept of path-integral quantization
of non-Abelian gauge theories. The originators were Fadeev and Popov [
32 ] . Heuristic derivations of the Fadeev-Popov trick applied to for
example electrodynamics can be found in most books on quantum field
theory e.g. [ 33 ] , which also include a more rigorous treatment of the
non-Abelian case.
We here state the result for the electromagnetic case. We have the
partition function (or more correctly the generating functional of
Greens functions), given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the action of the theory, and @xmath is the ordinary
vector potential in electromagnetism. The gauge invariance of @xmath
causes a divergence in @xmath . In order to remove this divergence we
gauge-fix, and use the well-known formula

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

to take care of the determinant that will appear in this procedure. Here
@xmath and @xmath are objects of odd Grassmann parity. We then find

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.18)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

@xmath where @xmath is the gauge fixing term, a convenient choice is
@xmath , and @xmath , the Fadeev-Popov term.
Turning to the case of pure Yang-Mills theory, we instead get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

As noted independently by Becchi, Rouet and Stora [ 34 ] and Tyutin [ 35
] the related action is invariant under the global BRST transformation

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (6.20)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

@xmath is a constant Grassmann-odd parameter. The BRST transformation (
6.20 ) has the important property that it is nilpotent i.e. two
subsequent transformations yield zero. In the above form of eq.( 6.20 )
this is only true on-shell, but one may restate off-shell nilpotency be
reformulating eq.( 6.19 ) in a more general form.
From these important discoveries, a rapid development of BRST
quantization techniques has emerged, which are valid on a much more
general basis.
Consider a gauge theory, which on the classical level, has @xmath
independent first class constraints @xmath . We assume that @xmath is
hermitean and bosonic. More general situations may also be considered in
an analogous manner. In the corresponding quantum theory @xmath could
obey an algebra

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

In general @xmath may be complicated functions and one distinguishes
between different cases by introducing the concept of rank of a theory.
We will soon illuminate this point further.
In order to BRST quantize the system we introduce ghosts @xmath , one
for each independent constraint, and its conjugate momenta @xmath , such
that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

As was proven in reference [ 36 ] , a nilpotent BRST charge @xmath can
always be found ¹ ¹ 1 The proof is for the case of finite number of
degrees of freedom , and the explicit form is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here the factors @xmath include ghosts, and @xmath is the rank of the
theory. Rank 0 is an Abelian theory. Considering the case of rank 1 we
may for example have constant functions @xmath i.e. eq.( 6.21 ) is a Lie
algebra, and we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

This BRST operator differs from the general form ( 6.23 ). The
difference is due to a reordering of the ghost term. One may note,
however, that a given theory may have several different BRST charges of
different ranks related by canonical transformations. G. Fülöp provides
us with an example of this situation in [ 37 ] .
@xmath is nilpotent by construction, self-adjoint and assumed to be
conserved. Since we have assumed hermitean constraints we have both
hermitean ghosts and ghost-momenta. We now require that physical states
are annihilated by the BRST charge [ 38 , 39 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

The nilpotency of the BRST charge tells us that any state of the form
@xmath obeys ( 6.25 ), but those states also decouple from all other
physical states, i.e. they are null states. The true physical states are
thus given by the cohomology of @xmath . Define Ker @xmath and Im @xmath
. The cohomology is given by Ker @xmath modulo Im @xmath . This means
that we have equivalence classes of solutions such that @xmath and
@xmath are identified.
It usually convenient to introduce the ghost number operator @xmath
given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

This operator counts the difference between the number of ghosts and the
number of ghost-momenta, as can be seen from the relations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

Also

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is therefore possible, as first noticed in [ 40 ] , to classify
states according to their ghost number

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

If we assume that the state space is irreducible we may classify states
following Kugo and Ojima [ 40 ] . The irreducibility means that we may
find a basis for the state space, consisting of states @xmath such that
@xmath . The index @xmath is the ghost number of the state.

Take now an arbitrary state @xmath . Obviously @xmath is either BRST
invariant or not and if BRST invariant it is either BRST exact or not.
We start by considering the physical states, i.e. states @xmath such
that @xmath , @xmath . Take also @xmath . We first assume that @xmath
but this leads immediately to a contradiction since then @xmath . Thus a
physical state cannot couple to a BRST exact state. The other
possibility would be that @xmath which we assume to hold. We have that
there exists @xmath such that @xmath . This gives @xmath . If we chose
our basis such that @xmath is in the basis, we must have @xmath where
@xmath decouples from @xmath . Thus @xmath . Since @xmath is BRST
invariant by assumption, @xmath must also be BRST invariant. Also @xmath
can obviously not be physical and hence @xmath and @xmath in
contradiction to the starting point. Thus physical states couples to
physical states.

Consider now the case when @xmath is not BRST invariant i.e. @xmath .
Consider then @xmath thus @xmath cannot be BRST invariant rather @xmath
where @xmath . Thus states that are not BRST invariant couples to state
which are BRST exact.

If we had started with an state @xmath which is BRST exact we would in
an analogous manner have found the reverse statement as we must. It is
clear from this argument that all unphysical states fall into quartets
related as the states @xmath above.

We have made use of this classification of states in paper I and
especially paper IV.

The essential steps to solve the cohomology are to introduce a
gradation, a degree, such that we may isolate a small part @xmath of the
full BRST charge @xmath and then solve the cohomology for @xmath .
Finally, one relates the cohomology of @xmath to the full cohomology.
This can be done order by order in the degree, when commutation
relations only preserve the degree to highest order, or to all orders,
when commutation relations preserve the degree exactly. The order by
order procedure is developed by Hwang and Marnelius in [ 41 ] and used
to prove a ghost decoupling theorem in a general setting. It is also
used in paper I of this thesis and we refer to this for more detailed
accounts. An example of the exact procedure may be found in [ 42 ] ,
where it is applied to two-dimensional gravity coupled to @xmath matter.
This is actually built on known mathematical techniques of spectral
sequences of filtered complexes, see for example [ 43 ] .

-   P. Dirac, Lectures on quantum mechanics , Belfer Graduate School of
    Science, Yeshiva University, New York 1964

-   M. Henneaux and C. Teitelboim, Quantization of gauge systems ,
    Princeton University Press 1992

-   S. Hwang and R. Marnelius, Unpublished lecture notes on BRST
    quantization , Graduate course, Chalmers University of Technology
    and Göteborg University, 1990-91

-   R. Marnelius, Unpublished lecture notes on Classical field theory ,
    Graduate course, Chalmers University of Technology and G @xmath
    teborg University

-   U. Mårtensson, Derivation and BRST quantization of models for
    spinning relativistic particles , PhD thesis, G @xmath teborg 1993

## Chapter 7 Wess-Zumino-Novikov-Witten Model

The WZNW theories are, as mentioned above, a conformal field theory
which symmetry algebra is a semidirect sum of the Virasoro algebra and
an affine Lie algebra. The generators of the holomorphic symmetry
algebra are at least the stress tensor @xmath and the affine symmetry
generator @xmath . Furthermore, it is an example of a so-called rational
conformal field theory i.e. a conformal field theory which has a finite
number of primary fields with respect to the symmetry algebra. This is
actually only the case for compact groups and finite dimensional
representations.

We also require that the stress-energy tensor of a WZNW theory is of
Sugawara type, namely

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath is some normalization constant @xmath is the Killing form of
the Lie algebra g that appears in the decomposition @xmath fore some Lie
algebra generators @xmath .

The WZNW models have a Lagrangian description in terms of an action
which with properly chosen couplings, is conformally invariant. In
addition to the conformal symmetry there is an affine symmetry of the
action.

The WZNW models and various versions of what is known as gauged WZNW
models have attracted a considerable interest from string theorists.
From the string point of view the WZNW models is a closed bosonic string
propagating on a group manifold. Exact results for correlation functions
have been presented [ 44 ] and critical dimensions are calculated in
references [ 45 , 46 ] . These models are solvable in the sense that one
may find the spectrum, vertex operators, and analyze modular invariance.
In fact, a closed bosonic string propagating on a group manifold always
give modular invariant theories [ 47 ] provided one chooses integrable
representations for the affine Lie algebra. These models are unphysical
since they include a tachyonic ground state.

The gauged WZNW models, which from the conformal point of view
correspond to so-called Goddard-Kent-Olive coset construction [ 48 ] in
the algebraic formulation [ 28 ] , provide with a wider range of
possible conformal field theories. They hence equip the string theory
with a plethora of choices for backgrounds. There are various ways of
gaugeing the WZNW model. We will below concentrate on what is known as
vector gaugeing.

A possibility to get rid of the tachyon is to include fermionic degrees
of freedom in the WZNW model yielding a supersymmetric WZNW model [ 49 ,
50 ] . This model may serve as backgrounds for the heterotic string if
gauged in a so-called chiral way, see [ 51 ] and references therein. The
vector gauged supersymmetric WZNW model is related to the algebraic
superconformal coset construction [ 52 , 53 ] in much the same fashion
as for the non-supersymmetric way.

### 7.1 General Properties

Consider a WZNW model defined on a Riemann surface @xmath with Lie group
@xmath valued fields g. The action looks like [ 54 , 47 , 44 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the boundary of @xmath on which g is assumed to be well
defined. ( 7.2 ) is conformally invariant [ 54 ] , and we impose the
closed string boundary condition @xmath . A general variation of ( 7.2 )
gives the result

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

From this we can obtain the equations of motion which in light-cone
coordinates @xmath become

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Note that the first of these equations follow directly from ( 7.3 ) and
the second by noting @xmath .
Actually, the action ( 7.2 ) possesses a much larger symmetry than the
conformal one known as the affine symmetry for reasons that will become
clear below. It is invariant under

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath and @xmath are arbitrary group-valued functions. A convenient
tool for verifying the affine symmetry is to use an identity known as
the Polyakov-Wiegmann identity [ 55 , 56 ] ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

This is found by a straightforward calculation starting from the action
( 7.2 ). In light-cone coordinates the last piece becomes @xmath . Using
the Polyakov-Wiegmann identity ( 7.6 ) it is know simple to verify the
affine invariance ( 7.5 ).

The symmetry ( 7.5 ) gives rise to an infinite number of conserved
currents obeying the relations

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath . @xmath are antihermitean matrices representing the Lie
algebra @xmath of @xmath , i.e. @xmath .
The variation of the currents @xmath and @xmath under the infinitesimal
version of ( 7.5 ), @xmath , yields the result

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (7.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

This shows, introducing the holomorphic and anti-holomorphic coordinates
@xmath , @xmath , and using

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

that @xmath and @xmath obey affine Lie algebras of level @xmath , i.e.
we have, using Laurent expansions of @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

as well as for @xmath . Also @xmath , which means that @xmath and @xmath
commutes. In what follows we will only bother to display the holomorphic
sector.
As shown for conformal field theories in two dimensions the
energy-momentum tensor splits into a holomorphic part, and an
anti-holomorphic one. The holomorphic part of the energy-momentum
tensor, for the WZNW theory, is given by the Sugawara construction as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.11)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

@xmath is the second Casimir of the adjoint representation of @xmath
defined as @xmath . From this we may identify the Laurent coefficients
of the energy-momentum tensor to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

From eq.( 7.10 ) we may verify that @xmath indeed satisfies a Virasoro
algebra, c.f. ( 2.24 ), with @xmath replaced by @xmath , and furthermore
we have the important relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

The conformal charge of the Virasoro algebra is found to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the dimension of the group @xmath . Eq.( 7.13 ) means
that we have the operator product expansion

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath is thus a weight (1,0) Virasoro-primary field, i.e. primary with
respect to the Virasoro algebra. The current is not, however, primary
with respect to affine Lie algebra as can be seen from eq.( 7.8 ), or
alternatively from ( 7.10 ). This fact is rather obvious since the
currents are the generators of the symmetry.
A primary field with respect to the current algebra transforms as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath belongs to some representation @xmath and @xmath of the Lie
algebra @xmath . Infinitesimally we may write them as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

and likewise for @xmath . @xmath is as usual an antihermitean matrix in
the representation @xmath . Since the currents are the symmetry
generators we should have the following operator product expansion

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

for primary fields @xmath of the affine symmetry. We will in what
follows often ignore the indices @xmath of the representation. Using (
7.18 ) we may write down Ward identities of the affine symmetry, compare
to eq.( 2.18 ) in the Virasoro case,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is not difficult to verify that primary fields of the affine algebra
are also primary with respect to the Virasoro algebra with conformal
weight

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

In analogy to Lie algebra analysis we introduce highest weight
representations of the affine Lie algebra see chapter 5. We build the
state space on ground states @xmath that satisfy

  -- -- -- --------
           (7.21)
  -- -- -- --------

i.e. @xmath is a highest weight state with respect to the currents, and
transforms in the representation @xmath of the Lie algebra @xmath . As
for the Virasoro case we have the correspondence between primary fields
and the ground state

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

General states are constructed by acting on @xmath with currents of
negative mode number yielding some state @xmath , where @xmath indicates
the sum of all the different mode numbers, that is the grade.
We have the necessary and sufficient condition, for the representations
to be unitary,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

for all simple roots @xmath , and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the highest root and @xmath the highest weight of the
vacuum representation.

To see that the condition ( 7.23 ) is necessary, we consider the the
@xmath subalgebra generated by @xmath and @xmath . Take a highest weight
state @xmath . The norm of the descendant @xmath becomes, using the
algebra,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence, we must have @xmath . It is sufficient to demand this for the
simple roots since it will then follow for all positive roots. The
condition ( 7.24 ) follows from identical considerations of the @xmath
subalgebra generated by @xmath and @xmath , and the descendant @xmath .
We now find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

Hence we must have @xmath . The most restrictive condition comes from
the highest root @xmath . This can be seen as follows. Take for
simplicity the case of a simply-laced algebra and the square of the root
to be two. Then we have @xmath , where @xmath are the simple roots and
@xmath are the fundamental weights. Any positive root may be expanded as
@xmath with non-negative integers @xmath . Furthermore any weight on the
weight lattice is a sum of fundamental weights with integer coefficients
@xmath . From the the condition @xmath we see that for unitary weights
all the coefficients @xmath are non-negative. The highest root may be
defined as the root @xmath for which @xmath with non-negative integers
@xmath valid for any positive root @xmath . It then follows that @xmath

It follows from representation theory of @xmath that the eigenvalues of
@xmath must be integers. Since @xmath are integers for any weight @xmath
on the weight lattice we also find that @xmath must be an integer.

### 7.2 Supersymmetric WZNW model

The supersymmetric generalization of the WZNW model at the conformal
point is given by the action [ 49 , 50 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a superfield, @xmath and @xmath are superderivatives and
@xmath is known as the level of the supersymmetric WZNW model.

We adopt the conventions in what follows. Gamma matrices

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

Conjugation of spinors

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have indicated the metric @xmath . Superderivative

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

which, using light-cone coordinates

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

has the components

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

The equations of motion of ( 7.27 ) take the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (7.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is convenient to introduce the component form for the superfield
@xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (7.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here g is a group @xmath valued bosonic field, @xmath a spinor
transforming in an appropriate representation of @xmath and @xmath is an
auxiliary field. Using the definition @xmath we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (7.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

We may now rewrite the equations of motion in components to find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

and finally using these equations and ( 7.35 ) the last one become

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

In components, and using the equations of motion to eliminate the
auxiliary field @xmath , we may find the action ( 7.27 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the ordinary bosonic WZNW action ( 7.2 ). This shows
that @xmath and @xmath are components of a free fermion @xmath which may
be written as [ 49 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

Furthermore, if we change variables to @xmath , bosons and fermions will
decouple. In the path-integral approach this will, however, introduce a
shift in the level of the WZNW model @xmath [ 57 ] , where @xmath is the
quadratic Casimir in the adjoint representation of G.

The appearance of the anomaly responsible for the shift of levels
becomes intuitively clear in the algebraic approach. The superaffine Lie
algebra couples fermions and bosons in the way indicated in ( 4.59 ).
One may introduce another affine Lie algebra which decouples from the
fermions. As is easily verified, the level of this decoupled affine Lie
algebra will be shifted by @xmath compared to the affine Lia algebra one
started with. The action of this decoupled system is then a bosonic WZNW
model with shifted level and free fremions. In the action, however, the
change of variables ( 7.39 ) does not change anything. Hence, in the
path-integral approach, the shift must appear as an anomaly, i.e. from
the measure.

The action ( 7.27 ) is invariant under superconformal transformations as
well as superaffine transformations. The latter are given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

for superfields @xmath and @xmath satisfying @xmath . The verification
of the invariance ( 7.40 ) is easiest in components. Introducing
components for the fields @xmath where @xmath , we may identify the
affine transformation and its superpartner

  -- -- -- --------
           (7.41)
  -- -- -- --------

where we have @xmath and @xmath . @xmath is found in a similar way as
@xmath above. The verification of the invariance ( 7.40 ) is now a
straightforward matter using the component form of the action ( 7.38 ),
the Polyakov-Wiegmann identity ( 7.6 ) and noting that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

under the affine transformation ( 7.40 ).

The conserved quantities that are related to the invariance ( 7.40 ) may
be constructed in a standard fashion, compare with the bosonic case in
for example [ 44 ] . They are found to be [ 49 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

and similarly for @xmath . On-shell the @xmath term vanishes and we may
identify the generators of the superaffine transformation ( 7.41 ).

A large class of conformal field theories can be classified using
Goddard, Kent and Olives (GKO) coset construction [ 48 , 7 ] . Actually
this method first appeared as an example several years earlier [ 58 , 59
] . The gauged WZNW model provides us with a Lagrangian formulation of
this construction [ 28 ] .

There also exists a similar construction for the @xmath superconformal
field theories known as the Kazama-Suzuki coset construction [ 52 , 53 ]
. Here the gauged supersymmetric WZNW model provides with the Lagrangian
formulation, see paper V.

### 7.3 Goddard-Kent-Olive and Kazama-Suzuki Coset Constructions

The GKO and Kazama-Suzuki coset constructions uses purely algebra
methods. It enables us to increase the set of consistent models
substantially. In fact without coset formulations the Sugawara
stress-energy tensor gives only conformal central charges which are
larger than one.

Consider a Virasoro algebra c.f. ( 2.24 ). As usual, we assume that we
have highest weight states ( 2.30 ) on which we build our state space by
applying products of @xmath . We represent the Virasoro algebra in terms
of an affine Lie algebra @xmath via the Sugawara prescription ( 7.12 ).
It is also assumed that the underlying Lie algebra @xmath corresponds to
a compact group @xmath . The central charge of the Virasoro algebra is
given by eq.( 7.14 ).
Take now @xmath to be a subalgebra of @xmath . We define

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

They satisfy Virasoro algebras of central charges @xmath and @xmath ,
respectively. (We adopt in this section the convention that capital
group indices take values in @xmath and lower case indices in @xmath .)
This corresponds to energy-momentum tensors of the Sugawara form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

and we define

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

Due to the feature ( 7.13 ) we find that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

which has the obvious consequence that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

and hence

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

This shows that not only @xmath and @xmath satisfy Virasoro algebras,
but so does also their difference @xmath . The corresponding central
charge is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

If @xmath is not simple but, for example, consists of two simple pieces,
we will subtract one piece for each simple part.
If we take the coset @xmath we will reproduce exactly the discrete
series of central charges of eq.( 2.33 ) with @xmath , as was found in
reference [ 48 ] .
Furthermore, we will get as condition on the state space of the coset
that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

We will refer to this as the GKO coset condition in the following.

The Kazama-Suzuki coset construction is a generalization of the GKO
construction for an N=1 superconformal algebra. We are here using a
different notation compared to the one in paper V. In order to compare
one should exchange @xmath and @xmath as well as @xmath and @xmath . We
take an N=1 super conformal algebra and represent its generators in
terms of a superaffine Lie algebra

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (7.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath for the Ramond and @xmath for Neveu-Schwartz boundary
conditions. We have here used the affine generator

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

which obeys an affine Lie algebra of level @xmath and decouples from the
fermions @xmath . Note that this is then just an affine algebra plus a
free fermion.

We now want to make a decomposition of @xmath and @xmath in terms of a
subalgebra @xmath and and a coset @xmath . We thus want an orthogonal
decomposition of the generators

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

The decomposition is given by using the @xmath generators ( 7.52 ) for
the algebra @xmath as well as the subalgebra @xmath and using ( 7.54 )
we may obtain expressions for @xmath and @xmath . It is of crucial
importance to note that the generator @xmath to be used in ( 7.52 ) for
@xmath and @xmath is not the restriction of @xmath to the subalgebra but
rather the generator given by substituting uppercase indices by
lowercase indices in ( 7.53 ). In this way @xmath will have level @xmath
while the restriction of @xmath to the subalgebra would still have level
@xmath . The central charge of the coset will be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

As usual, @xmath and @xmath denote the dimensions of the underlying Lie
algebras.

Goddard, Kent and Olive were able to construct a superconformal series
for the special choice of @xmath where the generators of the affine Lie
algebra were all represented by bilinears in fermions. They then
obtained a superconformal algebra of central charge

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

This central charge is found to be a special case of the Kazama-Suzuki
construction. If we introduce the shifted levels @xmath , take the
diagonal coset @xmath and choose @xmath we obtain ( 7.57 ) but in terms
of @xmath instead of @xmath .

### 7.4 The Gauged Wess-Zumino-Novikov-Witten Model

The WZNW model possesses, as pointed out above, an affine invariance
given by ( 7.5 ). In addition there is also a global invariance

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath take values in some sub-group @xmath of @xmath . In order
to promote this global invariance to a local one

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

we introduce non-propagating gauge fields @xmath and @xmath . We require
@xmath and @xmath to transform as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

in order to have the covariant derivatives @xmath and @xmath to
transform in the desired fashion @xmath and @xmath . We now choose
@xmath and @xmath to take values in the same sub-group and substitute
the derivatives for covariant derivatives in the action. This gives the
action for the chirally gauged WZNW model

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

For our purposes, we instead of this left right invariance, desire a
gauged WZNW model with so-called vector invariance i.e. invariance under
the vector transformation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

We may now use the Polyakov-Wiegmann identity ( 7.6 ) to convince
ourselves that it is sufficient to add the term @xmath to the chirally
gauged WZNW action to get an invariant action under ( 7.62 ). The
resulting action becomes

  -- -- -- --------
           (7.63)
  -- -- -- --------

@xmath transforms in the adjoint representation of @xmath which is taken
to be an anomaly-free vector subgroup of @xmath . Following [ 28 ] , we
may parametrize the gauge fields as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

where h and @xmath are group elements of @xmath .
The partition function is given as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the parametrization ( 7.64 ), and the Polyakov-Wiegmann identity (
7.6 ) we can write the action as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

This change of variables will render us Jacobians @xmath , where @xmath
are covariant derivatives. Following Polyakov-Wiegmann [ 55 , 56 ] we
rewrite this as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath denotes, as usual, the quadratic Casimir of the adjoint
representation of @xmath . The two remaining determinants are
represented by a @xmath ghost system. The @xmath ghost has conformal
weight one and the @xmath ghost weight zero. Changing variables @xmath ,
choosing the gauge @xmath i.e. @xmath and finally changing variables
again into @xmath we may write down the final form of the partition
function

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.68)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The total action ( 7.68 ) gives us a total conserved current consisting
of three parts, (now in holomorphic coordinates as above),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

The three parts of the current each obey affine Lie algebras of levels
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath respectively. This means that @xmath satisfy
an affine Lie algebra of level zero.
The energy-momentum tensor is found to be

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.70)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where, as above, capital indices take values in @xmath , and lower case
indices in @xmath . The total conformal anomaly becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

which, as noted in [ 27 ] , coincides with the conformal anomaly of the
GKO construction ( 7.50 ).

The total action of eq.( 7.68 ) is invariant under the BRST
transformation [ 28 , 60 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (7.72)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The BRST charge is then found to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

We note that the BRST transformation ( 7.72 ) is not nilpotent. The
transfomations on the @xmath -ghosts and the currents are nilpotent but
for example

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

A similar expression holds for @xmath . We thus se that nilpotency is
aquired on shell for @xmath -ghosts and if the level of the auxiliary
sector @xmath had been @xmath and not @xmath as above. This is, however,
not a surprise since the contribution of @xmath to the level of the
auxiliary sector is a quantum anomaly and ( 7.72 ) is just a classical
invariance. On the quantum level, like in the BRST charge, the ghosts
will contribute by the necessary amount to aquire nilpotency.

This may also be seen from another point of view. Classically we have a
constraint, @xmath , which is of second class if @xmath . In order to
make it first class we introduce a new set of variables @xmath which are
affine currents of level @xmath . The new constraits will be first class
if we take @xmath . This will give us the BRST operator ( 7.73 ). The
requirement of nilpotency of the BRST operator gives that the current
@xmath must have level @xmath , where the additional @xmath is a quantum
correction originating from the ghosts.

Using the BRST charge we find that [ 28 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is given by eq.( 7.46 ). This means that the
energy-momentum tensors will coincide when inserted between physical
states since @xmath .
When we have an abelian @xmath it was shown, [ 28 ] , that the two
constructions are identical, i.e. that the GKO coset condition eq.( 7.51
) and the BRST projection @xmath yield the same spectrum of physical
states.
The generalization to non-abelian groups @xmath is, as mentioned before,
the subject of paper I. We approach the problem using the BRST
technique. The state space will be given by the BRST cohomology, which
is solved by a standard technique known as spectral sequences of
filtered complexes. The essential step is to introduce a grading of the
operators such that one may start by analyzing a smaller and hopefully
easier part of the BRST operator. In the generic case the degree may
either be exact or not. Exact means that the degree is preserved by the
commutation relations. If the degree is exact one relates the cohomology
of the part of the BRST operator to the full BRST operator. In the case
where the degree is not exact, which is the one at hand in paper I, one
must solve the BRST cohomology order by order in the degree.

It is found that the states in the cohomology will be ghost free if one
restricts the representations to integrable representations of the G
sector and to representations that excludes null-vectors in the H
sector. We will refer in what follows to the latter type of
representations as anti-dominant highest weight representations. The
states in the cohomology will be restricted to highest weight primary
states in both the G and the H sectors, and to a ghost vacuum for the
ghosts. We take the level of the affine Lie algebra @xmath to be
positive for the G sector and, hence, it follows that it is negative in
the H sector. The restrictions of representations thus confines us to
the modules furthest to the left in figure (5.2) for the G sector and
the module furthest to the right in figure (5.3) for the H sector. This
means that there exists infinitely many null-vectors in the G module. If
we, however, restrict ourselves to the irreducible sub-module in the G
sector we have a unique solution. The BRST condition ( 6.25 ) will then
coincide with the conventional coset condition ( 7.51 ).

The cohomology for arbitrary representations will in the general case
include states at ghost numbers different from zero. Those states arise
due to the presence of null-vectors in the Verma modules over affine Lie
algebras. In paper IV we provide with a technique by which one may
construct non-trivial states in the cohomology for arbitrary
representations. The basic idea is to use the fact that in the
irreducible @xmath sub-module the null-vectors are identified with the
zero element. Thus if a state @xmath in @xmath is BRST exact with a
null-vector @xmath i.e. @xmath then @xmath may be a non-trivial state in
the cohomology over @xmath . Conversely, if a state @xmath obeys @xmath
where @xmath is null, then in the irreducible sub-module @xmath will be
BRST invariant. All states of those two forms are not in the cohomology,
we refer, however, to paper IV for an explicit account for the
restrictions for non-triviality of such states. The rigorous proof of
the cohomology is provided by Stephen Hwang [ 61 ] .

We now wish to gauge the supersymmetric WZNW model in a manifestly
supersymmetric way. The result becomes [ 62 ] , similarly to the
non-supersymmetric WZNW model, a sum of two supersymmetric WZNW models
the original and an auxiliary. We denote their levels @xmath and @xmath
, respectively. The determinant from the gauge fixing may be represented
by a superghost system of conformal weight @xmath which in components is
equivalent to a (0,1) fermionic ghost system, and a @xmath bosonic ghost
system. The entire ghost system contributes to the conformal charge by
@xmath .

In paper V we show that the effective action possesses a BRST symmetry
which is nilpotent if and only if @xmath . For this choice of level for
the auxiliary sector the total conformal anomaly becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

This may be recognized as the conformal anomaly of the algebraic N=1
coset construction of Kazama and Suzuki [ 53 ] .

In complete analogy to the bosonic case we were able to show that the
total stress-energy tensor of the gauged supersymmetric WZNW model
coincides with the Kazama-Suzuki coset stress-energy tensor plus a term
which is BRST exact.

In paper I the BRST invariant branching function is also defined which
leads us to the last subject of this thesis, characters. This is also
the subject of paper II and III.

-   J. Fuchs, Affine Lie algebras and quantum groups , Cambridge
    University Press 1992

-   V.G. Knizhnik and A.B. Zamolodchikov, Current algebra and
    Wess-Zumino model in two dimensions , Nucl. Phys. B247 (1984) 83

-   M. Henningsson, Out of flatland: Applications of Wess-Zumino-Witten
    models to string theory , PhD thesis, G @xmath teborg 1992

## Chapter 8 Characters And Modular Invariance

Consistent string theories are required to be completely
reparametrization invariant. We have above discussed local
reparametrization invariance which for example manifests itself in the
vanishing of the stress-energy tensor. There may, however, be global
reparametrization invariances left and requiring invariance under these
is equivalent to requiring modular invariance.

If modular invariance is not met we should be able to find this at the
one loop level in string perturbation theory. We hence consider this
case.

The one loop contribution in the string perturbation series comes from
the path-integral on the torus. We hence require the contribution to be
invariant under global reparametrizations of the torus. This is also
intuitively clear. A conformal field theory on the torus must be
independent of how we choose to parametrize the torus.
Reparametrizations on the torus are generated by the modular group.

To define a torus we use the complex coordinate @xmath of a conformal
field theory on a cylinder, and identify two periods. We can take one
period to be @xmath , and the other @xmath , where @xmath is the modular
parameter. @xmath and @xmath are taken to be real. (Usually one takes
@xmath and @xmath but we have normalized by @xmath .) By this we of
course mean that conformal fields @xmath that are defined on the torus
should satisfy @xmath , and @xmath . In coordinates this means that we
identify the opposite sides of the parallelogram as depicted in
fig.(8.1).

The action of the group of modular transformations may be visualized by
cutting along one of the non-trivial cycles, and the reglue after a
twist of 1 (read @xmath ). If we take @xmath for real @xmath and @xmath
we may cut along the lines of constant @xmath and @xmath . The cycle
corresponding to @xmath constant is the one parallel to the real axis.
Cuts along @xmath and @xmath corresponds to the transformations @xmath
and @xmath , respectively. We may represent these transformations in
diagrams as in fig.(8.2). Note that @xmath and @xmath are the new ratio
of periods.

The transformations @xmath and @xmath generate the group of
transformations

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

The modular group is then @xmath , since we can reverse the signs of
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath without changing the the physical
content. One conventionally chooses the transformation @xmath and @xmath
, @xmath instead of @xmath , to generate the modular group.

When, in string theory, one wishes to calculate loop amplitudes @xmath
la Polyakov [ 63 , 64 ] , one integrates over all inequivalent metrics
of the world sheet. If one considers a one-loop zero point diagram, one
finds the (gauge-fixed) expression

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the partition function on the torus, and @xmath is the
modular invariant measure.

Under @xmath and @xmath we have the transformations

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (8.3)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

It thus follows that @xmath is invariant under the modular group.
We must now also demand that the partition function is modular
invariant, i.e.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

From the requirement of modular invariance it follows that we must then
restrict the region of integration in the parameter space of @xmath . We
find that the fundamental region @xmath is sufficient to integrate over.

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (8.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath denotes the upper half of the complex plane. The rest of the
upper-half of the complex plane is covered by transformations of the
modular group of points in the fundamental region. Thus every point
outside this region is in the same equivalence class as some point
inside the strip.

In order to find a consistent string theory we thus have to investigate
the modular properties of the partition function. In the theories of our
interest the partition function factorizes into a holomorphic and an
anti-holomorphic part such that

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The functions @xmath and @xmath will be denoted characters. The
factorization of the partition function is related to the fact that the
symmetry algebras are direct sums of holomorphic and anti-holomorphic
parts. The modular properties of the partition function is hence encoded
in the modular properties of the characters.

We first consider the critical closed bosonic string for the flat case
and in the light-cone gauge. The partition function is given by the
trace over the Hilbert space of the zero mode of the Virasoro algebra

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

The Hilbert space is the Fock space of oscillators @xmath in the 24
transverse directions acting on a tachyonic vacuum. @xmath is given by
@xmath where @xmath is the tachyon momentum and @xmath , the total mode
number operator, satisfies @xmath .

For each transverse direction we may consider the infinite tower of
states

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath            
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The character will get a contribution of @xmath from each @xmath . It is
not difficult to convince oneself that the total mode number operator
contributes to the partition function by a factor

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the number of transverse directions, and we have used
the identity @xmath . If we introduce the well-known Dedekind @xmath
-function

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (8.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

we find the left character

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath has very nice modular properties, it is a particular example of
what is known as a modular form.

For the closed bosonic string propagating on a group manifold, i.e. a
WZNW model, the analysis is more complicated. It is, however, greatly
simplified by the fact that the complicated part of the partition
function can be found from the affine Lie algebra characters. The
relevant characters have nice modular properties since we may formulate
them in terms of modular forms.

### 8.1 Characters

We take an irreducible highest weight @xmath module @xmath over a
dominant weight @xmath ( 5.20 ). There exists a weight space
decomposition of @xmath into finite dimensional subspaces @xmath . The
dimensions of those subspaces will be denoted mult @xmath .

The character of the @xmath module @xmath is defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the formal exponential @xmath operates as @xmath for @xmath h the
Cartan sub-algebra.

We may write the character more explicitly if we introduce an arbitrary
vector in the root space. If we chose an orthonormal basis for the roots
of the finite Lie algebra @xmath to be @xmath @xmath then an arbitrary
vector in the affine root space is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . In what follows we will denote @xmath by @xmath . Thus we
may write the character

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

for a weight @xmath . For the special values @xmath @xmath we have the
contribution we desire for the string partition function. Note that the
states in the Verma modules all have negative grade so the sign for the
term proportional to @xmath in in ( 8.13 ) will turn out correctly for
the parametrization ( 8.12 ). Also since the level is constant in the
module we may take this part outside the sum.

It is, however, worth while to consider the general point in root space
before taking @xmath @xmath because the affine character may be
represented in terms of what is known as @xmath -functions. @xmath
-functions are, like the Dedekind @xmath -function, modular forms and
have very nice and well-studied modular properties.

For the case at hand, namely modules over dominant weights, the
character is given by the celebrated Kac-Weyl formula [ 65 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath is plus or minus one corresponding to whether @xmath can be
expressed in terms of even or odd number of simple reflexions. mult
@xmath is the multiplicity of the affine roots, which is one for the
real roots and @xmath for the light-like roots.

The denominator of ( 8.14 ) may be reformulated, using the character for
the trivial representation ch @xmath , into

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

This reformulation is desirable in order to write the character in terms
of modular forms, and hence for examining modular properties. In
explicit calculations, however, like the ones presented in paper II and
III, the first form is much more convenient. Note that for @xmath ( 8.15
) corresponds to the famous Jacobi triple product identity.

The affine Weyl group @xmath is a semidirect product of the finite Weyl
group and translations on the co-root lattice see chapter 5.2. We may
use this to split the sum over the affine Weyl group into sums over the
finite Weyl elements and the translations. The numerator of the
character ( 8.14 ) may then, in the basis ( 8.12 ), be written as
proportional to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

The constant of proportionality is @xmath . Here @xmath is the lattice
spanned by the translation part of the affine Weyl group @xmath .

In the basis for the root space ( 8.13 ) we define the @xmath -function

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the lattice of the translation part of the Weyl group
@xmath . Using this we may rewrite the numerator and the denominator of
the Kac-Weyl formula ( 8.14 ) into

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

respectively. We hence find the affine character expressed in therms of
@xmath functions to look like

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

The number @xmath may be rewritten using the very strange formula @xmath
valid for any simple Lie algebra @xmath , into @xmath where @xmath is
the quadratic Casimir of the representation with highest weight @xmath .
This is then nothing but the conformal dimension of the representation
minus @xmath times the conformal anomaly.

Finally we note that the appropriate extension of the action of the
modular group is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

under the transformation matrix

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Taking @xmath gives the ordinary action as it must.

The case of particular interest to us is the coset construction. For
dominant highest weights the character of the full algebra may be
decomposed into characters of a sub-algebra with coefficients known as
branching functions i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (8.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath are the weights of the sub-algebra which ranges over
dominant weights. The generic branching function is not easy to find
using conventional methods. Conventional calculations of branching
functions have been restricted to studies of special cases or by
considering general formulas obtained under some assumptions.

In paper I a branching function of the gauged WZNW model which respects
the BRST symmetry is introduced. This branching function factorizes into
three parts, one of which is the Kac-Weyl formula. The other two are
also of simple forms. This indicates that this branching function should
be most suited for investigations of modular properties.

It is shown in paper I that the BRST invariance of this branching
function guarantees that only the coset degrees of freedom are
propagating. Furthermore, this branching function respects the
symmetries of the full group @xmath , and does not rely on a
decomposition of @xmath in @xmath . This is an essential and novel
feature compared to previous branching function calculations.

We also, in paper I, compute explicitly the branching functions for the
parafermion theory @xmath as well as for minimal models @xmath . We find
that our result coincides with previously obtained results using
conventional methods.

In paper II we give an alternative proof of the correctness of the
branching function introduced in paper I. We prove that this branching
function coincides up to a possible normalization to the conventional
definition of a branching function ( 8.23 ). In the proof we make
extensive use of representation theory for affine Lie algebras. We also
give the general form for the type of branching functions known as
string functions.

Paper III deals with the application of the branching function
introduced in paper I to a number of general coset constructions.
Included in those are for example @xmath superconformal minimal models
@xmath . Some of those cases has been studied before using some
assumption or for some specific choice of coset. We partly verify
previously obtained results.

-   P. Ginsparg, Applied conformal field theory , In: Fields, Strings
    and critical phenomena, Les Houches, Session XLIX, 1988, Ed. by: E.
    Brezin and J. Zinn-Justin, Elsevier Science Publishers 1989

-   W. Lerche and A. Schellekens, The covariant lattice construction of
    four-dimensional string theories , Lectures delivered at the summer
    school on Strings and superstrings, Poiana Brasov, Romania,
    September 1987, CERN-TH.4925, 1988

-   V.G. Kac, Infinite dimensional Lie algebras , Cambridge University
    Press 3’d ed. 1990

-   V.G. Kac and D. Petersen, Infinite-dimensional Lie algebras theta
    functions and modular forms , Adv. in Math. 53 (1984) 125