  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

The scalar product of two arbitrary elements @xmath and @xmath thus
becomes @xmath . Note that the roots @xmath has zero scalar product with
all roots including itself and we will refer to those as lightlike roots
in what follows. The non-lightlike roots, referred to as real roots in
what follows, have positive inner product.

We define the set of positive roots

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the set of affine roots, and @xmath is the set of
positive roots of the finite dimensional Lie algebra. The set of
negative roots are @xmath and @xmath , which is a disjoint union. The
set of simple affine roots are then given as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are the simple roots and @xmath the highest root of the
finite dimensional Lie algebra.

We should also define the affine analogy of the sum of positive roots in
the finite case. There are, however, infinitely many positive affine
roots. We rather take the definition of the affine sum of positive roots
@xmath from one of the properties of the finite algebra sum of positive
roots @xmath namely

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

From this it follows that @xmath where @xmath is the quadratic Casimir
in the adjoint representation. Without loss of generality we may choose
@xmath . There also exists a non-ambiguous definition of @xmath in terms
of fundamental weights which yields this result.

It is not difficult to see that the Cartan matrix that follows from the
roots in this realization of the affine Lie algebra coincides with the
Cartan matrix given with the Chevalley-Serre realization. The easiest
way of convincing oneself is to compare the Dynkin diagrams of the two
realization. This finally proves the isomorphism of the defining
relations ( 4.5 ) and the realization of affine Lie algebras as
centrally extended loop algebras.
