## Part I Introduction

The aim of this thesis is to give an introduction to the subjects of
black holes and related superstring theory (but just to the extent of
facilitating the understanding of this review) and then to review the
progress of how far superstring theory has got in providing the
statistical mechanics of black holes. This is an intriguing subject for
anyone interested in fundamental sciences because two very important but
quite different theories (general relativity and a form of quantum
mechanics, here quantised superstring theory) meet each other at this
point and moreover do so at their thermodynamical ends. In a sense,
thermodynamics is still the most fundamental theory of physics (with
statistical mechanics only coming in when based on information theory)
because physics is based on observations (perception of macroscopic
entities) that have to be irreversible in order to constitute a
measurement. However, most advances in thermodynamics have been made by
taking statistical mechanics as the underlying theory and thermodynamics
as its surface phenomenon – popping up with overwhelming likelihood.
Superstring theory recently succeded in providing models for the
microstructure of black holes. Entropies, temperatures and black body
radiation of certain simple black holes have been calculated and shown
to be equivalent to the same variables of those black holes in the
context of classical general relativity. Moreover, sparked by the
Strominger-Vafa computation [ Strom./Vafa,96 ] many people shortly after
followed with calculations for quite a variety of black holes in
different numbers of dimensions of spacetime with charges and even
angular momentum and often the black hole solution in the context of
classical general relativity has not been known before the stringy
approach succeded.

The key points of these calculations are the identification of soliton
black holes in superstring theory with configurations of so called
D-branes (to be introduced later on). Full validity of the computations
applies for weak coupling where the string length is larger than the
Schwarzschild radius. For a black hole we require that the string length
sits inside the event horizon and that means strong coupling. One argues
that the calculations are still valid for extremal black holes because
the BPS (Bogomol’nyi-Prasad-Sommerfeld) properties of the D-branes make
the results coupling independent, i.e. protected by supersymmetry.

Superstring theory’s low energy effective actions are supergravity
actions and many methods of general relativity can be applied straight
forwardly to supergravity. Therefore, a relatively long introduction to
classical and semi-classical black hole physics is included in order to
show important methods only referred to later on and in order to provide
insight into the fact that black hole solutions are not just any ol’
examples of a theory because via these solutions one introduces arrows
of time (at the event horizon) for instance and thermodynamics in
general. “One could say that they are the ‘Hydrogen atom’ of quantum
gravity.” [ Malda.,96 ]

It might surprise how much (extensively) but at the same time as well
how little supergravity one really needs (to know, intensively) in order
to follow the argumentations. The assumed background knowledge is
bosonic string theory and relativistic quantum field theory but only
rudimentary superstring theory and general relativity are required.
Often all constants like @xmath will be suppressed and are only written
in case they give a deeper understanding when thought of as variables.

## Part II The Pre-String Physics of Black Holes

### 1 Introduction

#### 1.1 General Relativity

General relativity is a very geometrical and topology involving theory
but the connection between the clearly understood geometry on one side
and its dependence on the energy distribution on the other (of equation
( 1 ) for example) is not well understood at all. The more work is done
in order to resolve this connection the more it becomes apparent that
the description of spacetime as 3+1 dimensional instead of 2+1 or 9+1 or
whatever is only the easiest choice when doing mesoscopic physics. It is
a surface phenomenon. General relativity is an effective low energy
theory about the elasticity of spacetime, i.e. its resistance against
curving it. That is where inertia (mass) is coming from in this model
and I think it has a rather nice parallel in special relativity where
acceleration has the units of curvature @xmath and inertia is therefore
the resistance a body puts against curving its worldline (that is in
proper natural or geometrized units using length to measure time).
Viewing general relativity as a mesoscopic theory means that it might be
not so fundamental after all and that quantising it could be like
quantising phonons [ Hu,96 ] . [ Hu,96 ] put forward the idea that
general relativity is the “geometro-hydrodynamics” of a microscopic
theory.

Many people are taught that relativity is “very relativistic” in the
sense that any reference to absolute media equals a failure of the right
understanding. One of the reasons is that special relativity has a
derivation on an operational basis (how do we measure). Today, I think
that special relativity is easiest understood as being the physics that
systems would encounter if they were out of waves (on a pond of fluid)
with maximal wave velocity @xmath . With no way that these systems of
bound waves would ever perceive the fluid in low energy experimentation
(no sound in, splashing of the fluid) they will find time dilatation,
length contraction and so on (but no way to tell which system is
stationary in the fluid reference system). Even in general relativity
there are aspects of this. A region where such a medium is sucked in (a
sink) will have an event horizon where the medium has velocity @xmath
into the sink and even the fastest waves cannot get outside anymore (Of
course — a fluid giving rise to general relativity needs very strange
properties). I am not aware of anybody having proposed this fluid toy
model but I would not be surprised if so and particle or condensed state
physicists will surely find it to be an obvious “relativation” to see
relativity like this.

Applying Ockham’s razor ¹ ¹ 1 “Ockham’s razor” frees theories from
variables that are not observable in principle. It is certainly rightly
applied to the idea of hidden variables in quantum theory. and refusing
the possibility of an absolute medium or reference system (like the mean
microwave background) adds nothing to relativistic theories because they
can be described in any reference system and thus even in the absolute
one. It only removes a possible connection to more fundamental physics.
By the way, general relativity has not got an operational derivation
like special relativity has. All this is just to prepare those readers
who were introduced to relativity theories as being “very fundamental”
and “very relativistic” for a more open point of view.

One should mention though that this (general relativity as an effective
theory) is not the nowadays and everywhere accepted position. There are
suggestions that general relativity is more fundamental than quantum
mechanics and one might expect this because the former is non-linear and
the latter is linear (e.g. [ Asht./Schill.,97 ] and references therein).
Quantum physics would be based on the topological nature of the
interplay between measured system and the boundary conditions set by the
measurement apparatus [ Hadley,97 ] .

In general relativity a solution means an expression that solves the
famous Einstein field equations:

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (1)
  -- -------- -- -----

where @xmath is the energy-momentum tensor, @xmath the Ricci tensor and
@xmath the Ricci curvature scalar @xmath (sometimes one sees different
sign conventions). Thus a solution means an expression for the metric
tensor @xmath and the energy-momentum tensor; note that the @xmath
-variables above dependent only on the metric alone.

The action for the general relativity that includes only gravitating
matter/energy and electromagnetic fields @xmath is

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (2)
  -- -------- -- -----

where @xmath .

A vacuum solution with no radiation and no electro-magnetic fields gives
the metric for @xmath everywhere which leads with the @xmath -duality of
the Einstein equations ( 1 ) to @xmath . Thus a vacuum solution is an
expression for @xmath dependent on the coordinates that solves:

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (3)
  -- -------- -- -----

All what we need to know here is that doing general relativity requires
that the flat Minkowski metric

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (4)
  -- -------- -- -----

is replaced by the metric matrix @xmath that can be far more complicated
depending on the matter/energy distribution or even pure empty space
curvature. @xmath holds only for a flat spacetime where then special
relativity is valid again. For many physicists, learning about the
Einstein equations is a “one off” only to realise that they are far too
complicated to be of much use to them. From then onwards, all they need
is an ansatz for the metric that reflects the symmetry of the system
(e.g.: spherically symmetric). Trying to obtain @xmath starting with
@xmath is futile because @xmath depends on @xmath as well. The metric is
there to calculate distances (define a geometry) and leads therefore
together with the coordinates one chooses to the line element @xmath
that gives the physical distances @xmath due to paths one goes in pure
coordinate space. I write @xmath instead of @xmath because it is
actually the eigentime, the time a clock would proceed if its worldline
in spacetime were the path choosen (consider the sign convention for
@xmath ).

General relativity is easily generalized to @xmath spacetime dimensions
by writing down a @xmath -metric tensor. To investigate general
relativity in other that @xmath dimensions can have advantages.

-   @xmath general relativity for example is shown to be equivalent to
    the Yang-Mills theory of a Chern-Simons action [ Witten,88 ] [ Bimo.
    et al,97 ] . Chern-Simons terms are Lagrangians like:

      -- -------- -- -----
         @xmath      (5)
      -- -------- -- -----

    where m is the Chern-Simons mass of the gauge field. One can then
    approach general relativity from this Yang-Mills point of view more
    easily than in @xmath dimensions because we cannot do the same there
    — that is, a pure Yang-Mills description.

-   A @xmath gravity is the @xmath gravity with imposed axial symmetry.
    This yields Jackiw-Teitelboim dilaton gravity [ Jackiw/Teitel.,84 ]
    where the dilaton is related to the length of the path around the
    axis of symmetry at any given point. It is called ‘‘dilaton
    gravity’’ because the dilaton is not just minimally coupled ² ² 2
    Minimal substitution is one procedure of introducing fields to
    relativity theory that are not in the theory from the outset. This
    theory is interesting in conection with our subject because it can
    be described by the sine-Gordon theory and the black holes are then
    solitons of the sine-Gordon system (on sine-Gordon theory and
    solitons see [ Rajar.,82 ] ). It might be that the entropy of those
    black holes can be accounted for by configurations of the members of
    the so called “breather solutions” (bound solitons) [
    Gegen./Kuns.,97 ] .

-   In order to compare @xmath dimensional superstring theory with
    general relativity one often needs more than @xmath dimensions
    because the superstring theory can have less than @xmath dimensions
    compactified. I use @xmath for the dimensionalty of the full theory
    and @xmath for the dimensionality that a large scale observer will
    see.

Masses (and in general other momenta apart from @xmath ) we can
calculate from the metric with the ADM-Method (Arnovitt Dazer Mizner) [
Weinberg,72 ] . One uses the metric at @xmath where one can use the weak
field approximation:

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (6)
     @xmath      (7)
  -- -------- -- -----

Since @xmath solves the Einstein equations there exists a conserved
energy-momentum vector @xmath . With @xmath etc. and for @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -----
     @xmath      (8)
     @xmath      (9)
  -- -------- -- -----

An example is given in the next section.

#### 1.2 Kerr-Neumann Solutions and Extremal Black Holes

It is sufficient for our purposes to define a black hole as a region of
no escape. Neither matter nor light can ever leave it. For more
sophisticated physics this is not too good a definition because any
future light cone in flat Minkowski space or the universe itself for
example is such a region. However, definitions like this allow us to
identify black holes when they emerge in a theory since the (spatial)
boundary of a region of no escape is the event horizon where even light
is accelerated inwards enough to make it stand still relative to spatial
infinity and thus the event horizon often reveals itself as a coordinate
singularity of the space-time metric that can be circumvented by
transforming to a new coordinate system.

The stationary mass-only solution, that is the uncharged and not
rotating black hole called Schwarzschild solution, is a vacuum solution
(apart from the singularity in the middle of it). Thus, a Schwarzschild
black hole is a vacuum solution that has an event horizon and the latter
revealed itself as a coordinate singularity of the metric without it
being a curvature singularity.

All classically stationary black holes fall into the 3-parameter family
of Kerr-Neumann solutions where the parameters are mass M, angular
momentum density a=J/M and electric charge q. More precisely, this holds
only for Einstein-Maxwell black holes, that is for ones that have no
self-gravitating Yang-Mills fields for example. The proofs of general
relativity are mathematically demanding but physically the results are
often expected if not trivial statements. That a stationary black hole
is axissymmetrical for example is expected since otherwise tidal forces
will lead to gravitational radiation and the black hole loses energy –
hence is not stationary. That there are only three parameters is due to
the fact that for gravity and self-gravitating Maxwell fields no
multipole moments can be seen outside the black hole leaving only
overall values of long range fields as characteristics although inside
the black hole multipol momenta may exist – even off centre [ Wald,72 ]
. That only those parameters survive that can be calculated via surface
integrals at spatial infinity is called the “no hair theorem” [
Israel,67/68 ] [ Carter,71 ] [ Hawk.,72,1 ] . Any properties that cannot
be detected at spatial infinity but can be detected close to the black
hole are refered to as “hair” of the black hole. It will occur for any
non-linear theory that is coupled to gravity [ Nunez et al,96 ] like in
case of self-gravitating Yang-Mills fields for which no uniqueness
theorem like the Kerr-Neumann family exist.

The line element of the Kerr-Neumann solution is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath               (10)
                       @xmath      
              @xmath               (11)
              @xmath               (12)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ------

[ Wald,84 ] , where it can be very misleading to interpret the
coordinates @xmath and @xmath as spherical polar ones and @xmath as the
time. At large @xmath this interpretation is not misleading since @xmath
there and the line element is just the one of special relativity (here
in spherical polar coordinates). Far from the centre @xmath of the black
hole the spacetime is flat. But for the black hole (i.e. the very region
of no escape behind the event horizon) the line element gives timelike
results if going along @xmath and spacelike ones for lengths along
@xmath . This mirrors the fact that nothing can escape, i.e. that the
future light cones are entirely inside the black hole.

M is the mass of the black hole and q will be generalised later on to
include new kinds of charges. @xmath is the Kerr black hole, @xmath is
the Reissner-Nordström solution and @xmath the famous Schwarzschild
solution. While @xmath is the true curvature singularity the @xmath
-singularities are due to the choice of coordinates and are in fact the
event horizons at

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (13)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the outer event horizon that we will be concerned with
mostly. These horizons only exist for @xmath . @xmath are the extremal
black holes. The extremal black holes are not so much the big
astrophysical objects because a @xmath -solution must be very small in
order not to attract opposite charge immediatelly in all astronomically
realised situations. It is therefore, if at all, a microscopic one. It
is an infinitesimal step close to a naked singularity and because the
event horizon and singularity coincide it is called “null-singularity”.

For @xmath the curvature singularities are naked (without event horizon
because @xmath would be imaginary then). A short calculation shows that
general relativity naively ³ ³ 3 The validity of general relativity in
the microcosmos and so close to elementary particles has always been
highly doubtful of course. applied to an electron results in a naked
singularity and not in a black hole. Just take known values for the
charge and the spin of the electron and compare them with its mass. On
both accounts alone (charge or spin) I found that @xmath is far greater
than @xmath (by a factor of @xmath for the charge in SI units).
Nevertheless, we will be confronted with extremal black holes later on
and many proofs, for example the one proving that every black hole has a
curvature singularity, use the cosmic-censorship conjecture, which is
basically saying that there are no naked singularities possible or
better none but the one of the big bang. The cosmic censorship
conjecture is widely doubted. Either people with a background in general
relativity are not afraid of naked singularities as they are used to
strange geometrical objects by now, or people with mostly a background
of particle physics deny the singularity in the first place.

Note that the solutions have a well behaved metric even for negative
@xmath . In general, there are many transformations of the coordinates
possible that seem to open up new regions of spacetime. These regions
exist “beyond” the singularity @xmath and are asymptotically flat just
like the solution is at large values of positive @xmath . Whether or not
there are whole universes behind the horizons and beyond the
singularities is a matter of debate. Coordinates are names for points
like temperatures are names for states of thermal equilibrium. There are
not necessarily physical and accessible regions corresponding to
previously not considered ranges of names. In the context of general
relativity coordinates are easily misinterpreted anyway.

Recall that one is free to generalise general relativity to @xmath
spacetime dimensions. For the Reissner-Nordström solution for example
this leads to:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (14)
     @xmath      (15)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the extremal black hole @xmath . It is easy to check
that for the mass and the charge one obtains the following arithmetic
and harmonic means:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (16)
     @xmath      (17)
  -- -------- -- ------

where I restituted the gravitational (Newton) constant @xmath of units
@xmath and where
@xmath and @xmath for example derive from the volumes of spheres of
higher dimensionality. This leads for the line element of the
Schwarzschild solution (no charge, no angular momentum) for instance in
@xmath dimensions to:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (18)
  -- -------- -- ------

The calculation of the masses of the black hole solutions can be done
with the ADM method (equations ( 6 ), ( 7 ) …). For the Schwarzschild
solution for instance in Cartesian coordinates:

  -- -------- -------- -- -- ------
     @xmath   @xmath         (19)
              @xmath         (20)
              @xmath         (21)
              @xmath         (22)
  -- -------- -------- -- -- ------

### 2 Thermodynamics

#### 2.1 Massloss, Arrow of Time and 0th to 3rd Laws

Even in the context of classical general relativity (without effects of
quantum mechanics) it is not true that a black hole cannot lose some of
its mass M. The latter is only valid for the Schwarzschild solution. The
black hole as a region of no escape loses mass by taking up negative
energy. The Kerr and the Reissner-Nordström solutions can lose all their
rotational or electrical field energy. This is known as the Penrose
process in case of the Kerr solution (see [ Wald,84 ] for an
introduction to the Penrose process). For both, the Kerr and the
Reissner-Nordström black holes, but not for the charged Kerr black hole,
it is possible to consider Maxwell’s linearised Einstein equations in
the background of the black hole in order to reduce the problem of
determining the behaviour of electro-magnetic and gravitational
perturbations to ordinary differential equations (see for example [
Chandra.,83 ] ). With this approach one can deduce the possibility of
superradiant scattering [ Starob.,73 ] where electro-magnetic or
gravitational radiation is sent into the ergosphere

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (23)
  -- -------- -- ------

outside the black hole in such a way that the scattering leads to a
reflected part with higher amplitude and a transmitted part going into
the black hole and carrying negative energy. However, the irreducible
mass, which is in the case of a Kerr black hole

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (24)
  -- -------- -- ------

cannot (classically) be reduced:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (25)
  -- -------- -- ------

and the line element (equation ( 10 )) shows that the event horizon at
@xmath only ever becomes larger. Even in case of a maximally rotating
black hole @xmath one can only extract @xmath of the mass. The area of
the event horizon of the general Kerr-Neumann solution is given by

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (26)
     @xmath      (27)
     @xmath      (28)
  -- -------- -- ------

because @xmath at the event horizon. It follows:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (29)
  -- -------- -- ------

and thus the area can only increase, too. @xmath because the event
horizon rotates for @xmath and is then Lorentz contracted relative to
the observer far away.

In fact, a more general area theorem proven by S. Hawking 1971, saying
that the area of the event horizon of any black hole can only ever stay
the same or increase, leads in the case of two black holes which merge
and, in doing so, radiate energy in form of gravitational waves, to
@xmath with @xmath being again the maximum loss of mass via
gravitational radiation. This indicates fundamental limits of mass loss
leading to the notion of irreducible mass. The area theorem is
surprising in that it introduces an arrow of time into the theory of
general relativity of dense matter (although general relativity is time
symmetric and the black hole has a white hole as the time symmetrical
partner). The entropy time arrow has the same direction. Therefore, the
area of a black hole is related to entropy via a relation between the
area theorem and the second law of thermodynamics. This poses no
problems for the macroscopic observer for whom both, general relativity
and thermodynamics are very fundamental theories. But microscopically
the second law is not a rigorous consequence of classical laws. It is
rather something that follows from statistical mechanics with
overwhelming probability for systems with a large number of degrees of
freedom. There is no thermodynamics on the scale of an elementary
particle — only statistics or better stochastics even. Are there black
holes ?

With the introduction of a Killing field @xmath normal to the event
horizon one can define a proportionality factor @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (30)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the covariant derivative. Some calculation [
Foster/Night.,95 ] leads to

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (31)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath with @xmath

@xmath is the surface gravity at the (outer) event horizon — that is the
force that must be exerted to hold a unit test mass at the event
horizon. @xmath is not infinite because both – force and mass — are
infinite relative to spatial infinity. The result that @xmath is
constant all over the event horizon of a stationary black hole is
similar to the zeroth law of thermodynamics (one version of it), saying
that the temperature of a body in equilibrium is the same everywhere.
Using Stokes’ theorem (i.e. calculating at spatial infinity similar to
the ADM method) one deduces the following for the mass of a black hole:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (32)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is a sort of angular velocity of the event horizon:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (33)
     @xmath      (34)
  -- -------- -- ------

because of @xmath at the event horizon. Having @xmath behaving similar
to temperature @xmath and the area of the event horizon @xmath similar
to an entropy @xmath one can say that this is the first law of
thermodynamics with @xmath being the work term @xmath . The third law –
that one cannot reach zero temperature quasistatically – is reflected in
the fact that one cannot achieve @xmath quasistatically. [ Wald,74 ]
showed that the closer the state of the black hole is to the state of an
extreme black hole the harder it is to get even closer (by adding charge
quasistatically for example) in a manner similar to the third law.
Neither Plank’s version of the third law, the possible gauging @xmath ,
nor Nernst’s statement ( @xmath for any process occuring near absolute
zero) are appropriate. They come with the assumption of classical
thermodynamics that the ground state is never degenerate. We see that
the extremal black hole @xmath has an event horizon with positive area
because @xmath leads to @xmath although it is infinitesimally close to
having no event horizon. Its surface gravity @xmath is zero. The zero
temperature of extremal black holes having finite entropy indicates high
degeneracy.

#### 2.2 The Black Hole is a Black/Grey Body

Still – we cannot simply set temperature proportional to @xmath and
entropy proportional to the area of the event horizon since classically
the black hole has no black body radiation and is only in equilibrium
with a zero temperature background. Moreover, we can violate the second
law by lowering a body quasistatically to the event horizon thereby
retrieving all its energy (even its thermal one (!)). In order to
resolve this paradox and in order to give finite temperature to the
black holes one has to leave the purely classical general relativity.
For example one might just claim that because the lowered body has to be
lowered very close to the event horizon one comes into the realm of
superstring theory as one is closer to the event horizon than the string
length.

There is another way which one might anticipate on the grounds alone
that the black body radiation spectrum led Planck to the assumption that
light is quantised although black body radiation follows from classical
laws and is but a @xmath -equilibrium of the electro-magnetic field.
What is done is to proceed semiclassically. One introduced quantum
effects into the black hole background. The demand for unitary evolution
in quantum mechanics @xmath –normalisation for the probabilities needs
unitary operators) does not allow for anything that only absorbs but
does not emit. [ Hawk.,75 ] showed that particle creation near the event
horizon leads to an effective emission of particles from the black hole
which has @xmath -black body characteristic in case of an Schwarzschild
black hole for an observer at infinity which is in line with the
equivalence principle and the result [ Unruh,76 ] that an accelerated
@xmath observer is being immersed in a thermal bath of particles with
temperature (Unruh-temperature):

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (35)
  -- -------- -- ------

The energy emitted is equal to that of a black body with surface area
@xmath . Thus, @xmath is the temperature of the black hole in a direct
physical sense. In SI–units one writes:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (36)
  -- -------- -- ------

so that

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (37)
  -- -------- -- ------

and it becomes obvious that we are dealing with a quantum mechanical
effect. Originally this was derived from studies of linear, free
quantised fields propagating on certain black hole backgrounds but it
holds equally well for fields of arbitrary spin in general black hole
spacetimes. In order to calculate the exact expressions for scattering
cross sections and black hole decay rates one needs to consider the wave
equation of the radiation on the black hole background. This wave
equation (for example Klein Gordon equation on the background) is
obtained by substituting the metric of the black hole background into
the covariant Laplacian:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (38)
  -- -------- -- ------

Actually, the black hole’s Hawking radiation is not striktly coming with
a black body spectrum. This is due to frequency-dependent filtering
because of the potential barriers due to the long range fields outside
the black hole that reflect some of the radiation back to the black
hole. The black body spectrum would only be seen in case of no such
filtering and only by the distant observer at spatial infinity. The
Hawking formula for the black hole’s decay rate is [ Hawk.,75 ]

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (39)
     @xmath      (40)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath are the charges of the emitted particle, @xmath the related
chemical potentials and @xmath is the thermal occupation factor (here
for bosons the “mean Planck excitation” or “BE-distribution”) and @xmath
is the classical absorption cross section (grey body factor) that would
equal @xmath in case of an ideal black body spectrum. The effect of this
partial reflection that depends on the frequency of the light is that
the semi-classical and the string theory black holes look the same from
far away. This is interesting because the filtering occurs outside the
black hole and introduces new complications into the discussion of
whether the information of the black hole is stored near the singularity
or on the event horizon.

For a very simple primer on Hawking radiation see [ Open Uni.,79 ] , for
an introduction of how to solve the paradox of the second law violation
near an event horizon please see [ Wald,88 ] .

The Hawking radiation opens up a way to the extremal black hole as being
the final state of the Hawking process (effective evaporation of a black
hole starting when the background temperature drops under the
temperature of the black hole) of a charged black hole since the Hawking
radiation lowers the classically irreducible mass @xmath . Introducing
more charges like the magnetic monopole charge for instance leads to a
lot more possible extremal black holes that satisfy the @xmath bound
with different contributions of the charges involved.

#### 2.3 The Calculation of Temperature and Entropy

Black hole thermodynamics can be approached by using Euclidean path
integrals [ Gibb./Hawk.,77 ] . This method uses the Einstein-Hilbert
action for gravity and actions for classical matter fields. Time is
analytically continuated into the complex numbers. One formulates the
path-integral after a Wick rotation @xmath . The action is expanded
semi-classically via a saddle point expansion around classical field
configurations. One finds partition functions even on gravitational tree
level. Black holes become non-singular gravitational instantons that
solve the Euclidean Einstein equations. For this transformation one
needs to remove conical singularities that appear at the event horizon
(of non-extremal black hole solutions). This enforcing of
non-singularity of the solutions requires the imaginary time to be
periodic. Statistical mechanics tells us that a period in time is the
inverse of a temperature. Here holds @xmath because of the relation
between the periodicity of the Euclidean Green’s function and the role
of the corresponding Green’s function in Lorentzian spacetime (one
speaks of a thermal propagator). One can say that any event horizon
together with quantum field theory leads to thermodynamics because
quantum field theory in a Euclidean spacetime with periodic time is
equivalent to finite temperature quantum field theory in Minkowski
spacetime.

In this method there appears a so called “reference action” subtraction
for the gravitational contribution on tree level. This subtraction is
needed in order to get finite results on shell. The justification for
this subtraction is that the action for a flat spacetime should vanish.
This reminds of the subtraction of the zero-point energy in quantum
electro dynamics. Therefore [ Bimo./Liber.,97 ] suggests a gravitational
Casimir effect. The entropy of black holes could be due to this effect
and therefore it could be ascribed to vacuum fluctuations (zero modes)
at the event horizon and it would be natural that it comes with a
dependance on surfaces ( @xmath ).

@xmath one can obtain with the above outlined periodic in Euclidian time
@xmath partition function method:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (41)
     @xmath      (42)
  -- -------- -- ------

where the period of @xmath gives the inverse of the temperature. For the
Schwarzschild solution for example we get a flat metric of a conical
singularity with

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (43)
  -- -------- -- ------

(compare with equation 36 ). For the charged black hole the Euclidian
section leads to:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (44)
  -- -------- -- ------

which is @xmath for @xmath but goes to zero for @xmath . The extremal
black hole has zero Hawking temperature, i.e. it is stable.

As we will see shortly one can even define a chemical potential
associated with gauge charges and the usual relations of thermodynamics
are valid. There are three ways to the entropy of a black hole:

-   The fundamental one (based on the fundamental definition of
    entropy): Compute it directly from the saddle point approximation to
    the gravitational partition function (namely the generating
    functional analytically continued to the Euclidian spacetime as
    outlined above) [ Gibb./Hawk.,77 ] . This is a quite complicated way
    though.

-   Knowing @xmath and chemical potentials (i.e. the Coulomb potential
    at the event horizon @xmath for the conserved U(1) charge @xmath and
    angular velocity of the event horizon @xmath for conserved angular
    momentum @xmath ) one may integrate the first law of thermodynamics
    (compare with equation ( 32 ))

      -- -------- -- ------
         @xmath      (45)
      -- -------- -- ------

    to obtain @xmath [ Gibb./Hawk.,77 ] [ Wald,84 ] . For the
    Schwarzschild solution for example one obtains the
    Bekenstein-Hawking formula ( 52 ) using equation ( 43 ):

      -- -------- -- ------
         @xmath      (46)
      -- -------- -- ------

    More precisely:

      -- -------- -- ------
         @xmath      (47)
         @xmath      (48)
         @xmath      (49)
      -- -------- -- ------

    lead to

      -- -------- -- ------
         @xmath      (50)
      -- -------- -- ------

    Assuming that the black hole exchanges mass (= energy) only trough
    heat @xmath then @xmath holds for processes in thermal equilibrium.
    It follows

      -- -------- -- ------
         @xmath      (51)
      -- -------- -- ------

    and with @xmath for @xmath and the assumption that @xmath follows

      -- -------- -- ------
         @xmath      (52)
      -- -------- -- ------

    The same holds for the charged black hole using equation 44 :

      -- -------- -- ------
         @xmath      (53)
         @xmath      (54)
         @xmath      (55)
      -- -------- -- ------

    which holds as well for the extremal black hole (there @xmath )
    although @xmath , as discussed above (Degeneracy of the ground
    state).

    This method can be hard if the expression of @xmath is complicated
    like it is for example in Brans Dicke gravity.

-   Just take the Bekenstein-Hawking relation [ Bek.,73/74 ] [ Hawk.,76
    ] , that is equation 52 , which is established in the context of
    Einstein’s general relativity via the first law of thermodynamics,
    see in [ Wald,84 ] . This is not valid in every gravity theory like
    for example Brans Dicke gravity.

Since Brans Dicke gravity theory [ Brans/Dicke,73 ] is not ruled out by
experiment and superstring theory can incorporate many forms of gravity
and is about compactifications (in Kaluza-Klein 5 dimensional theory the
compactification of the fifth dimension leads to the Brans Dicke scalar
@xmath ) one should speak more of entropy and not reduce it to the
Bekenstein-Hawking one as often done. This is to say that all is not
easy and superstring theory is expected to alter gravity theory of
course, which might lead to Brans Dicke gravity or something else and
will most probably lead to the result that the Bekenstein-Hawking
entropy formula is only valid for large black holes. We will see that
the superstring results match the Bekenstein-Hawking entropy only for
configurations with many membranes and excitations. To my knowledge, the
first explicit statement of a “correction” to the Bekenstein-Hawking
temperature is due to [ Sen,95 ] . In relation to our subject of black
holes and thermodynamics it might interest the reader that the non
trivial Brans Dicke black hole solutions that were thought impossible [
Haw.,72,2 ] and that have been reinstated in case Hawking’s weak energy
condition fails [ Campa./Lousto,93 ] are probably censored. At least the
semiclassical treatment censors, which means here that it leads to
infinite @xmath for them [ Kim,97 ] . Therefore Brans Dicke gravity
theory is still viable without even leading to any different black hole
solutions.

The found entropy @xmath is very large indeed. With for the
Schwarzschild black hole @xmath , @xmath and @xmath ( @xmath in SI
units) follows:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (56)
  -- -------- -- ------

Using well known formulas for the energy and entropy of black body
radiation
(i.e. cavity radiation in a cavity of volume @xmath )

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (57)
     @xmath      (58)
  -- -------- -- ------

,where @xmath is the Stefan-Boltzmann constant, it becomes evident that
an astronomical black hole (say of a few solar masses) can never fully
evaporate because its entropy is so large that @xmath has to be larger
than the whole universe.

It should be noted that the Bekenstein-Hawking area law cannot always be
applied to extremal solutions. Some extremal black holes have zero
entropy but finite @xmath [ Hawk. et al,95/96 ] .
[ Liber./Poll.,97 ] suggest that this is resolved by closer study of the
topology of black hole solutions — or better their corresponding
instantons in the Euclidean metric. Proposed is the following
entropy-area-law:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (59)
  -- -------- -- ------

, where @xmath is the Euler number of the manifold. For a @xmath
manifold holds [ Liber./Poll.,97 ] :

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (60)
  -- -------- -- ------

where the @xmath are the nth Betti numbers. They show that @xmath for
extremal black holes and @xmath for the non-extremal ones in classical
general relativity. Later on, in the string theory part, we will find
black holes with @xmath due to a microstate description but @xmath . For
them the Bekenstein-Hawking entropy will only be valid if thought to be
due to the “stretched horizon” about one string length further out than
the event horizon. Extremal but non-zero entropy black holes have been
found by [ Sen,95 ] and [ Strom./Vafa,96 ] . This discussion on extremal
black holes (whether @xmath or @xmath ) is far from resolved but [
Gosh/Mitra,96/97 ] have shown that the superstring theory results will
be confirmed if one uses a summation over topologies and applies the
extremalety condition late (after quantisation).

The semi-classical approach to black hole thermodynamics is not a closed
case and new results from superstring theory sparked new interest into
deriving thermodynamics via path integrals in non-trivial spacetime
topologies; eg.: [ Ortiz et al,97 ] who argue that black hole topologies
are multipli connected:

  “…, a particle may tunnel across the horizon, and the topology of the
  whole configuration space is then physically relevant. The radiation
  of a black hole is thermal because, from the point of view of a
  distant inertial observer, there is a denumerable infinite number of
  ways for a particle to tunnel through the horizon …”

### 3 Information Loss Paradox and Black Hole Complementarity

The thermal spectrum of a star is the result of an averaging over its
microstates. Given a star in a pure state the radiation is actually
dependent on the microstates and correlated. A detailed analysis of the
radiation could (in principle) be used to determine the initial state.
Say that we consider the collapse of a star in a pure state that is
describing its many degrees of freedom resulting in a black hole (say a
Schwarzschild one). This black hole still is a pure state and the laws
of quantum mechanics tell us that its phase relations evolve unitarily.
The pure state will always remain a pure state. The Hawking radiation on
the other hand will lead to a complete evaporation of the Schwarzschild
black hole and the result of this process is purely thermal radiation
that cannot depend on the initial state because the Hawking radiation
depends only on the outside geometry of the black hole but the
information carrying matter is inside the black hole in the framework of
classical general relativity. This means that the phase relations are
lost completely and in principle; the final state is not pure but mixed.
The information is not encoded in correlations among the particles of
the Hawking radiation because this would violate principles of field
theory (locality and causality especially when the information is
thought to be in the middle of the black hole at the singularity) and
basically goes against the whole notion of thermal radiation. The
violation of unitarity in time evolution that we encounter here is
called the information loss paradox because we lose all information
(except parameters like the mass @xmath ) once the information carrying
matter falls through the event horizon. Hawking defends his point of
view [ Hawk.,75/76 ] that the evolution of black holes is not unitary
and that quantum mechanics has to be altered. Hawking proposed the
“superscattering operator” @xmath that acts on the density matrices
@xmath in such a way that the state functions are not evolving due to an
unitary S-matrix @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (61)
  -- -------- -- ------

Other aspects of the information paradox are the problem of where the
great amount of entropy of the black hole is stored after the Hawking
evaporation and the violation of conservation laws. The latter comes
from the fact that the black hole has lost all information about how
many baryons and leptons for example have fallen into it. The former is
basically saying that our universe is too small to allow for evaporation
of black holes. Practically the temperature would never drop low enough
to let the black holes evaporate fully. [ Mashk.,97 ] claims that both
aspects are due to the assumption that the black hole loses energy
through heat only. The requirement of conservation laws even for the
black hole via

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (62)
  -- -------- -- ------

with chemical potentials ( @xmath ) for the baryons etc. leads to the
possibility of entropy loss that is not heat related and to less entropy
for the black hole with a correction to the Bekenstein-Hawking relation
[ Mashk.,97 ] :

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (63)
  -- -------- -- ------

It should be noted that the information paradox is a purely “inner
theoretical” one. For the observer outside matter never actually falls
through the event horizon because of time dilation. Shortly before the
collapse, the information from the region inside the collapsing region
has no chance of escaping anymore. Therefore, the event horizon comes
always out of the middle and even things in the centre are not seen to
ever fall through.

In [ Sussk. et al,93 ] , where the notion of the “stretched horizon”is
introduced, one can read most clearly about the complementarity between
observations of distant observers and observers who fall through the
event horizon. In a nutshell: One either describes the physics from
outside the black hole or from the inside but because no information can
be exchanged between these two observation posts it is nonsense to
require a description valid for both. Such a description would have no
operational meaning. I like this complementarity suggestion because it
goes hand in hand with “the world” and its physics being whatever is
self-consistently possible for a consciousness as such. This point of
view does not exclude but does not require a description valid for all
possible observers at once either. In the background of a black hole,
quantum field theory as we know it today leads to states describing the
inside and the outside at once and a quantum field theory of gravity
certainly would do so.
An observer falling freely through the event horizon will observe no
shell or membrane at all if the equivalence principle does hold there.
But for our purposes of understanding black hole thermodynamics one
might like to adopt the complementary side and view the black hole from
the outside seeing the event horizon as a physical membrane [ Sussk. et
al,93 ] page 3745:

  “ The membrane is very real to an outside observer. For example, if
  such an observer is suspended just above the stretched horizon, he or
  she will observe an intense flux of energetic radiation apparently
  emanating from the membrane. If provided with an electrical
  multimeter, our observer will discover that the membrane has a surface
  resistivity of 377 ohms. If disturbed, the stretched horizon will
  respond like a viscous fluid, albeit with negative bulk viscosity. And
  finally, the observed entropy of the massive black hole is
  proportional to the area of the stretched horizon.”

Anyway, one is free to suspect that the theory of general gravity does
not break down near the singularity it predicts but near the event
horizons. That would mean that we cannot fall freely through the
horizon.

With the recent advances in superstring theory one is able to address
the information paradox. There are claims that the problem is now solved
[ Amati,97 ] , that the evolution is unitary and that the Hawking
radiation is only thermal when computed in the classical limit.
Basically, the (any) thermal radiation only looks thermal when quantum
mechanics is fully applicable because thermodynamics is about
observation (measurement) and the microscopic descriptions one seeks are
to extract the probability amplitudes that an observation will destroy.

## Part III String Theory of Black Holes

### 4 Introduction to the New Approach

#### 4.1 BPS States and Dualities

This is not the place to introduce supersymmetry but we will at least
need to know a little about BPS States later on. BPS means satisfying
the Bogomol’nyi-Prasad-Sommerfeld bound that (given appropriate
normalisation) the charges equal the self-coupling (mass). More
precisely, the mass is bound from below due to the supersymmetry algebra
having conserved charges that are not momentum or supercharges. A
BPS-state has a mass equal to this lowest bound (it “saturates” the
bound). Therefore, BPS states are in reduced multiplets of the
supersymmetry algebra (short representations) and the supersymmetry
protects their charges (like mass) from changes due to changes of
coupling constants (from weak to strong for example). This has its
parallel in the photon/Z-particle for which @xmath and that is in a
short representation of the Pointcaré group if @xmath because the
longitudinal polarisation is missing. Recall that @xmath was the
condition for an extremal black hole as well.

T-duality means simplified that compactification of one theory for
example with radius @xmath gives the same spectrum of states as the
@xmath -compactification on the dual lattice of the thereby T-dual
theory (see equation ( 78 )) and the same interactions if @xmath . The
unit cell of the lattice has volume @xmath and the dual lattice @xmath
(for compactification of one dimension only @xmath (simplified)).
Therefore, T-duality translates into ( @xmath ) if we express the volume
@xmath ( @xmath in one dimension) as the expectation of a scalar field
@xmath :

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (64)
  -- -------- -- ------

Note that the purely mathematical duality relations @xmath are given. We
have to translate this into less beautiful relations between coordinate
space and momentum space for which winding and quantisation of momentum
make sense. With volume @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (65)
  -- -------- -- ------

We need @xmath for the interactions to be invariant under T-duality
because we will see that:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (66)
  -- -------- -- ------

With

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (67)
  -- -------- -- ------

where @xmath is the volume of the torus of compactification one needs
@xmath in order to leave @xmath invariant. For example:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (68)
  -- -------- -- ------

S-Duality [ Schwarz,93 ] is strong-weak coupling duality like for
example electric-magnetic duality

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (69)
  -- -------- -- ------

with the latter for all radii of compactifications that there happen to
be. It is very similar to T-duality (simplified @xmath ) especially
since coupling constants can be radii of compactifications (see equation
( 77 )). In fact, the expectation value of the dilaton field @xmath
fixes the dimensionless coupling of superstring theory

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (70)
  -- -------- -- ------

thus the coupling is a moduli just like the radii of compactifications
are. S-duality translates as @xmath . Therefore it is convenient not to
use the string metric @xmath that will appear in the supergravity
equations but the Einstein metric

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (71)
     @xmath      (72)
  -- -------- -- ------

that is then used to evaluate ADM masses and which is invariant under
the S-duality transformation because of the @xmath -dependence of @xmath
.

U-duality mixes S- and T-dualities and translates as @xmath ). There are
two consistent quantisations possible for the left and right moving
spinors on a closed string that is parameterized by @xmath :

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (73)
     @xmath      (74)
  -- -------- -- ------

With an independent choice for the left and right movers there are two
bosonic sectors (R,R and NS,NS) and two fermionic ones (R,NS and NS,R).
One remarkable fact about U-duality is that it unifies R,R and NS,NS
sectors [ Hull/Town.,94 ] [ Hull/Town.,95 ] . This shows that the
difference between periodic and anti periodic boundary conditions for
fermions is related to the shortcommings of perturbative string theory
and vanishes at a certain level in the non-perturbative theories. When
we discuss D-branes we will see more closely how R,R charged D-branes
are turned into NS,NS branes. They appear in the same U-duality
multiplet [ Schwarz,95,8 ] .

Recall that BPS states are in short representations. This means that
they have properties that do not change due to renormalisation [
Olive/Witten,78 ] [ Kallosh,92 ] (they do not get quantum corrected,
i.e. do not depend on the coupling strength) and stay constant even when
other moduli than the coupling strength are changed. That BPS states are
coupling independent brings with it the appearance of them in any theory
that is connected via dualities. Thus, BPS states have been vital in
testing non-perturbative dualities [ Hull/Town.,94 ] [ Witten,95 ] . For
black hole calculations it will be important that the validity of
results can be extended into strong coupling [ Sen,95 ] . Charges will
be counted in order to give the degeneracy due to microstates and the
mass gives the entropy due to the area of the event horizon. In order to
compare then in a meaningful way in another coupling regime one requires
that the mass-charge relation stays the same. That will be so if the
states stay in their short representations, i.e. are BPS. For
p-dimensional branes the BPS inequality is one between the tension
@xmath and the charges. For BPS states there is a projection operator (
@xmath ) such that

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (75)
  -- -------- -- ------

where Q is the supersymmetry charge. This is the very meaning of the
statement that the presence of a BPS state preserves @xmath with @xmath
of the supersymmetries.

#### 4.2 Superstring Theories and M-Theory

The great interest into string theories comes partly from the fact that
they give rise to a lot of symmetries and related non-perturbative
methods. The latter is due to dualities and solitons. Introductions to
string dualities are: [ Schwarz,95,9 ] [ Polch.,96,7 ] [ Schwarz,96,7 ]
. String theories, just by being theories not about matter points but
about the simplest possible extended objects, generate gravity
consistent with quantum mechanics and they are the only theories yet we
know of that do so. Moreover, starting with just a few postulates,
superstring theories provide easily what GUTs always wanted to give but
GUTs always do so in a more artificial manner leaving a lot of free
parameters like the choice of the gauge group. Superstring theories
generate gauge groups large enough to incorporate all gauge groups of
the standard model leaving only very few degrees of freedom that are
well understood geometrically: The string scale length, and
compactification parameters; the latter hopefully being fixed by
selfconsistency eventually. Other assets of string theories are that we
find finite theories, axions, bounds on the number of lepton
generations, light Higgs bosons addressing the hierarchy problem and
maybe the most important asset is that string theory needs supersymmetry
and will most probably be testable via its predictions of “low” energy
supersymmetric effects. The first superstring revolution (1984) led to a
most welcome bound on the dimensionality of spacetime by showing that
there are five consistent superstring theories and all are in 9+1
dimensions. This is “most welcome” because such theories might explain
why we perceive a 3+1 dimensional spacetime.

However, the euphoria among some particle physicists who put superstring
theory close to the endpoint of all fundamental physics is not quite
justified. Problematic is that superstring theories still use the
concept of something very unphysical — the spacetime point. Nothing is
able to resolve a point and a fundamental theory should have some
characteristics of for example twistor theory where one gets rid of
spacetime points after quantisation is done in twistor space. Twistors
are generalisations of spinors. With fundamental spinors (only up or
down) one can build up an @xmath symmetry. In order to obtain Poincaré
symmetry one needs to somehow add the aspect of momentum to the spinors.
The result is called “twistors”. Indeed, twistorial methods in
superstring theories and supergravity theories were advocated by Witten
[ Witten,78 ] . A singularity often just indicates a point where a
theory is breaking down. Similar to the interpretation that quantum
mechanically smeared out electrons do not “see” the singularity of the
electric field of a nucleus (and therefore do not spiral inside) there
is an interpretation saying that the finite length of the string makes
it blind to the singularities of gravitational fields and thus general
relativity and quantum mechanics are reconciled. This argumentation
still accepts spacetime singularities of background fields and the
extended objects have zero thickness and moreover, they can be wrapped
up along compactified dimensions (isospaces) so that in the spacetime
(the uncompactified one) there is nothing left but a point. Superstring
theory leads in the right direction though since there are proposals
that the curvature singularity inside a black hole is indeed string
theoretically just another coordinate singularity through which matter
passes smoothly (because there are dualities that interchange event
horizon and singularity) [ Giveon,91 ] [ Dijk. et al,92 ] . Others
suggest that the singularity is not there at all and that the black hole
is homogeneous inside [ Hotta,97 ] .

Other downsides that we might be able to overcome shortly are the many
vacua of superstring theories: some come as discrete choices, some even
as continuous ones. Problems with the weak coupling limit led to the now
accepted view that so called M-theory is the more fundamental one with
the superstring theories being certain limits of it. Dualities allow us
to formulate strong coupling problems as weak coupling ones. Only at
weak coupling one can perform real calculations and these lead often to
wrong predictions like unstable vacua. There are even general arguments
against the validity of any superstring theoretical weak coupling
analysis.

Instead of weakly coupled strings one now favours [ Town.,97 ] 11
dimensional M-Theory
[ Schwarz,95,10 ] [ Duff,96 ] [ Town.,96 ] which features membranes of
higher dimensionality than strings but which has a non-perturbative only
strings-formulation (only open strings and D-0-branes (see later))
called (M)atrix theory
[ Banks et al,96 ] which is incomplete in case many dimensions are
compactified. Although it is a matter of dispute, the name “M-theory”
seems to come from the now obsolete view that it is a theory of two
dimensional branes (Membranes) only. The strings would appear after
compactification of the eleventh dimension. The low energy limit of
M-theory is 11 dimensional supergravity. The 5 consistent (anomaly free)
superstring theories represent different corners (vacua) in a large
phase diagram that is supposed to describe M-theory. That all five are
related by dualities (fundamental states in one are solitons in a dual
description) one has known before (second superstring revolution 1994).
Now one can view the superstring theories as certain compactifications
of the more general 11 dimensional theory [ Schwarz,96,1 ] [
Schwarz,96,7,2 ] . The latter or maybe an even more general theory
[Since IIB superstring theory is not accessable via a straight
compactification of 11 dimensions — that is only possible from 12
dimensions (F-theory [ Vafa,96 ] )] should give rise to a big so called
moduli space since the dynamical fields whose expectation values are the
parameters characterising different superstring theories (e.g.:radii and
the shape of compactifications) are called moduli. How fundamental is
M-theory ? [ Witten,97 ] has shown that the 5 dimensional membrane of
M-theory can be used to model supersymmetric gausge theories in four
dimensions precisely. In fact, the series [IIA/B in 10, M in 11, F in 12
dimensions] is mirrored quite precisely by so called “little superstring
theories” called [a/b in 6, m in 7, f in 8 dimensions]. This points to
the possibility of a whole tower of theories ([6,7,8 with gauge summetry
but without gravitation], [10,11,12 with general covariance], [14,15, 16
with ???], …) in which M-theory might be due only to one particular 11
dimensional membrane [ Losev et al,97 ] .

However, all we know for certain about M-theory is its weak coupling
limit, the 11 dimensional supergravity. The latter is not renormalisable
(has UV-divergences) but M-theory hopefully is by being the embracing
structure visible only at strong (infinite) coupling. Compactifying the
11th dimension onto a circle @xmath of radius @xmath gives ten
dimensional type IIA superstring theory which (at weak coupling) has BPS
solitons with mass

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (76)
  -- -------- -- ------

These IIA BPS soliton states can now (from M-theory) be understood as
winding states, here with

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (77)
  -- -------- -- ------

since a @xmath compactification leads to formulae like

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (78)
  -- -------- -- ------

(simplified) where n is due to the momentum quantisation along @xmath ,
@xmath , and m is due to the winding. That these winding states can be
BPS (n or m equal to zero) comes from the fact that the momenta along
the eleventh dimension appear in the supersymmetry algebra and are
therefore turned into central charges (winding and momentum along @xmath
) after compactification. The components of the 11 dimensional metric
lead to: @xmath and @xmath . Thus, as mentioned before, the radius is
the expectation of a moduli and is dynamical although it can have any
value, i.e. there is no potential for it. Moduli have in lowest order
approximation no potential and if there is enough supersymmetry there
will be perturbatively none at all (of course, non-perturbatively there
has to be some mechanism that fixes them).

The expectation value of the dilaton field @xmath fixes the
dimensionless coupling of superstring theory

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (79)
  -- -------- -- ------

thus the coupling is a moduli just like the radii are and from the
M-theoretical point of view the D=10 dilaton is just a component of the
D=11 metric.

@xmath compactification on an interval of the 11th dimension ( i.e. the
11 dimensional manifold has two boundares separated by @xmath , no
multiple windings) leads to heterotic @xmath superstring theory [
Horava/Witten,96 ] . After this compactification fields of the 11
dimensional supergravity (e.g.: graviton) propagate through all 11
dimensions but the gauginos and gauge fields are restricted to the
boundaries. This is an important fact because it makes the gravitational
coupling grow faster than the three couplings of the standard model and
all couplings meet at the same unification scale if the length of the
interval is chosen appropriately.

With these duality connections one can relate all 5 consistent
superstring theories to M-theory because type IIB and heterotic SO(32)
are related to IIA and heterotic @xmath respectively via T-dualities and
type I SO(32) is related to heterotic SO(32) via S-duality (IIB is
S-self-dual).

According to [ Sen,96 ] the type I / heterotic duality (based on a
duality between strings and five dimensional membranes) is enough to
generate all other relations, including relations of M and F theory. The
equivalence of type I (a theory of open unoriented strings) and the
other four superstring theories (all of oriented closed strings) tells
us that the distinction between open and closed string theories is not
that important anymore. In general, duality relations allow us to be
rather free in our choice of objects we use for models. Because of this
and because of the closeness of theories with objects of higher
dimensionality and superstring theory, the subject of black hole entropy
is said to be addressed by string theory although the vital tool will be
D-branes and M-theory eventually.

#### 4.3 D-Branes

String theory becomes more and more a theory about p-dimensional
membranes. The usefulness of so called D-branes comes from them being
massive BPS states if the string theory is supersymmetric.

T-duality leads to certain new boundary conditions for strings and
therefore naturally to D-branes [ Dai et al,89 ] . Since then the
subject of dualites has become much clearer since D-branes give a
detailed dynamical description with the D-brane being in the duality
multiplets together with fundamental strings and solitons of field
theory. For the early work in the context of bosonic string theory see [
Dai et al,89 ] [ Leigh,89 ] [ Horava,89 ] . To be recommended as a
review on D-branes is [ Polch.,96,11 ] and a very recent review is [
Thor.,97 ] . Stringtheory (M-theory) has D-branes (Dirichlet
p-dimensional membranes) — domain walls (solitons) of dimension 0 to 9
(D-0-brane is a point, D-1-brane a string and so on.) necessarily [
Polch.,94 ] . “D” stands for Dirichlet boundary conditions (see equation
( 81 )) of open strings. In fact, D-branes are defined via the boundary
conditions of strings ending on the brane and this is understandable as
soon as one realizes that the open strings are the excitations of the
D-brane which in turn is expected to be non-rigid because we are dealing
with a theory that incorporates gravity. An excited D-brane is described
by a gas of strings on the brane. For example: Massless bosonic open
strings have one Lorentz index and if the dimension of this index is
perpendicular to the D-p-brane then it is an oscillation of the brane.
If the index is parallel (inside the brane) then this corresponds to
gauge fields on the brane. The defining open strings end on the D-brane
and the string end points can move freely inside the brane but satisfy
Dirichlet boundary conditions in directions transverse to the thereby
defined brane. Recall that the variation of the free string action with
respect to the auxiliary field @xmath (the world sheet metric) and
covariant gauging after that gives the open string boundary condition as

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (80)
  -- -------- -- ------

at the string ends. This is the well known Neumann boundary condition
saying that an open vibrating string has displacement nodes at @xmath
from the string ends. For the 10 dimensional type II open strings that
are introduced into the theory of closed strings via the D-brane these
conditions hold for say @xmath . The Dirichlet boundary condition

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (81)
  -- -------- -- ------

describes the location of the D-p-brane for say @xmath . In such a way
open strings are consistently introduced if p is even for IIA and odd
for IIB superstring theory. This even/odd dichotomy arises from the
boundary conditions that open strings/branes require. Closed strings do
not relate left and right moving spinors but for open strings the fact
that IIA/B has spinors of opposite/same chirality will lead to
restrictions on p that we find from a different point of view again
later on. That the left and right moving spinors become reflected and
mixed at the boundaries of the D-brane leads to them breaking half of
the supersymmetries. That is exactly the condition for BPS states and
thus D-branes are BPS. That 1/2 supersymmetries survive is similar to
the fact that open string theory is type I because the boundary
conditions at the open ends mix right and left moving spinors.

The D-branes are translation and boost invariant along dimensions
parallel to the brane. This relativistic behaviour comes from the
preservation of some of the supersymmetries and demands that the
longitudinal momentum of the D-brane is modelled by the excitations of
the branes (open attached strings) that move along the brane with light
velocity — the latter because the tension of the D-brane is @xmath just
like it has always been for the fundamental strings.

D-p-branes couple to @xmath -dimensional antisymmetric tensor potentials
with gauge invariance @xmath with @xmath the gauge transformation and
here Abelian field strength @xmath or without

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (82)
  -- -------- -- ------

differential forms:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (83)
     @xmath      (84)
  -- -------- -- ------

This holds for p-pranes in general (eg: the 0-brane @xmath couples to
@xmath with @xmath ). D-branes couple to these tensor gauge fields with
the coupling constant being an integer unit, the Ramond charge. Due to
supersymmetry the relationship @xmath holds precisely in the quantised
theory. One says that they interpolate between fundamental (NS) strings
(Tension @xmath ) and (NS) solitons ( @xmath ). There are two ways of
calculating the masses of D-branes. One way uses dualities rather
intensively. Starting with a fundamental string its minimal mass is
given by its momentum quantisation and/or winding along a compact
dimension (equation ( 78 )). SL(2,Z) symmetry in low energy IIB
(U-duality) relates this fundamental string to a series of soliton
solutions (all in the “SL(2,Z)-multiplet” [ Schwarz,95,8 ] ) in the
following way: Using S-duality the fundamental string turns into a
D-string. Remember that the Einstein metric is invariant under S-duality
and the metric is used for the determination of masses. Thus, the mass
stays the same appart from factors like @xmath for example which is due
to the difference between Einstein and string metrics ( @xmath mass of
D-string @xmath ). T-duality perpendicular to a D-p-brane creates a
D-(p+1)-brane. Therfore, from the minimum mass for the D-string one can
deduce the minimum masses for D-branes of higher dimensionality. Now one
can go back to NS states via a further S-duality.

The other way is computing D-brane masses via virtual closed string
diagrams of the mutual gravitational attraction between D-branes. When
dualities were still being discovered it was perceived as one of the
miracles of string theory that these two ways lead to the same mass [
Polch.,95 ] . The results for the brane tensions are as follows:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (85)
     @xmath      (86)
     @xmath      (87)
  -- -------- -- ------

for the NS-fundamental string, the D-branes (RR-solitons) and the
NS-solitonic 5-brane respectively.

All this makes the D-brane models rather simple. The relation between
D-branes and some T-dualities leads to a very useful “D-brane
technology” because T-duality is an exact symmetry and one understands
it perturbatively. S-duality is used less often in this context.
D-branes give the right model for many objects that are required by the
dualities. So called D-instantons [ Corrigan,75 ] [ Green,76 ] [ Cohen
et al,86/87 ] have Dirichlet boundary conditions for all @xmath
including time. D-instantons can probe sub-string and sub-Planck scales.
Thus the D-branes point towards degrees of freedom on an otherwise as
meaninglessly short discarded length scale. On how D-brane-D-brane
scattering at D-instantons probe shorter distances than the Planck or
string length see [ Shenker,95 ] . Thus, the Planck scale is probably
not the smallest length but the one where quantum mechanics and general
relativity (these are the theories that give the constants contributing
to the Planck length) have to be considered together as one theory
giving a new geometry (non-commutative geometry) below this length.
There has been quite a lot of work on D-brane-D-brane scattering and the
emergence of very short scales: [ Kleb./Thor.,95 ] [ Bachas,95 ] [
Barbon,96 ] [ Douglas et al,96 ] [ Douglas,96 ] .

Why do D-brane considerations lead to non-commuting geometry ? D-branes
are massive BPS-states. Therefore they gravitate or in general
interchange closed strings — for example gravitons of course. When the
distance between the membranes is smaller than the string length scale
the description via closed strings is not convenient anymore because it
involves the exchange of all the massive modes of the strings of which
there are infinitely many. Basically, if the branes are so close that
the average open string does not fit in between them the description in
terms of open string exchange will be unphysical. Physical is that the
open strings squeezed between two branes that approach each other will
touch both branes and break up. Therefore, the short distance
interactions are best described by taking virtual open strings between
the D-branes to model the propagation of a closed string. These open
strings are gauge fields transverse to the branes. @xmath D-branes close
to one another (for an exact statement read: “on top of each other,
identical”) give a @xmath Yang-Mills interaction because the connecting
open strings (massless if D-branes have zero separation) have
“Chan-Paton” indices @xmath with @xmath indicating which D-brane a given
string connects and where the oriented string starts and ends. A single
brane has a @xmath gauge field in it ( @xmath for all @xmath ). The
distance of the branes is now expressed in terms of the open strings
connecting them (The coordinates of these strings are spacetime
coordinates as well.). This gives matrices that not necessarily commute.
Thus, below the string length scale we find the quantum gravity being a
non-Abelian gauge field theory. At large distances the geometry becomes
Abelian again. The branes disconnect, the group @xmath of the Chan-Paton
factors @xmath becomes @xmath and the location of the branes is still
described by matrices but they are now diagonal ones and do commute [
Witten,95,10 ] . The issue of scales (string, Planck and GUT) is quite
intensively debated. There are many suggestions about what one
encounters near and below these scales and whether and which scales are
identical. There could wait an entirely new geometry, smaller elementary
units or a phase transition. For hints pointing to the latter see for
example [ Dick,97 ] )

In (M)atrix theory membranes (including strings) are viewed as
composites of D-0-branes which carry a single unit of RR-charge
(Ramond-Ramond). The membrane is a collective excitation of the
D-0-branes. The strings that connect very close D-0-branes result in a
“coordinate space” in which the 9 spatial coordinates of @xmath
D-0-branes become 9 @xmath -matrices [ Banks et al,96 ] . The large
@xmath limit corresponds to the large momentum of the light cone frame.
[ Banks et al,96 ] conjectured:

  “The calculation of any physical quantity in M-theory can be reduced
  to a calculation in matrix quantum mechanics followed by an
  extrapolation to large @xmath .”

Therefore, it would be a non-perturbative form of quantum-gravity.

The M-theory point of view opens up new possibilities for relations
between strings and branes — just like @xmath and the three form @xmath
in 11 dimensions lead after compactification to 10 dimensions to @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , @xmath etc. respectively in IIA
superstring theory. We can now have for instance 2-branes in 11
dimensions wrapping up to give a string of type II in 10 dimensions, or
a D-2-brane of IIA theory after dimensional reduction.

The D-branes will be wrapped up in compactified dimensions in order to
give charged point particles for the observer in the uncompactified
spacetime dimensions. Calculations will show that these charged
localized particles have an event horizon that is inside the string
length scale so that they are not jet black holes for the open strings
attached to them or when interacting with other objects (D-brane
scattering). Therefore one has to superimpose many branes and strings in
order to obtain a black hole – that leads to strong coupling.

In order to model a near extremal black hole and its Hawking radiation
one excites the D-branes of an extremal black hole. This is basically
nothing else but D-brane scattering at an extremal black hole. The
extremal black hole will absorb, become excited, that is a near extremal
one, and will then scatter back which means that the near extremal black
hole radiates Hawking radiation until it is an extremal black hole
again. A review on D-branes being probes of black holes is [ Malda.,97 ]
.

#### 4.4 Supergravity

Before D-brane technology the most important instrument for
investigation of the non-perturbative aspects of superstring theory was
supergravity. Even now, although there are the successes of (M)atrix
theory, the low energy limit of M-theory is the other handle that we can
be certain of allows to study M-theory. This limit is 11 dimensional
supergravity.

Supergravity contains scalar fields, U(1) gauge fields and fermionic
fields that are not the subject of classical general relativity but
otherwise the theories are very similar. @xmath supergravity has the
exactly same Reissner-Nordström solution where there is only one gauge
field excited. These supergravities can be introduced via the
introduction of supersymmetry into stringtheory. For example, @xmath ,
@xmath supergravity is the low energy limit of the type II superstring
theory compactified on the torus @xmath . The strings and p-branes of
the superstring theory can be black, i.e. they are inside their own
event horizons, and indeed if these black branes are charged and wrapped
up around compact dimensions than they will be just like a charged black
hole in the context of general relativity where in the uncompactified
spacetime one would observe a spherical symmetric (or axis symmetric in
case of rotation) event horizon and suspect a point (or ring)
singularity within it.

The important point in the context of black holes is that in
supergravity there are the BPS-states and they are stable states.
Moreover, many ⁴ ⁴ 4 Actually, the most extremal black holes are not
BPS, for example extremal @xmath solutions or see in [ Kallosh et al,92
] . extremal and therefore stable ( @xmath ) black holes are BPS as we
discovered before (recall the charge-equal-mass condition). One can
compute variables like the entropy of an assembly of D-branes (which are
BPS as well) for weak coupling and then these results are valid for any
coupling strength — even for the regime where the D-brane assembly is an
extremal black hole. Hence, the gravity theory being “super” was vital
for the calculation of extremal and near extremal black hole entropy not
only because the string theory should be a superstring theory in order
to be free from tachyons for example. We find D-branes as well in
bosonic string theory. The near extremal calculations are dependent on
the extremal ones in a very close sense as we discussed before (D-brane
scattering).

In practise, obtaining supergravities from superstring theories means
expanding the closed string @xmath -functions and then keeping only the
lowest order in @xmath terms (Regge slope). The supergravities have
UV-divergences and are not renormalisable but are much easier to handle
(therefore the name “effective” theory). Many properties of the
supergravities that we obtain by investigation of the low energy
effective action of a superstring theory follow straight from the
properties of the latter. From uncompactified IIA/B superstring theory
we obtain @xmath supergravities IIA/B with different/same chiralities of
the supersymmetry generators. For both the NSNS sector fields are the
same. They are the string metric @xmath , the two form @xmath with field
strength @xmath or ( @xmath ) and the dilaton @xmath and they lead to
the same terms in the action that follows as (compare with equation ( 2
)):

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (88)
  -- -------- -- ------

where “ @xmath …” is different in IIA and IIB due to different RR fields
and all the fermionic fields. @xmath is the ten dimensional gravitation
(Newton) constant, @xmath represents a RR field strength and R is the
scalar curvature again (not a radius of a compactification). The
differences between the RR sectors of type IIA and IIB are as follows:

In IIA supergravity [ Camp./West,84 ] : A is a one form ( @xmath ) and
there is @xmath where C is a three form ( @xmath ).

In IIB supergravity [ Green et al,82 ] : A is a four form that is self
dual ( @xmath ) and there are a scalar @xmath and another two form
@xmath with strength @xmath . @xmath denotes the Hodge duality operator.

This mirrors the properties of the superstring theories that allow for
D-p-branes if @xmath is even/odd in IIA/B respectively. To see what
fields are allowed it is best to study the vertex operators ( @xmath a
Ramond spinor) @xmath where @xmath again the field strength and @xmath .
Together with the boundary conditions for the spinors [ Polch. et al,96
]

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (89)
  -- -------- -- ------

it follows that same/opposite @xmath -parity implies odd/even rank of H
and a very similar condition for the supersymmetry parameters that
generate the unbroken supersymmetries follows from equation ( 89 ) [
Malda.,96 ] :

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (90)
  -- -------- -- ------

which is only possible for even/odd @xmath in IIA/B. We discussed the
S-self-duality of IIB superstring theory and again we find that the IIB
supergravity still has this symmetry. Because of the S-duality being the
duality @xmath it is convenient not to use the string but the S-duality
invariant Einstein metric (equation ( 71 )). It follows:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (91)
  -- -------- -- ------

#### 4.5 Ramond-Ramond Solitons

In the present work I first described M-theory and its D-branes and then
supergravity. Historically there was first the effective supergravity
and then the question: What are the solitons (localised field energy
stabilized by topological charges) ? Because we find p+1 forms in the RR
sector and tensor potentials couple to extended objects, they must be
p-branes. Form-theoretically one writes in (d-1)+1 dimensions of the
spacetime for the point charge (electric) and the dual point charge
(magnetic) the generic Gauss law:

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (92)
     @xmath      (93)
  -- -------- -- ------

in order to express that the charge is measured by the long range
fields. @xmath is the Hodge duality operator, @xmath is at spatial
infinity and j is a (d-1) form current. In quantum electro dynamics j is
a three form because the electron is a point particle. If the p-brane is
not compactified to a point but an infinite @xmath -hyperplane than
@xmath for the electric brane and so on.

@xmath and @xmath should obey the Dirac quantisation condition ( @xmath
is an integer) in the quantised theory. The coupling is

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (94)
  -- -------- -- ------

for the electric p-brane; for example

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (95)
  -- -------- -- ------

in quantum electro dynamics. The magnetic fields are not necessary but
expected because one expects the generic electric charge to be
quantised. Such a (electric) charge quantisation is either understood to
be topological — then one has most certainly as well topological
arrangements that are magnetic — or it is only that one would like at
least one magnetic charge that leads then to quantisation of the
electric charges via the Dirac quantisation condition which is here the
only quantisation due to quantum mechanics. In 10 dimensions the
magnetic dual charge is due to a (6-p)-brane (D-4-p) that couples to a
@xmath form related through equations like @xmath such that for @xmath
and @xmath holds @xmath . In perturbative string theory there are no
fundamental objects (perturbative string states) that have charges under
the described fields. Therefore, both, the electric and the dual
magnetic charges must be solitons and indeed the p-branes that are BPS
turn out to be D-p-branes. More precisely: the D-branes we encountered
in the non-perturbative superstring theory (i.e.: via string dualities)
and that are described by conformal field theories turn out to be
extremal p-branes in the supergravities that we obtained from the
superstring theories. The D-p-brane tension goes as @xmath (equation (
86 )), where the tension is the mass per spatial volume of the D-p-brane
just like for the D-string ( @xmath ) (equation 86 etc.). To summarize:
The S-duality (electric-magnetic duality) leads to the following pairing
of D-p- and D-(6-p)-branes: In IIA

-   @xmath : electric 0-brane and magnetic 6-brane

-   @xmath : electric 2-brane and magnetic 4-brane

and in IIB which has the zero form @xmath as well

-   @xmath : electric (-1)-brane (the instanton in the Euclidean theory)
    and magnetic 7-brane

-   @xmath : electric 1-brane and magnetic 5-brane

-   @xmath : self dual 3-brane

Of course, the above is the RR sector. There are other quite similar
pairs like the important 1-brane (fundamental string) paired with the
solitonic 5-brane (that is 1 dual to 5 under @xmath instead of @xmath ):

-   1-brane: worldsheet on @xmath which is @xmath with @xmath

-   5-brane: worldvolume on @xmath which is @xmath with @xmath

with @xmath , tension @xmath , @xmath and Dirac quantisation @xmath —
just to stress that the duality relations do not only apply to the
RR-sector. This @xmath -pair is important because we can calculate the
gravitational constant with help of the Dirac quantisation for this
pair. With equations ( 85 ), ( 87 ), ( 67 ) and the Dirac quantisation
condition we can write immediatelly

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (96)
     @xmath      (97)
  -- -------- -- ------

which is equation ( 66 ). Considering the various factors of @xmath and
demanding that there is no singularity like the Dirac string that
appears when we introduce a magnetic monopole into the quantised Maxwell
theory results in

  -- -------- -- ------
     @xmath      (98)
  -- -------- -- ------

#### 4.6 Matching D-brane Configurations with the Relevant
Supergravities

##### 4.6.1 Introduction

The aim is to obtain thermodynamics from a microstate description. The
strategy will be simple: Compare supergravity solutions with the BPS
string/brane configurations that have the same quantum numbers
(charges). Especially compare whether their degeneracy due to winding
charges etc. fits to the entropy of the area of the event horizon that
comes from the metric of the supergravity solution.

We have to clearly distinguish between the two sides of it. One is the
effective supergravity side; i.e. the finding of BPS black holes with
non-zero area of the event horizon. Then we calculate @xmath , @xmath
and so on and this gives the thermodynamics of the black hole due to
superstring theory (namely its low and perturbative energy
approximation) but not yet the microstate description. The other side is
the identification of D-brane configurations and the calculation of the
emerging thermodynamics from the statistical mechanics of the
microstates. If we find agreement with the results from the supergravity
side then this will boost our confidence in the consistency of
superstring theory (M-theory). Thus, the relatively new thing is not
that superstring theory describes black holes (thats “old” apart from
the fact that the superstring inspired gravities have charges not
carried by the fundamental string and need a D-brane interpretation).
New is that M-theory gives a microstate description. In the light of the
recent successes of the D-brane picture I will present it first and
after that the supergravity side because this facilitates the
unterstanding of the latter.

##### 4.6.2 The D-brane Side of the Matching

There are at least two reasons why one needs more than just one black
brane in order to model a black hole — and we want a black hole because
the Bekenstein-Hawking entropy law is derived for black holes and not
for just any body and its would-be event horizon if it were compressed
enough. The supergravity solution of a D-brane has a Schwarzschild
radius of order @xmath . Thus, any strings on it or interacting with it
will not see the event horizon. This is obviously not a good model for
black hole. Secondly, using only one type of brane leads to scalar
fields that diverge at the event horizon. Therefore, the event horizon
is not smooth and the black hole is not like the ones we have in general
relativity with non-zero entropy. The latter is what we would like to
model. Thus we need superpositions of many branes for a large
Schwarzschild radius and moreover different types of branes so that
scalars of different type may balance each other at the horizon. They
can do so because scalars (like the dilaton determining the size of
@xmath ) are pressures and tensions in the direction of compactified
dimensions. For example the dilaton field generated by @xmath coincident
p-branes in @xmath dimensions is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (99)
     @xmath      (100)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath for the NS branes, @xmath for the D-branes and @xmath will
be discussed a bit closer later on. Thus, with different kinds of branes
and appropriate choices of the charges @xmath one may balance scalars
like the dilaton for all @xmath .

Having different kinds of D-branes leads to more boundaries and related
constraints on the spinors due to equation ( 90 ) being valid for
different p simultaneously. Investigation of these constraints leads to
information about whether and how many supersymmetries survive (recall
that the @xmath in equation ( 90 ) are the parameters generating the
unbroken supersymmetries) and to the BPS-bound (mass formula) due to the
dimension p of the involved D-branes and due to their orientation, i.e.
whether they are parallel or orthogonal or it might be a tilted
intersection between them. For example @xmath (that is @xmath with
@xmath the dimension of another brane) being 4 or 8 preserves one
quarter of the supersymmetries in the parallel case [ Douglas,95 ] .

In order to have winding charges other than the winding around the 11th
dimension we need to compactify dimensions (apart from the incentive to
be left with a @xmath -spacetime we would like to play with charges and
balance scalars). The simplest way for spacetime and D-branes is a
compactification on a torus @xmath that gives an identification on a
lattice to the spacetime

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (101)
     @xmath      (102)
     @xmath      (103)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the @xmath are the lattice basis vectors. This compactification
means a periodicity for the properties of the D-p-brane along the
directions of the lattice basis vectors which is ensured for the
D-p-brane via its translation/boost invariance only for directions
parallel to the brane like in the case where we “wrap” the p-brane
around the compactification torus @xmath . Orthogonal to the branes one
needs to superimpose D-branes in order to create a periodic function
along the compactified directions which means a lattice of branes on the
lattice of compactification.

##### 4.6.3 The Supergravity Side

In order to study the appropriate solution of the supergravity we need
not write down the whole and complex supersymmetric action and we do not
need to solve the second order Euler Lagrange equations. It is
sufficient to work with an ansatz for the metric that is quite general
but has the symmetry one expects the black hole to have; @xmath for
example in case of a single D-p-brane in the 10 dimensional string frame
gives the following ansatz for the line element:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (104)
     @xmath      (105)
     @xmath      (106)
  -- -------- -- -------

Then one has to consider only the first order supersymmetry equations
that set the dilatino and gravitino variations to zero

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (107)
  -- -------- -- -------

because we work with BPS states and there are preserved supersymmetries.
Allowing for the fields we want to keep (like the dilaton and the RR
field B) and setting the other fields to zero one obtains conditions
relating metric and fields. Equipped with these conditions on the ansatz
on one hand and the dilatino and gravitino variations being zero on the
other one obtains constraints like equation ( 90 ) again.

Note that parallel to the relations mass @xmath and @xmath for the
fundamental string, the D-branes and the NS solitons (solitonic 5-brane)
respectively one obtains:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (108)
     @xmath      (109)
  -- -------- -- -------

For a concrete example consider the long fundamental string (not
D-string). The @xmath ansatz is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (110)
     @xmath      (111)
  -- -------- -- -------

and one allows the dilaton and @xmath to be excited. In type IIA we
require [ Malda.,96 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (112)
     @xmath      (113)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the sum of one spinor with positive and one with
negative chirality. @xmath is the spin connection corresponding to the
zehnbeins @xmath and the @xmath satisfy the Clifford algebra @xmath with
@xmath .

These relations lead to the following modified ansatz [ Dabhol. et
al,89/90 ] that keeps half of the supersymmetries:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (114)
     @xmath      (115)
     @xmath      (116)
  -- -------- -- -------

which gives with @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (117)
  -- -------- -- -------

and @xmath will be satisfied when ( [ Malda.,96 ] equation (2.6)):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (118)
     @xmath      (119)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath are asymptotic values of the Killing spinors which generate
the infinitesimal local supersymmetry transformations. The dilaton’s
@xmath -dependence is still arbitrary and the equation of motions only
require @xmath to be a harmonic function of @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (120)
  -- -------- -- -------

In order to model a black hole we might like to put

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (121)
  -- -------- -- -------

(after compactification of one dimension @xmath ) which gives a
curvature singularity and the event horizon at @xmath .

Note that in general the whole apparatus of general relativity as
discussed can now be applied. That is, for a solution that is Minkowski
flat at spatial infinity we may expand the Einstein metric ( @xmath
where @xmath is small ) in order to calculate the ADM mass with surface
integrals at infinity. We may read off charges, angular momentum,
Bekenstein-Hawking entropy and Hawking temperature straightforwardly
from the metric.

For simplicity the examples above are in the D=10 spacetime but the
macroscopic observer ( @xmath ) who does not see the compactified
dimensions will request a purely d-dimensional supergravity theory.
Therefore we have to do a dimensional reduction: reduction on the
supergravity side and compactification on the superstring theory side.
The ansatz is the same with @xmath substituting @xmath but after this
Kaluza Klein dimensional reduction we have to consider new fields when
determining the solution. These fields are Kaluza Klein gauge fields and
Kaluza Klein scalars. Considering all scalars the result is that if only
a single type of RR charge is used (that corresponds to a single type of
D-brane), the event horizon will have zero area and the solution is
singular at the event horizon because of unbalanced and diverging
scalars.

### 5 The Black Hole Microstate Descriptions

#### 5.1 Introduction

There have been numerous early efforts to describe black hole entropy
via microstates; as early as 1975 [ Bek.,75 ] . That only superstring
theory as the only consistent quantum theory of gravity is the right
place to look for such microstate descriptions has been stressed by
t‘Hooft (for example in [ ’t Hooft,90/91 ] ) and later very much by
Susskind who suggested that very massive string states should be black [
Sussk.,93/94 ] . During that time one still thought that black holes
must be fundamental string states but this clashes with the fact that
the logarithm of the degeneracy of elementary string states is
proportional to the mass @xmath but the Bekenstein-Hawking entropy is
proportional to @xmath (see equation ( 46 )). [ Sussk.,93/94 ] and [
Russo/Sussk.,94 ] suggested that @xmath because of large mass
renormalisations. This is one more reason to study BPS states because
they do not receive renormalisation corrections.

More recent approaches to black hole microstates have been attempted
notably by [ Sen,95 ] [ Carlip,95 ] [ Larsen/Wilc.,95 ] [
Cvetic/Tsey.,95 ] [ Tsey.,96 ] . Although they proposed a quite
different string theoretical approach (different from the now so widely
known approach starting with [ Strom./Vafa,96 ] ) it is remarkable that
[ Larsen/Wilc.,95 ] anticipated the results of Strominger and Vafa
rather closely and on general considerations in the framework of
superstring theory. The Strominger-Vafa computation [ Strom./Vafa,96 ]
was the first success in accounting for the Bekenstein-Hawking entropy
via microstates, but I will not start with their work because there are
now equivalent but easier ways. What will be historically correct though
is to start with IIB theory compactified on @xmath as [ Strom./Vafa,96 ]
have done because here the analysis is still the simplest of the ones
found yet.

In the next sections we will see that the string theoretical
microstate-descriptions all suggest that the evolution of a black hole
is unitary. We might not trust the results in the strong coupling regime
because the D-brane description is not valid there and we have to rely
on the results being protected by supersymmetry due to the BPS nature of
the configurations. But on the D-brane side of the comparison between
D-brane configuration and supergravity effective theory one has a very
clear topological picture with the entropy coming from the degeneracy of
possible numbers of branes and possible windings — especially for BPS
states that have @xmath where n is the momentum quantum number and m
counts the winding because T-duality is @xmath -duality. Cranking up the
coupling there is no reason to assume this topological picture will
change as long as one does not encounter phase transitions.

#### 5.2 Extremal and Near-Extremal Black Holes in 4 and 5 Dimensions

##### 5.2.1 Extremal d=4+1 and d=3+1 Black Holes

For the following I go more or less closely along with the
argumentations of
[ Callan/Malda.,96 ] for @xmath , [ Malda./Strom.,96,3 ] and [ John. et
al,96 ] for @xmath and [ Malda.,96 ] for both. I tried to add with
notations and explanations that I as a beginner would have liked to
find. The literature reflects the anxiety that accompanies the pressure
to publish and the swift pace with which the subject is moving ahead. I
changed almost everything in order to be left with a convenient and
consistent notation rather than with a historically correct account. The
result is that the arguments look very straightforward to a degree that
one might wonder why the early work did not derive it that way.

The D-1-brane is the simplest D-brane we can wrap in different ways in
order to have degeneracy and therefore entropy due to windings for
example. In @xmath a D-p-brane produces the dilaton field

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (122)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we assumed @xmath from now onwards since that is how we expect
fields to behave when they are far from the black hole. In order to have
solutions that do not blow up at the event horizon one has to balance
the dilaton. A D-5-brane would be very convenient because the matching
powers of the @xmath -functions make them balanced for all @xmath if
they are for any one @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (123)
  -- -------- -- -------

In order to wrap away a 5-brane (we want to model a spherically
symmetric black hole) we need a 5-dimensional torus of compactification.
D-1 and D-5 branes are S-dual in the IIB theory. Thus if we take the IIB
theory then we need only consider one field, namely the RR 2-form @xmath
. Therefore consider IIB superstring theory on @xmath . The torus is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (124)
  -- -------- -- -------

with “volume” (volume @xmath )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (125)
  -- -------- -- -------

so that a @xmath uncompactified spacetime is left and has the familiar
indices @xmath . A @xmath -compactification is the simplest one but does
not yield the physics of our world. We would like to have @xmath though
to be a bit closer to our world and therefore we consider a theory on
@xmath . Because IIB on @xmath turned out successful, the recipe is:
Take the @xmath configurations and compactify one more direction by
doing a T-duality transformation along @xmath and having a lattice of
the @xmath -configurations on the lattice of compactification. This is
exactly the way in that we compactified D-p-branes earlier on. The
T-duality transformation has two effects: The D-1- and D-5-branes become
D-2- and D-6-branes respectively ( @xmath the dilaton will not be
balanced anymore) and the IIB theory on @xmath becomes a IIA theory on
@xmath because IIB and IIA are related by T-duality as we have
discussed. Compactifying like this leaves a relatively simple model in
that the branes of highest dimensionality have only one way to be
wrapped away (D-6-brane on @xmath ). In order to balance the scalar
(equation ( 122 )) we take (NS) solitonic 5-branes ( @xmath ”) because
IIA has not got suitable RR-5-branes (D-5-branes):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (126)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the dilaton field of a NS p-brane is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (127)
  -- -------- -- -------

There are now 27 charges due to the gauge fields (i.e. D-branes etc.)
possible on the torus @xmath for example: 5 momentums, 5 D-string
windings, 5 string windings, @xmath D-3-brane wrappings, 1 D-5-brane and
1 solitonic 5-brane wrapping. By “ @xmath wrappings” is meant that there
are @xmath choices of the set of internal directions along which the
entire brane is wrapped away. Thus there are @xmath charges together
with the anti charges. An anti brane is a brane with opposite
orientation and anti momentum is right instead of left moving. The
variables @xmath are integers and count the number of units @xmath
-charge. We will only be concerned with @xmath for D-p-branes, @xmath ”
(i.e. @xmath ) for units of momentum and @xmath ” for solitonic
5-branes.

IIB on @xmath for @xmath :

-   @xmath D-strings wrapped along @xmath

-   @xmath D-5-branes wrapped on @xmath

-   @xmath units of momentum @xmath along @xmath in one direction only
    (say left).

This is the S-dual to the solution of [ Cvetic/Tsey.,95 ] [ Tsey.,96 ]
because fundamental strings and solitonic 5-branes are S-duals to D-1-
and D-5-branes.

IIA on @xmath for @xmath :

-   @xmath D-2-branes wrapped on @xmath

-   @xmath D-6-branes wrapped on @xmath

-   @xmath units of momentum @xmath along @xmath in one direction only
    (say left).

-   @xmath 5-branes wrapped on @xmath (not on @xmath )

The equations given by formula ( 90 ) applied to all the D-branes and
momentums show that the solitonic 5-brane does not break additional
supersymmetries. If @xmath this arrangement will be T-dual to the one
for IIB on @xmath .

In the case that there are only branes ( @xmath ), the ansatz on the
supergravity side is straight forward because the metric is a “local
thing” and the effects on it simply add up linearly. Thus with equations
( 104 ) and ( 109 ) we obtain in the @xmath dimensional string frame:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (128)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (129)
  -- -------- -- -------

This becomes especially simple because the intersections of branes are
all taken as orthogonal or parallel and we consider only @xmath or
@xmath with the @xmath -branes lying inside the @xmath -branes. With
@xmath for example:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (130)
  -- -------- -- -------

where those directions which are parrallel/orthogonal to all branes are
denoted by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (131)
     @xmath      (132)
  -- -------- -- -------

and orthogonal to the D-p-brane but parallel to the D-(p+4)-brane are

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (133)
  -- -------- -- -------

The dilaton field of this ansatz is (equation ( 122 ))

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (134)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the harmonic functions @xmath turn out to be dependent on the
d-spacetime radius @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (135)
     @xmath      (136)
  -- -------- -- -------

where the power of @xmath is dependent on @xmath because any further
compactification needs a lattice structure of the configuration we had
before the compactification. Therefore we obtain other harmonic
functions @xmath whose dependence on @xmath reflects that the large
scale observer does not observe any internal dimensions. The @xmath
-proportionality factors are due to rather tedious calculations
involving the mass of the D-branes and the gravitational constant in
@xmath dimensions [ Malda.,96 ] , for example:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (137)
     @xmath      (138)
  -- -------- -- -------

The supersymmetry breaking leads to (use equation ( 90 )):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (139)
     @xmath      (140)
  -- -------- -- -------

for @xmath for example. In order to balance the dilaton in the IIA on
@xmath case we need @xmath which gives with equations ( 129 ) and ( 130
)

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (141)
  -- -------- -- -------

and with equation ( 126 )

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (142)
  -- -------- -- -------

, thus the dilaton is balanced if we chose the charges appropriately.
For the fields one obtains:
IIB on @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (143)
     @xmath      (144)
  -- -------- -- -------

[ Malda.,96 ] , compare with equations ( 115 ) etc.

IIA on @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (145)
     @xmath      (146)
     @xmath      (147)
  -- -------- -- -------

[ Cvetic/Youm,95 ] [ Tsey.,96 ] , where the @xmath -tensor density is
the @xmath -tensor for the flat @xmath -space (the flat space volume
form) and @xmath .

The brane configurations as they are up to now ( @xmath ) are put
together in a way that balances the dilaton fields of the branes. But
gravity curves spacetime and that applies as well to the internal
compactified space. Thus, actually the balancing is as well a
compensation of brane tension parallel to the branes with help of the
pressure due to the electric fields perpendicular to other branes. These
forces determine the internal metric and the compactification radii
@xmath . Thus, the dilaton is just one of the scalars we would like to
balance in order to model the black holes that we are used to in the
context of general relativity. All branes are parallel to @xmath and we
need to put momentum along this circle in order to have a stable @xmath
as the compromise between the tension parallel to the branes and the
pressure of the momentum. Therefore we need to put @xmath but these
units of momentum do only go along @xmath and into one direction only in
order to have a solution that preserves some supersymmetry and is still
BPS. The complete @xmath -configuration owes its degeneracy to the
different possible windings of branes and to the momentum. The momentum
we can interpret as oscillations of the D-strings inside the D-5-branes
(or D-2-branes and solitonic 5-branes inside the D-6-branes) and as
moving open strings stretched between different branes. The oscillations
are parallel to the D-5(/6)-branes because the configuration is a bound
system. Thus the D-5(/6)-branes do not oscillate. The degeneracy is due
to all the ways that the @xmath units of momentum can be assigned to
certain branes. The ansatz for the line element changes due to these
oscillations [ Callan et al,91 ] [ Garfinke,92 ] . This becomes a simple
substitution in case we have only oscillations in internal dimensions
and no angular momentum [ Callan et al,95 ] [ Malda.,96 ] :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (148)
  -- -------- -- -------

with the @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (149)
     @xmath      (150)
  -- -------- -- -------

The supersymmetries that are broken by the addition of the momentum
states lead to formulas similar to ( 90 ), here:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (151)
     @xmath      (152)
  -- -------- -- -------

An oscillating string preserves @xmath supersymmetries and our whole
configuration of two types of D-branes and momentum excitations
preserves (see equations ( 140 ) and ( 152 )) only @xmath , that is 4
left from initially @xmath due to 8 transverse dimensions for every kind
of right and left moving spinors. The ansatz is still not entirely
independent of the internal dimensions. What we want is a @xmath
-dimensional supergravity with a metric that is only dependent on @xmath
and @xmath . Thus one needs to perform the dimensional reduction. How
one does this in detail one can find in [ Mahar./Schwarz,93 ] and [
Sen,93 ] . One finds in the Einstein frame (using the Einstein metric):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (153)
  -- -------- -- -------

(where @xmath and @xmath ) which is a d-dimensional black hole because

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (154)
     @xmath      (155)
  -- -------- -- -------

thus the event horizon is at @xmath (this coordinate system does not
cover the inside of the black hole). In order to obtain a general
Reissner-Nordström solution it is required that we do perform a certain
balancing of the dilaton. We need to set the charges into relation to
each other. With equation ( 15 ) for the extremal black hole ( @xmath )
and equations ( 153 ) and ( 154 ) one finds that the charges have to
obey

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (156)
  -- -------- -- -------

for all @xmath in order to make the metric an extremal
Reissner-Nordström one. Note that the @xmath of equation ( 15 ) is not
the @xmath of the equations ( 153 ) and ( 154 ) but a simple
transformation will show the equivalence. If ( 156 ) is satisfied the
geometry of the internal space will be independent of the uncompactified
space coordinates. This statement includes the dilaton since it is due
to the compactification of the 11th dimension.

Now we may apply the formulas of general relativity. @xmath is zero
because the black hole is an extremal one. The entropy due to the area
of the event horizon @xmath with @xmath being a 3-dimensional “area” in
the case of IIB on @xmath , turns out to be

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (157)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath or @xmath . This equation reflects the topological origin
of the entropy of the BPS states because none of the continuous
parameters like @xmath or @xmath are in the equation.

##### 5.2.2 Counting of States for the Extremal Black Holes

Does equation ( 157 ) fully agree with the D-brane picture, i.e. with
the denumeration of possible degenerate states ? [ Strom./Vafa,96 ] uses
a very involved counting based on Vafa’s ( [ Vafa,95,11 ] and [
Vafa,95,12 ] ) analysis of the cohomology of moduli spaces for
instantons. [ Callan/Malda.,96 ] have given a slightly easier method of
the counting but it is actually not the “simple” denumeration and it
will not possibly be if we want to reproduce equation ( 157 ) because it
contains @xmath and makes therefore no difference between many
D-p-branes or a single D-string wrapped @xmath times along @xmath — as
if D-1-branes and D-5-branes [or D-2-branes and D-6-branes] are all
mutually indistinguishable.

All we know so far about the momentum is that there are @xmath left
moving units of it on @xmath . These units are carried by open strings
that are attached to the branes. This is the only way in that one can
describe D-brane momentum that goes parallel to the brane because the
D-brane is translation and boost invariant parallel to itself. The
oriented strings have start and end points that are attached to the
branes. Therefore, these open srings have Chan-Paton factors @xmath ,
for example @xmath for a string that starts on the D-5-brane number
@xmath and ends on the D-string number @xmath ( @xmath and @xmath ). One
possible way of the counting of states uses the following
simplifications:

-   Although @xmath is evaluated by considering oscillations of branes,
    i.e. moving massless and open strings attached to a brane, the
    largest contributions to the entropy is due to open strings
    stretched between different branes and even different kinds of
    branes like @xmath and @xmath . The entropy due to @xmath and @xmath
    strings can be neglected because although these open strings are
    massless, all open strings considered together lead to interactions
    that are effectively mass terms. The detailed analysis points to the
    @xmath strings with @xmath as giving the configurations where the
    most constituents remain massless. These will give the leading
    contributions to the entropy. The latter is just the well known
    result about the populations of states of different energy in
    statistical mechanics.

-   Concentrating on @xmath strings with @xmath , one finds that for
    every possible numbers of charges @xmath the largest contributions
    to the entropy are due to the windings that have the effective
    length @xmath [ or @xmath ]. For example: If there is only one brane
    of every type @xmath but the D-1-brane is wrapped @xmath times
    around @xmath . Or for another example: There is only one D-string
    wrapped @xmath times around @xmath and only one D-5-brane wrapped
    @xmath times around @xmath . The Chan-Paton factors count the turns
    along @xmath . If @xmath and @xmath have no common devisors a @xmath
    string will have to be carried around @xmath for @xmath times until
    the Chan-Paton factor is the same again [ @xmath ]. The effective
    length is again @xmath . Other examples are more difficult to argue.

    In general: The open strings are on the branes and therefore there
    are now @xmath units of momentum

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (158)
      -- -------- -- -------

    where @xmath or @xmath .

Both simplifications are only possible if the charges @xmath are large
but eventually we want to have large charges anyway in order to have a
Schwarzschild radius that is bigger than the string length. What now
remains is to count the possible states for the @xmath type string for
example. It has two orientations [ @xmath and @xmath ] and can bind any
of the @xmath D-strings to any of the @xmath D-5-branes. In the case of
multiple winding the different turns of a brane contribute to the
counting. Thus we have ( @xmath ) possibilities. An analysis of the
Dirichlet and Neumann boundary conditions and the GSO (Gliozzi Scherk
Olive) chirality conditions ⁵ ⁵ 5 The GSO projection is needed for the
superstring in order to match the number of the bosonic degrees of
freedom to the number of fermionic ones. This truncation of the spectrum
removes the tachyonic ground state. [ Callan/Malda.,96 ] for the
fermions after that leads to the result that the strings have only few
more degrees of freedom. In fact only two because they effectively live
in two dimensions. This gives ( @xmath ) possibilities for the fermions.
An analysis of the bosonic sector gives the same number. The factor (
@xmath ) in the case of the IIA theory on @xmath may be derived in a
similar way. The degrees of freedom for the fermions are not decreased
by the solitonic 5-branes because they do not break additional
supersymmetries. The entropy has a topological origin and if @xmath is
still zero IIA on @xmath will be the T-dual to IIB on @xmath . Thus we
take the factor ( @xmath ) as a general result.

The “simple” denumeration turns out rather complicated if we want to
follow it in detail and give a rigorous derivation. Nevertheless, there
are different interpretations of the configurations of charges possible
and therefore different countings. [ Strom./Vafa,96 ] started with
@xmath D-5-branes wrapped on @xmath and put @xmath instanton solutions
of the corresponding @xmath gauge theory on @xmath of @xmath . The
instantons carry D-1-brane charge (one RR charge) but are only
D-1-branes after shrinking to zero thickness. As instantons they can
have different orientations and the factor ( @xmath ) is derived from
the analysis of the moduli space for these instantons [ Vafa,95,11 ] [
Vafa,95,12 ] . One can equally well put @xmath instanton solutions on
the D-6-branes and derive the factor ( @xmath ). In general one has to
investigate the moduli space

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (159)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath of @xmath is the permutation group of @xmath elements. [
Horo./Strom.,96 ] simply argue that the @xmath D-strings may wander
around inside the 4 transverse directions left for them inside the
D-5-brane. Therefore the number ( @xmath ) as the number of massless
bosons and the same number of fermionic supersymmetry partners. The same
goes for D-2-branes inside D-6-branes. In general, the D-p-branes are
bound to the D-(p+4)-branes so that the oscillations can only be inside
the 4 transverse directions inside the larger brane. [ John. et al,96 ]
avoid a singular horizon and ensure a finite horizon area by having the
D-brane configurations in the background of a Kaluza Klein monople.
Their @xmath (!) configuration has only the three charges @xmath or the
charges @xmath for the T-dual configuration where @xmath stands for the
possible winding of fundamental strings. Again the factor @xmath is
found.

For IIA on @xmath we add solitonic 5-branes and the factor ( @xmath )
gets multiplicated by @xmath because the solitonic 5-branes are
distributed along @xmath which they intersect. Therefore the open
strings are further distinguished by the pair of solitonic 5-branes they
lie in between. Actually the intersected D-2-branes break and end on the
5-branes just like closed fundamental strings break and connect D-branes
which is the U-dual scenario because those strings and branes are in the
@xmath -multiplet [ Schwarz,95,8 ] . Thus there are ( @xmath )
D-twobranes and we have in general a factor of ( @xmath ).

Note that the factor ( @xmath ) is basically the only string theoretical
input because from now on we treat the open strings as an ideal gas.
Ideal means noninteracting and we treat the gas with classical kinetic
gas theory. The gas has ( @xmath ) types of bosons and ( @xmath ) types
of fermionic partners due to supersymmetry where we put another factor
of 2 for the two spin states of particles with spin @xmath . The total
energy is @xmath and the “box” the gas lives in has the volume @xmath .
Therefore the entropy follows as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (160)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is exactly equation ( 157 ) and which is only valid for large
charges as well.

[ John. et al,96 ] , who had @xmath configurations with only three
charges, express the @xmath possible ways of distributing a total of
@xmath or @xmath units to the possible (1,5) strings or fundamental
strings with help of the partition function

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (161)
     @xmath      (162)
  -- -------- -- -------

(similar in [ John. et al,96 ] ) and therefore equation ( 157 ) is valid
again.

##### 5.2.3 Counting of States for the Near Extremal Black Holes

The D-brane picture and the counting are almost the same as for the
extremal black holes. Therefore I will describe the supergravity side
later.

Near extremal black holes have finite temperature and are therefore not
possibly to be described by the BPS states because finite temperature
implies Hawking radiation but BPS states are stable. Recall that we
added only left moving momentum because adding left and right moving
momentum would destroy the BPS properties. Hence, adding right moving
momentum along @xmath should model a non extremal black hole. In
general, adding anti charges ( @xmath ) gives the configuration more
mass than the lowest bound that is required to carry the total charge.
Therefore we have a non extremal configuration and charges may
annihilate anti charges which will result in Hawking radiation. This
works only fine in the near extremal region because then there are so
few right movers for example that one can neglect the interactions
between left moving and the right moving gas. This is called the “dilute
gas approximation” and it allows us to just add the entropies of the
gases. However, one should recall that the simple formula for the
entropy was deduced for large charges only. In order for these equations
to be valid again we have to add not few but many anti charges. Thus we
require for the left and right moving momentum for example: @xmath where
@xmath . Adding the entropies yields ⁶ ⁶ 6 Because of the discussion
leading to equation ( 158 ) we could add far less momentum, namely as
little as two units of momentum @xmath such that
@xmath and @xmath of the whole configuration is still quantised to units
of @xmath .

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (163)
  -- -------- -- -------

In general, with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (164)
  -- -------- -- -------

the same is valid for all kinds of branes because U-duality interchanges
momentum and branes among each other. That alters coupling constants and
radii of compactifications but it lets the entropy unchanged because of
its topological origin. Thus

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (165)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath or @xmath with @xmath and @xmath . Equation ( 165 ) can be
written as an expansion that gives the increase due to deviations from
the extremal case precisely:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (166)
     @xmath      (167)
  -- -------- -- -------

The latter part of this formula gives the leading contributions to the
increase in entropy as being @xmath if we add equal amounts of charges
and anti charges in order to keep the total charge fixed.

##### 5.2.4 The Supergravity of Near-Extremal d=4+1 and d=3+1 Black
Holes

On the supergravity side one has to find the metric for the general non
extremal black hole. This is done by starting with the extremal
Reissner-Nordström solution which had the constraints ( 156 ). The
constraints are removed by boosting the solution in order to change the
momentum and by using U-duality to interchange the charges amongst each
other so that every charge can become a momentum in a dual description
and can then be boosted [ Horo./Strom.,96 ] [ Horo./Malda./Strom.,96 ] .
This boosting with boost parameters @xmath results in @xmath -type
functions familiar from special relativity and the resulting metric is (
130 ) with ( 134 ) [or ( 126 ) for IIA on @xmath ], ( 136 ) and ( 148 )
but instead of @xmath in ( 148 ) write

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (168)
  -- -------- -- -------

and we substitute ⁷ ⁷ 7 Especially in this section the formulae can
nowhere be found like this and may be hard to compare with the
literature. This notation allows one to be most general and brief. :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (169)
  -- -------- -- -------

The charges are (with @xmath for simplification)

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (170)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (171)
  -- -------- -- -------

with the mass @xmath again dependent on the tension formulae [( 85 )
etc.]:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (172)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Note that the term @xmath has the units of a number and will therefore
appear in equations that are dependent on pure numbers (e.g.:( 170 ) and
( 175 )).

Reduction to @xmath dimensions leads again to equations like ( 153 )
with ( 154 ) but this time we write:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (173)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath and @xmath as usual and @xmath from ( 154 ) with the boosted
@xmath from equation ( 169 ). The solution is invariant under
interchange of the boost parameters @xmath due to the applied U-duality.
@xmath is still an event horizon. In the extremal case it was the inner
and the outer one since they coincide. Here it is the inner event
horizon and @xmath is the outer one. Applying the methods of general
relativity we find the ADM mass

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (174)
  -- -------- -- -------

and the entropy and temperature

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (175)
     @xmath      (176)
  -- -------- -- -------

The compactification leads to @xmath scalars due to the components
@xmath , @xmath [or @xmath , @xmath , @xmath in the case of IIA on
@xmath . These are related to the pressures @xmath along compactified
directions as discussed when we balanced the scalars. It holds simply
@xmath factors of @xmath , for example

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (177)
  -- -------- -- -------

for IIB on @xmath or for IIA on @xmath for example

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (178)
  -- -------- -- -------

according to which directions the certain D-branes are parallel or
orthogonal to. The extremal black hole has @xmath and one or more @xmath
and if all charges are finite @xmath we will get back the formulae
@xmath and @xmath and the mass @xmath will be the sum of the masses of
each contribution:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (179)
  -- -------- -- -------

For only one single charge being finite @xmath and for the others @xmath
one obtains the line elements for a single brane or single anti brane or
a single unit of momentum. Simple relations between masses and pressures
are obtained [ Horo./Lowe./Malda.,96 ] (but I write a very different
notation); for example for a single D-p-brane or anti D-p-brane with the
mass @xmath for the case IIB on @xmath : @xmath , @xmath and @xmath has
@xmath of course because the D-1-brane and D-5-brane are orthogonal and
parallel to @xmath respectively and the momentum does not go along
@xmath .

Why do I write all these equations ? They show that masses, pressures
and charges simply decompose into the contributions of single charge
carriers. We need this insight in order to derive the expression for the
numbers of charges @xmath on the supergravity side although comparing
equations ( 170 ), ( 174 ) and ( 175 ) with equations ( 164 )( 165 )
makes a guess like @xmath obvious. With the equations above we do not
have to guess because they allow to express the solution in terms of
numbers of branes and anti branes and units of left and right moving
momentum instead of using the boost parameters @xmath and @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath [or boost parameters @xmath and @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath in case of IIA on @xmath ]. The following definitions
are equivalent to the variables used in equation ( 164 ):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (180)
     @xmath      (181)
  -- -------- -- -------

Now we can rewrite equations like ( 170 ), ( 174 ) etc. in a simple
form, for instance

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (182)
  -- -------- -- -------

and equations ( 165 ) and the Bekenstein-Hawking entropy ( 175 ) are
equivalent.

Just like we express the numbers with help of boost parameters,
compactification radii and so on we can express these parameters in
terms of the numbers of branes (for a list see [ Malda.,96 ] ). If we
maximise @xmath holding the charges @xmath and mass @xmath of the
configuration fixed the compactification parameters and in turn the
expression for the numbers @xmath will result. Therefore the
configuration is a thermodynamic equilibrium of the contributing charge
carriers; but only in this sense because the right and left moving
gasses have different temperatures and are thought to be noninteracting.
The different temperatures come from the form of equation ( 176 ) which
is written inversely as follows:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (183)
  -- -------- -- -------

for example

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (184)
  -- -------- -- -------

From equation ( 165 ) follows @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (185)
  -- -------- -- -------

For an extremal black hole we have @xmath and @xmath and deviating from
extremality the inner and outer horizons separate. This suggests to
generalise equation ( 185 ) to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (186)
  -- -------- -- -------

which actually can be verified in just the way as it was done for @xmath
alone. Equation ( 186 ) leads to the surprising form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (187)
     @xmath      (188)
     @xmath      (189)
     @xmath      (190)
  -- -------- -- -------

Both horizons seem to have their own thermodynamic variables which is a
suggestion due to [ Cvetic/Youm,96 ] . All this is derived in the dilute
gas approximation but looks very fundamental.

#### 5.3 Less special Black Holes

The results reviewed thus far are very special black holes in that the
compactifications and wrappings (5-brane around @xmath , one-brane
around @xmath etc.) imply that the D-brane configurations are quite
artificial ones. All branes intersect with an angle of either zero or a
half @xmath . As well, we did not treat rotating solutions any closer.
These more general solutions can be obtained with the solution
generating techniques as there are U-duality including T-duality at an
angle and boosting along all sorts of directions. On rotating black
holes see for example [ Brek. et al,96,2 ] [ Brek. et al,96,3 ] [
Cvetic/Youm,96 ] . On solutions with new angles of intersections see for
example [ Behrndt/Cvetic,97 ] [ Brek. et al,97 ] [ Costa/Cvetic,97 ] .
The supergravity calculations are complicated because of the many boost
parameters and angles but the results for the entropy and the
temperature for example match the results from the counting of states of
the configuration of branes and the results show the topological
character of the degeneracy. Solutions that have branes intersecting at
an arbitrary angle have the entropy depending on this continuous
parameter but still the results match the counting of states because
these solutions interpolate between the different configurations of
branes with angles of zero and @xmath . The angle is the mixing
parameter. [ Costa/Cvetic,97 ] for example found a black hole that
interpolates between a configuration of (D-1-branes plus D-5-branes) and
a configuration of (3-branes plus 3-branes). The mixing comes from the
fact that T-duality orthogonal to a D-p-brane creates a D-(p+1)-brane
and T-duality parallel to a D-p-brane reverses the (p-1) to p process
and leads to a D-(p-1)-brane. T-duality at an angle will therefore mix
the D-(p-1)-brane and the D-(p+1)-brane.

An exhaustive enumeration of all the work done on all kinds of black
holes and their thermodynamics in all kinds of dimensions and sorts of
compactifications would be a very long list indeed. Therefore a few
examples out of many produced by a whole industry of finding strange
black hole solutions must suffice. Other kinds of charges have been
considered; for example black holes with D-0- and D-6-brane charge [
Shein.,97 ] [ Pierre,97 ] , or D-0- and D-4-branes [ John. et al,96 ] .
Other dimensions have been treated; for example @xmath [
Birm./Sachs/Sen,97 ] [ Taejin,97 ] and @xmath [ Gegen./Kuns.,97 ] .

#### 5.4 Hawking Decay

Charges and anti charges can annihilate each other. For example two
D-strings combine with a D- @xmath -brane @xmath resulting in one
D-string with left and right moving momentum. Open strings with @xmath
units of momentum @xmath can combine with left moving strings carrying
@xmath units of momentum resulting in closed strings with @xmath and
total mass @xmath which in turn can leave the D-branes and tunnel
through the outer horizon in case of a black hole. The emission of
charged particles ( @xmath ) is suppressed because their momentum has to
be quantised in units of @xmath which needs the right numbers @xmath and
@xmath of momentum units that happen to combine and results in a quite
massive particle @xmath anyway. On emission of charged particles see [
Gubser/Kleb.,96,8 ] . The decay rate @xmath is dependent on the mass
@xmath of the emitted particle and the interaction Hamiltonian @xmath
has to be calculated with the string amplitude for the joining of open
strings. This amplitude @xmath is calculated “on the disc” as is
familiar from bosonic string theory. If the (say) two colliding open
strings are a bosonic one and a fermionic one the emitted particle will
be a fermion. Then the calculation of the D-brane decay to lowest order
in string coupling means calculation of the disc amplitude where one
bosonic and one fermionic Vertex operator are on the boundary of the
disc and a fermionic closed string vertex operator is put into the bulk
of the disc. On fermionic decay see [ Gubser,97 ] and [ Das et al,97 ] .
@xmath is the string coupling constant, thus @xmath , and in order to
have @xmath and @xmath we require @xmath [ Hash./Kleb.,96 ] . Denoting
the emission process for the configuration of branes as @xmath one may
write:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (191)
  -- -------- -- -------

If the initial state is not known an averaging over initial states will
be required. This is the very step that leads to the thermal character
of the radiation because the averaging over the initial states
introduces the occupation number of the left and right moving
oscillators as @xmath of @xmath as given in equation ( 40 ) [
Callan/Malda.,96 ] [ Dhar et al,96 ] [ Das/Mathur,96,6 ] . The summing
over the final states leads simply to the product of left and right
occupation numbers. Averaging and summing leads to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (192)
  -- -------- -- -------

as well and this results with @xmath in

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (193)
  -- -------- -- -------

[ Das/Mathur,96,6 ] .

Due to time symmetry, the formulae hold for absorption and emission but
are derived only for low energy radiation because we still need the
limit of large but near extremal configurations for the simplifications
made. Thus, the Compton wavelength of the radiation is far bigger than
the Schwarzschild radius. The condition @xmath can be avoided but the
calculations are involved and beyond the scope of the present work ( [
Dhar et al,96 ] [ Das/Mathur,96,6 ]
[ Das/Mathur,96,7 ] [ Malda./Strom.,96,9 ] ). In @xmath dimensions for
near extremal black holes and in the dilute gas approximation (although
@xmath is not necessary) holds for the decay rate of the string and
D-brane configurations into S-wave scalar particles (compare equation (
39 ):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (194)
  -- -------- -- -------

because [ Malda./Strom.,96,9 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (195)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is an effective coupling between left and right moving
oscillators. Thus, the observer at spatial infinity cannot distinguish
between the semi classical black hole with its grey body radiation and
the configurations of strings and D-branes. Both look the same even if
observed in the high energy radiation.

The configuration of the branes is a bound system and so the vibrations
of the strings are only inside the D-5-branes or D-6-branes for IIB and
IIA respectively. Therefore not all closed strings in 10 dimensions can
be absorbed [ Das/Mathur,96,6 ] . Only the ones that are scalars in the
uncompactified spacetime are not suppressed. This fits to the
semi-classical result that at low energies scalars are attracted by the
black hole but vector particles and gravitons are repelled by a so
called “centrifugal barrier”. The grey body spectrum of rotating black
holes has been investigated by [ Gubser/Kleb.,96,9 ] [ Cvetic/Larsen,97
] [ Youm,97 ] .

#### 5.5 Domains of Applicability

In order to ensure validity of the statistical approximations the
charges @xmath have to be large ( @xmath ). On the other hand, in order
to avoid large open string loop corrections to the perturbative brane
picture (Hawking decay, scattering) we would like @xmath . Both
conditions are possible simultaneously in the limits @xmath , @xmath but
@xmath const. However, having @xmath for simplification and the charges
@xmath comparable to each other, the metrics like ( 153 ) for example
imply that for the D-branes for example we need @xmath ( @xmath for
momentum, the power of g depends on the power of g in the mass formulae)
in order to model a black hole, i.e. in order to have the Schwarzschild
radius larger than the string length @xmath . No BPS properties extend
the range of validity of the D-brane picture in the non extremal cases.
Thus, at about @xmath string length @xmath gravitational radius ( @xmath
), which is called the correspondence point [ Horo./Polch.,96 ] , we are
in between the domain of validity of the D-brane description ( @xmath )
and the black hole region ( @xmath ). The domain of validity of the
models encountered seems to be very large though because not only does
the statics (entropies and temperatures) of the semi-classical theory
and M-theory agree but we found agreement of the dynamics as well
(decay, scattering). This implies that the open string loop corrections
are somehow suppressed (by a background of open strings suspect [
Callan/Malda.,96 ] ) and that the near BPS D-brane picture — however it
actually looks like at @xmath — is valid in the near extremal black hole
region as well. Ranges of applicability and where the D-brane
description and the semi-classical one agree and disagree are further
discussed in [ Hawk./Tayl.,76 ] [ Dowker et al,96 ] [ Larsen,97 ] . In
fact, closer investigation reveals that there are phase transitions to
be considered if we want to describe non extremal black holes that are
not near extremal. [ Mathur,97 ] for example varied compactification
moduli so that the string theoretical description breaks down when the
curvature comes close to the string length scale. He found that it
becomes entropically advantageous for the configuration of branes and
strings to rearrange when the correspondence point at @xmath is crossed.
What has been vibrations in the @xmath region can be turned into
solitonic 5-branes for example. This is a phase transition because the
degrees of freedom change. That this transition is negligible for near
extremal black holes shows only that the degeneracy does not change much
for those near stable configurations during the phase transition
although the question of how the configurations look like at strong
coupling might have a surprising answer for all black holes — whether
non extremal or extremal.

#### 5.6 Remarks on Storage and Evolution of Information

The discussion of whether the information is stored at the singularity
or on the event horizon is not resolved yet because one is not sure how
the weakly coupled D-brane configurations look like in the strong
coupling region where they model black holes. This issue lies at the
heart of the information loss problem. The sources of the RR charges are
at the singularity and the D-branes are the carriers of the RR charges.
Thus the strong coupling limit of the D-brane arrangement, which is
expected to be not larger than the string length, should be at the
singularity. But on the other hand, the thermo dynamics of black holes
implies that the information is stored near the horizon because there
the black hole interacts with external probes. Moreover, the grey body
factors are due to a filtering outside the black hole, so the
information should be accessible there as well as if the black holes
store the information in long hair on the event horizon. If the
information is near the singularity, how does it get to the surface ?
This is addressed by [ Hotta,97 ] as the problem of “… the mechanism of
carrying out the information to the outside…” and he suggests a very
mechanical mechanism indeed (see below).

Susskind and others think of the information as being stored in a shell
between the event horizon and a stretched horizon about one string
length further away [ Sussk. et al,93 ] [ Sussk.,93,7 ] [
Sussk./Thor.,94 ] [ Sussk.,93,8 ]
[ Sussk./Uglum,94 ] . The stretched horizon was defined as [
Sussk.,93/94 ] the location where the local Unruh temperature (formula (
35 )) equals the Hagedorn temperature which is the temperature above
which the energy does not go into more and more excitations of the
strings (temperature is not increased anymore) but leads to longer and
longer strings (a phase transition (!)). [ Sen,95 ] showed that this is
equivalent to the definition of the stretched horizon as the location
where the theory of the string world sheet becomes strongly coupled.
Susskind put forward the idea of a “holographic” world, meaning that the
3+1 dimensional world has so few degrees of freedom that a 2+1
dimensional description on its 2+1 dimensional boundary is sufficient to
account for everything [ Sussk.,95 ] . His argument uses an idea due to
t’Hooft [ ’t Hooft,93 ] based on Bekenstein’s observation that the
maximum entropy of a region of space is realised by a black hole which
suggests a mapping of its microstates onto the 2 dimensional event
horizon because the entropy and the area of the horizon are
proportional. I recommend Susskind’s work here because he gives an
argument involving black holes and their microstates due to string
theory that is moreover in parts very accessible even for people without
much knowledge of the related physics [ Sussk.,95 ] .

‘t Hooft took the Planck instead of the string length and derived the
thermodynamics with help of scalar fields living outside the black hole
[ ’t Hooft,85 ] . t’Hooft proposed an S-matrix approach which is
necessarily unitary. The first S-matrix ansatz showed that the
gravitational interaction between ingoing particles and outgoing Hawking
radiation can act as a mechanism to recover the information. The effect
is a shock wave and outgoing trajectories are shifted [ Dray/Hooft,85 ]
[ ’t Hooft,96 ] . Hawking did not take into account that the particles
of the in- and outgoing radiations alter the metric. Particles that fall
to the event horizon have very high energy and therefore the
interactions with outgoing particles should not be neglected. Coming
from S-matrix considerations in gravity [ Haro,97 ] rediscovered the
action of bosonic string theory. Hence all these suggestions rather
complete than contradict each other.

[ Hotta,97 ] describes the gravitational collapse as a phase transition
starting at the centre of the collapsing body where the degeneracy
pressure of any entropy carrying mass is overcome first. A body of so
called “Planck solid” develops pushing the mass (and the information
with it) in form of a layer of string gas outside the Schwarzschild
radius. This gas is then between stretched and Planck horizons and leads
to Hawking radiation with the inside of the black hole being smooth.

[ Horo./Marolf,96 ] describe the information as being carried by modes
that live only inside the event horizon but that stretch between it and
the singularity and do not travel into other asymptotically flat
spacetimes beyond the singularity. There are a large number of such
modes that leave the event horizon smooth. It is shown how these modes
are generated at the singularity where the RR charges sit. These
interior modes are inhomogeneous in the internal (compactified)
dimensions and the whole picture of these modes can be thought of as
being like the field of a shell of charge in electrostatics. The field
is trivial inside but non-trivial outside. Here one finds an
“inside-out” line element, i.e. with increasing @xmath one gets closer
to the singularity, and for these modes the fields outside instead of
the inside are trivial. The modes would have to be faster than light in
order to carry information from the singularity to the event horizon.
This is overcome by the topology having closed timelike loops (these are
loops that are timelike along every section, so time repeats itself over
and over for bodies with such worldlines).

Black hole complementarity allows us to have two different descriptions
simultaneously. One of them may carry the information on the event
horizon and the other one inside the black hole. The D-brane picture
shows a possible origin of this complementarity. Everything that falls
onto the event horizon is turned into open strings on the branes which
are — in this description — at the event horizon at say @xmath where we
have put the carriers of the charges. In order to compare the classical
picture with the D-brane picture one has to transform the coordinates
because the system with the @xmath from above does not cover the inside
of the black hole (see the discussion after equation ( 154 )). By
falling inside the black hole the closed strings are turned into open
ones on the branes and the ongoings inside the black hole are actually
interactions of the open strings on the branes. No information will be
lost. At first it seems strange that for example human observers and
their measurement devices should not realise that they hit the branes
and are turned into open strings because the equivalence principle says
that they feel nothing unusual but the approaching singularity. On the
other hand, in the model of the holographic universe, the observer has
always been 2+1 dimensional. The D-brane picture might be a crucial step
in finding the mapping between the 3+1 dimensional description and the
2+1 dimensional holographic one.

The maybe most radical position is taken by [ Amati,97 ] who claims that
not only the thermal spectrum but the black hole itself, its event
horizon and the whole causal spacetime description are only due to an
averaging over initial states that basically equals a classical
treatment. Quantum mechanically the black hole does not exist as such.
This reminds of (M)atrix and twistor theories which treat spacetime as
an emergent classical limit. With the discussion of section ( 2.1 ) in
mind one might like to ask whether the event horizons exist only with a
“overwhelming probability for systems with a large number of degrees of
freedom”.

## Part IV

### 6 Conclusions

We have seen that the semi-classical descriptions and the stringy ones
of black holes and their thermodynamics lead to very similar results.
The string theoretical descriptions are the ones that can account for
the microstates which are topologically and geometrically well
understood (at least at weak coupling). The agreement in statics and
dynamics for the extremal and near extremal regions is striking and this
suggests the fundamental nature and validity of some findings for all
black holes. For example the two horizons both seem to have their own
thermodynamics. A general non extremal and not near extremal black hole
can not yet be described with M-theory because the string theoretical
approach might not be sufficient or at least has to be altered
considerably due to phase transitions. The underlying superconformal
field theory is not yet found in detail.

Although there are strong hints in favour for the unitarity of black
hole evolution it is too early to decide in favour for any one of the
many models and it will be too early as long as there is no agreement
over the exact form of the entropy of a say small sized, simple
Schwarzschild black hole and no understanding of what its microstates
are. As long as we have good results only near extremal, all one knows
is that the theories work so well in that region because the
shortcommings they have are negligible there. What we may expect is that
both — semi-classical and superstring theory — will go on and try to
reproduce each others results until the theory that is valid even for a
simple and small black hole is found. This theory will be a major step
forward for all those reasons for which the simple black holes are so
famous — like the question of how many degrees of freedom has the
universe — and because one expects a consistent theory of quantum
gravity.

Black holes are likely to go the way the hydrogen atom did: From
“oh-so-strange and fundamental” to just another “chemicists thing”.
Probably, the authors of popular science, who could make capital out of
concentrating on the strange things that seem to happen when one takes
the theory of general relativity at the points where serious scientists
only concentrate because they expect it to break down, will see all
those other universes and time machines disappear. Then we are left with
grey bodies called “black” holes because the gravitation is at some
distance strong enough to accelerate light inwards – oh well, so what ?

### 7 Acknowledgements

I would like to thank my supervisor Professor David Bailin for his
guidance through my MSc course. I am grateful to him for many helpful
discussions. I am grateful to Doctor Mark B. Hindmarsh who had always
time for my questions and who helped me with the computers. As well
there is to mention the support provided by the physics departement of
the University of Sussex allowing me to attend the String ’97 conference
where I had many useful conversations that contributed to this
MSc-thesis.

### 8 General Bibliography and References

To be recommended as texts on general relativity:

-   Foster J. and Nightingale J.D. A short course in General Relativity
    , Springer Verlag, New York 1995

-   Hawking S.W. and Ellis G.F.R. The large scale structure of the
    Universe , Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 1973

-   Wald R.M. General Relativity , University of Chicago Press, Chicago
    1984

-   Wald R.M. Quantum Field Theory in Curved Space-Time and Black Hole
    Thermodynamics , University of Chicago Press, Chicago 1994

Texts for the introduction into superstring theory:

-   Bailin D. and Love A. Supersymmetric Gauge Theory and String Theory
    , Grad. Student Series in Physics, IOP Publishing, Bristol 1994

-   Green M., Schwarz J. and Witten E. Superstring Theory , Cambridge
    Univ. Press, 1987

-   Kaku M. Introduction to Superstrings , Grad. texts in Contemporary
    Phys., Springer Verlag,New York 1988

-   Kaku M. Strings, Conformal Fields, and Topology: An Introduction ,
    Springer Verlag, 1991

-   Rosenbaum Relativity,Supersymmetry and Strings , A., Plenum Press,
    New York 1990
