### Chapter 1 Introduction

“Undoubtedly one of the greatest difficulties, if not the greatest of
all, in the way of obtaining an understanding of the real distribution
of the stars in space, lies in our uncertainty about the amount of loss
suffered by the light on its way to the observer.”

— Jacobus Cornelius Kapteyn, 1909

#### 1.1 Background

Quasars are the most luminous and exotic objects known in the universe
and are the only objects observable in large numbers at sizeable
redshifts. The most distant quasars known at present have redshifts of
@xmath , corresponding to epochs at which the universe was less than 10%
of its present age. The standard model (Lynden-Bell, 1969) of a possible
supermassive ( @xmath ) black hole fueled by an accretion disk, provides
a laboratory for studying the physical processes of matter under extreme
conditions.

Quasars are of great importance in astronomy. The fact that they can be
seen at early epochs in the universe provides constraints on models for
galaxy formation and evolution of the large scale structure. Recently,
Katz @xmath (1994) have shown that the inferred quasar number density at
high redshifts can be easily accommodated in hierarchical galaxy
formation theories such as CDM in which galaxies form first followed by
larger scale structures. As shown by Loeb (1993), the existence of
quasars at high redshift implies rapid collapse and very efficient
cooling of high mass, dark matter haloes to form black holes on
relatively short timescales of @xmath Gyr.

High redshift quasars provide background light sources to probe the
nature and matter content of the intervening medium. This has been
achieved through two means. First, the existence of galaxies,
proto-galaxies and gas clouds absorb the light from background quasars
giving rise to absorption-line features in quasar spectra.
Absorption-line studies have provided important constraints on a wealth
of physical parameters, including evolution of the neutral hydrogen
content in the universe. Second, gravitational lensing of background
quasars where light is deflected by intervening matter, can be used to
probe mass concentrations in galaxies, haloes and on galaxy cluster
scales. Quasars therefore remain an important tool in cosmology for
examining the distribution and evolutionary history of matter in the
universe.

Despite recent attempts for improving selection techniques for finding
quasa- rs, a majority of quasar surveys have been based on criteria
which assume strong blue continua or a UV-excess (eg. Schmidt & Green,
1983). Such surveys however are believed to be seriously incomplete as
indicated by the increasing numbers of quasars being discovered in X-ray
and radio surveys (see Crampton, 1991 for a review). Optical studies are
biased against quasars with weak optical continuum emission. Strong
evidence for a population of optically-weak quasars has recently been
provided by optical follow-up observations of complete radio-selected
samples (eg. Kollgaard @xmath 1995 and references therein; Webster
@xmath 1995). A significant proportion of these sources also have
optical continuum slopes much redder than those quasars selected by
standard optical techniques. We hypothesise that the most probable
explanation is reddening by dust (Webster @xmath 1995).

Any given amount of dust along the line-of-sight is expected to
drastically extinguish the observed UV-optical flux leading to a
selection bias. Such dust may be located in the local quasar
environment, somewhere along the line-of-sight; for example in
intervening dusty galaxies, or a combination of both. If a majority of
quasars are obscured by line-of-sight dust, say in intervening galaxies,
then studies which use bright optical quasars to detect absorption lines
and gravitational lens systems will have underestimated their true
abundance. Therefore, an understanding of the effects of dust on quasars
is essential. Whatever the mechanism for the optical reddening, if the
bulk of quasars remain undetected, then all statistical studies of
evolution in the early universe may be seriously incomplete.

In this thesis, I will explore two issues: the problem of incompleteness
in optical quasar surveys due to obscuration by dust, and the
interpretation of the relatively red optical continua observed in a
complete sample of radio quasars (the ‘Parkes sample’). The amount of
dust involved, both along the line-of-sight and in the quasar environs
is investigated. A number of predictions of the dust reddening
hypothesis for Parkes quasars are presented and compared with
observations. A more specific outline of the thesis follows.

##### 1.1.1 Plan of this Thesis

This thesis is divided into two parts. Part I (Chapters 2, 3 and 4) is
concerned with the observational consequences of an intervening
cosmological dust component and uses the Parkes sample to constrain the
amount of dust involved. Chapter 2 explores the dependence of the
spatial extent of foreground dust distributions on obscuration of
background sources. We show that ‘large-scale’ diffusely distributed
dust (eg. on galaxy cluster scales) is more effective at obscuring
background sources than dust confined to the visible extent of normal
galaxies. In Chapter 3, we simulate obscuration by dust located in
galaxies randomly distributed along the line-of-sight. We use a range of
parameters that may describe the dust properties of galaxies to explore
implications on optical counts of quasars. In Chapter 4, we explore the
effects of more complicated models of dusty line-of-sight galaxies where
the dust content evolves. Implications on quasar and absorption-line
statistics are investigated. We use the Parkes sample to constrain
evolutionary and physical properties of dust in intervening systems. The
contribution of line-of-sight galactic dust to the reddening observed in
this sample is quantified.

Part II (Chapters 5, 6 and 7) examines the continuum properties of
Parkes quasars in the framework of a number of absorption and emission
mechanisms to assess the importance of extinction by dust. Chapter 5
explores two classes of theories to explain the reddening observed:
‘intrinsically red’ AGN emission models, and dust extinction models.
Simple models are developed and tested against the available data. For
the dust model, we explore the effects of dust on soft X-rays and
compare our predictions with soft X-ray data for Parkes sources.
Possible physical dust properties are also discussed. In Chapter 6, we
consider the possibility that a ‘red’ stellar component from the host
galaxies of Parkes quasars contributes to the observed reddening. We
quantify this contribution using a new, unbiased spectral fitting
method. In Chapter 7, we present a near-infrared polarisation study of
Parkes quasars to distinguish between two models for the reddening: the
synchrotron emission model and the dust model. Combined with spectral
and photometric data, the observations are used to constrain various
emission and dust absorption models.

All key results are summarised in Chapter 8. Some avenues for further
research suggested from my work on Parkes quasars is also discussed.

#### 1.2 The Study of Cosmic Dust

The first indications that photometric observations of astronomical
objects were affected by dust date back to the 1930s when stellar
observations by Trumpler (1930) and Stebbins @xmath (1934) showed that
distant parts of the galaxy were obscured by interstellar dust. Since
then, observations have established that dust is an important
constituent of galaxies. Its presence has significantly contributed to
our understanding of star formation rates and on the evolution of galaxy
populations with cosmic time (Franceschini @xmath 1994; De Zotti @xmath
1995). Recent observations of local galaxies that are suspected of
having intense regions of star formation are also observed to be very
dusty (see Rieke & Lebofsky, 1979 for a review). Dust is crucial in star
forming regions in that it strongly absorbs the UV radiation responsible
for molecular dissociations and provides the site for the formation of
@xmath - the most abundant molecule in star forming clouds. Dust also
controls the temperature of the interstellar medium (ISM). The initial
cooling of dense molecular clouds through dust-gas interactions enhances
gravitational collapse allowing star formation to occur.

The main questions about dust refer generally to its composition, grain
size and temperature. Our knowledge primarily comes from observations of
the ISM of our Galaxy and simulations in the laboratory. The grains
forming cosmic dust consist of silicates, graphite, dirty ices and heavy
metals and range in size from @xmath - @xmath m (Draine, 1981). Grains
typical of the ISM of our galaxy form from the condensation of heavy
elements initially synthesised in supernovae and grow by accretion in
dense molecular clouds, depending crucially on the environment in the
ISM. Grains are expected to be efficiently destroyed by supernova shocks
in the ISM of galaxies (McKee @xmath 1987). Recently however, studies
have shown that molecular star forming clouds can supply the total ISM
dust in less than @xmath years, at a rate faster than it is destroyed by
supernovae (Wang, 1991a and references therein).

Dust absorbs the UV-optical radiation in star-forming regions and
re-radiates absorbed energy in the far-infrared part of the spectrum (
@xmath m-1mm). Observations by the Infrared Astronomy Satellite (IRAS)
have shown that radiation by dust from galaxies is comparable to what we
see in the visual band (Soifer, Houck & Neugebauer, 1986). Since dust in
mostly made of heavy elements, its evolution is directly connected to
chemical evolution in the ISM of galaxies. Consequently, observations at
infrared wavelengths have contributed significantly towards our
understanding of the evolutionary properties of galaxies and their
contribution to the integrated background radiation (Wang 1991a; 1991b).

#### 1.3 The Interaction of Radiation with Dust and Observational
Diagnostics

The two major processes in which dust grains can alter the transmission
of electromagnetic radiation are absorption and scattering. These
effects, collectively referred to as extinction, are the best studied
property of cosmic dust since they can be accurately determined over a
range of wavelengths. A determination of the extinction properties are
essential for correcting astronomical measurements for the effects of
dust. Other very important diagnostics of dust are its emission
properties, both in spectral features and continuum emission in the
infrared, and its polarisation properties. These properties are briefly
discussed below. An excellent and thorough analysis of the physics can
be found in Hoyle & Wickramasinghe (1991).

##### 1.3.1 Extinction

Extinction of radiation at optical wavelengths by dust is largely due to
scattering, with the effects of absorption becoming important at shorter
wavelengths. Light from a source shining through dust along the
line-of-sight has its flux reduced according to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the flux that would be received at Earth in the absence
of dust, @xmath is the actual flux observed and @xmath is defined as the
optical depth at the wavelength observed. This is derived by solving the
radiative transfer equation for a homogeneous slab of dust. The
extinction in magnitudes is related to the optical depth by @xmath . The
extinction law is defined by specified values of @xmath at a range of
wavelengths and can generally be expressed as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath relates to the amount of dust and the function @xmath
depends on the optical properties of grains.

Extinction laws in our galaxy are primarily determined from observations
of stars by comparing the spectral energy distribution of a reddened
star with that of an unreddened star of similar spectral-type. The
galactic interstellar extinction laws of Savage & Mathis (1979) and
Seaton (1979) are commonly used to model the effects of dust and correct
astronomical observations. Pei (1992) has obtained excellent empirical
fits for extinction curves derived from previous studies for the Milky
Way, LMC and SMC. These are shown in Fig. 1.1 , where the extinction is
measured relative to that observed in the @xmath -band, ie. @xmath . The
striking feature is the almost universal behaviour at wavelengths @xmath
Å @xmath . The “mean” interstellar extinction curve derived in our
galaxy varies by a factor of @xmath in extinction over the range @xmath
m and exhibits both continuous extinction and a strong feature known as
the “2175Å @xmath bump” over which the extinction varies appreciably.
This feature decreases in strength going from the Milky Way to the LMC
and SMC. This bump is believed to be due to graphite, however its origin
is not as yet well understood.

It is remarkable that a recent study by Calzetti @xmath (1994) finds no
evidence for a 2175Å @xmath bump feature in the extinction curves of
nearby galaxies (see dashed curve in Fig. 1.1 ). These authors also find
the extinction laws for a number of galaxies to be considerably flatter
as a function of wavelength in the UV, with extinction measures smaller
by factors of @xmath at @xmath Å @xmath than those in the Milky Way.
This behaviour is commonly referred to as “gray extinction”. They
attribute the “grayness” as being due to their method of derivation.
Their method relies on examining correlations between the Balmer line
ratio ( @xmath ; see section 5.5.3 ) and optical continuum reddening.
Each of these quantities is expected to arise from different physical
regions in the galaxies: the hydrogen lines from hot ionizing stars
associated with dusty regions, and the continuum from older stellar
populations which may have had time to drift away from the dustier
regions. Thus, the continuum measurements may be weighted mostly by
regions of lowest extinction. The absence of the 2175Å @xmath bump
feature has been interpreted as being either due to effects of
scattering of light within extended dust-regions into the line-of-sight
(therefore reducing the effective extinction in the UV), or to a
chemical composition of grains different from that in the Milky Way.

There have been many efforts devoted to the understanding of the
composition and optical properties of dust grains giving rise to the
various extinction laws, in particular that of the Milky Way (Mathis,
Rumpl & Nordsiek, 1977; Drain & Lee, 1984). These authors have studied
different chemical mixtures to reproduce the Milky Way extinction law
and as yet no definite agreement exists. Draine & Lee (1984) find that
for a @xmath graphite and silicate mixture, the extinction (or the
function @xmath in Eqn. 1.2 ) at optical wavelengths varies as a
function of wavelength as @xmath , where @xmath -2. This is derived
using the optical properties of grains and the theory of light
scattering which involves a solution of Maxwell’s equations. The index
@xmath depends on the characteristic grain size “ @xmath ”, and its
dependence has been studied via the extinction efficiencies @xmath of
spherical dielectric grains (eg. Greenberg, 1968). In the
optical–to–near-infrared, the extinction law in our galaxy approaches
the characteristic behaviour @xmath . This is expected when the sizes of
individual grains become comparable with the wavelength of light (
@xmath ), where the extinction efficiency is given by @xmath . For
comparison, when the grain sizes are very small compared with the
wavelength ( @xmath ), the extinction efficiency varies as @xmath ,
known as the Rayleigh scattering regime. When @xmath , @xmath levels off
asymptotically to about twice the geometric cross-section of the grain.
Hence, larger grain sizes produce a flatter dependence with wavelength.

Approaching higher energies such as X-rays, and depending on the grain
size, grains become somewhat transparent. Using graphite and silicate
mixtures, Laor & Draine (1993) show that the extinction decreases by at
least two orders of magnitude from 0.1-10keV (see Fig. 5.9 ). At
energies @xmath keV, the dust extinction law becomes the same as if all
grains were composed of neutral atoms in the gas phase rather than
possibly being ionized. In this case, atomic X-ray absorption will
dominate the optical depth. At soft energies ( @xmath keV), the X-ray
absorption cross-section is dominated mostly by H and He which, given a
large neutral fraction, can attenuate the X-ray flux by more than 80%,
even for relatively low values of the hydrogen column density (ie.
@xmath ). At @xmath keV however, absorption becomes dominated by metals
(primarily the K-edges of oxygen and carbon and to a lesser extent Ne,
Mg, Si, S and Fe - Morrison & McCammon, 1983). See section 5.6.1 for
more details. Metals in dust grains can be shielded from the effects of
X-ray absorption, however, modifications of only a few percent to their
absorption cross-section are expected, even at soft X-ray energies
(Fireman, 1974).

##### 1.3.2 Other Diagnostics

In addition to general extinction over a continuous wavelength range,
the presence of spectral absorption features can be used to confirm the
presence of dust, and also provide information regarding the
compositions and nature of the grains. Apart from the 2175Å @xmath bump
in our galaxy, strong @xmath m and @xmath m absorption/emission features
are almost always seen in our ISM and the ISM of a number of external
galaxies when the dust is optically thin to its own emission, ie. @xmath
. These features have been attributed to silicate grains with sizes
@xmath m (Laor & Draine, 1993). These authors also show that their
absence in the near-infrared spectra of active galaxies (including
luminous quasars) provides important constraints on the chemical and
physical properties of dust in such sources (see section 1.5.2 for more
details).

Infrared (IR) continuum emission from dust grains can arise through two
means. First, by absorption and heating by UV photons and subsequent
re-radiation at infrared wavelengths and second, by steady state
emission or fluorescence. The latter process occurs for far-infrared
wavelengths, @xmath m. An important diagnostic of this emission is in
the determination of dust temperatures and/or masses. These can be
calculated by assuming that dust grains are in thermal equilibrium with
their surroundings so that the emission can be approximated as a
blackbody. The blackbody radiation law can be written

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Given measurements of the infrared flux at two or more frequencies, the
dust temperature @xmath can be determined by fitting equation 1.3. In
the determination of dust masses however, we define an additional
quantity called the dust emissivity, @xmath , with units @xmath per gram
of dust. From galactic observations at sub-mm wavelengths, @xmath (Chini
& Krügel, 1994). As an example, let us consider an IR-source at some
redshift @xmath , whose observed IR flux is due to thermal dust
emission. The dust mass, assuming the dust is optically thin to its own
emission with effective temperature @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are the observed and rest frame frequencies
respectively, @xmath is the dust emissivity defined above, @xmath the
luminosity distance and @xmath the observed flux. The factor @xmath is
due to the decrease in frequency bandpass in the observer’s frame with
increasing redshift. Depending on the temperature @xmath and emission
frequency @xmath , there are two limiting behaviours for the blackbody
radiation law (Eqn. 1.3 ) which are commonly used to simplify
calculations. One limit is the well known Rayleigh-Jean’s law and is
applicable in the low frequency limit:

  -- -- -- -------
           (1.5)
  -- -- -- -------

In the high frequency limit, we have Wien’s law:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

As a general rule, the blackbody law allows us to approximate the
effective dust temperature through the relation:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the wavelength at which the emission peaks (ie. where
@xmath is a maximum). If dust is to survive, it is estimated that grains
cannot exceed a temperature of @xmath K after which evaporation or
sublimation will occur. Thus, we expect dust to emit only at wavelengths
@xmath m. Evidence for hot dust approaching the limiting temperature
@xmath K is believed to exist in the environments of quasars and other
active galaxies, giving rise to the characteristic near-IR bump observed
in the range @xmath m (Sanders @xmath 1989).

Polarisation of radiation produced by scattering or transmission through
aligned dust particles provides a useful diagnostic for determining the
size distribution of dust grains, the conditions under which grains can
be aligned (eg. magnetic field geometry) and most importantly, the
geometry of scattering regions (Whittet, 1992 and references therein).
In the Milky Way, where the most accurate determinations of
dust-polarisation have been made, the polarisation is of order a few
percent. The polarisation properties of dust are less well determined
than those of extinction, however, optical polarisation coincident with
extinction or IR emission may confirm that the latter processes are due
to dust.

To summarise, the difficulties in drawing a consistent picture of the
interaction of dust grains with radiation lie in their chemical and
physical properties, such as composition and grain size distribution.
These properties, which are primarily determined from extinction
measures, are very sensitive to the geometrical distribution of dust in
galaxies and hence subject to considerable uncertainty.

#### 1.4 The Cosmological Distribution of Dust

Infrared and optical studies of local galaxies have provided a good
description of their dust content, however, the study of dust at high
redshift has yet to produce conclusive results. Despite many efforts for
detecting high redshift ( @xmath ) galaxies in the optical, it is
suspected that large numbers are obscured by dust associated with
intense star formation activity (Djorgovski @xmath 1993; Franceschini,
1994). Our knowledge regarding high redshift dust (at @xmath ) has
primarily come from two sources. First, by direct imaging of
intrinsically luminous, high redshift radio galaxies at far-IR to mm
wavelengths, and second, from studies of QSO absorption line systems.
The observational status is given below.

##### 1.4.1 Dust in Local Galaxies

Various morphological and spectral studies of nearby galaxies have
demonstrated that the bulk of their IR luminosity originates from
extended emission by dust. The local far-infrared luminosity density is
estimated to be about one-third of the optical luminosity density (eg.
Saunders @xmath 1990). This emission has lead to estimates of galactic
dust masses in the range @xmath - @xmath , ie. @xmath of the total mass
in a typical galaxy (Rieke & Lebofsky, 1979). Furthermore, Zaritsky
(1994a) has provided strong evidence for diffuse dust haloes extending
to distances @xmath kpc from the centers of galaxies. This was provided
by studies of the colours of distant galaxies seen through the haloes of
nearby spirals, where background galaxies at smaller projected
separations were statistically redder than those in outer regions. If
such a diffuse component proves to be common, then the local dust
content is expected to be greater by almost an order of magnitude than
previously estimated using IR emission alone.

In cases where IR emission is not observed, measures of the dust optical
depth using surface photometry can provide a useful diagnostic for
determining the dust content of galaxies. This method is based on
statistical studies of the dependence of optical surface brightness on
the viewing angle of a spiral disk. For a transparent disk, the surface
brightness depends sensitively on inclination, while for an opaque
“dusty” disk it does not (Holmberg, 1958). This allows limits to be
placed on the dust optical depth. One caveat however is that this method
is limited to galaxies of relatively high surface brightness. Recent
studies predict central @xmath -band optical depths for spiral galaxies
in the range @xmath (Giovanelli @xmath 1994 and references therein). In
E/SO galaxies, extinction is not as well studied, though not believed to
be as large. Goudfrooij @xmath (1994a; 1994b; 1995) suggest there is a
diffuse component with @xmath . These optical depth properties still
remain an open question.

##### 1.4.2 High Redshift Dust and Evolution

Luminous radio galaxies can be studied out to large cosmological
distances. Recently, a number of radio galaxies at redshifts @xmath have
been observed to emit a strong far-IR to mm continuum. If the emission
is assumed to be thermal emission from dust, then dust masses comparable
to those of local galaxies are implied (Chini & Krügel, 1994 and
references therein). The detection of dusty objects at @xmath is
puzzling. One might expect that the majority of objects at high
redshifts (corresponding to epochs only @xmath of the age of the
universe) still contain a large reservoir of primordial gas. The
presence of dust implies an early episode of star formation and provides
a step towards understanding the interstellar medium, and hence
formation and evolution of galaxies at high redshift.

Strong evidence for the existence of dust at high redshift is provided
by studies of QSO absorption line systems. The highest neutral hydrogen
column density systems known as the damped Ly- @xmath absorbers are
believed to be the progenitors of present day galactic disks.
Observations of trace metals such as Ni, Cr and Zn in these systems have
provided an opportunity to study chemical and dust evolution in galaxies
at high redshift (Meyer & Roth, 1990; Pettini @xmath 1994; 1997).

The relative strengths of various metal ions in the spectra of
background quasars have been used to infer the amount of metal depletion
in the gas phase and hence the amount of dust assuming depletion onto
grains. Recent studies of metal absorption line systems towards
redshifts @xmath have indicated metallicities which are @xmath solar and
dust-to-gas ratios less than @xmath of the galactic value (Meyer, Welty
and York, 1989; Pettini @xmath 1994). This constraint on the dust-to-gas
ratio is also in agreement with studies by Fall @xmath (1989) who
compared the spectra of quasars that have damped Ly- @xmath with those
that do not. They found that quasars with damped Ly- @xmath absorption
in their spectra had spectral slopes somewhat redder than those without
absorption.

The lower metal abundances in QSO absorption systems relative to those
in the galaxy have been interpreted as evidence for less chemical
enrichment at high @xmath . It is important to note however that such
measurements may be subject to considerable observational bias. Existing
observations of QSOs with damped Ly- @xmath absorption lines are drawn
mostly from optically-selected, magnitude-limited samples and hence, it
is possible than an unrecognised population of highly reddened QSOs may
escape detection due to heavy obscuration by dust in damped Ly- @xmath
systems. Thus, present QSO absorption line studies may only
preferentially pick out chemically unevolved gas. Fall & Pei (1993) have
attempted to correct for this bias, estimating that the true metal and
dust content may be on average 2-3 times greater than that deduced
observationally.

There seems to be considerable difficulty in applying the results of QSO
absorption line studies and high redshift radio galaxy surveys to the
study of primeval galaxies and evolution of their ISM. It may be some
time before large enough, complete statistical samples can be compiled
so to obtain a consistent picture of chemical and dust evolution in the
universe. At present, we must resort to dynamical modelling of stellar
processes in galaxies to gain some insight into this problem (eg. Wang
1991a and references therein).

#### 1.5 Dust and Quasars

In my study of the effects of dust on the properties and identification
of quasars in the optical, I shall investigate two possibilities for its
location. First, I will consider extrinsic or line-of-sight dust
associated with foreground galaxies and second, intrinsic dust or dust
physically associated with the quasars themselves. A brief review of the
status on each of these studies is given below.

##### 1.5.1 Obscuration of Quasars by Intervening Dust

Studies investigating the effects of intervening, cosmologically
distributed dust on background quasars were initially motivated by the
apparent lack of high redshift quasars in the optical (McKee &
Petrosian, 1974; Cheney & Rowan-Robinson, 1981). Based on observations
of individual quasar spectra, colours and counts as a function of
redshift, it was concluded that uniformly distributed intergalactic dust
as distinct from galactic dust was not likely to be a large source of
extinction. From thereon, modelling of this problem assumed all dust to
be situated in clumps or hypothesised dusty galaxies along the
line-of-sight.

Various theoretical studies by Ostriker & Heisler (1984); Heisler &
Ostriker (1988), Fall & Pei (1989, 1993) and Wright (1986, 1990)
conclude that at least @xmath of bright quasars at redshifts @xmath may
be obscured by intervening galactic dust in the optical. A more refined
treatment was undertaken by Wright (1990) who stressed the importance of
galaxy “hardness” on the properties of a quasar sample subject to both
flux and colour selection effects. The term “hardness” depends on the
assumed spatial distribution for dust optical depth through an
individual galaxy. For optical depth profiles which are smooth or
“fuzzy” around the edges (eg. an exponential or King model), the
“hardness” is defined by the magnitude of the central optical depth. For
central @xmath -band optical depths @xmath , galaxies were defined as
being “hard-edged” up to a typical scale radius, while for @xmath ,
galaxies were defined as “soft-edged”. For “sharp-edged” optical depth
profiles (eg. an optical depth which is uniform throughout a finite
projected area and zero outside - as considered by Ostriker & Heisler,
1984), the hardness is defined by the magnitude of this optical depth.
Wright (1990) found that galaxies which are “soft” around the edges will
cause many background quasars to ‘appear’ reddened without actually
removing them from a flux-limited sample.

It is important to note that these studies are extremely model
dependent. The most crucial parameters are the number of absorbing
galaxies involved and their dust properties (eg. individual optical
depths and dust spatial extent). These parameters are presently known to
within a factor of three. Further studies to determine these parameters
are therefore necessary before plausible conclusions regarding the
effects of foreground dust on optical observations of high redshift
quasars can be made.

If published estimates of the effects of foreground dust on optical
studies of quasars are correct, then implications for present
cosmological studies are immense. Studies which use bright optical
quasars to count absorption line systems and gravitational lenses may
have severely underestimated their true abundance. Studies involving
damped Ly- @xmath absorption systems to determine a wealth of physical
parameters such as chemical composition, dust and gas content, and star
formation rates at high redshift, are also likely to be affected (Fall &
Pei, 1993; Pei & Fall, 1995). If substantial numbers of quasars remain
undetected, then a significant fraction of the observed @xmath - and
X-ray background may arise from dust obscured quasars (Heisler &
Ostriker, 1988). More importantly, these quasars would significantly
contribute to the UV photon density at high redshifts, thereby altering
the nature and physical state of the intergalactic medium at early
epochs.

##### 1.5.2 Dust in the Quasar Environment

There are two major lines of study investigating the existence and
properties of dust in the neighbourhood of quasars. The first class of
studies is based on the observed IR emission. It is suggested that the
near-IR “bump” at @xmath m and spectral turnover at @xmath m in a
majority of optically-selected quasars can be attributed to emission by
dust (Neugebauer @xmath 1979; McAlary & Rieke, 1988; Sanders @xmath
1989). In fact, about a third of the total luminosity from quasars is
emitted in the @xmath m range (Sanders @xmath 1989). The most attractive
explanation for this emission is thermal radiation from dust heated by a
central UV-optical continuum source. This is supported by a significant
lack of variability and polarisation in the IR compared to the emission
properties at @xmath m (Sitko & Zhu, 1991). The IR continuum emission
can be fitted with a variety of models: optically thin dust in a
spherical distribution (Barvainis, 1987), optically thick dust in a
torus with equatorial optical depths @xmath on scales less than a few
hundred parsecs (Pier & Krolik, 1992), or dust in a highly warped disk
on much larger scales (Sanders @xmath 1989). These studies are
consistent with a significant number of quasars having their optical
emission substantially reduced, preventing their detection in the
optical.

The second class of studies involve searching for dust from differential
extinction of emission lines in the optical-UV spectra of quasars
(Draine & Bahcall, 1981; MacAlpine, 1985; Netzer & Laor, 1993).
MacAlpine (1985) and Netzer & Laor (1993) conclude that much of the
absorbing dust is likely to be embedded within the narrow line emitting
gas (the NLR) on scales no larger than about a kiloparsec, ie. on scales
a little larger than that of a possible dusty torus. Dust in the NLR is
expected to modify the physical conditions of the emitting gas and
consequently, the continuum spectral slope (see MacAlpine, 1985 for a
review).

Together with studies of the IR continuum, these studies have provided
strong constraints on the possible location for dust in quasars and
other lower luminosity active galactic nuclei (AGN). For quasars, it is
predicted that dust grains are heated to high evaporation temperatures.
Barvainis (1987) has estimated an “evaporation radius” greater than
@xmath pc, ie. scales much larger than the hypothesised broad line
emitting region (BLR). Furthermore, the characteristic turnover at
@xmath m has been shown to imply that a significant fraction of the
thermal IR radiation may be emitted from scales @xmath pc (Edelson,
Malkan & Rieke, 1987). This leaves two possible options for the location
of the dust: a torus and/or NLR clouds, or the quasar host galaxy.

There is remarkable similarity between quasars and other nearby, less
luminous AGN such as Seyferts. The growing importance of dust in Seyfert
galaxies may suggest that at least some quasars should also exhibit
similar properties. Recently, optically thick dust with azimuthal
symmetry such as a torus, has been invoked to explain the difference
between broad and narrow-line AGN in the framework of unified schemes
(Antonucci, 1993). The distribution of this material in a torus can
obscure the central UV-optical continuum source and BLR from direct
view, while emission from the larger scale NLR is unaffected. This is
supported by spectropolarimetric observations showing broad emission
lines in polarized light in narrow line (type-II) Seyfert galaxies.
Further evidence for a torus-shaped dust region is provided by the
observation of ionization cones in several Seyfert galaxies,
demonstrating that the gas in the host galaxy sees an anisotropic
ionizing source. Evidence for dust tori in high redshift quasars is
scarce. However, spectropolarimetric observations revealing the presence
of a hidden BLR, combined with a reddened UV-optical continuum has been
found in two quasars (Hines & Wills, 1992 and Wills @xmath 1992).

##### 1.5.3 Optically Dust-Obscured Quasars

One drawback in the above studies investigating “intrinsic” dust, is
that almost all are based on optically-selected quasar samples. Optical
studies are expected to be heavily biased against significant extinction
by dust. These inevitably show that dust is present and an important
constituent of quasars, however, it is possible that a large population
remains undetected optically due to obscuration by dust. Evidence for
such a population may be provided by studies at wavelengths where no
bias against dust obscuration is expected. There are three possible
wavelength regimes of interest: The infrared, X-rays and the radio. I
shall consider each in turn below.

Near or far-infrared surveys may provide a useful means of detecting
dust obscured quasars. The ideal strategy is to look for intrinsically
luminous point like sources in the IR. Follow-up IR-spectroscopy is then
required for further identification of standard characteristics such as
broad emission lines. The ultraluminous infrared sources detected by the
Infrared Astronomy Satellite (IRAS) are likely candidates for
dust-obscured quasars. These sources have IR luminosities comparable to
those of quasars ( @xmath ) and there is debate about whether such
objects host buried quasars (Hines @xmath 1995 and references therein).
Evidence for such a population has been presented by Hill @xmath (1987)
and Sanders @xmath (1988). Moreover, a large abundance of faint,
possibly dust-obscured quasars is suggested by the IRAS selected sample
of Low @xmath (1989). In this study, FeII emission was shown to be
prominent in quasars with strong IR luminosity relative to their optical
emission, suggesting a medium significantly enriched in metals and dust.
Through an investigation of their radio properties, Lonsdale @xmath
(1995) claim that it is physically plausible for dust enshrouded quasars
to power the IR emission observed from IRAS sources.

X-ray selected samples may provide stronger evidence for an optically
obscured quasar population. Soft X-rays ( @xmath keV) are subject to
considerable absorption by hydrogen and heavy metals (see section 5.6.1
), and hence soft X-ray surveys are expected to be heavily biased. Hard
X-rays ( @xmath keV) however penetrate the dust, and absorption may
become significant only when the gas column density is sufficiently
high, ie. @xmath (Awaki @xmath 1990). Stocke @xmath (1991) found a
factor of almost two orders of magnitude dispersion in the
X-ray-to-optical ratios of an X-ray selected sample as compared to those
selected optically. This scatter may be caused by variable dust
extinction in the optical and in fact supports the claim by McDowell
@xmath (1989) for a possible a correlation between X-ray-to-optical flux
ratio and @xmath colour.

There have been numerous X-ray spectroscopic studies claiming soft X-ray
absorption in excess of that expected from the galaxy in the spectra of
radio-selected quasars (Madejski @xmath 1991; Wilkes @xmath 1992; Elvis
@xmath 1994). Absorptions corresponding to @xmath atoms @xmath were
deduced in a majority of cases. These studies however failed to detect
any associated extinction by dust in the optical. A correlation is
expected at some level, however as will be discussed in section 5.6.1 ,
these separate processes may critically depend on the physical
conditions, locations and geometry of the absorbing gas and dust.

Optical identification of radio-selected sources probably provides the
best technique for detecting dust-obscured quasars, being subject to
fewer possible selection effects than surveys based at X-ray or IR
wavelengths. Criteria for selecting quasars in the radio is primarily
based on their characteristic “flat” spectral energy distribution at GHz
frequencies; @xmath where @xmath . Most of the bright (ie. @xmath Jy)
radio surveys based on this criterion have @xmath of sources identified
with quasars which have optical properties extremely similar to those
selected optically. More than 10% also comprise sources which are highly
polarised and strongly variable at radio to optical wavelengths. These
sources belong to the “Blazar” class of AGN (Angel & Stockman, 1980).
There have been very few radio-surveys specifically aimed towards
finding quasars. Most surveys did not include criteria based on radio
spectral-slope. Both steep and flat-spectrum sources were selected,
where the former comprised the majority of sources and were usually
identified with galaxies. For instance, an optical study of a complete
radio sample with @xmath Jy by Dunlop @xmath (1989) found a quasar
fraction @xmath . Their spectroscopic identifications however are also
significantly incomplete.

Recently, the largest and most complete radio-selected quasar sample has
been compiled by Drinkwater @xmath (1997), initially selected from the
Parkes Catalogue. All sources have flat radio spectra ( @xmath ) and
2.7GHz fluxes @xmath Jy at the epoch of the Parkes survey. Based on a
high identification rate in the optical and near-infrared, this study
may provide crucial evidence for a substantial population of
dust-reddened quasars. A broad and flat distribution in
optical–to–near-IR colour with @xmath as compared to @xmath for an
optically selected sample was found (see Fig. 1.2 ). It is important to
note however that only @xmath of sources in optical-quasar surveys are
radio-loud. It is uncertain then whether the distribution of reddening
in this sample is applicable to samples of radio-quiet QSOs. If so, then
this sample predicts that existing optical quasar-samples may be only
@xmath complete (Webster @xmath 1995).

#### 1.6 Radio-Selected, Optically Reddened Quasars

Radio-selected quasars have optical characteristics very similar to
those selected optically. Recent studies however have found one
exception: as seen from Fig. 1.2 , the large spread in optical–near-IR
colour suggests that not all quasars can be characterised by the lower
envelope cutoff of @xmath . This section gives a brief review of the
previous work aimed at disentangling the nature of this “red”
population.

In previous studies, flat-spectrum radio sources where no optical
counterpart was detected were often classified as “Empty Fields”. Deep
optical and near-infrared observations in fact showed that many were
very red in optical–near-IR colour. They were characterised by spectral
indices, @xmath , where @xmath (Spinrad & Smith, 1975; Rieke, Lebofsky &
Kinman, 1979; Bregman @xmath 1981; Rieke @xmath 1982). For comparison,
optically-selected quasars (see Fig. 1.2 ) are characterised by
optical–near-IR spectral indices @xmath .

Possible causes for the relatively red optical–to–near-IR continua have
been discussed, but no consensus exists. Some authors have claimed that
since a majority of these flat-spectrum radio sources were also
associated with “blazar-like” activity, the redness may be a
characteristic of the synchrotron emission mechanism. (Cruz-Gonzalez &
Huchra 1984; Bregman @xmath 1981; Rieke @xmath 1982). Other explanations
such as optical continuum reddening by dust somewhere along the
line-of-sight have been suggested, but evidence has been scarce. Some of
the observational tests (eg. Ledden & O’Dell, 1983) included searching
for metal absorption-line systems, X-ray absorption, or effects of
gravitational lensing if the absorbing material lies in an unrelated
intervening system. In a study by Ledden & O’Dell (1983) and more
recently by Kollgaard @xmath (1995), evidence for soft X-ray absorption
was presented for a few of the reddest sources. The numbers however were
too low to draw any firm conclusion.

The difficulty in obtaining a self-consistent picture of radio-loud
optically reddened quasars lies in the lack of sufficient knowledge of
the sources themselves. There appear to be no additional characteristics
which correlate with optical reddening that may provide a hint about the
physics.

More than 40% of the 323 sources in the complete, flat spectrum radio
sample of Drinkwater @xmath (1997) have optical–near-IR colours @xmath .
This corresponds to optical–near-IR spectral indices @xmath , very much
redder than those of optically selected quasars where @xmath . At
present, it remains unclear whether these sources represent one extreme
of the flat spectrum radio population or a fundamentally new class of
AGN. Their faint identifications and red colours suggest that
significant numbers of quasars may be severely under-represented in
current optical surveys. The last chapters of this thesis shall explore
possible physical mechanisms to explain the anomalous properties of
sources in this sample.

## Part I Cosmologically Distributed Dust

### Chapter 2 Diffuse versus Compact Dust Distributions

Who can number the clouds by wisdom
Or who can pour out the bottles of heaven,
When the dust runneth into a mass,
And the clods cleave fast together?

— Job, 38:37

#### 2.1 Introduction

There are number of studies claiming that dust in foreground galaxies
has a substantial effect on the colours and counts of optically selected
quasars (Ostriker & Heisler, 1984; Heisler & Ostriker, 1988; Fall & Pei,
1992 and Wright, 1990). It is estimated that more than 50% of bright
quasars at a redshift of @xmath may be obscured by dust in intervening
galaxies and hence missing from optical samples. These studies assumed
that dust was confined only within the visible extent of normal massive
galaxies. However, distant populations such as faint field galaxies and
quasars may also be observed through foreground diffuse dust
distributions. Such distributions may be associated with galaxy clusters
and extended galactic haloes.

A truly diffuse, intergalactic dust distribution is ruled out based on
the counts of quasars and reddening as a function of redshift (eg.
Rudnicki, 1986; Ostriker & Heisler, 1984). Such observations indicate
that if a significant amount of dust exists, it must be patchy and
diffuse with relatively low optical depth so that quasars will appear
reddened without being removed from flux limited samples.

Galaxy clusters provide a likely location for ‘large-scale’ diffusely
distributed dust. Indirect evidence is provided by several studies which
reported large deficits of distant quasars or clusters of galaxies
behind nearby clusters (Boyle @xmath 1988; Romani & Maoz, 1992 and
references therein). These studies propose that extinction by
intracluster dust is the major cause. Additional evidence for diffuse
dust distributions is provided by observations of massive local galaxies
where in a few cases, dust haloes extending to scales @xmath kpc have
been confirmed (Zaritsky, 1994 and Peletier @xmath 1995; see the review
in section 1.4.1 ).

It is possible that a uniformly distributed dust component exists in the
intergalactic medium (IGM). Galactic winds associated with prodigious
star formation activity at early epochs may have provided a likely
source of metal enrichment and hence dust for the IGM (eg. Nath &
Trentham, 1997). Observations of metal lines in Ly @xmath absorption
systems of low column density ( @xmath ) indeed suggest that the IGM was
enriched to about @xmath by redshift @xmath (Womble @xmath 1996;
Songaila & Cowie, 1996). A source of diffuse dust may also have been
provided by an early generation of pre-galactic stars (ie. population
III stars) associated with the formation of galactic haloes (McDowell,
1986). Later in this thesis, it will be shown that possible reddening
from uniformly distributed IGM dust is limited by observations of
radio-selected quasars. Since radio-selected quasars should have no bias
against reddening by dust (see section 1.5.3 ), such a component must be
of sufficiently low optical depth to avoid producing a large fraction of
‘reddened’ sources at high redshift (see Fig. 1.2 ).

In this chapter, we show that a given quantity of dust has a much
greater effect on the background universe when diffusely distributed. We
shall investigate the effects of diffuse dust from, firstly, the
existence of a diffuse component in galaxy clusters and secondly, from a
hypothesised uniformly distributed component in the IGM.

This chapter is organised as follows: in the next section, we explore
the dependence of background source counts observed through a given mass
of dust on its spatial extent. In section 2.3 , we investigate the
spatial distribution of dust optical depth through galaxy clusters and
its effect on the counts and colours of background sources. Section 2.4
explores the consequences if all dust in the local universe were assumed
uniformly distributed in the IGM. Further implications are discussed in
section 2.5 and all results are summarised in section 2.6 . All
calculations use a Friedmann cosmology with @xmath and Hubble parameter
@xmath where @xmath .

#### 2.2 Compact versus Diffuse Dust Distributions

In this section, we explore the dependence of obscuration of background
sources on the spatial distribution of a given mass of dust. For
simplicity, we assume the dust to be associated with a cylindrical
face-on disk with uniform spatial dust mass density. We quantify the
amount of obscuration by investigating the number of background sources
behind our absorber that are missed from an optical flux-limited sample.

The fraction of sources missing to some luminosity @xmath relative to
the case where there is no dust extinction is simply @xmath , where
@xmath represents the observed number of sources in the presence of
dust. For a uniform dust optical depth @xmath , @xmath . For simplicity,
we assume that background sources are described by a cumulative
luminosity function that follows a power-law: @xmath , where @xmath is
the slope. With this assumption, the fraction of background sources
missing over a given area when viewed through our dusty absorber with
uniform optical depth @xmath is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

If the ‘true’ number of background sources per unit solid angle is
@xmath , then the total number of background sources lost from a flux
limited sample within the projected radius @xmath of our absorber can be
written:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the distance of the absorber from us.

To investigate the dependence of background source counts on the spatial
dust distribution, we need to first determine the dependence of @xmath
in Eqn. 2.2 on the spatial extent @xmath for a fixed mass of dust @xmath
. This can be determined from the individual properties of grains as
follows. The extinction optical depth at a wavelength @xmath through a
slab of dust composed of grains with uniform radius @xmath is defined as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the extinction efficiency which depends on the grain
size and dielectric properties, @xmath is the number density of grains
and @xmath is the length of the dust column along the line-of-sight.
Assuming our cylindrical absorber (whose axis lies along the
line-of-sight) has a uniform dust mass density: @xmath , where @xmath is
its cross-sectional radius, we can write, @xmath , where @xmath is the
mass density of an individual grain. We use the extinction efficiency
@xmath in the @xmath -band as parameterised by Goudfrooij @xmath (1994)
for a graphite and silicate mixture (of equal abundances) with mean
grain size @xmath m characteristic of the galactic ISM. The value used
is @xmath . We use a galactic extinction curve to convert to a @xmath
-band extinction measure, where typically @xmath (eg. Pei, 1992).
Combining these quantities, we find that the @xmath -band optical depth,
@xmath , through our model absorber can be written in terms of its dust
mass and cross-sectional radius as follows:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where we have scaled to a dust mass and radius typical of local massive
spirals and ellipticals (eg. Zaritsky, 1994). This measure is consistent
with mean optical depths derived by other means (eg. Giovanelli @xmath
1994 and references therein).

From Eqn. 2.4 , we see that the dust optical depth through our model
absorber for a fixed dust mass varies in terms of its cross-sectional
radius @xmath as @xmath . For the nominal dust parameters in Eqn. 2.4 ,
the number of sources missed behind our model absorber (Eqn. 2.2 ) can
be written

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

is the ‘true’ number of background sources falling within the projected
scale radius @xmath kpc.

From the functional forms of Eqns. 2.2 and 2.5 , there are two limiting
cases:

1.   For optical depths @xmath , the factor @xmath in Eqn. 2.2 is of
    order unity. This corresponds to values of @xmath such that @xmath
    for the nominal parameters in Eqn. 2.4 . For values of @xmath in
    this range, we have @xmath and the obscuration of background sources
    will depend most strongly on @xmath .

2.   For @xmath or equivalently @xmath , @xmath will approach a constant
    limiting value, independent of the dust extent @xmath . From Eqn.
    2.5 , this limiting value can be shown to be @xmath .

As a simple illustration, we show in Fig. 2.1 the dependence of the
number of background sources missing behind our model dust absorber on
@xmath , for a fixed dust mass of @xmath as defined by Eqn. 2.5 . We
assumed a cumulative luminosity function slope of @xmath , typical of
that for luminous galaxies and quasars. From the above discussion, we
see that when @xmath , ie. @xmath (or when @xmath ), the obscuration
will start to approach its maximum value and remain approximately
constant as @xmath .

We conclude that when dust becomes diffuse and extended on a scale such
that the mean optical depth @xmath through the distribution satisfies
@xmath , where @xmath is the cumulative luminosity function slope of
background sources, obscuration will start to be important and is
maximised for @xmath . The characteristic spatial scale at which this
occurs will depend on the dust mass through Eqn. 2.4 . For the typical
grain values in Eqn. 2.4 , this characteristic radius is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

The simple model in Fig. 2.1 shows that the obscuration of background
sources due to a normal foreground galaxy will be most effective if dust
is distributed over a region a few times its optical radius. This
prediction may be difficult to confirm observationally due to possible
contamination from light in the galactic absorber. In the following
sections, we explore two examples of possible diffuse dust distributions
on relatively large scales that can be explored observationally.

#### 2.3 Diffuse Dust in Galaxy Clusters

A number of studies have attributed the existence of large deficits of
background sources behind nearby galaxy clusters as due to extinction by
dust. Bogart & Wagner (1973) found that distant rich Abell clusters were
anticorrelated on the sky with nearby ones. They argued for a mean
extinction of @xmath mag extending to @xmath times the optical radii of
the nearby clusters. Boyle, Fong & Shanks (1988) however claimed a
@xmath deficit of background quasars within @xmath of clusters
consisting of tens of galaxies. These authors attribute this to an
extinction @xmath mag, and deduce a dust mass of @xmath within 0.5Mpc of
the clusters. Romani & Maoz (1992) found that optically-selected quasars
from the Véron-Cetty & Véron (1989) catalogue avoid rich foreground
Abell clusters. They also found deficits of @xmath out to radii @xmath
from the clusters, and postulate a mean extinction, @xmath mag.

The numbers of background sources behind clusters is also expected to be
modified by gravitational lensing (GL) by the cluster potential.
Depending on the intrinsic luminosity function of the background
population, and the limiting magnitude to which the sources are
detected, GL can cause either an enhancement or a deficit in the number
of background sources. The GL effect has been used to explain various
reports of overdensities of both optically and radio-selected quasars
behind foreground clusters (Bartelmann & Schneider, 1993; Bartelmann
@xmath 1994; Rodrigues-Williams & Hogan, 1994; Seitz & Schneider, 1995).
The reported overdensities for optically-selected QSOs are contrary to
the studies above where anticorrelations with foreground clusters are
found. These overdensities however are claimed on angular scales @xmath
from the cluster centers, considerably larger than scales on which most
of the underdensities have been claimed, which are of order a few
arcminutes. One interpretation is that dust obscuration bias may be
greater towards cluster centers due to the presence of greater
quantities of dust. On the other hand, the reported anticorrelations on
small angular scales can perhaps be explained by the optically crowded
fields, where QSO identification may be difficult. At present, the
effects of clusters on background source counts still remains
controversial.

More direct evidence for the existence of intracluster dust was provided
by Hu @xmath (1985) and Hu (1992) who compared the Ly- @xmath flux from
emission line systems in “cooling flow” clusters with Balmer line fluxes
at optical wavelengths. Extinctions of @xmath mag towards the cluster
centers were found, in good agreement with estimates from the quasar
deficits above. Intracluster dust has been predicted to give rise to
detectable diffuse IR emission (eg. Dwek @xmath 1990). The most
extensive search was conducted by Wise @xmath (1993), who claimed to
have detected excess diffuse 60-100 @xmath m emission at the 2 @xmath
level from a number of rich Abell clusters. They derived dust
temperatures in the range 24-34 K and dust masses @xmath within radii of
@xmath Mpc. Recently, Allen (1995) detected strong X-ray absorption and
optical reddening in ellipticals situated at the centers of rich cooling
flow clusters, providing strong evidence for dust. These studies
indicate that intracluster dust is certainly present, however, the
magnitude of its effect on producing background source deficits remains
a controversial issue.

In this section, we give some predictions that may be used to further
constrain cluster dust properties, or help determine the dominant
mechanism (ie. GL or extinction) by which clusters affect background
observations.

##### 2.3.1 Spatial Distribution of Cluster Dust?

X-ray spectral measurements show the presence of hot, metal enriched gas
in rich galaxy clusters with @xmath solar metallicity. This gas is
believed to be both of galactic and primordial origin (ie. pre-existing
IGM gas), with the bulk of metals being ejected from cluster galaxies
(see Sarazin, 1986 for a review). Ejection from galaxies may occur
abruptly through collisions between the cluster galaxies, ‘sudden’
ram-pressure ablation, or through continuous ram-pressure stripping by
intracluster gas (eg. Takeda @xmath 1984). The lack of significant
amounts of dust (relative to what should have been produced by stellar
evolution) and interstellar gas in cluster ellipticals provides evidence
for a mass loss process. On the other hand, in ellipticals that avoid
dense cluster environments, significant quantities of neutral hydrogen,
molecular gas and dust have been detected (eg. Lees @xmath 1991).

If the dust-to-gas ratio of intracluster gas in rich clusters were
similar to that of the Milky Way, then a radial gas column density of
typically @xmath with metallicity @xmath would produce an extinction
@xmath mag. This however is much greater than the value observed. The
likely reason for the deficiency of dust in the intracluster medium is
its destruction by thermal sputtering in the hot gas, a process which
operates on timescales @xmath yr, where @xmath is the gas density and
@xmath the grain radius (Draine & Salpeter, 1979). Dust injection
timescales from galaxies is typically of order a Hubble time (eg. Takeda
@xmath 1984) and hence, grains are effectively destroyed, with only the
most recently injected still surviving and providing possibly some
measurable extinction.

The spatial distribution in dust mass density remains a major
uncertainty. A number of authors have shown that under a steady state of
continuous injection from cluster galaxies, destruction by thermal
sputtering at a constant rate, and assuming instantaneous mixing with
the hot gas, the resulting mass density in dust will be of order

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

(eg. Dwek @xmath 1990) where @xmath is the injected dust-to-gas mass
ratio, assumed to be equal to the mean value of the galactic ISM, @xmath
(Pei, 1992). According to this simple model, the dust mass density is
independent of gas density and position in the cluster. If we relax the
assumption of instantaneous mixing of dust with the hot gas however, so
that the spatial distribution of gas is different from that of the
injected dust, the radial distribution of dust can significantly differ
from uniformity throughout a cluster. Such a non-uniform spatial dust
distribution may be found in clusters exhibiting cooling flows. If, as
suggested by Fabian @xmath (1991), most of the cooled gas remains cold
and becomes molecular in cluster cores, then a relatively large amount
of dust may also form, resulting in a dust distribution which peaks
within the central regions.

We explore the radial dependence of extinction optical depth through a
cluster, and the expected deficit in background sources by assuming that
dust is diffusely distributed and follows a spatial density
distribution:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a characteristic radius which we fix and @xmath is our
free parameter. Eqn. 2.9 with @xmath is the usual King profile which
with @xmath Mpc, represents a good approximation to the galaxy
distribution in clusters. Thus for simplicity, we keep @xmath fixed at
@xmath Mpc and vary @xmath . To bracket the range of possibilities in
the distribution of intracluster dust, we shall consider the range
@xmath . @xmath corresponds to the simple case where @xmath constant,
which may describe a situation where injection of dust is balanced by
its destruction by hot gas as discussed above. The value @xmath assumes
that dust follows the galaxy distribution. This profile may arise if
grain destruction by a similar distribution of hot gas were entirely
absent.

##### 2.3.2 Spatial Distribution of Dust Optical Depth and Background
Source Deficits

To model the spatial distribution of optical depth, we assume that
intracluster dust is distributed within a sphere of radius @xmath . The
central dust mass density @xmath in Eqn. 2.9 is fixed by assuming values
for the total dust mass @xmath and @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

We assume a cluster dust radius of @xmath Mpc, which represents a radius
containing @xmath of the virial mass of a typical dense cluster
characterised by galactic velocity dispersion @xmath (Sarazin, 1986 and
references therein). We assume that the total dust mass within @xmath
Mpc is @xmath . This value is consistent with that derived from
extinction measures by Hu, Cowie & Wang (1985), IR emission detections
by Wise @xmath (1993) and theoretical estimates of the mean intracluster
dust density as given by Eqn. 2.8 .

Using Eqn. 2.3 , the @xmath -band optical depth through our spherical
intracluster dust distribution at some projected distance @xmath from
its center can be written:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is our assumed radial density distribution (Eqn. 2.9 ) and
@xmath the mass density of an individual dust grain. For a uniform dust
density ( @xmath constant), and our assumed values of @xmath and @xmath
given above, the radial dependence in dust optical depth can be written:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the optical depth through the center of our cluster,
which with grain properties characteristic of the galactic ISM, will
scale as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

This value is about a factor three times lower than estimates of the
mean extinction derived from the deficit of QSOs behind foreground
clusters (eg. Boyle @xmath 1988), and that implied by the Balmer
decrements of Hu @xmath (1985). For a fixed dust mass of @xmath however,
we can achieve larger values for the central optical depth by steepening
the radial dust-density distribution profile, determined by the slope
@xmath in Eqn. 2.9 .

Fig. 2.2 a shows the optical depth as a function of projected cluster
radius for the cases @xmath , 0.5, 1, and 1.5. The case @xmath
approximately corresponds to the model of Dwek @xmath (1990), which
included effects of mild sputtering by hot gas in order to fit for the
observed IR emission from the Coma cluster. As shown, the case @xmath (
@xmath constant) predicts that the dust optical depth should be almost
independent of projected radius @xmath . Within all projected radii, the
optical depths predicted by our diffuse dust model lie in the range
@xmath . Turning back to the discussion of section 2.2 where we show
that background obscuration by diffuse dust reaches its maximum for
@xmath , these optical depths satisfy this condition for @xmath ,
typical of luminous background galaxies and quasars.

We now explore the effects of these models on background source counts
as a function of projected cluster radius. We first give an estimate of
the projected radius at which the numbers of background sources lost
from a flux-limited sample is expected to be a maximum. This is
determined by investigating the dependence in the differential number of
sources missing, @xmath , within an interval ( @xmath ) as a function of
projected radius @xmath . From Eqn. 2.2 , this differential number will
scale as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is given by Eqn. 2.11 . Fig. 2.2 b plots @xmath as a
function of @xmath for our various models, where we have assumed @xmath
. Thus from observations, an identification of the projected radius at
which the background source deficit peaks can be used to constrain the
spatial distribution of intracluster dust.

The cumulative fraction of background sources missing within a projected
cluster radius is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

This fraction is shown in Fig. 2.2 c. As expected, the @xmath model
which contains the largest amount of dust within the inner few hundred
kiloparsecs predicts the strongest trend with @xmath , while the
opposite is predicted if the dust density were completely uniform. These
predictions can be compared with a number of existing studies of the
observed two-point angular correlation function between clusters and
optically-selected QSOs. This function is usually defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the average number of observed cluster-QSO pairs within
an angular radius @xmath and @xmath is that expected in a random
distribution. For our purposes, @xmath can be replaced by the “true”
number of cluster-QSO pairs expected in the absence of dust, and hence,
we can re-write Eqn. 2.16 as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

We compare our models with a number of studies of @xmath for optically
selected QSOs in Fig. 2.2 d. These studies considerably differ from each
other in the selection of the QSO and cluster samples, and as seen, both
anticorrelations and correlations on different angular scales are found.
The former have been interpreted in terms of extinction by intracluster
dust, while the latter with the GL phenomenon. In most cases, the
reported overdensities are too large to be consistent with GL models
given our current knowledge of cluster masses and QSO distributions.

It is interesting to note that the studies which have reached the
smallest angular scales ( @xmath ) are also those in which
anticorrelations between QSOs and foreground clusters have been
reported. This can be understood in terms of a larger dust concentration
and hence extinction towards cluster centers. These studies however may
not be free of selection effects, such as in the detection of QSOs from
the visual inspection of objective prism plates. From a
cross-correlation analysis of galactic stars with their cluster sample
however, Boyle @xmath (1988) found that such selection effects are
minimal.

The maximum dust radial extent assumed in our models, @xmath Mpc,
corresponds to angular scales @xmath at the mean redshift of the
clusters ( @xmath ) used in these studies. Thus, as shown in Fig. 2.2 d,
our model predictions only extend to @xmath . As shown in this figure,
the @xmath model which corresponds to the case where the dust density is
assumed to follow the galaxy distribution, provides the best fit to the
Boyle @xmath (1988) data. We must note that this is the only existing
study performed to angular scales @xmath with which we can compare our
models. Further studies to such scales are necessary to confirm the
Boyle @xmath result, and/or provide a handle on any selection effects.

##### 2.3.3 Summary

To summarise, we have shown that for a plausible value of the dust mass
in a typical rich galaxy cluster, obscuration of background sources will
be most effective if dust is diffusely distributed on scales @xmath Mpc.
This conclusion is based on our predicted optical depths ( @xmath )
satisfying our condition for ‘maximum’ obscuration: @xmath (see section
2.2 ), where typically @xmath for luminous background galaxies and QSOs.

We have explored the spatial distribution in dust optical depth and
background source deficits expected through a typical rich cluster by
assuming different radial dust density profiles. These predictions can
be used to constrain cluster dust properties. A dust density
distribution with @xmath (Eqn. 2.9 ) appears to best satisfy the ‘small
scale’ cluster-QSO angular correlation study of Boyle @xmath (1988).

#### 2.4 Diffuse Intergalactic Dust?

There have been a number of studies claiming that the bulk of metals in
the local universe had already formed by @xmath (eg. Lilly & Cowie,
1987; White & Frenk, 1991; Fall & Pei, 1995). Similarly, models of dust
evolution in the galaxy show that the bulk of its dust content was
formed in the first few billion years (Wang, 1991). These studies
suggest that the global star formation rate peaked at epochs @xmath when
the bulk of galaxies were believed to have formed. Supernova-driven
winds at early epochs may thus have provided an effective mechanism by
which chemically enriched material and dust were dispersed into the IGM.
As modelled by Babul & Rees (1992), such a mechanism is postulated to be
crucial in the evolution of the ‘faint blue’ galaxy population observed
to magnitudes @xmath . Nath & Trentham (1997) also show that this
mechanism could explain the recent detection of metallicities @xmath in
low density Ly @xmath absorption systems at @xmath . Another source of
diffuse IGM dust may have been provided from an epoch of population III
star formation associated with the formation of galactic haloes (eg.
McDowell, 1986).

What are the effects expected on background sources if all dust formed
to the present day was completely uniform and diffuse throughout the
IGM? In this section, we show that such a component will have a low
optical depth and have an insignificant effect on the colours of
background sources, but will be high enough to significantly bias their
number counts in the optical.

##### 2.4.1 Comoving Dust Mass Density

To explore the effects of a diffuse intergalactic dust component, we
need to assume a value for the mean mass density in dust in the local
universe. This density must not exceed the total mass density in heavy
metals at the present epoch. An upper bound for the local mass density
in metals (hence dust) can be derived from the assumption that the mean
metallicity of the local universe is typically: @xmath (ie. the ratio of
elements heavier than helium to total gas mass), as found from galactic
chemical evolution models (eg. Tinsley, 1976) and abundance observations
(Grevesse & Anders, 1988). Combining this with the upper bound in the
baryon density predicted from big-bang nucleosynthesis (Olive @xmath
1990) where @xmath , it is apparent that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let us now compute the total mass density in dust used in previous
studies that modelled the effects of dust in individual galaxies on
background quasars. Both Heisler & Ostriker (1988) and Fall & Pei (1993)
modelled these effects by assuming that dust in each galaxy was
distributed as an exponential disk with scale radius @xmath kpc and
central face-on optical depth, @xmath . The comoving mean mass density
in dust (relative to the critical density) in these studies, given a
comoving galaxy number density @xmath , can be shown to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

(see section 4.2.1 ). This is consistent with the constraint in Eqn.
2.18 . Thus, as a working measure, we assume the comoving mass density
defined by Eqn. 2.19 in the calculation that follows.

##### 2.4.2 Obscuration by Diffuse Intergalactic Dust

If the dust mass density given by Eqn. 2.19 is assumed uniformly
distributed and constant on comoving scales to some redshift, the @xmath
-band optical depth through a dust sheet of width d @xmath at redshift
@xmath in an observer’s frame can be written (see Eqn. 2.3 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have assumed dust properties characteristic of the galactic
ISM. The factor @xmath is due to our assumption of a @xmath dependence
for the dust extinction law. This arises from the fact that light
received in the @xmath -band corresponds to light of wavelength @xmath
at redshift @xmath , which consequently suffers greater extinction. With
@xmath Mpc (for a @xmath and @xmath cosmology), the total mean optical
depth to some redshift in an observer’s @xmath -band will scale as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

This represents the total optical depth if all dust in the intervening
galaxy model of Heisler & Ostriker (1988) were assumed uniformly
distributed throughout the universe.

Assuming dust is uniformly distributed to @xmath , the observed @xmath
-band optical depth from Eqn. 2.21 will be of order

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using a galactic extinction law (Pei, 1992), this corresponds to an
extinction in @xmath colour of @xmath mag. Thus, if background faint
field galaxies and QSOs are observed through a uniform intergalactic
dust distribution, their observed colours are not expected to be
significantly affected. We now show however that the numbers of sources
missing at such redshifts could be significantly greater than that
claimed by previous studies which assume all dust to be associated with
massive galaxies alone.

If dust to some distance @xmath covers an area of sky @xmath and hence,
has covering factor @xmath , the number of background sources lost from
a flux-limited sample can be estimated from Eqn. 2.2 . In general, the
number of background sources at some redshift lost from an area of sky
with dust covering factor @xmath will scale as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the fraction of sources missing per unit area. For a
completely uniform dust distribution, @xmath , and to redshift @xmath ,
@xmath for @xmath .

If dust were confined to individual galaxies along the line-of-sight
however, their covering factor, assuming they follow a Poisson
distribution is typically @xmath , where @xmath is the mean number of
absorber intersections to redshift @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

(see Appendix C). We have scaled to the nominal parameters assumed in
the intervening galaxy model of Heisler & Ostriker (1988) (hereafter
HO). In this model, we find a covering factor of only @xmath to @xmath .
We can estimate the mean effective optical depth observed in the @xmath
-band through an individual absorber to @xmath in the HO model by using
the formalism of section 2.2 . For a fixed mass of dust, Eqn. 2.4
implies that the product of the area (or covering factor) and optical
depth of a dust distribution: @xmath , is a constant, depending on grain
properties and dust mass alone. Using this relation, the observed
effective absorber optical depth to @xmath in the HO model, @xmath , can
be estimated by scaling from our values of @xmath and @xmath above for
uniformly distributed dust:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using this value, the fraction of background sources missed by
obscuration from an individual absorber is ‘effectively’ @xmath .
Combining these results, we find using Eqn. 2.23 that the number of
sources missing at @xmath due to a uniform foreground dust distribution
to be greater by a factor of @xmath than that predicted by Heisler &
Ostriker (1988).

We must note that this estimate makes no allowance for possible
evolution in dust content. Effects of foreground diffuse dust on source
counts at @xmath may be significantly reduced if appreciable evolution
has occured. Effects of models where the dust content evolves will be
considered in Chapter 4.

##### 2.4.3 Summary

We conclude that the existence of a significant amount of diffusely
distributed dust (eg. with mass density on comoving scales of order that
observed in local galaxies) can enhance the number of background sources
missing in optical samples. Due to its relatively large covering factor,
diffuse dust predicts a reduction in optical counts at @xmath about
three times greater than that claimed by previous studies.

The colours of background sources are not expected to be significantly
affected. This implies that the use of background populations to measure
a diffuse IGM dust component will be extremely difficult.

#### 2.5 Discussion

In this section, we discuss some further uncertainties and implications
regarding the existence of diffuse dust in the universe.

First, the effects of intracluster dust on background sources critically
depends on the amount of dust present, and its spatial distribution.
Regardless of the mechanism by which grains are injected into the
intracluster medium from galaxies, it is possible that a significant
fraction are destroyed in the injection process. Significant amounts of
hot gas are also believed to exist in the ISM of cluster ellipticals
(eg. Forman @xmath 1985). This gas is expected to destroy grains on
timescales @xmath yr (Draine & Salpeter, 1979), much shorter than
injection timescales. Such destruction mechanisms can thus prevent the
formation of significant quantities of dust.

It is possible that the spatial distribution of intracluster dust is not
‘diffuse’ and uniformly distributed, but inhomogeneous. For example,
Fabian @xmath (1991) propose that if most of the cooled gas resulting
from cluster cooling flows remains cold and becomes molecular, then this
may provide suitable conditions for large amounts of dust to form. A
clumpy dust distribution that follows cooling flow filaments may result,
reducing the effective dust covering factor and hence background source
deficit. These issues need to be addressed before attributing such
deficits to extinction by dust.

The existence of a smooth IGM dust component also remains a major
uncertainty. Due to their deep gravitational potential, Margolis &
Schramm (1977) showed that it is unlikely for supernovae-driven winds to
expel significant quantities of dust from a massive galaxy to large
scales. For low mass galaxies however (eg. dwarfs), Babul & Rees (1992)
show that this mechanism can be effective. Such systems are believed to
comprise a majority of the ‘faint-blue population’ which show an excess
@xmath times that predicted from non-evolving galaxy models for @xmath
(eg. Tyson, 1988). Simulations based on star-formation rates that assume
yields in metallicity from local observations, predict that the amount
of metals (and hence dust, assuming a fixed fraction of metals condense
into grains at a constant rate) produced from such a population will be
smaller than local estimates by an order of magnitude (eg. White &
Frenk, 1991). If the only source of IGM dust was from these ‘low-mass’
galaxies, then the total optical depth to @xmath would be insignificant,
and effects on the background universe would be minimal.

#### 2.6 Conclusions

In this chapter, we have shown that dust is more effective at obscuring
background sources when diffuse or extended. We find that obscuration of
background sources by a given dust distribution with optical depth
@xmath will be most effective when @xmath , where @xmath is the
cumulative luminosity function slope of the sources.

We have explored the effects of diffuse dust from, firstly, galaxy
clusters and secondly, from a hypothesised uniform IGM component. By
assuming different radial dust density profiles in a typical rich
cluster, we have predicted the optical depth and background source
deficit as a function of projected cluster radius. These predictions can
be compared with future observations to constrain the properties of
intracluster dust. Our predicted optical depth measures ( @xmath )
satisfy the above criterion ( @xmath ) for background luminous QSOs and
galaxies. Existing studies claiming anticorrelations in the distribution
of QSOs with foreground clusters down to scales @xmath are consistent
with a dust density profile that follows the galaxy distribution.

As a further illustration, we have explored the effects of a diffuse IGM
dust component with cosmic mass density equal to that observed in local
galaxies. Assuming this density is constant on comoving scales to @xmath
, we find a deficit in background sources about three times greater than
that predicted assuming dust in normal galaxies alone.

The ‘diffuseness’ of the dust is the key parameter which we claim
determines the effectiveness of obscuration of the background universe.
Although such dust distributions may be difficult to detect, we must not
neglect their possible presence. Further studies of spatial dust
distributions, preferably via the counts and colours of background
sources will be essential in confirming our predictions.

### Chapter 3 Modelling the Obscuration of Quasars by Foreground Dusty
Galaxies

Images of broken light which dance before me
Like a million eyes,
…They tumble blindly as they make their way across the universe.

— Across the Universe,

John Lennon & Paul McCartney, 1970

#### 3.1 Introduction

As early as 1930, Trumpler showed that optical observations of distant
stellar clusters were affected by dust, which he suggested was in a thin
absorbing layer in the galactic plane. Similarly, sources at large
redshift might be severely affected by dust in intervening galaxies,
thus biasing our knowledge of the distant universe. An historical review
of cosmological studies of obscuration by dust is given by Rudnicki
(1986).

We are motivated by recent observations of a large radio-selected sample
of quasars (Drinkwater @xmath 1997), which is optimal for the study of
the effects of dust. A large fraction of the sources have
optical–to–near-infrared colours and optical continuum slopes much
redder than is characteristically assumed in optical searches for
quasars. Webster @xmath (1995) have argued that the reddening is due to
dust, although the location of the dust is uncertain. There are two
obvious possibilities: either the dust is in the local quasar
environment or else it is extrinsic and lies along the line-of-sight. In
this and the following chapter, we investigate the effects of an
intervening dust component which is located in galaxies along the
line-of-sight.

The effect of intergalactic dust on observations of objects at
cosmological distances has been discussed by Ostriker & Heisler (1984);
Heisler & Ostriker (1988); Fall & Pei (1989; 1992) and Wright (1986;
1990). These authors show that the line-of-sight to a high-redshift
quasar has a high probability of intercepting a galaxy disk,
particularly if the dusty disk is larger than the optical radius of the
galaxy. The principle issue in these calculations is that realistic dust
distributions, which are “soft” around the edges, will cause many
quasars to ‘appear’ reddened without actually removing them from a flux
limited sample. There has been little evidence for a population of
reddened quasars in the past. This has been considered a strong
constraint on models postulating that dust might obscure a large
fraction of the high-redshift universe. The new observations of
Drinkwater @xmath (1997) remove this constraint, and will provide a
distribution of reddening as a function of redshift against which
intervening models can be measured.

Ostriker & Heisler (1984) and Heisler & Ostriker (1988), have suggested
that intervening dusty galaxies would individually produce enough
extinction to remove background quasars from a flux-limited sample. In
order to avoid the problem of generating too many (unobserved) reddened
quasars, these authors suggest that the dusty regions are ‘hard-edged’:
either a quasar is reddened out of the sample or it is not reddened at
all. They find that existing quasar observations (at optical, X-ray and
radio wavelengths) are consistent with significant obscuration setting
in by @xmath . They estimate that more than @xmath of bright quasars at
this redshift may be obscured by dust in intervening galaxies and hence
missing in optically-selected samples.

Similar conclusions were reached by Fall & Pei (1989; 1992) who modelled
the obscuration of quasars by dust in damped Ly- @xmath absorption
systems. These intervening systems have column densities of neutral
hydrogen in excess of @xmath and are believed to be the progenitors of
present day galactic disks. Fall & Pei (1992) estimate that @xmath -
@xmath of bright quasars at @xmath are obscured by dust in damped Ly-
@xmath systems. They find that the ‘true’ comoving density of bright
quasars can exceed the observed comoving density by factors of up to 4
at @xmath and by more than an order of magnitude at @xmath .

Wright (1986) has described a numerical method to compute the total
optical depth in intervening dusty galaxies. In a later paper, Wright
(1990) examined the relationship between the reddening observed in the
colours of optically-selected quasars and total @xmath -band optical
depth along the line-of-sight. He finds that individual galaxies with
“soft” edges and large central optical depths (compared to those
previously assumed) are required to satisfy the range of colours
observed. This model also predicts a reduction in the numbers of quasars
in optical flux-limited samples similar to that previously claimed.

In almost all of the studies above, only a relatively small region of
parameter space defining the dust properties of galaxies has been
explored. Most of the parameters assumed describe galaxies which are
dustier than those observed locally (eg. Giovanelli @xmath 1994; Byun
1993). In this chapter, we repeat these calculations using a range of
parameters that may describe the dust properties of galaxies. We modify
a statistical method introduced by Wright (1986) to calculate the
distribution in net optical depth in dust as a function of redshift.
Implications of the results of our simulations on optical QSO number
counts, and on the recently detected reddening in the radio-quasar
sample of Drinkwater @xmath (1997) are explored.

This chapter is organised as follows: in section 3.2 , we describe the
method used to compute the optical depth distribution. Section 3.3
presents the galaxy parameters for four different models and the results
of our calculations. Section 3.4 investigates the effects of intervening
galactic dust on the counts of quasars in the optical. We also quantify
the bias introduced from using ‘optically-selected’ quasars to infer the
amount of dust reddening in the line-of-sight. A comparison of our
predictions with observations in the radio sample of Drinkwater @xmath
(1997) is given in section 3.5 . All results are summarised in section
3.6 . Throughout, all calculations assume a Friedmann cosmology with
@xmath and Hubble parameter @xmath where @xmath .

#### 3.2 Optical Depth Distribution

We explore the effect of dust in intervening galaxies on quasar
observations by computing the probability distribution of optical depth
@xmath as a function of redshift along any random line-of-sight. The
optical depth for photons emitted at a redshift @xmath is the sum of
optical depths from all galaxies intercepted to redshift @xmath . We
define @xmath to be the total optical depth that is encountered by the
emitted photons which are observed at @xmath in the @xmath -passband (
@xmath Å).

The method used is based on Wright (1986). We initially follow Wright by
modelling the universe as a series of concentric thin shells. The
observed extinction @xmath between redshifts 0 and @xmath can be
represented as a sum of extinctions over intermediate redshifts,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

For a uniform dust distribution, the @xmath ’s in each redshift bin are
all definite numbers, but if the absorption is due to dusty galaxies
then each @xmath is treated as an independent random variable. The
probability density function @xmath for optical depth @xmath over some
redshift range @xmath can thus be written as a repeated convolution of
probabilities @xmath over the intermediate redshift bins:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath represents convolution. A Fourier transform method can then
be used to calculate @xmath in terms of model dependent galaxy
parameters to be discussed later. We wish to obtain an explicit
expression for @xmath that may be computed for any set of model
parameters. Details of the derivation are as follows.

If we denote @xmath as the probability density that a photon passing
through the @xmath shell encounters an optical depth @xmath , then the
Fourier transform, @xmath of @xmath is defined

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

By convolving the @xmath thin shells as in Eqn. 3.2 and taking the
Fourier transform of this convolution, we have the following

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Since the shells are considered to be thin ( @xmath ), the probability
that the optical depth @xmath within any one shell is nonzero is small.
Hence for the @xmath shell we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Thus we may write using Eqn. 3.4 ,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.7)
                                         
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Taking the limit where the shell size reduces to zero ( @xmath and hence
@xmath ) we have from Eqn. 3.7 ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The function @xmath in the integrand of Eqn. 3.8 gives the probability
density distribution for @xmath for some interval @xmath . Thus, the
quantity @xmath gives the probability that the optical depth @xmath lies
within the range @xmath for the interval @xmath .

Our method for calculating the final result @xmath now differs from
Wright (1986). We wish to express @xmath in Eqn. 3.8 in terms of
observables, such as the mean number and optical depth of individual
galaxies within any interval @xmath . We can do this by noting that the
mean optical depth for the interval @xmath in which @xmath lies within
@xmath can be written

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

We can also write this mean optical depth in terms of the mean galaxy
number, @xmath , within @xmath and their individual optical depths.
Assuming each galaxy within @xmath has a uniform dust distribution with
optical depth @xmath , so that @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

The mean number of galaxies, @xmath , along a line of sight at some
redshift within the range @xmath , is defined by (Weinberg, 1972)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the cross-sectional area of a typical face-on galaxy,
and @xmath the local comoving number density of galaxies which is
assumed to be constant. In other words we will assume a non-evolving
galaxy population. Combining Eqns. 3.9 , 3.10 and 3.11 we have, for any
interval @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Substituting Eqn. 3.12 into Eqn. 3.8 and evaluating the integral with
respect to @xmath , we arrive at

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Equation 3.13 holds for the case of uniform galactic disks where the
optical depth of an individual galaxy, @xmath , is constant throughout
the disk. Note that @xmath in Eqn. 3.13 is a function of redshift @xmath
. This is a consequence of the increase in absorber rest-frame frequency
with increasing redshift. The observed optical depth in a fixed bandpass
will therefore have a redshift dependence that exactly corresponds to
the frequency dependence of dust extinction in the absorber frame.

For galaxies with a non-uniform dust distribution, the optical depth is
a function of the impact parameter @xmath , so that @xmath in Eqn. 3.13
is replaced by @xmath , where @xmath is the distance from the galaxy’s
center. Following Wright (1986) and as confirmed observationally by
Zaritsky (1994), we will model the absorbers as exponential galactic
disks, where the optical depth through a face-on disk decreases
exponentially with distance @xmath from the center;

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a characteristic galactic radius and @xmath , now, is
the value of @xmath through the centre of the galaxy @xmath . This
profile is supported by similar observations for the light distribution
in nearby spirals (Freeman, 1970), and the existence of near-exponential
radial metallicity gradients (Vila-Costas & Edmunds, 1992; Oey &
Kennicutt, 1993). Given the exponential profile (Eqn. 3.14 ), the
cross-section @xmath in Eqn. 3.13 is replaced by an integral over @xmath
. Making these replacements, Eqn. 3.13 becomes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Furthermore, we will allow the disks of galaxies to be tilted with
respect to the line of sight by some random inclination angle @xmath (
@xmath being the angle between the plane of the disk and the plane of
the sky). To introduce tilts we will need to consider a random
inclination factor @xmath , where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

As a consequence, optical depths @xmath , will be increased by this
factor and cross-sectional areas, @xmath , decreased by the same amount.
Thus with the substitutions:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and averaging over @xmath where @xmath is randomly distributed between 0
and 1, Eqn. 3.15 becomes

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

With the change of variables @xmath and @xmath and rearranging terms, we
reach the final expression

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the constant @xmath defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

is a model dependent parameter discussed in the next section and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

is a standard mathematical function termed the “Exponential Integral”.

Equation 3.18 can be calculated numerically and the inverse Fourier
transform of @xmath gives the required probability density distribution
function for the optical depth, @xmath , as a function of @xmath , i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

To summarise, we have followed Wright (1986) (Eqns. 3.1 - 3.7 ) by
dividing the universe into a series of concentric shells, each with a
distribution of galaxies. Using a Fourier transform method and
convolving the effect due to each shell, we have obtained the
probability density function for the total optical depth @xmath due to
intervening galaxies in the range @xmath . Once the probability
distribution function @xmath is calculated from Eqns. 3.18 - 3.21 (for
some set of galaxy parameters), we can then determine the probability
that the total optical depth is some given value @xmath along any
line-of-sight to redshift @xmath .

#### 3.3 Model Parameters and Results

Our model depends on three parameters which describe the characteristics
of the intervening galaxies. @xmath and @xmath are included in @xmath
(Eqn. 3.19 ), which gives the average number of intersections in a
Hubble length of a light ray within @xmath of a galaxy’s centre. The
third parameter, @xmath , is the dust opacity at the center of an
individual absorber. In this work we assume the optical depth follows a
simple linear dependence on frequency, thus

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the @xmath -band optical depth at the center of a local
galaxy ( @xmath ) and @xmath . More complex models where the extinction
curve includes a @xmath Å  bump, as in the Milky Way are considered by
Heisler & Ostriker (1988). However recent work (Calzetti @xmath 1994)
finds no evidence of such a feature in the extinction curves of nearby
galaxies.

Table 3.1 gives the values of three parameters for each of four models
to be considered. Model 1 uses the values of Heisler & Ostriker (1988).
Their value of @xmath was chosen to yield a sky covering fraction of
galaxies which is consistent with the percentage of quasars detected
with damped Ly- @xmath absorption systems along the line-of-sight. For
the nominal value @xmath , they find (from Eqn. 3.19 ) @xmath kpc, which
is large compared to values typical of present day spirals ( @xmath kpc,
Freeman, 1970). Heisler & Ostriker have set @xmath from a study of the
range of absorption in galaxies by Phillips (1986).

Model 2 uses the values of Wright (1990) who studied correlations
between reddening and obscuration of background quasars. This model
contains the same total amount of dust as Model 1 but the dust is
concentrated in a smaller number of more opaque clouds. In other words,
by making @xmath larger, one approaches the opaque, hard-edged disk
limit.

The values in Models 3 and 4 are believed to be more representative of
local galaxies. In both of these models @xmath , consistent with lower
limits for spiral galaxies derived by Disney and Phillipps (1989), Byun
(1993) and Giovanelli @xmath (1994). Model 3 has a characteristic radius
of @xmath kpc, while Model 4 represents a minimal model with @xmath kpc
and @xmath .

##### 3.3.1 Results and Analysis

For each set of galaxy parameters ( @xmath , @xmath , @xmath ),
distribution functions @xmath for the total optical depth have been
computed from Eqns. 3.18 - 3.21 in redshift intervals of 0.5 up to
@xmath . Figures 3.1 a and b show the optical depth probability density
distributions at different redshifts for Models 1 and 4 respectively. As
discussed, these refer to two extreme scenarios. The curves in Fig. 3.1
a closely resemble those computed by Heisler and Ostriker (1988) (see
their figure 1), except that the median points differ. This is due to
Heisler and Ostriker adopting an extinction curve for the dust which
involves the @xmath Å  feature. The probability that the total optical
depth to some redshift @xmath lies within the interval @xmath is given
by the area under the normalised curve:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

For each curve in Fig. 3.1 , a dot is drawn to indicate the median point
where the curve integrated over @xmath equals @xmath . Physically, this
means that for a specific dust model and redshift @xmath , we should
expect that in a radio-quasar survey (expected to be unbiased against
reddening by dust), at least 50% of sources with redshifts @xmath should
suffer extinctions corresponding to @xmath .

Figure 3.2 shows the probability that the total optical depth towards
some redshift @xmath is greater than 1, computed from the distribution
functions for Models 1, 2, 3 and 4 in Table 3.1 . The probability @xmath
up to a redshift @xmath is the fraction of the sky to that redshift
which has at least @xmath . Model 1 predicts that all sources with
@xmath should have at least @xmath , whereas the percentage drops to
@xmath and @xmath for Models 2 and 3 respectively. The obscuration in
Model 4 becomes significant for redshift @xmath , where more than @xmath
of sources are predicted to encounter an optical depth of at least
@xmath .

As shown in Fig. 3.2 , Model 1 corresponding to “soft”-edged galactic
disks predicts that obscuration should be less severe by as much as a
factor of 2 at redshifts @xmath than that of the “harder”-edged disk
Model 2. For redshifts @xmath , the situation reverses: optical depths
predicted by Model 1 exceed those predicted by Model 2. This can be
explained by the values of the parameters defining these models in Table
3.1 . The “harder” edged galaxies with higher central optical depths in
Model 2 are more effective in causing significant obscuration at lower
redshifts ( @xmath ). Light emitted from a source is more likely to
suffer reddening once it encounters a harder-edged disk than for a
softer-edged disk (Model 1), even though Model 1 contains a greater
number of galaxies per unit redshift interval. At redshifts @xmath ,
obscuration becomes more dependent on the number of galaxies
intercepting a light ray (the parameter @xmath in Table 3.1 ). Model 1
with four times as many galaxies along the line of sight, therefore
dominates the optical depth to high redshifts.

The mean optical depth to a given @xmath provides a handle on making the
comparison between the dust content specified by each set of model
parameters in Table 3.1 . Heisler & Ostriker (1988) have shown that the
mean optical depth to a redshift @xmath scales as the following product:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Equation 3.24 is plotted in Fig. 3.3 for the models listed in Table 3.1
.

#### 3.4 Effect on Quasar Number Counts

We will give a simple illustration of the effects of dust in intervening
foreground galaxies on quasar counts in the optical. We assume that the
‘true’ number of quasars (ie. in a ‘dust-free’ universe) at a given
redshift follows a power-law:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the total number of quasars observed at fixed @xmath
with fluxes greater than some limiting flux @xmath , and @xmath is the
cumulative luminosity function slope.

In a dusty universe, quasars observed through a uniform extinction
@xmath have their true fluxes reduced by a factor @xmath . The total
number of sources that will be reddened below some flux limit @xmath
(and hence removed from a sample) can therefore be written: @xmath .
Using Eqn. 3.25 , we can rewrite this as: @xmath . Since there is a
probability @xmath of encountering an optical depth @xmath , the total
fraction of sources lost from a sample (relative to a dust-free
universe) at some redshift is:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

This fraction scales in terms of the model galaxy parameters as follows:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the last step follows when the argument of the exponential is
small, which for typical values of @xmath and @xmath , is sufficiently
accurate for @xmath and redshifts @xmath . We see from Eqn. 3.27 that
the obscuration of background sources by line-of-sight galactic dust has
a stronger dependence on the covering factor parameter @xmath (Eqn. 3.19
), than on the central absorber optical depth @xmath (see section 4.3.2
for more details). The fraction of sources missing from some flux limit
will increase with increasing @xmath ; in other words, a steeper
luminosity function implies that a greater fraction of sources will be
lost from a flux-limited sample.

From surveys of quasars selected in the @xmath -band, the slope @xmath
at the bright end of the cumulative luminosity function (typically for
@xmath ) lies in the range @xmath (Boyle @xmath 1990). We have chosen
the lower bound @xmath . Figure 3.4 plots @xmath , which with @xmath ,
is a lower limit on the fraction of ‘bright’ quasars missing from a
@xmath -band flux limited sample. These sources may be detected as
optical ‘empty fields’ in radio surveys. The prediction for each of our
four models is shown. Model 1 predicts that almost no quasars should be
observed at @xmath within some flux limit, while for model 4, we expect
at least 5% and @xmath of quasars at redshifts @xmath and @xmath
respectively to have been missed.

##### 3.4.1 Dust Reddening and Bias in Optically-Selected Samples

The mean optical depths as a function of redshift illustrated in Fig.
3.3 represent ‘true’ optical depths associated with line-of-sight dusty
galaxies. Since optically-selected quasars are expected to be biased
against significant amounts of dust in their line-of-sight, the
predictions in Fig. 3.3 are expected to differ considerably from
reddening estimates deduced from optically-selected samples. Due to the
relatively large dispersion about the mean optical depth to any redshift
as shown in the probability distribution functions (PDFs) of Fig. 3.1 ,
only background sources which have suffered sufficiently low optical
depths will be reddened such as to remain within the flux limit of a
sample. Thus, this observational bias will lead to an effective
‘observed’ mean optical depth that is considerably smaller than the
‘true’ optical depths modelled above. In this section, we present a
simple model to quantify this bias.

In general, the mean optical depth to any redshift is defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the probability distribution function describing the
dust model. To give an estimate of “observed” optical depth as inferred
from observations of the reddening in an optically-selected quasar
population, we must take into account the effects of the “finite” flux
limit imposed. To do this, we require information regarding the quasar
luminosity distribution. To give a simple illustration, we shall assume
a power-law luminosity function like above (Eqn. 3.25 ). We require an
effective “observed” PDF for the optical depth to the optically detected
sources. For a power-law luminosity function, this observed PDF is given
by @xmath , where @xmath is the probability that a source which is
reddened by amount @xmath , will remain within the flux of a sample (see
above) and @xmath is the “true” optical depth probability distribution
modelled in section 3.2 . From Eqn. 3.28 and requiring that @xmath be
normalised, the “observed” optical depth to optically detected sources
at some redshift can be written:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

This can be shown to scale in terms of the dust model parameters as
follows:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

Figure 3.5 shows the “true” and “observed” model optical depths as a
function of redshift. A quasar (cumulative) luminosity function slope of
@xmath and dust parameters @xmath , @xmath kpc and @xmath are assumed.
The @xmath spread is shown for @xmath only, while for the “true” optical
depth @xmath , the @xmath value (where @xmath ) is almost equal to the
mean itself at all redshifts. We see that the mean observed reddening to
optically detected quasars can be less by up to a factor of 3 than the
true mean at redshifts @xmath and a factor of 6 at redshifts @xmath .
Comparing Eqns. 3.24 and 3.30 , the ratio @xmath will be independent of
the covering factor parameter @xmath , and will only slightly depend on
the central galaxy optical depth @xmath . We conclude that the use of
optically selected quasars as a means to measure the dust content along
the line-of-sight can lead to results that are grossly in error.

#### 3.5 Comparison with ‘Reddened’ Parkes Quasars

Let us consider whether the reddening observed in the radio-selected
quasar sample of Drinkwater @xmath (1997) (hereafter ‘Parkes quasars’)
can all be attributed to dust in galaxies that may happen to lie along
the line-of-sight. From Fig. 1.2 in section 1.5.3 , two aspects of the
observations are relevant: (i) overall, more than @xmath of the sample
is reddened with colours @xmath , and (ii) the distribution in reddening
(with median @xmath ) is relatively uniform with redshift to @xmath .

Assuming the generic @xmath extinction law, and that the intrinsic
(unabsorbed) colour of Parkes quasars is equivalent to the mean value
@xmath found for optically-selected quasars (which show relatively small
scatter; see Fig. 1.2 ), the observed @xmath -band optical depth can be
written:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

Observed colours of @xmath therefore correspond to optical depths @xmath
in the @xmath -band.

As shown in Fig. 3.2 , model 4 (our ‘minimal’ model) predicts that the
number of reddened quasars exhibiting @xmath is small. For example at
@xmath , there is almost no predicted reddening. From the observations,
as many as @xmath of such quasars show significant reddening. Thus, dust
model 4 cannot account for all the observed reddening. The most
stringent test for model 1 (our ‘maximal’ model) is at low redshift (
@xmath ), where a reddening of @xmath is predicted for all but a few
percent of quasars (see Fig. 3.2 ). More than @xmath of Parkes quasars
observed at @xmath however appear strongly reddened. The predicted
number of reddened quasars to @xmath is closer to the observed value,
but the dependence of reddening with redshift is inconsistent with that
observed.

We conclude that if the observed reddening is to be totally explained by
dust in galaxies in the line-of-sight, then more complicated models are
required. An example is the inclusion of evolution in galactic dust
which has been neglected in this chapter. A more detailed model is
presented and constrained using the data in the next chapter.

#### 3.6 Conclusions

In this chapter, we have modelled the effects of obscuration due to dust
in galaxies randomly distributed along the line-of-sight as a function
of redshift. We have modelled galaxies as randomly inclined disks with
exponential dust profiles. As an initial investigation, no allowance has
been made for possible evolution in galactic dust content with redshift.

Our main results are:
1. Flux-limited, optically selected quasar surveys are strongly biased
against reddening by line-of-sight dust. Optically selected quasars are
expected to exhibit only a few percent of the total reddening to any
redshift, and do not provide a handle on the total dust content of the
universe. Our ‘minimal’ dust model predicts that at least 10% of quasars
at redshifts @xmath may have been under-represented in optical surveys.
2. The distribution of observed reddening in quasars in the
radio-selected sample of Drinkwater @xmath (1996) cannot be fully
explained by a non-evolving distribution of dusty galaxies along the
line-of-sight. The observed dependence of reddening on redshift is
inconsistent with our predictions.
3. The models depend on a range of parameters which will require
detailed fitting of the observations. The observed reddening
distribution as a function of redshift for Parkes quasars may provide a
strong constraint on possible models. In the next chapter, a detailed
comparison of more complicated models with the data is presented.

The predictions of this chapter can be best confirmed using
radio-selected quasar samples which should have no bias against
obscuration by dust. If models of dusty line-of-sight galaxies are
correct, then a large fraction of radio-selected quasars at high
redshift must appear heavily reddened. If they are to be completely
ruled out, then current radio surveys will have to identify virtually
all highly reddened sources as low redshift galaxies or quasars that are
intrinsically reddened.

### Chapter 4 Time Evolution of Galactic Dust and the Obscuration of
Quasars

All space, all time,
The stars, the terrible perturbations of the suns,
Swelling, collapsing, ending, serving their longer, shorter use,
Ever the mutable,
Ever materials, changing, crumbling, recohering …

— Song Of Myself

Walter Whitman, 1855

#### 4.1 Introduction

As shown in Chapter 3, the distribution of observed reddening in quasars
in the radio-selected sample of Drinkwater @xmath (1997) (hereafter the
‘Parkes sample’) cannot be fully explained by a non-evolving
distribution of dusty galaxies along the line-of-sight. The observations
(see Fig. 1.2 ) indicate a mean reddening which scales as a function of
redshift as @xmath . This dependence is considerably ‘flatter’ than the
mean optical depth predicted from models where the dust content is
assumed not to evolve where @xmath (see section 3.3.1 ). By introducing
evolution in dust content, it may be possible to reproduce the ‘flat’
reddening behaviour as a function of redshift in the Parkes sample. This
chapter explores the effects of more complicated models where galactic
dust content evolves.

Cosmic evolution in dust content to redshifts @xmath is indirectly
suggested by numerous claims of reduced chemical enrichment at @xmath
relative to local estimates. This is provided by observations of trace
metals and their relative abundances in QSO absorption-line systems to
@xmath (Meyer & Roth, 1990; Savaglio, D’Odorico & Möller, 1994; Pettini
@xmath . 1994; Wolfe @xmath . 1994; Pettini @xmath 1997; Songaila,
1997), which are thought to arise from intervening clouds or the haloes
and disks of galaxies. These studies indicate mean metallicities @xmath
and @xmath solar at @xmath and @xmath respectively, and dust-to-gas
ratios @xmath of the galactic value at @xmath . These estimates are
consistent with simple global evolution models of the star formation
rate and evolution of gas in the universe (Pei & Fall, 1995). If the
observed metallicities in QSO absorption systems are common, then their
interpretation as galactic disks implies that substantial evolution has
taken place since @xmath . If dust follows a similar trend (as expected
if dust follows heavy metal production from stellar processes), then one
may expect the effects of obscuration to high redshift to be reduced
relative to non-evolving predictions.

In this chapter, we investigate the reddening effects of dust located in
galaxies along the line-of-sight using models where the dust content
evolves. Implications of obscuration on QSO and absorption line
statistics are explored. We use optical and near-infrared observations
in the Parkes sample to constrain evolutionary and physical properties
of dust in intervening systems. Using existing observations of galactic
dust properties, we also quantify the contribution of dust in external
systems to the reddening observed in this sample.

This chapter is organised as follows: The next section briefly describes
the generalised model. Section 4.3 presents the model predictions.
Implications of dust obscuration on observations of background quasars
and QSO absorption line systems are explored in section 4.4 . In section
4.5 , we fit our model to the Parkes quasar data. Comparisons of our
constrained parameters with existing observations are made in section
4.6 . Possible uncertainties are discussed in section 4.7 and all
results are summarised in section 4.8 . All calculations assume a
Friedmann cosmology with @xmath , and Hubble parameter @xmath where
@xmath (unless otherwise stated).

#### 4.2 The Evolutionary Dust Model

We calculate the distribution in total dust optical depth from model
galaxies along the line-of-sight as a function of redshift by following
the method presented in Chapter 3. This method does not include the
effects of evolution. We shall generalise this model by considering the
possibility of evolution in the dust properties of galaxies.

We assume the following properties for individual absorbing galaxies. As
assumed in Chapter 3, we model galaxies as randomly tilted exponential
disks, where the optical depth through a face-on disk decreases
exponentially with distance @xmath from the center;

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath is a characteristic radius and @xmath , the value of @xmath
through the center of the galaxy @xmath . The redshift dependence of
@xmath is due to the increase in absorber rest frame frequency with
redshift.

Since the observed reddening in Parkes sources (with which we shall
compare our model) is measured in terms of a @xmath colour excess, we
require an extinction law that covers the optical to near-infrared
wavelength range. In this study, we assume an extinction law which
represents an average of a number of laws computed for our galaxy and
several external galaxies by Rieke & Lebofsky (1985), Knapen @xmath
(1991) and Jansen @xmath (1994). This law applies for passbands @xmath
to @xmath where the optical depth scales as frequency as @xmath . Thus,
the optical depth in an observer’s frame through an absorber at redshift
@xmath ( @xmath in Eqn. 4.1 ) will follow the dependence:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the @xmath -band optical depth through the center of a
local galaxy ( @xmath ).

##### 4.2.1 Evolution

Equation 4.2 must be modified if the dust content in each galaxy is
assumed to evolve with cosmic time. The optical depth seen through the
center of a single absorber at some redshift, @xmath , depends on the
quantity of dust formed from past stellar processes. For simplicity, we
assume all galaxies form simultaneously, maintain a constant space
density, and increase in dust content at a rate that is uniform
throughout.

We parameterise evolution in dust content by following simulations of
the formation of heavy metals in the cold dark matter scenario of galaxy
formation by Blain & Longair (1993a,1993b). These authors assume that
galaxies form by the coalescence of gaseous protoclouds through
hierarchical clustering as prescribed by Press & Schechter (1974). A
fixed fraction of the mass involved in each merger event is converted
into stars, leading to the formation of heavy metals and dust. It was
assumed that the energy liberated through stellar radiation was absorbed
by dust and re-radiated into the far-infrared. They found that such
radiation can contribute substantially to the far-infrared background
intensity from which they constrain a model for the formation of heavy
metals as a function of cosmic time. Their models show that the comoving
density of heavy metals created by some redshift @xmath , given that
star formation commenced at some epoch @xmath follows the form

  -- -- -- -------
           (4.3)
  -- -- -- -------

We assume that a fixed fraction of heavy metals condense into dust
grains so that the comoving density in dust, @xmath , follows a similar
dependence as Eqn. 4.3 . The density in dust relative to the present
closure density in @xmath exponential disks per unit comoving volume is
given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath is the dust mass in a single exponential disk.
This mass can be estimated using Eq.7-24 from Spitzer (1978) where the
total density in dust, @xmath , is related to the extinction @xmath
along a path length @xmath in kpc by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath and @xmath are the density and dielectric constant of a typical
dust grain respectively and the numerical factor has dimensions of
@xmath - see Spitzer (1978). Using the exponential profile (Eqn. 4.1 )
where @xmath and integrating along cylinders, the dust mass in a single
exponential disk can be found in terms of the model parameters @xmath
and @xmath . We find that the comoving density in dust at some redshift
scales as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the central @xmath -band optical depth and @xmath the
dust scale radius of each disk. Thus, the central optical depth, @xmath
, in any model absorber at some redshift is directly proportional to the
mass density in dust or heavy metals as specified by Eqn. 4.3 ;

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

The redshift dependence in optical depth observed in the fixed @xmath
-bandpass due to a single absorber now involves two factors. First, the
extinction properties of the dust as defined by Eqn. 4.2 and second, its
evolution specified by Eqn. 4.7 . We replace @xmath (the star formation
epoch) by a hypothesised “dust formation epoch” @xmath . By convolving
Eqns. 4.2 and 4.7 , and requiring that locally; @xmath , the “observed”
optical depth through a single absorber at some redshift @xmath now
takes the form:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Fig. 4.1 illustrates the combined effects of evolution and increase in
observed frame @xmath -band extinction with redshift defined by Eqn. 4.8
. The extinction initially increases with @xmath due to a decrease in
corresponding rest frame wavelength. Depending on the value for @xmath ,
it then decreases due to evolution in dust content. This latter effect
dominates towards @xmath .

The characteristic galactic dust radius @xmath defined in Eqn. 4.1 is
also given a redshift dependence in the sense that galaxies had smaller
dust-haloes at earlier epochs. The following evolutionary form is
adopted:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath gives the rate of evolution and @xmath is now a ‘local’
scale radius. Evolution in radial dust extent is suggested by dynamical
models of star formation in an initially formed protogalaxy (Edmunds,
1990 and references therein). These studies show that the star formation
rate and hence metallicity in disk galaxies has a radial dependence that
decreases outwards at all times. It is thus quite plausible that
galaxies have an evolving effective ‘dust radius’ which follows chemical
enrichment from stellar processes.

Our parameterisation for evolution in galactic dust (Eqns 4.7 and 4.9 )
is qualitatively similar to the ‘accretion models’ for chemical
evolution of Wang (1991), where the effects of grain destruction by
supernovae and grain formation in molecular clouds is taken into
account. This model is also consistent with empirical age-metallicity
relationships inferred from stellar spectral observations in the Galaxy
(Wheeler, Snedin & Truran 1989), and models of chemical evolution on a
cosmic scale implied by absorption-line observations of quasars
(Lanzetta @xmath 1995; Pei & Fall, 1995).

#### 4.3 Model Parameters and Results

##### 4.3.1 Model Parameters

Our model depends on four independent parameters which describe the
characteristics and evolutionary properties of intervening galaxies. The
parameters defined ‘locally’ are: the comoving number density of
galaxies; @xmath , the characteristic dust radius; @xmath and dust
opacity @xmath at the center of an individual absorber. The evolution in
@xmath and @xmath is defined by Eqns 4.7 and 4.9 respectively.
Parameters defining their evolution are @xmath for @xmath , and the
‘dust formation epoch’ @xmath for @xmath . Both @xmath and @xmath have
been conveniently combined into the parameter @xmath where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath being the Hubble length. This parameter is proportional to
the number of galaxies and mean optical depth introduced along the
line-of-sight (see section 4.3.2 ). It also represents a ‘local’
covering factor in dusty galactic disks - the fraction of sky at the
observer covered in absorbers.

In all calculations, we assume a fixed value for @xmath . From Eqn. 4.10
, any evolution in the comoving number density @xmath is included in the
evolution parameter @xmath for @xmath (Eqn. 4.9 ). Thus in general,
@xmath represents an effective evolution parameter for both @xmath and
@xmath . Our model is therefore specified by four parameters: @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

##### 4.3.2 Results and Analysis

Using the formalism of Chapter 3 (ie. Eqns 3.18 - 3.21 ), Fig. 4.2 shows
probability density functions @xmath for the total optical depth up to
redshifts @xmath 1, 3 and 5 for two sets of galaxy parameters ( @xmath ,
@xmath ), and four sets of evolutionary parameters ( @xmath , @xmath )
for each. The values ( @xmath , @xmath ) were chosen to bracket the
range available from existing observations. In studies investigating the
effects of intervening galaxies on background quasars, Heisler &
Ostriker (1988) chose @xmath and @xmath , with @xmath (Eqn. 4.10 )
corresponding to a scale radius @xmath kpc, for a nominal comoving
density @xmath . On examination of the literature, Fall & Pei (1992)
however considered the ranges: @xmath and @xmath . This range for @xmath
is consistent with values found by Rix & Rieke (1993), Giovanelli @xmath
(1994), Valentijn (1994) and Xu & Buat (1995).

The values ( @xmath , @xmath ) were chosen to cover a range of evolution
strengths for @xmath and @xmath respectively. To cover a plausible range
of dust formation epochs, we consider @xmath , consistent with a range
of galaxy ‘formation’ epochs predicted by existing theories of structure
formation (eg. Peebles, 1989). The upper bound @xmath corresponds to the
star formation epoch considered in the galaxy formation models of Blain
& Longair (1993b). The values considered for @xmath ( @xmath ) may be
compared with those implied by observations of the space density of
metal absorption systems from QSO spectra as a function of redshift
(Sargent, Boksenberg & Steidel, 1988; Thomas & Webster 1990). A decrease
in absorber numbers is often implied, suggesting fewer (or less)
chemically enriched regions at high redshift. Present estimates on the
evolution of absorber numbers however are poorly constrained. Thomas &
Webster (1990) have combined several datasets increasing absorption
redshift ranges to give strong constraints on evolution models. For C IV
absorption, their values for the evolution parameter @xmath (where
@xmath -see section 4.6.2 for more details) correspond in our model, at
the @xmath level to @xmath and @xmath for rest frame equivalent widths
@xmath Å @xmath and @xmath Å @xmath respectively.

The area under any normalised curve in Fig. 4.2 gives the fraction of
lines-of-sight to that redshift which have optical depths within some
interval @xmath . Towards high redshifts, we find that obscuration
depends most sensitively on the parameter @xmath , in other words, on
the covering factor of absorbers (Eqn. 4.10 ). Figure 4.2 shows that as
the amount of dust at high redshift increases, ie., as @xmath and @xmath
increase, the curves show little horizontal shift towards larger optical
depths from @xmath to @xmath . A significant shift becomes noticeable
however for the weaker evolution cases, and is largest for ‘no
evolution’ (solid lines). This behaviour is further investigated below.

In order to give a clearer comparison between the amount of obscuration
and strength of evolution implied by our model parameters ( @xmath ), we
have calculated the mean and variance in total optical depth as a
function of redshift. Formal derivations of these quantities are given
in Appendix C. Here we are mainly concerned with their general
dependence on the model parameters.

A useful quantity first worth noting is the number of galaxies
intercepted along the line-of-sight. In a @xmath ( @xmath ) universe,
the average number of intersections within a scale length @xmath of a
galaxy’s center by a light ray to some redshift is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

Where @xmath and @xmath are defined in Eqns 4.9 and 4.10 respectively.

The mean optical depth due to intervening dusty galaxies to some
redshift @xmath is found to scale as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the optical depth at the center of a local galaxy. An
exact expression for @xmath follows for the no evolution case:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

A more convenient measure of the obscuration is the scatter or variance
in optical depth about the mean to some redshift. The mean optical depth
has a simple linear dependence on the parameters @xmath and @xmath and
thus gives no indication of the degree to which each of these parameters
contributes to the scatter. As seen from the probability distributions
in Fig. 4.2 , there is a relatively large scatter about the mean optical
depth to any redshift. The variance is found to scale as

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.14)
  -- -- -- --------

In the no evolution case, the variance is given by the exact expression:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

From Eqn. 4.14 or 4.15 , it is seen that the strongest dependence of the
variance is on the central absorber optical depth @xmath . Larger values
of @xmath (corresponding to ‘harder-edged’ disks), are likely to
introduce considerable scatter amongst random individual lines of sight,
even to relatively low redshift.

In Fig. 4.3 , we show how the mean optical depth varies as a function of
redshift for a range of evolutionary parameters. ‘Strong evolution’ is
characterised by @xmath , @xmath (dot-dashed curves), as compared to the
‘no’, ‘weak’ and ‘moderate’ evolution cases indicated. The mean optical
depth flattens out considerably towards high redshift in the strong
evolution case, and gradually steepens as @xmath and @xmath are
increased. Note that no such flattening is expected in mean reddening
for the no evolution case (Fig. 4.3 c). The mean optical depth to
redshifts @xmath in evolution models can be reduced by factors of at
least four, even for low to moderately low evolution strengths.

Figure 4.3 d shows the scaling of mean optical depth with respect to the
evolutionary parameters. It is seen that obscuration depends most
sensitively on the parameter @xmath , which controls the rate of
evolution in galactic dust scale radius @xmath . A similar trend is
followed in Fig. 4.4 , which shows the dependence of variance in optical
depth on evolution as a function of redshift, for fixed ( @xmath ,
@xmath ). Considerable scatter is expected if the dust radius of a
typical galaxy evolves slowly with cosmic time as shown for the
‘weakest’ evolution case @xmath in Fig. 4.4 .

Our main conclusion is that the inclusion of evolution in dust content,
by amounts consistent with other indirect studies can dramatically
reduce the redshift dependence of total reddening along the
line-of-sight to @xmath , contrary to previous non-evolving predictions.

#### 4.4 Implications

This section explores some consequences of obscuration by intervening
galactic dust as predicted by our generalised model above. We
investigate two issues: First, implications on QSO absorption line
statistics due to obscuration of background QSOs by dust in absorption
systems and second, on evolution of the comoving quasar number density
with redshift.

##### 4.4.1 Quasar Absorption Line Systems

Due to their strength, the heavy element absorption systems in QSO
spectra studied in depth are the Mg II and C IV doublet lines (Tytler
@xmath 1987; Sargent, Boksenberg & Steidel, 1988). A major step in
understanding the origin of these systems is to tie the properties of
the absorbers to the properties of galaxies. It has been found that
@xmath of known Mg II absorbers are associated with galaxies, confirming
the hypothesis that metal line systems do in fact arise from intervening
galaxies (Bergeron & Boisse, 1991 and references therein).

One of the major concerns in QSO absorption line surveys is the
existence of a selection bias due to obscuration by dust. As discussed
by Pettini @xmath (1994), this bias is based on the fact that metal line
absorption systems are usually detected in quasars which need to be
relatively bright in the optical (ie. @xmath ) to enable accurate
spectroscopic confirmation. Those absorbers that are significantly dusty
and hence presumably metal rich may obscure some of the quasars and
hence escape detection. This will lead to an underestimate of inferred
absorber numbers and hence mean metallicity towards high @xmath .

In this section, we compute the distribution in equivalent width (EW) of
metal absorption line systems predicted by our evolving dust-galaxy
model. We also estimate the fraction of metal line systems that may have
been missed from existing surveys due to obscuration by dust.

We assume absorbers to be associated with spherical haloes where the
dust optical depth through an absorber follows the exponential profile
Eqn. 4.1 . Allowing for non-uniformity, the number of absorbers along
the line-of-sight is assumed to follow a Poisson distribution. In other
words, the probability that an absorber is intersected within a distance
@xmath of its center along a line-of-sight to redshift @xmath is given
by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath represents the mean number of intersections within @xmath .
In a complete sample, unbiased with respect to obscuration by dust, we
shall define @xmath where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

(see Appendix C). As before, we assume a direct proportionality between
heavy metal abundance and the amount of dust extinction. To convert from
optical depth through a single absorber to an absorption line EW
measure, we make use of the “local” calibration:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

found along a number of galactic and LMC sight lines (Ostriker, Vogeley
& York, 1990 and references therein). We shall follow these authors who
used Eqn. 4.18 to infer the amount of dust reddening associated with QSO
absorption line systems. We assume the mean value @xmath in our
calculations.

The fraction of background QSOs at a redshift @xmath exhibiting
absorption lines with rest frame EWs greater than some value @xmath , is
simply the fraction of QSOs whose line-of-sight passes within some
radius @xmath of an exponential dust profile such that @xmath for radii
@xmath . Converting our rest frame central @xmath -band optical depth
@xmath into @xmath assuming a galactic extinction law, Eqn. 4.7 can be
re-written:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Our exponential dust profile at any @xmath which includes evolution in
the scale radius @xmath can be written

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath and @xmath are our evolutionary model parameters as defined in
section 4.3.1 . Combining Eqns. 4.18 , 4.19 and 4.20 , we find that an
absorber at redshift @xmath will give rise to an absorption line with EW
greater than some value @xmath if it is intercepted within a radius:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

The “true” (or unbiased) mean number of absorber intersections to a
redshift @xmath (Eqn. 4.17 ), which yield EWs @xmath can now be written

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is defined by Eqn. 4.21 .

To determine the fraction of QSOs with absorption line EWs @xmath in an
optical flux-limited QSO sample, we must account for the bias due to
obscuration by dust. In other words, the mean number of absorption
systems intercepted to ‘bright’ optically selected QSOs is expected to
be less than @xmath defined by Eqn. 4.22 . Let us define the “observed”
mean number of intersections as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the ‘dust bias’ factor. To some redshift and for a fixed
absorber optical depth @xmath , the “true” (unbiased) mean optical
depth, @xmath , is directly proportional to the mean number of absorbers
intercepted @xmath (cf. Eqns. 4.11 and 4.13 ), since both depend
linearly on the covering factor parameter @xmath . For a fixed QSO
distribution, this implies that @xmath will also be true, where @xmath
is the “observed” mean optical depth to optically detected sources (see
section 3.4.1 ). Comparing the functional forms of @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath (eg. Eqns. 4.11 , 3.24 and 3.30 ), one can easily (and crudely)
guess an approximate functional form for @xmath . Given this, it can be
shown that for redshifts @xmath and optical depths @xmath , the bias
factor @xmath will scale as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

For a given set of absorber dust parameters and QSO luminosity function
slope, @xmath can be easily computed from the observed and true mean
optical depth following the formalism in section 3.4.1 .

To summarise, the “true” (unbiased) fraction of QSOs with absorption
line EWs @xmath is computed by combining Eqns. 4.16 , 4.21 and 4.22 ,
while the “observed” fraction (corrected for dust obscuration) involves
use of the bias factor @xmath (Eqns. 4.23 and 4.24 ), where @xmath is
replaced by @xmath in Eqn. 4.16 .

Figure 4.5 shows the cumulative EW distribution of a typical metal
absorption line (eg. either C IV or Mg II ) expected from a population
of quasars at @xmath in our model. The dust parameters assumed for model
absorbers are an exponential scale radius @xmath kpc and central optical
depth @xmath @xmath . A comoving number density of @xmath is assumed,
similar to that inferred for local galaxies. Fig. 4.5 a refers to no
evolution in these parameters with @xmath , while Fig. 4.5 b assumes a
‘moderate’ evolution in both @xmath and @xmath . Each plot shows the
true distribution expected in a complete sample unbiased with respect to
obscuration by dust and that expected in an optical flux-limited QSO
sample. The latter assumes a QSO cumulative luminosity function slope
@xmath .

The heavy solid lines represent the fraction of absorption lines with
EWs @xmath missing from a flux-limited QSO sample relative to the ‘true’
number expected in the absence of dust obscuration. As expected, the
incompleteness in the number of absorption lines as a function of EW
increases towards the highest EWs. This can be explained by
lines-of-sight passing close to an absorber’s center where relatively
more dust is intercepted in its assumed exponential dust profile. Thus,
if the dust distribution in QSO absorbers follows an exponential-type
law, then current absorption line surveys are more likely to probe their
outer regions (at @xmath kpc). The inclusion of moderate amounts of
evolution in absorber properties (Fig. 4.5 b), only slightly reduces the
incompleteness in absorber numbers.

Since the dust properties assumed for model absorbers in Fig. 4.5 are at
the upper limits of existing observations, we conclude that current
metal absorption line surveys may have missed up to 40% of lines with
EWs @xmath Å. For comparison, Fall & Pei (1995) find that up to to 60%
of damped Ly @xmath systems at redshifts @xmath may have been missed due
to obscuration by associated dust. These latter systems however may
correspond to a totally different class of absorber. If they are to be
interpreted as arising from the gaseous disks of galaxies, then they may
also probe the dustiest regions, where obscuration is more efficient.

##### 4.4.2 Quasar Evolution and Statistics

There are numerous observations suggesting that the space density of
bright quasars declines beyond @xmath (Sandage, 1972; Schmidt, Schneider
& Gunn, 1988). This has been strongly confirmed from various luminosity
