##### Acknowledgements. My journey towards becoming a physicist began
at a very early age when I accompanied my dad to work at the Niels Bohr
Institute. I was immediately captivated by all his different experiments
and the magical feel of the place. The magic is still intact all these
years later, although somehow I ended up with pen and paper as my
primary tools. I guess it is difficult to foresee your future when you
are only 7 years old? Having a pastor and a physicist as parents
certainly proved an inspiration in my life and gave me a strong desire
to discover and understand the world around me. I wish to thank my
family for giving me a wonderful home to grow up in. I enjoyed a very
dynamic and exciting physics education at the Niels Bohr Institute with
inspirational teachers such as Mogens Dam, Poul Henrik Damgaard, Henrik
Smith, Jens Martin Knudsen, Finn Berg, Jan Ambjørn, Andrew Jackson, and
many others. In particular, I should thank Poul Henrik Damgaard, not
only for his careful guidance of my master’s thesis, but also for
suggesting that I apply to CU when I considered pursuing my graduate
studies in the US. He told me I would love it here, and he was
absolutely right! From the day I arrived in Boulder, Victor has been a
great advisor, always full of ideas for new and exciting projects. I
have very much appreciated the independence he granted me in working on
those projects which I found interesting. Over the past four years I
have learned an immense amount from Victor, not only from the many times
I would knock on his door to discuss different subjects, but also from
his clear way of approaching physics problems. Thanks a lot for always
taking the time to explain difficult subjects to me! Thanks also go to
Jim Shepard who helped me take those important first steps towards
solving difficult few-body problems. I should also mention his hugely
useful class, through which I learned not to underestimate the power of
Fetter and Walecka. Over the past few years, I have been happy to share
F425 with a host of officemates. I thoroughly appreciate our many
stimulating discussions. In particular, I enjoyed the company of James
McCollough and Quan Zhang, and our many discussions of physics and
whatever else came to mind. Many more people have helped make my time in
Boulder rich. I would especially like to thank Rune Niclasen, Mike
Wilking, Jim Hirschauer, and Sungsoo Choi. Last but not least I want to
mention my girlfriend Klara. Klara continues to make me happy every day.
She has taught me a lot about life and through her I have come to
realize that life is not only about physics and football. I have
immensely enjoyed our walks in the foothills, our trips, and our nights
on the sofa watching a good movie. I look forward to every day with her.
Finally, I am grateful for the generous support I have enjoyed from the
NSF, the Fulbright Program (through the Danish-American Fulbright
Commission), and the Danish Research Agency. \emptyLoF \emptyLoT

## Chapter 1 Introduction

The history of superfluidity dates back to the discovery of
superconductivity (charged superfluidity) in mercury by Kamerlingh Onnes
[ 54 ] . Onnes observed that the electrical resistance of mercury
disappears completely as the system is cooled below a critical
temperature. A detailed microscopic explanation of the phenomenon of
superconductivity proved elusive until the breakthrough in the 1950’s by
Bardeen, Cooper, and Schrieffer [ 5 , 6 ] . The work of these authors
(BCS theory) described how an arbitrarily weak attractive interaction in
a degenerate Fermi gas leads to the formation of Cooper pairs [ 18 ] ,
composed of weakly correlated pairs of fermions. The BCS theory
explained the resulting appearance of a minimum excitation energy, or
energy gap, and proved hugely succesful in understanding properties of
superconductors. In particular, the BCS theory was able to correctly
describe superfluid @xmath He (fermionic atoms) but not superfluidity in
liquid @xmath He (bosonic atoms).

The development of the theory of Bose-Einstein condensation (BEC)
occurred in parallel. In 1925 Einstein predicted [ 26 ] the macroscopic
occupation of the single-particle ground state below a critical
temperature in systems of particles obeying Bose statistics. This
followed ideas by Bose on the quantum statistics of phonons [ 11 ] . In
1938 it was proposed by London [ 51 , 52 ] that superfluidity in @xmath
He appears as a consequence of Bose-Einstein condensation. However,
liquid @xmath He is a strongly interacting system, very different from
the weakly interacting limit studied by Einstein. In particular, the
number of particles occupying the single-particle ground state is
strongly suppressed even at zero temperature, making the verification of
Bose-Einstein condensation in liquid @xmath He extremely difficult.

Considerable experimental effort was spent on attempting to obtain a BEC
in a weakly interacting system. This was first achieved in 1995 in
dilute gases of alkali atoms consisting of rubidium [ 3 ] , sodium [ 21
] , and lithium [ 13 ] . In these experiments, the gas was cooled to
temperatures for which the thermal de Broglie wavelength was of the
order of the interparticle spacing and the BEC of weakly interacting
atoms could be observed very clearly from the bimodal profile of the
momentum distribution of the gas below the critical temperature. For a
review of the subject of Bose-Einstein condensation in dilute gases see
e.g. Refs. [ 19 , 48 , 55 ] .

Soon after the observation of BEC in dilute gases of bosonic atoms,
considerable attention was shifted to the study of Fermi gases. Applying
the same experimental methods as in the bosonic gases proved
challenging, as the @xmath -wave interactions necessary for evaporative
cooling are absent in spin-polarized Fermi gases. Thus the cooling of
Fermi gases requires the presence of two distinguishable atoms, either
in the form of two hyperfine spin components of the same atom or in
mixtures of two atomic species. The first realization of a quantum
degenerate two-component Fermi gas was obtained in a system of @xmath K
[ 23 ] where a temperature of @xmath was achieved ( @xmath is the Fermi
temperature). Soon experiments followed in which quantum degeneracy was
observed in @xmath Li [ 72 , 66 ] using sympathetic cooling with the
@xmath Li isotope.

In two-component ultracold Fermi gases, it should be possible to observe
superfluidity according to the BCS theory. However, in these first
experiments which reached quantum degeneracy, the critical temperature
required to enter the superfluid phase was very small due to the
diluteness and weak interactions in these gases. It was soon recognized
[ 37 , 70 ] that it is possible to enhance the weak interactions by the
use of a scattering resonance known as a Feshbach resonance [ 27 ] ,
thereby increasing the critical temperature.

The use of Feshbach resonances opened up the possibility of studying
both BCS superfluidity and BEC in the same system. These resonances are
a characteristic of the two-body interactions and they allow for the
precise control of the strength of interparticle interactions through
the tuning of an applied magnetic field. For a weak and attractive
interaction in a two-component Fermi gas, BCS theory is valid and the
system is expected to form a BCS superfluid below a critical
temperature. If the two-body interaction is made progressively stronger
by the tuning of a magnetic field, at some critical strength of the
interaction a two-body bound state becomes possible. The bound states
are then bosons and form a BEC at sufficiently low temperatures. A BEC
in a two-component Fermi gas was first observed in 2003 through the
typical bimodal distributions [ 33 , 40 , 78 ] . The observation of the
BCS superfluid phase is more subtle as the normal and superfluid phases
share many properties. Convincing proof of superfluidity was obtained in
2005 through the observation of quantized vortices on both sides of a
Feshbach resonance [ 77 ] .

The possibility of a BCS-BEC crossover was originally proposed by Eagles
in 1969 [ 24 ] , and later by Leggett [ 47 ] , and by Nozières and
Schmitt-Rink [ 53 ] . These authors extended the mean field BCS model,
valid in the weakly interacting BCS regime, to an arbitrary interaction
strength, i.e. to well outside the regime of the original model’s
validity. It was discovered that under the strengthening of the
interaction, the BCS gap equation, the mean field theory which describes
the BCS state, evolves into the Schrödinger equation of a bound pair of
fermionic atoms, correctly predicting the binding energy of the diatomic
molecule. Furthermore, the results of these authors suggested that no
phase transition occurs in the crossover, and thus the BCS and BEC
phases are qualitatively the same phase. These results connected the two
types of paired superfluidity, within mean field theory, and
demonstrated how BCS and BEC are two extreme limits of the same system.

Despite the success of the gap equation in describing the BCS superfluid
and the bound pairs in the BEC regime, it remained an open question
whether it could correctly predict properties of the many-body system on
the BEC side of a Feshbach resonance. The short answer is that it
cannot; the gap equation, when applied to the BEC side of the crossover,
implicitly assumes that the perturbative parameter is the interaction
strength between the Feshbach molecules, i.e. that interactions are weak
and scattering proceeds in the Born approximation. However, the Born
approximation is known to fail to describe interactions between
molecules properly [ 59 ] . It follows that while the BCS-BEC gap
equation may describe the physics of the BEC regime at a qualitative
level due to the lack of a phase transition, it is not to be trusted
quantitatively. Thus there is a need for a reliable technique in the BEC
regime, beyond mean field theory. This is one of the main subjects of
this thesis (see also Ref. [ 50 ] ).

In this thesis, the small parameter used in the BEC regime is the gas
parameter @xmath . Here, @xmath is the density of fermions and @xmath
the @xmath -wave scattering length between the two components of the
Fermi gas. In the gas parameter expansion the chemical potential, ground
state energy, speed of sound, and condensate depletion are computed. The
results are seen to match the results of the standard dilute Bose gas [
1 , 29 ] , however with the boson-boson scattering length related to the
underlying fermion-fermion scattering length by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

This result was first computed in Ref. [ 59 ] using a coordinate space
formalism and the result is confirmed in this thesis using a
diagrammatic technique. While the work reported in Ref. [ 50 ] and also
in this thesis was in progress, the result ( 1.1 ) was computed
independently by Brodsky et al [ 14 ] using essentially the same
diagrammatic technique.

At the crossover, the scattering length @xmath diverges. Thus, the
parameter @xmath is no longer small, and properties of the gas close to
the Feshbach resonance will not be computed.

In the 1950’s, perturbative corrections in powers of @xmath to the
chemical potential and ground state energy were computed in the standard
dilute Bose gas [ 45 , 46 , 76 , 65 , 38 ] . It is explicitly
demonstrated in this thesis how the fact that the bosons are composed of
fermions does not change the first two such corrections, apart from
replacing @xmath by @xmath . Even higher order contributions will depend
explicitly on the presence of fermions in the problem but will not be
considered here.

An interesting system is a two-component Fermi gas where the two
components have different masses. For small mass imbalances, this system
still displays the usual BCS-BEC crossover physics, with the few-body
couplings slightly changed. However, as the mass imbalance is increased,
the system becomes less stable until finally above a mass-ratio of 13.6
between the fermion components, the three-body system has been found [
57 ] to contain bound states similar to the Efimov states [ 25 ] in
systems of bosons. Properties of the mass imbalanced system such as the
atom-molecule and molecule-molecule scattering lengths and the loss rate
due to collisional relaxation have been calculated in Refs. [ 56 , 57 ,
59 ] by use of a real-space technique, and the results will be confirmed
in this thesis using a diagrammatic technique.

To date, experiments in ultracold gases of fermionic atoms have
primarily studied gases consisting of two hyperfine states of the same
atom. However, recently there has been a considerable interest in gases
of identical fermionic atoms interacting close to a @xmath -wave
Feshbach resonance. The observation of @xmath -wave Feshbach resonances
has been reported in @xmath K [ 69 ] and @xmath Li [ 67 ] , and
theoretical work on the subject includes Refs. [ 36 , 22 , 35 , 17 , 34
, 49 ] . In the @xmath -wave superfluid, the BCS and BEC phases are no
longer extreme limits of the same phase, rather they are separated by a
genuine phase transition [ 74 , 22 ] , or in some cases a sequence of
phase transitions [ 35 , 17 , 34 ] . The phase transition may be
topological in some cases [ 62 , 35 , 43 ] .

@xmath -wave Feshbach resonances naturally fall into two categories of
weak and strong. Mean field theory in the crossover, as developed in
Refs. [ 35 , 17 , 34 ] , is only strictly valid for the weak resonances.
On the other hand, the @xmath -wave resonance studied in the experiment
of Refs. [ 69 , 30 ] is strong [ 34 ] . It is therefore of interest to
study the strong resonances. It was first noticed by Y. Castin and
collaborators [ 16 ] that in this regime, three fermions will form a
bound state with angular momentum 1. These trimers are very strongly
bound, with a size of the order of the short range physics which led to
the formation of the Feshbach molecule. In this thesis, the appearance
of the trimer under the strengthening of the resonance will be studied,
and the decay rate due to inelastic collisions in which two molecules
turn into a trimer and an atom will be estimated.

In this thesis the effects of a trapping potential will not be
considered. Of course, the trapping potential is an essential ingredient
in the experimental study of ultracold gases. However, the local density
approximation has proven quite succesful in describing most properties
of the system as long as the trapping potential is sufficiently smooth.
For a review of trapped gases see e.g. Ref. [ 19 ] .

The thesis is organized as follows. Chapter 2 presents some simple
properties of the BCS-BEC crossover, and a model of the Feshbach
resonance physics is introduced. Chapter 3 contains calculations of
properties of the BEC-BCS crossover in the BEC regime, and in chapter 4
higher order corrections to the chemical potential and ground state
energy are computed in the gas parameter expansion. The two-component
mass-imbalanced Fermi gas in the BEC regime is studied in chapter 5 ,
with emphasis on few body scattering lengths and collisional losses. The
focus then shifts to @xmath -wave resonantly coupled superfluids. In
chapter 6 the system is described and the model introduced. Chapter 7
investigates the behavior of strongly-resonant @xmath -wave superfluids
and the appearance of bound trimer states under the strengthening of the
resonance.

For simplicity of notation, Planck’s constant @xmath and Boltzmann’s
constant @xmath have been set to 1.

## Chapter 2 Physics of the BCS-BEC crossover

Soon after the achievement of Bose-Einstein condensation in dilute gases
of bosonic alkali atoms, considerable attention was instead focused on
gases comprised by fermionic atoms. The difference in quantum statistics
makes these systems quite distinct at ultracold temperatures. As
temperature is lowered, a bosonic system goes through a phase-transition
to a BEC and this happens even in the absence of interactions. The Pauli
principle, on the other hand, prevents two identical fermions from
occupying the same single-particle state. Thus, in a non-interacting
Fermi gas at zero temperature, the fermions will instead occupy the
lowest energy states with exactly one fermion in each state. Hence,
superfluidity in a gas of fermions can only stem from the presence of
interactions. As the temperature of a Fermi gas is decreased, the
crossover from a classical to a quantum behavior is smooth.

Consider a gas of spin @xmath fermions at low temperature. If the
interactions in the spin singlet channel are arbitrarily weak and
attractive, the Fermi sea will be destabilized towards the formation of
Cooper pairs [ 18 ] . The pairing occurs between fermions with equal and
opposite momenta, the pairs being weakly correlated in momentum space.
The pairs are highly overlapping in real space and should not be thought
of as molecules. The ground state of the system is then no longer a
Fermi sea, rather it is a superposition of Cooper pairs, the primary
contribution arising from fermions close to the Fermi surface. This is
explained in the famous work of Bardeen, Cooper and Schrieffer [ 5 , 6 ]
. The system studied by these authors consisted of pairs of spin-up and
spin-down electrons and the resulting many-body system was a
superconductor (a charged superfluid). In the context of ultracold
two-species Fermi gases, the regime described is known as the BCS
regime.

Imagine then that by some means the attractive interaction is increased.
As the strength of the interaction is increased, a bound molecular state
between two fermions becomes possible. The resulting bound state is then
a boson, and a gas of these diatomic molecules may form a BEC. This is
the essence of the BCS-BEC crossover; as the interaction between
fermions is increased, there will be a continuous crossover from a BCS
superfluid to a BEC of diatomic molecules. Thus the BCS and BEC regimes
are merely limiting cases of the same system. The crossover is
illustrated in Fig. 2.1 . In the central region between the two limiting
regimes, the bosonic pairs retain some properties of both Cooper pairs
and diatomic molecules.

With the advent of BCS theory in the 1950’s, the limiting regimes in the
BCS-BEC crossover were well understood. However, the connection between
these types of superfluids was not appreciated until the work of Eagles
in 1969 [ 24 ] , and the later works of Leggett [ 47 ] as well as
Nozières and Schmitt-Rink [ 53 ] in the 1980’s. These authors started
from a BCS mean-field theory which is valid only for weak attractive
interactions. They extended the original model to arbitrarily strong
attractive interactions, well outside the range of validity of the
model. The mean field equation which describes properties of the BCS
superfluid is known as the gap equation and it was discovered [ 47 , 53
] that the gap equation evolves into the Schrödinger equation of a bound
pair of fermions under the strengthening of the interaction. Thus the
results of these authors connected the BCS superfluid with the BEC of
condensed pairs of fermionic atoms, within a mean field approach. Finite
temperature studies [ 53 , 64 ] further showed that the transition
temperature evolves smoothly between the two regimes. The results
suggested a smooth crossover without any phase transition. It should be
emphasized that the results obtained by this method, while qualitatively
correct due to the lack of a phase transition, are not quantitatively
correct in the BEC regime, since the mean field approach is not strictly
valid. This point will be discussed further in chapter 3 .

The crucial tool which allows the experimental control over the
interaction strength in a two-component Fermi gas is a Feshbach
resonance [ 27 , 28 , 71 ] . A Feshbach resonance is an intrinsic
two-body phenomenon. Consider the interaction between two fermionic
atoms; at short distances the interaction is repulsive, while at large
distances it is dominated by the van der Waals attraction which goes as
@xmath . In general, the interatomic potentials contain several
vibrational bound states. A Feshbach resonance occurs when the energy of
a bound state in one scattering channel (usually called the closed
channel) coincides with the energy of free particles scattering in
another channel (the open channel). The two spin channels will in
general have different magnetic moments. Typically, the closed channel
is an approximate spin singlet, the open channel an approximate spin
triplet, and the (large-distance) splitting between the energy levels is
provided by the Zeeman effect. The Zeeman splitting may be tuned by
adjusting the magnitude of an external magnetic field. The situation is
illustrated in Fig. 2.2 . The use of Feshbach resonances allows a very
precise tuning of the strength of the interaction, which may even be
changed in real time.

The presence of the (real or virtual) bound state in the closed channel
can significantly alter scattering in the open channel. Across a
Feshbach resonance, the (open channel) scattering length behaves as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here, @xmath is the non-resonant scattering length, the value of the
scattering length @xmath far off-resonance, @xmath is the magnetic field
position of the resonance, and @xmath is known as the magnetic resonance
width (defined as the difference in magnetic field, @xmath , at which
the scattering length becomes zero). The behavior of the scattering
length is illustrated in Fig. 2.3 .

Below, low-energy scattering properties relevant for the present work
will be reviewed. A model of the resonant interactions, the so-called
two-channel model, will be considered and its relevance to the Feshbach
resonance physics described above will be discussed.

### 2.1 Low energy scattering

This section contains a short discussion of the scattering theory
relevant for this thesis. For elastic scattering of two particles via a
centrally symmetric interaction potential, the scattering amplitude may
be written as [ 44 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here, @xmath is the magnitude of the incoming, @xmath , and outgoing,
@xmath , momenta, while @xmath is the scattering angle, with @xmath .
The probability of scattering through the solid angle @xmath is related
to the scattering amplitude by @xmath . A centrally symmetric
interaction @xmath conserves the angular momentum @xmath and in this
thesis, focus will be on @xmath - and @xmath -wave scattering, with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

The partial wave amplitudes may also be written in the form [ 44 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The functions @xmath are real and may be Taylor expanded in their
arguments. Assuming that all the expansion coefficients take values of
the order of some “natural” scale, it is seen that for low-energy
scattering (e.g. in ultracold gases) the functions @xmath are well
approximated by the first few terms of their Taylor expansions. In
particular it is important to note that the scattering amplitude at low
energy only depends very weakly on the precise details of the
complicated inter-atomic interaction potential @xmath .

For @xmath -wave scattering, keeping only one term in the Taylor
expansion of @xmath amounts to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the @xmath -wave scattering length. The scattering
amplitude has one pole, located at @xmath . This pole only corresponds
to a real bound state if @xmath , otherwise it corresponds to a virtual
bound state [ 44 ] . For @xmath the real bound state has the energy

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the reduced mass in the two body system. The result
already nicely matches the Feshbach resonance picture described above.
However, the approximation Eq. ( 2.5 ) is deficient in one respect, it
lacks a true resonance, i.e. a quasistationary state with a finite
lifetime [ 34 ] . In order to correctly capture the possible existence
of such states, the next order expansion

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

is needed. The parameter @xmath is known as the effective range of the
interaction potential @xmath .

An important energy scale is set by the effective range

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

This energy scale is related to the magnetic field width by the
approximate relationship @xmath [ 34 ] . The gas contains a finite atom
density @xmath , and consequently an additional length scale is set by
the average particle spacing @xmath . The corresponding energy scale is
the Fermi energy ¹ ¹ 1 In the absence of two-body bound states this
would have been the conventional Fermi energy. @xmath given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath is the Fermi momentum. The two energy scales allow the definition
of a dimensionless parameter [ 34 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

which measures the width of the resonance. Resonances for which @xmath
are termed narrow while those with @xmath are called wide . The precise
criterion for the resonances to be wide was first derived in Ref. [ 15 ]
.

The distinction between wide and narrow resonances is quite important.
Since the effective range only varies weakly across a Feshbach
resonance, for narrow resonances @xmath provides a small parameter in
which a quantitatively correct (in the zero width limit) perturbation
theory may be formulated across the whole crossover [ 34 ] . In
contrast, no such simplification occurs for wide resonances; the other
dimensionless parameter which may be constructed from the three length
scales @xmath @xmath , and @xmath is known as the gas parameter , @xmath
. Since the scattering length diverges across the resonance, no small
parameter exists close to a wide Feshbach resonance.

Most current experiments in ultracold two-component Fermi gases are
carried out close to wide resonances. As these are the most relevant,
the focus in the parts of this thesis concerning @xmath -wave Feshbach
resonances (chapters 3 , 4 , and 5 ) will be on wide resonances.

It is precisely for the narrow resonances that the two-body problem may
display a true resonance (a positive energy state with a finite
lifetime) [ 34 ] . Since the @xmath -wave Feshbach resonances studied in
this thesis are wide, these quasistationary states will be ignored. It
is, however, interesting to note that although most experiments are
performed close to wide resonances, since @xmath resonances which are
wide in current experiments may become narrow if higher densities are
achieved.

### 2.2 The two-channel model

A model which reflects the physics of the interaction in a two-component
Fermi gas interacting close to a Feshbach resonance is provided by the
two-channel model. It was first studied by Rumer in 1959 [ 63 ] and in
the context of atomic Bose-Einstein condensates it was studied by
Timmermans et al in 1999 [ 71 ] . Without interactions, the model
describes the open-channel atoms and closed-channel molecules
separately. Interaction between atoms and molecules is provided by an
interconversion term.

The model is conveniently defined in terms of a functional integral

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath and @xmath are the fermionic atoms in two different hyperfine
states (for simplicity denoted @xmath and @xmath ) and @xmath is the
closed-channel molecule. The action @xmath consists of three parts,
@xmath . Of these, @xmath is the free action of fermions

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the chemical potential of the fermions. The free action
of the closed-channel molecules is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath is called the detuning and is the parameter which is typically
controlled by a magnetic field in the experimental setup. That is, the
detuning controls the proximity to the Feshbach resonance. The
interconversion term between open-channel atoms and the closed-channel
molecule is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

The coupling @xmath is the probability of converting a @xmath particle
to a pair of atoms. In itself, the interaction occurs at a point in
space and is unphysical; the action needs to be supplemented by a
cut-off, @xmath where @xmath denotes the range of the (short-ranged)
forces.

It is important to note that the molecule @xmath is only the true bound
state in the case of a vanishing coupling between atoms and molecules.
Otherwise, the true bound state is the “bare” molecule @xmath surrounded
by a cloud of atoms. Thus, while the bare molecule’s size is of the
range of the forces which led to its creation, @xmath , the size of the
physical molecule is of the order of the atom-atom scattering length
@xmath . In fact, the contribution of the bare molecule to the physical
molecule effectively disappears for infinitely wide Feshbach resonances,
where the two-channel model may be replaced by a one-channel model. This
will be discussed in more detail in chapter 3 .

The two parameters which characterize the scattering between the atoms
are the scattering length and the effective range. These may be
calculated in the model and are given by [ 4 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is apparent that the position of the resonance is shifted from the
“bare” value @xmath to the physical detuning ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

The shift again occurs because the bare molecule does not coincide with
the physical molecule.

In terms of the parameters of the model,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the two-channel model, it is again seen that @xmath is independent of
detuning @xmath and scattering length @xmath . Thus, if @xmath away from
resonance then this is the case across the whole crossover. On the other
hand, if @xmath is small then the resonance will be wide. In the next
chapter the effective range will be taken to zero in order to model the
wide resonances.

## Chapter 3 The BCS-BEC crossover in the BEC regime

In the previous chapter some basic properties of the BCS-BEC crossover
were described. Consider a two-component Fermi gas with short-ranged
interactions. If the interactions between the two components are weak,
the fermions will pair into the usual Cooper pairs and the system
becomes a BCS superconductor at low temperatures. If the strength of the
interaction is then increased by some means, at some point it becomes
possible for two fermions to form a bound molecular state. As the
strength is tuned further away from resonance, the bosonic molecules
will form a regular BEC, and it is properties of this BEC which will be
described in the present chapter.

The @xmath -wave scattering length of two different fermionic atoms
diverges across the Feshbach resonance. However, the BCS-BEC gap
equation which describes the weakly attractive Fermi two-component Fermi
gas implicitly assumes that the scattering is weak. Thus, even though
the gap equation correctly describes the physics on the BCS side of the
resonance there is no reason why the gap equation should be trusted on
the BEC side of a Feshbach resonance. Yet, in Refs. [ 47 , 53 ] it was
discovered that under the strengthening of the interaction, the gap
equation develops into the Schrödinger equation for the bound pair of
fermionic atoms and correctly predicts the binding energy of this bound
pair. Studies by these authors furthermore demonstrated that the BCS
superfluid evolves into the BEC without undergoing a phase transition.
Thus, even though the gap equation is not quantitatively correct on the
BEC side of a resonance, it still yields qualitatively correct results.

In order to systematically investigate the BEC regime of the weakly
bound bosonic molecules, it is necessary to identify a small parameter.
This is provided by the so-called gas parameter @xmath . @xmath is the
density of fermions while @xmath is the density of bosonic molecules.
The size of a molecule is roughly of order @xmath , as discussed in
chapter 2 , while the average intermolecular distance is @xmath . Thus,
even though the molecules are rather large compared to the
short-distance physics which led to their formation, for small values of
the gas parameter the gas is a dilute Bose gas.

Using the low-density (or small gas parameter) expansion allows the
computation of the molecular chemical potential @xmath , the speed of
sound wave propagation @xmath , the condensate depletion, and the ground
state energy @xmath . In the lowest order these are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.1)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.2)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.3)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

@xmath is the mass of a molecule and @xmath is the volume of the system.
The molecule-molecule scattering length @xmath appearing in these
equations is proportional to the atom-atom scattering length. The
coefficient of proportionality was first calculated by Petrov et al [ 59
] who found

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

This result was later confirmed in Refs. [ 14 , 50 ] with the
calculations of Ref. [ 50 ] presented in section 3.6 below. It should be
noted that the gap equation predics @xmath . Hence it is seen how the
gap equation does not take interactions between the molecules properly
into account.

At the crossover between BEC and BCS physics, the scattering length
@xmath diverges. This means that the gas parameter is no longer small,
instead the scattering length will be much larger than the
inter-molecular distance. The point at which @xmath diverges is known as
the unitary point. The physical behavior of the superfluid at zero
temperature can only depend on one parameter, the density. The physical
properties of the gas in this regime may be obtained by methods such as
a large @xmath expansion [ 73 ] , Monte Carlo techniques (see e.g. the
review [ 32 ] for references), or other methods. The perturbative
approximation employed in this thesis breaks down close to the resonance
and here only systems with @xmath will be considered.

In this chapter, wide resonances are investigated. As discussed in
chapter 2 this requires @xmath . It is important to note that while
@xmath diverges across a Feshbach resonance the effective range stays
roughly constant. Thus the validity of the low-density expansion is
restricted to scattering lengths such that @xmath . This limitation of
the model’s validity is not too restrictive; typical experimental
densities of two-component Fermi gases are of order @xmath cm @xmath
corresponding to an interparticle distance of order @xmath ( @xmath is
the Bohr radius) while @xmath is typically of order @xmath .

The fact that the investigated Feshbach resonances are wide implies that
the dynamics of the closed-channel molecule is suppressed. In the limit
of a vanishing effective range it is then simpler to describe the gas by
a one-channel model rather than the two-channel model described in
chapter 2 . The equivalence of these two approaches will be demonstrated
below.

It should be reiterated that all calculations presented in this thesis
proceed at zero temperature. A finite temperature extension of these
results will not be discussed here. For further references see Ref. [ 2
] and references therein.

The systematic perturbative expansion in the gas parameter may be
continued below the lowest order. The first two corrections to the
results ( 3.1 ) and ( 3.4 ) depend only on the gas parameter after which
further details of the interaction become important. The discussion of
these higher order contributions to the chemical potential and ground
state energy will be studied in chapter 4 .

Another natural extension of the work presented here is to consider a
two-component gas with a mass-imbalance. This is treated in chapter 5 .

This chapter is organized as follows. First, the one-channel model is
introduced and the diagrammatic approach to the BEC regime of the weakly
bound molecules is discussed. Next, in section 3.4 , physical properties
of the BEC are computed in the lowest order gas parameter expansion.
Finally, sections 3.5 and 3.6 contain the few-body diagrammatic
calculations relevant for the BEC regime.

### 3.1 The one-channel model

In the previous chapter, the two-channel model was introduced to
describe a system where a bound state of two fermions appeared as the
magnetic field was tuned across a resonance. The Feshbach resonances
described in this thesis (and indeed relevant to most BCS-BEC
experiments) are wide, and for wide resonances it is more convenient to
treat the gas of weakly bound molecules using what is known as the
one-channel model. Below, it will be shown that these two approaches are
equivalent in the limit of infinitely wide resonances.

The one-channel model may be expressed by a functional integral

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

The action @xmath consists of a free part and an interacting part. The
free part is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

while the interacting part is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath is chosen positive because the interaction potential is
attractive. The interactions described by @xmath take place at one point
in space which by itself is unphysical. The results should be
independent of the precise short distance physics and thus @xmath needs
to be supplemented by a cut-off @xmath . Note that the one-channel model
described by Eqs. ( 3.6 ), ( 3.7 ), and ( 3.8 ) does not explicitly
contain the closed channel molecule associated with a Feshbach
resonance.

#### 3.1.1 Diagrammatic approach

Consider now the one-channel model of a two-component Fermi gas with
@xmath and @xmath . The propagator of fermions in the model described by
Eqs. ( 3.6 ), ( 3.7 ), and ( 3.8 ) is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the mass of either one of the fermionic atoms.

The scattering length of fermions in the vacuum may be computed by
summing the diagrams shown in Fig. 3.1 . The result of this summation is
the @xmath -matrix and the relationship between the scattering length
and the @xmath -matrix is ¹ ¹ 1 The @xmath -matrix is a quantity defined
for any kind of scattering. In this thesis, scattering between two
fermions, a fermion and a bosonic molecule, and between two molecules
will be considered. These result in @xmath -matrices @xmath , @xmath ,
and @xmath . In general the superscripts will be suppressed to ease
notation except where any confusion might occur.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath the reduced mass of two atoms.

In the calculation of the fermionic scattering length it is important to
keep @xmath since the scattering proceeds in the vacuum. The diagrams in
Fig. 3.1 form a geometric series since each loop is independent of the
other loops. The @xmath -matrix evaluated at zero incoming and outgoing
fermion four-momenta is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

The bubble diagram @xmath consists of two fermion propagators integrated
over the free four-momentum in the loop. That is,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus, in the one-channel model the atom-atom scattering length is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the one-channel model, the dynamics of the closed-channel molecule is
suppressed. Instead the propagator of the closed-channel model is
constant, equal to @xmath . However, the molecule needs to be “dressed”
by the self energy correction due to repeated interactions between the
two fermionic components. Fig. 3.2 shows the propagator dressed by the
self energy corrections, which consist of fermionic bubble diagrams. The
molecular propagator is then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where it has been used that the diagrams again form a geometric series.
The calculation now proceeds in the medium at a finite chemical
potential @xmath . Then the fermionic loop takes the value

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.15)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The infinitesimal is derived from the fermionic propagators and is such
that also the molecular propagator is retarded. Note the importance of
having @xmath . Had this not been the case, the fermionic propagator
would not have been retarded and hole propagation would have occured.

Using the relation ( 3.13 ) between the scattering length and the
cut-off, the molecular propagator becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

### 3.2 BCS-BEC gap equation

In order to derive the BCS-BEC gap equation (the equation for the
extremum of the action) from the one-channel model, it is convenient to
introduce a Hubbard-Stratonovich field @xmath . The one-channel
functional integral ( 3.6 ) may then be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the action @xmath replaced by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

The advantage of introducing the Hubbard-Stratonovich field is that the
action @xmath becomes quadratic in fermion fields, and these may then be
integrated out. The resulting functional integral is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath .

The gap equation is then derived by assuming that the extremum of the
action @xmath occurs at a constant value @xmath of @xmath . This results
in

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.21)
  -- -- -- --------

Using Eq. ( 3.13 ) the divergence in the momentum integral of Eq. ( 3.21
) at large momenta may be regularized, and the gap equation becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

### 3.3 Equivalence of the one- and two-channel models

The two-channel model described in section 2.2 contains the dynamics of
the molecular field. Compared with the one-channel model, this model has
an additional parameter, the detuning. This parameter allows for the
control of the effective range @xmath independently of the scattering
length @xmath . The precise relationships are listed here again for
convenience

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.23)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

To ensure that a Feshbach resonance is wide, the effective range should
be vanishingly small. This means that the interaction strength must be
taken to @xmath , while at the same time the detuning should be adjusted
in such a way that the scattering length remains finite.

This may be achieved as follows. Redefine the bosonic fields of the
two-channel model

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using this definition, the interconversion part of the action, Eq. (
2.14 ), becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

For the free bosonic action use

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

which follows from Eqs. ( 3.13 ) and ( 3.23 ). Then in the limit @xmath
the free bosonic action ( 2.13 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the sum @xmath exactly matches the Hubbard-Stratonovich action
@xmath of the one-channel model, see Eq. ( 3.18 ). Thus in the limit of
wide resonances, the one-channel model is equivalent to the two-channel
model.

In order to ensure that the Feshbach resonance is wide, the interaction
strength is taken to the limit @xmath . Thus it is again seen that it is
not possible to treat @xmath as a small coupling and construct a
perturbative expansion in powers of @xmath .

### 3.4 The BEC regime of weakly bound molecules

Having set up the perturbative framework in terms of the gas parameter,
the calculation of properties of the BEC of weakly bound bosonic
molecules proceeds in a fairly standard manner [ 1 , 29 ] .

It is convenient to trade the expansion in powers of @xmath with a
diagrammatic expansion in the number of propagators beginning or ending
in the condensate. Each such line is assigned the value @xmath , the
expectation value of the field @xmath . @xmath is not the density of
particles in the condensate (the value assigned to condensate lines in
the standard dilute Bose gas) but is proportional to it, with the
relation given below. Since the density of bosons in the condensate is
lower than the total density, the perturbative expansion in powers of
the gas parameter may be viewed as an expansion in the number of
condensate lines in the diagrammatic approach.

The presence of the condensate leads to the appearance of both normal
(one particle enters, one particle exits) and anomalous (two particles
enter and no particles exit or vice versa) propagators. These replace
the “bare” propagators @xmath and @xmath and will be denoted @xmath ,
@xmath for the fermions and @xmath , @xmath for the bosons. The
fermionic propagators are needed in order to properly compute the
particle number while the molecular propagators are needed to determine
parameters of the gas. In the systematic perturbative treatment, the
low-density approximations to the normal and anomalous propagators must
be constructed.

To this end it is convenient to construct the self energy corrections to
the propagators. The normal and anomalous fermionic self energies are
denoted @xmath and @xmath while @xmath and @xmath are the normal and
anomalous self energies for the molecules. The perturbative expansion in
the number of condensate lines then consists in letting @xmath where the
superscript denotes the number of condensate lines. However, as
discovered by Lee, Huang, and Yang [ 45 , 46 ] non-trivial orders may be
obtained through the summation of certain classes of infinite numbers of
diagrams. This does not affect the lowest order results presented in
this chapter and is instead the subject of chapter 4 .

No normal self energy for the fermions has only one condensate line and
thus

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

The anomalous self energy in this order is given by the diagram shown in
Fig. 3.3 . This has the value

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the next order, the contributions to the normal self energy are as
shown in Fig. 3.4 . The square block shown in this diagram equals the
sum of all diagrams contributing to scattering of an atom and a
molecule. There are an infinite number of such diagrams. The computation
of such a sum will be discussed in detail in section 3.5 below. Denote
by @xmath (the atom-molecule scattering matrix) the result of the
summation. ² ² 2 The simplest such diagram consists of @xmath repeated
twice and should not be included (this is the diagram depicted in Fig.
3.6 , excluding external lines). This technical point will not be
important for the following discussion. Then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

No diagrams with two condensate lines contribute to the anomalous self
energy and thus

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

For the molecular self energies, no diagrams with only one condensate
line contribute and therefore

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the next order, the self energies are shown in Fig. 3.5 . The square
block is the @xmath -matrix of molecule-molecule scattering calculated
in section 3.6 . Again this consists of an infinite number of diagrams
which may be summed. The self energies are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.34)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.35)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The factor 2 is due to the symmetry of the diagram.

Using the bosonic self energies @xmath and @xmath , the normal and
anomalous propagators of the bosons may be computed. This was first done
by Beliaev [ 8 , 9 ] with the result

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.36)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.37)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The denominator has the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the BEC regime, it was shown by Hugenholtz and Pines [ 38 ] that the
propagator of bosons must have a pole as the four-momentum tends to
zero, corresponding to the presence of a gap-less sound mode in the
condensate. This is the crucial observation on which the results of this
section depend, and in general the Hugenholtz-Pines relation takes the
form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the lowest order in the expansion in powers of @xmath , the
propagator of bosons reduces to the form @xmath obtained in Eq. ( 3.16
). The chemical potential in the lowest order is then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus, in the lowest order of the BEC regime the chemical potential of
fermions equals half the binding energy of the molecular state as
expected.

It should be noted that the same result for the chemical potential would
have been obtained if in the gap equation ( 3.22 ) the expectation value
@xmath had been ignored compared with @xmath .

The bosonic self energies should be related to the scattering length of
the molecules in vacuum, @xmath . The self energies appearing in the
Hugenholtz-Pines relation are on the other hand proportional to the
molecule-molecule scattering @xmath -matrix in the presence of the
medium. In particular the @xmath -matrix is to be evaluated at a finite
chemical potential @xmath . However, as long as corrections to the
chemical potential are small, @xmath in the medium will approximately
equal @xmath evaluated in vacuum and will thus (as the four-momentum
tends to zero) be proportional to the vacuum scattering length @xmath .
The precise relationship is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the residue of the molecular propagator at its pole and is needed for
proper normalization of external propagators [ 10 ] .

The chemical potential of the bosonic molecules is defined as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

which vanishes in the lowest order of the low-density approximation.
Using this definition of the bosonic chemical potential, the
Hugenholtz-Pines relation ( 3.39 ) results in

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

Eq. ( 3.39 ) will have one additional solution, however this solution is
unphysical [ 1 , 29 ] . In the lowest order in density

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.45)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

and the relation becomes reminiscent of the Hugenholtz-Pines equation in
the standard dilute Bose gas [ 38 ] .

The particle number may now be computed from the fermionic self
energies. The particle number equation is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.46)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath is the contour which includes the real axis and is closed
in the upper half plane ensuring that the field operators occur in the
proper order. The diagram which contributes to the particle number in
the lowest order is shown in Fig. 3.6 . Thus the particle number is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.47)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The sign of the expression comes from fermionic anti-commutivity and the
factor 2 from the two species of fermions. In the evaluation of the
integral, the chemical potential has been set to its zero’th order
value, Eq. ( 3.40 ). With the help of Eq. ( 3.47 ) the bosonic chemical
potential Eq. ( 3.45 ) becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

The ground state energy @xmath (measured from the binding energy of the
molecules, i.e. from @xmath ) is calculated using the standard relation
[ 38 , 29 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the contour @xmath is again taken in the upper half plane. In the
lowest order, the normal molecular propagator reduces to @xmath which is
a retarded propagator. Thus with the help of Eq. ( 3.48 ) the ground
state energy becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

The effect of including the higher order molecular propagator ( 3.36 )
in the equation for the ground state energy will be discussed in chapter
4 .

Even at zero temperature there is still a finite fraction of the bosonic
molecules not in the condensate. This phenomenon, caused by the presence
of interactions, is known as the condensate depletion. The total density
of bosons is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath the density of bosons in the condensate. In the lowest
order, the density @xmath . Using Eq. ( 3.36 ) for @xmath it is seen
that the frequency and momentum dependence of the molecular self
energies @xmath and @xmath is needed. However, considering the integral
in Eq. ( 3.51 ), it is observed that the integration is dominated by
frequencies of order @xmath and momenta of order @xmath . For such low
frequencies and momenta, the underlying structure of the molecular
propagator ( 3.16 ) is not important and it reduces to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

Also, @xmath and @xmath coincide with @xmath and @xmath in the usual
dilute Bose gas. Hence, for small frequencies and momenta, the normal
molecular propagator divided by @xmath coincides with the dilute Bose
gas normal propagator at this order in the expansion. The result of
evaluating the integral ( 3.51 ) then takes the usual form [ 1 , 29 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally, the speed of sound wave propagation is evaluated by use of the
Hugenholtz-Pines relation, Eq. ( 3.39 ), at finite @xmath . For small
@xmath and @xmath the self energy terms approximately take the limiting
values @xmath and @xmath in the low density expansion. Imposing the
condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

for the denominator, Eq. ( 3.38 ), of the molecular propagators, it is
found that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the speed of sound.

The results of this section coincide with the results for the dilute
interacting Bose gas [ 1 , 29 ] with scattering length @xmath . In order
to go beyond these results it is necessary to modify the self energies
in a systematic way. This will be further investigated in chapter 4 .

### 3.5 Scattering of a molecule and an atom

In this section, the scattering problem of a fermionic atom with a bound
state of fermions is treated. The solution of this scattering process
has a long history. It was first solved in the approximation of
vanishing effective range by Skorniakov and Ter-Martirosian in 1956 [ 68
] who studied the related problem of a neutron scattering with a
deuteron (a neutron-proton bound state). In the context of cold
two-component Fermi gases the scattering problem was solved in Ref. [ 56
] for any mass ratio of the fermionic atoms below 13.6. The three-body
calculation presented below is a useful exercise before proceeding to
more complicated few-body calculations. It is important to note that the
calculation below relies on the approximation of a vanishing effective
range, i.e. @xmath and the results are only valid in this regime.

It should be mentioned that there is a fundamental difference between
the fermionic and the bosonic problem. The system of three identical
bosons with a large scattering length has an infinite number of bound
states, the effect known as the Efimov effect [ 25 ] . In this case, to
correctly describe the three-body physics, an additional three-body
parameter coming from short distance physics is required [ 20 , 7 , 12 ]
. This is not the case in the fermionic problem (for mass ratios below
13.6); here the three-body problem is completely describable in terms of
the two-body scattering length and the fermionic masses [ 56 ] .

In the one channel model, the only length scale left is the scattering
length between the distinguishable atoms. Since no additional parameters
are required in order to describe the three-body problem, the
atom-molecule scattering length, @xmath , must be proportional to the
atom-atom scattering length, @xmath .

Apart from the three-body scattering length, it is also interesting to
note that the achievable densities for two-component Fermi gases are
limited by three-body recombination, a process governed by three-body
physics. Here two atoms form a deeply bound state with binding energy of
order @xmath and a third atom escapes the trap as it carries away the
released binding energy as kinetic energy. The process requires at least
two identical fermionic atoms to approach each other closely (at the
order of the range of short distance physics, @xmath ) and is suppressed
by the Pauli principle. The loss rate depends on the precise three-body
physics and may be extracted from the three-body calculations below. A
precise discussion will be postponed for chapter 5 on mass-imbalanced
two-component Fermi gases since the loss-rate depends intimately on the
mass ratio.

This is the first of a number of few body problems treated using
integral equations and therefore this will be done very carefully. The
simplest process contributing to the atom-molecule scattering is that
the molecule breaks into its two constituent atoms, one of which forms a
bound state with the remaining atom. The process is illustrated in
Figure 3.7 ; had the scattering been weak, this would have been the only
contribution to the scattering and thus this diagram will be called the
Born contribution. However, as will be discussed below, all of the
diagrams contributing to the scattering are of the ladder diagram type
shown in Fig. 3.8 and these are all of the same order.

As pointed out above, the vacuum scattering diagrams are exactly those
needed for the normal fermionic self energy at next to leading order in
the low density expansion and the normal and anomalous molecular self
energy at lowest order. That the type of diagrams shown in Fig. 3.8 is
the only type contributing to the scattering stems precisely from the
fact that this is vacuum scattering, i.e. all propagators are retarded
and there is no hole propagation. This in turn means diagrammatically
that all propagators specify a time direction and the possible diagrams
are greatly simplified. In fact, because of the simplicity of the
diagrams it is possible to sum all the possible diagrams by using an
integral equation of Lippmann-Schwinger type.

Since the scattering proceeds in the vacuum, the chemical potential
@xmath will be taken to vanish in this section.

The scattering @xmath -matrix consists of all diagrams with external
incoming and outgoing lines being the scattering particles. The external
lines are not included in the @xmath -matrix, however they do affect the
overall normalization. The first diagram in Fig. 3.8 thus contributes a
single atomic propagator, proportional to @xmath . In general, a diagram
with @xmath loops will then contain @xmath fermionic lines of order
@xmath , @xmath bosonic lines of order @xmath , and @xmath integrations
over four-momenta @xmath . It follows that each diagram will be of order
@xmath .

Given the structure of the contributing diagrams it is possible to write
an integral equation for the sum of these. The integral equation is
shown in Fig. 3.9 . In Eq. ( 3.13 ) the two-fermion bubble diagrams were
summed to yield the atom-atom scattering length by using a geometric
series. The reason why the three-body problem is an integral equation
rather than a geomatric series is that there will be an integral over
the free four-momentum in the loop of the iterated term.

Let the four-momenta be as shown in Fig. 3.9 . That is, the incoming
molecule and atom have four-momenta @xmath and @xmath , respectively,
while the outgoing molecule and atom have four-momenta @xmath and @xmath
, respectively. @xmath is the total energy going into the scattering and
since the initial and final states consist of a bound pair and an atom,
it is necessary to restrict the total energy to energies @xmath .
Otherwise, the final scattering state could be three free particles. The
scattering @xmath -matrix with these kinematics is denoted @xmath (the
dependence on total energy is suppressed in this notation). Then the
integral equation becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, in a slightly abusive notation, the total energy @xmath is also
used as the total four-momentum @xmath . To simplify notation further,
the four-momentum @xmath is abbreviated as @xmath . The propagator of
molecules is here given by the expression ( 3.16 ) with the chemical
potential taken to vanish.

The @xmath -matrix depends on five variables; the two frequencies, the
amplitudes of the two momenta, and the angle between incoming and
outgoing momenta. However, as the dependence of @xmath on @xmath and
@xmath is the same on both sides of the integral equation, the integral
equation for @xmath is only a three dimensional problem. Below, it will
be discussed how the frequencies @xmath and @xmath may be integrated out
from Eq. ( 3.56 ) and in chapter 5 it will be demonstrated how the
integral equation may be projected onto each spherical wave component,
making the solution of each of these a one-dimensional problem.

@xmath is analytic in the upper half planes of both @xmath and @xmath .
This may be seen from the ladder diagrams contributing to the @xmath
-matrix or simply from Eq. ( 3.56 ). This in turn means that the
integration over @xmath in Eq. ( 3.56 ) may be carried out by closing
the contour in the upper half plane, with the only contribution coming
from the simple pole of @xmath , setting @xmath . The solution of the
integral equation is then most easily obtained by letting @xmath which
means that the momentum dependence of the @xmath -matrix is the same on
both sides of the integral equation. Should the value of the @xmath
-matrix be desired at a different value of @xmath , the result of
solving the integral equation at @xmath may simply be inserted on the
right hand side of Eq. ( 3.56 ) and the integration carried out. In this
sense the @xmath -matrix with @xmath and @xmath is quite natural. It is
the result of attaching the external atomic propagators to the @xmath
-matrix and integrating over their frequencies, closing the contour in
the upper half plane (where @xmath is analytic). This will be called the
“on-shell” @xmath -matrix and satisfies the integral equation

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.57)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The iterative procedure described above for obtaining the solution to
the integral equation at the desired values of @xmath from the on-shell
@xmath -matrix is illustrated in Fig. 3.10 .

To calculate the @xmath -wave scattering length, the total energy should
be set to the two-body binding energy. The scattering length is then
found by solving the integral equation, averaging over angles, and
taking the limit of vanishing incoming and outgoing four-momenta.
Equivalently, the incoming momentum can be taken to vanish prior to
solving the integral equation after which there can be no dependence on
the angle between incoming and outgoing momentum. Using this second
approach yields the integral equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

In this equation, momenta are measured in units of inverse scattering
length and the “on-shell” @xmath -wave scattering matrix is @xmath .

In general, the integral equations have a form which in matrix notation
is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

The matrix equation has the formal solution

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

The matrix @xmath is the identity matrix. The numerical solution of the
@xmath -matrix is then a matter of choosing a discretization and solving
the matrix equation. Typically, for purposes of convergence, it is
advantageous to perform a change of variable such that the limits of
integration become finite [ 61 ] . A convenient choice is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

All integrals are then performed employing Gauss-Legendre quadrature [
61 ] . Using this method the @xmath -matrix is found to take the shape
shown in Fig. 3.11 .

The atom-molecule scattering length @xmath is proportional to the @xmath
-matrix of Eq. ( 3.58 ) evaluated at vanishing momentum and energy
@xmath . To obtain the scattering amplitude from the @xmath -matrix it
is necessary to renormalize the external propagators. The fermionic
propagators are already free propagators, however the molecular
propagators need to be renormalized by the square root of the residue of
the molecular propagator at the energy of the bound state [ 10 ] , i.e.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.62)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath given by Eq. ( 3.42 ). The scattering amplitude is related
to the scattering length by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the three-body reduced mass. Using the method described
above it is found that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

in perfect agreement with the literature [ 68 , 56 ] .

Bound states in the three-body problem show up as poles of the
scattering amplitude. This corresponds to solutions of the homogenous
integral equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

or in other words to the integration kernel @xmath having a unit
eigenvalue. Bound three-body states will have @xmath , and writing
@xmath the homogenous equation becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is found that the three-body problem does not have any @xmath -wave
bound states. Note that the validity of this statement is limited by the
zero effective range approximation. There may still be deeply bound
states with binding energies of order @xmath .

### 3.6 Molecule-molecule scattering

As discussed above, properties of the gas of weakly bound molecules
depend intimately on the molecule-molecule scattering length, @xmath .
Mean field theory gives the result @xmath . This result implicitly
assumes that the coupling is weak and that only the diagram shown in
Fig. 3.12 contributes to the scattering. An approximate diagrammatic
method was developed by Pieri and Strinati in Ref. [ 60 ] who found
@xmath . Later the problem was solved exactly by Petrov, Salomon, and
Shlyapnikov [ 59 ] by solving the quantum mechanical four-body problem
using the Bethe-Peierl’s method. In this work it was found that @xmath .
This last result is confirmed below by the use of diagrammatic methods.
While the work presented in this section and published in Ref. [ 50 ]
was in progress, the problem was solved by Brodsky et al in Ref. [ 14 ]
by essentially the same diagrammatic method.

The scattering @xmath -matrix consists of all possible diagrams with two
incoming and two outgoing molecules, excluding the external propagators.
In the atom-molecule scattering problem treated above, it was discussed
how diagrams contributing to the molecule-molecule scattering do not
contain any internal condensate lines nor any hole propagation. This is
again the case, since the process considered is scattering in the
vacuum. This observation greatly simplifies the diagrams possible in the
scattering process. Since all propagators can be assigned a definite
time direction, at any time in the scattering of two molecules there
will be either two molecules, one molecule and two atoms, or four atoms.

With this observation in mind, consider the different diagrams which
contribute to the scattering @xmath -matrix. The simplest possible
diagram is the Born diagram shown in Fig. 3.12 where the two molecules
exchange their constituent fermionic atoms. Other possible diagrams
contributing to the scattering are shown in Fig. 3.13 . Fig. 3.13 a
shows the propagation of an intermediate molecule, Fig. 3.13 b a
slightly more complicated diagram, and 3.13 c a diagram where a pair of
molecules propagate at an intermediate step. The crucial observation is
that all of these diagrams are of the same order, namely they are all
proportinal to @xmath . Indeed this is true for all possible vacuum
scattering diagrams. Thus the problem of molecule-molecule scattering is
not amenable to a perturbative treatment. Instead of considering only
the Born diagram, Fig. 3.12 , an infinite number of diagrams need to be
taken into account.

Fortunately it is possible to perform the summation of all diagrams by
using an integral equation. To this end, it is useful to define the
concept of a two-boson irreducible diagram as a diagram which cannot be
cut in two by cutting two molecular lines only. For instance, the
diagrams in Fig. 3.13 a and b are two-boson irreducible while the
diagram in Fig. 3.13 c is not. The scattering @xmath -matrix may then be
viewed as the repeated propagation and scattering of two molecules, each
pair of molecular propagators separated by the sum of all two boson
irreducible diagrams. In this sense, the sum of two-boson irreducible
diagrams is similar to the bubble diagram, @xmath (see Fig. 3.1 )
occurring in the repeated atom-atom scattering. However, there will be
an integral over a free four-momentum and thus the sum does not form a
geometric series. Defining @xmath as the sum of all two-boson
irreducible diagrams, @xmath satisfies an integral equation as shown in
Fig. 3.14 .

Each diagram contributing to @xmath will have a number, @xmath , of
molecular propagators, @xmath fermionic propagators, and @xmath
integrations. The total order of such a diagram is @xmath . Any diagram
contributing to @xmath will then have @xmath insertions of @xmath ,
@xmath molecular propagators and @xmath integrations and will be
proportional to @xmath .

The integral equation for the @xmath -matrix with kinematics as shown in
Fig. 3.14 is

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.67)
  -- -- -- --------

The incoming momentum has been taken to zero while the outgoing
four-momenta of the molecules are @xmath . This choice of kinematics is
convenient since ultimately the quantity of interest is the @xmath -wave
scattering length, proportional to @xmath . The scalar @xmath cannot
depend on the direction of @xmath , which is why it is possible to
average the sum of two-boson irreducible diagrams over the angle between
incoming and outgoing momentum. This average is denoted @xmath . To
determine the scattering length, let @xmath , while to search for bound
states look for solutions of the homogenous integral equation with
@xmath .

Because of the symmetry of the problem, it is convenient to slightly
redefine what is meant by @xmath and @xmath . Below, in this section
only , the convention will be used that all atomic propagators have
their frequency shifted by a quarter of the energy going into the
scattering, while the molecules have their frequency shifted by half the
energy. That is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.68)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.69)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

For the purpose of calculating the molecular scattering length @xmath ,
the total energy is @xmath and in this case each molecule will carry the
molecular binding energy.

The integral equation ( 3.67 ) is not sufficient to compute the @xmath
-matrix. The sum of all two-boson irreducible diagrams still needs to be
computed and this sum may again be obtained through the solution of an
integral equation. It is not possible to directly write down an integral
equation satisfied by @xmath . However, it is possible to relate @xmath
to the solution of an integral equation for the sum, @xmath , of
two-boson irreducible diagrams with two incoming molecules, one outgoing
molecule and two outgoing fermions. The integral equation to be solved
is depicted in Fig. 3.15 . This integral equation is quite similar to
the equation for atom-molecule scattering, see Fig. 3.9 .

Let the kinematics be as shown in Fig. 3.15 . @xmath with incoming
four-momenta of @xmath for the molecules, @xmath for the outgoing
molecule, and @xmath for the outgoing fermions is denoted @xmath . The
integral equation for @xmath may then be written as ³ ³ 3 The
calculation of the vertex @xmath presented here differs slightly from
the formalism in Ref. [ 50 ] . The present formalism is better suited to
an extension to treating the mass imbalanced problem investigated in
chapter 5 .

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.70)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The integration over directions of @xmath (with notation @xmath ) is the
averaging over directions of incoming momentum, i.e. the projection onto
the @xmath -wave. Minus signs in front of both the Born terms and the
iterated terms all follow from anti-commutivity of the fermionic atoms.

Eq. ( 3.70 ) has to be solved at every @xmath and @xmath . It is an
integral equation in 5 variables, the length of @xmath and @xmath , the
angle between these vectors, and the corresponding frequencies. As will
be shown below, it is possible to integrate out the two frequencies such
that the resulting integral equation becomes three-dimensional.

Finally, the two-boson irreducible vertex @xmath is related to @xmath by
joining the two external fermionic propagators into a molecule as shown
in Fig. 3.16 . This relation may be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

The factor @xmath ensures that all diagrams enter @xmath with the
correct weights.

It is advantageous to split @xmath into parts @xmath [ @xmath ] analytic
in the upper [lower] half planes of @xmath , with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

To this end, note that the iterated terms are already thus split. To
split up the Born terms, use the relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then Eq. ( 3.71 ) becomes

  -- -------- -------- -- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath               (3.74)
                          @xmath   
                          @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -- -------- --------

In each of the two last terms of Eq. ( 3.70 ) it is possible to
integrate out @xmath by closing around the single pole in the lower half
plane. The two parts of @xmath appearing in Eq. ( 3.74 ) satisfy the
coupled integral equations

  -- -- -------- -------- --
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
        @xmath   @xmath   
                 @xmath   
                 @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- --

In the first of these equations @xmath and @xmath . In the second
equation @xmath and @xmath .

On the right hand side of Eqs. ( LABEL:eq:xisplit0 ), the vertex @xmath
only appears in the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

This will be called the “on-shell” vertex. The reason for this
terminology is clear; had the propagators @xmath and @xmath been
attached to the vertex @xmath and the frequencies been integrated over
using the poles of the propagators, then these on-shell values of the
frequencies would have been obtained. In this sense, the on-shell vertex
is equivalent to the atom-molecule scattering vertex @xmath discussed
above, see Eq. ( 3.57 ).

Solving the integral equations is now possible with the substitution

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

at which value also the left hand sides of Eqs. ( LABEL:eq:xisplit0 )
will be on-shell. Adding the expressions in Eqs. ( LABEL:eq:xisplit0 )
at this value of @xmath results in an integral equation in three
variables for the total on-shell vertex which may subsequently be
inserted on the right hand side of Eqs. ( LABEL:eq:xisplit0 ) to find
the value of the vertex @xmath at any value of @xmath .

After a change of variables to @xmath and @xmath , the equation for the
total on-shell vertex takes the form

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.78)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath and @xmath .

Inserting Eq. ( 3.78 ) into the right hand sides of Eqs. (
LABEL:eq:xisplit0 ) and the resulting expression into the right hand
side of Eq. ( 3.74 ), the vertex @xmath finally becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.79)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Here again @xmath and @xmath while it is important to note that @xmath
is a free parameter. This method ( 3.79 ) of constructing the two-boson
irreducible vertex corresponds diagrammatically to the situation
depicted in Fig. 3.17 .

@xmath is the result of calculating the Born diagram, shown in Fig. (
3.12 ),

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.80)
                                @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath            (3.81)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.82)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The angular integrations may be performed independently by first
integrating over directions of @xmath and then over directions of @xmath
. The result is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.83)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The procedure for solving the set of integral equations is now as
follows. The integral equation ( 3.78 ) for the on-shell @xmath has to
be solved at every @xmath . However, the kernel of this integral
equation does not depend on @xmath , an observation which is of great
help in the numerical solution, since this means that the identity
matrix minus the integration kernel needs to be inverted only once [see
Eqs. ( 3.59 ) and ( 3.60 )]. With the on-shell @xmath determined, this
should be inserted in Eq. ( 3.79 ) to find the two-boson irreducible
vertex @xmath . Finally, @xmath may be inserted in Eq. ( 3.67 ) to find
the scattering @xmath -matrix.

A bit of care needs to be taken in peforming the integration over
frequency in Eq. ( 3.67 ). Due to the square-root structure of the
molecular propagators there will be branch cuts starting at

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

and continuing towards @xmath , respectively. The contour of integration
is such that for @xmath [ @xmath ] the integration is above [below] the
branch cut, which follows from the infinitesimal in the molecular
propagator, Eq. ( 3.16 ). Furthermore, the molecular propagators have
poles at @xmath . It is thus advantageous to perform a Wick rotation as
illustrated in Fig. 3.18 . This removes the problem of integrating close
to the branch cuts and poles. In order to perform such a Wick rotation,
the vertex @xmath needs to be analytic in quadrants @xmath and @xmath .
Eqs. ( 3.78 , 3.79 , 3.80 ) show that this is indeed the case and that
any non-analytic structure of @xmath must be restricted to the areas
marked as gray boxes in Fig. 3.18 .

When computing the scattering length, the total energy should be set to
@xmath . Then the simple poles of the molecular propagators present in
Eq. ( 3.67 ) occur at @xmath , i.e. close to both the original and the
Wick rotated integration contour. These simple poles are integrable and
may be treated by a change of variables to “polar” coordinates,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.85)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath and @xmath .

To search for bound states in the four-fermion problem, let @xmath and
look for solutions to the homogenous equation. In a matrix notation this
corresponds to the existence of a solution to the equation @xmath or, in
other words, the existence of a bound state implies that the kernel of
the integral equation, @xmath , has an eigenvalue equal to 1. No bound
states are found by using this method. As the one-channel model is
employed here, the effective range @xmath has been taken to zero. Thus
the validity of this method is only for bound states with binding
energies @xmath and the result does not exclude deeply bound states.

The scattering amplitude is calculated on-shell, with the incoming and
outgoing molecules all having four-momentum @xmath . Thus @xmath . As in
the three-body problem above, to calculate the scattering amplitude each
external molecular propagator needs to be renormalized by @xmath , and
the relation between the scattering amplitude and the scattering matrix
is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.86)
  -- -------- -- --------

The scattering length is then found through

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath the molecule-molecule reduced mass. By solving the set of
equations described above, it is found that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.88)
  -- -------- -- --------

in complete agreement with Refs. [ 14 , 59 ] . Fig. 3.19 shows the
computed @xmath -matrix, from which @xmath may be extracted.

## Chapter 4 Quantum corrections

In chapter 3 properties of the BEC regime of the dilute Bose gas
consisting of weakly bound molecules were calculated. The calculations
were performed in the low density limit and it was seen how this limit
corresponds to a diagrammatic expansion in terms of lines beginning or
ending in the condensate. The results obtained were seen to exactly
match the results of the standard dilute Bose gas [ 1 , 29 ] with the
effect of the fermionic atoms being that the boson-boson scattering
length is related to the fermion-fermion scattering length by @xmath .

It is possible to extend the low density expansion in order to obtain
the chemical potential and ground state energy in higher orders. This
involves the determination of the fermionic and bosonic self energies in
higher orders. Somewhat surprisingly, the next order self energies for
the bosons do not involve diagrams such as in Fig. 4.1 which only
contributes at even higher order. Rather, they arise due to non-trivial
resummations of diagrams occuring because of infrared divergences of the
molecular propagator. Lee, Huang, and Yang computed the first correction
to the ground state energy [ 45 , 46 ] . Later, results were obtained in
the next order by Wu [ 76 ] and Sawada [ 65 ] and the results of these
authors confirmed by Hugenholtz and Pines [ 38 ] .

The results in the dilute Bose gas are the following:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.1)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

Below, it will be shown that these results are also correct in the gas
of weakly bound molecules, with the scattering length @xmath related to
the underlying fermion scattering length @xmath .

The first two corrections to the ground state energy and chemical
potential are universal in the sense that they only depend on the
scattering length @xmath , the density, and the mass of bosons. Higher
order corrections will depend on the shape of the interatomic potential,
in particular on the effective range @xmath . These will not be
considered here.

### 4.1 The molecular propagator at low densities and momenta

Define the chemical potential and particle number as an expansion in
@xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.3)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The superscript denotes powers of @xmath . In chapter 3 the results

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.5)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

were found. Below, the next two orders in the chemical potential will be
calculated.

It is useful to consider the molecular propagator at frequencies @xmath
and momenta @xmath . In the zero density approximation it becomes a free
propagator

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the first non-trivial order of the low density expansion, the normal
and anomalous propagators were similarly seen in section 3.4 to be
approximately @xmath times the usual dilute Bose gas normal and
anomalous propagators. The poles of the iterated propagators at low
frequencies and momenta may then be separated as [ 38 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.8)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.10)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Here

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the spectrum of low-lying excitations found by solving the
Hugenholtz-Pines relation ( 3.39 ) at low frequencies and momenta.

For the purpose of computing the vacuum scattering lengths @xmath and
@xmath in chapter 3 there was only one relevant length scale, namely the
atom-atom scattering length @xmath . However, in the BEC regime another
length scale is given by the average interparticle spacing @xmath and
@xmath is a dimensionless parameter. It is now seen how another
important length scale appears of order @xmath . This scale, known as
the healing length, defines a crossover in the excitation spectrum of
low-lying excitations; for @xmath these behave as sound waves with a
constant velocity while for @xmath they are almost free particles.
Indeed, for small momenta

  -- -- -- --------
           (4.13)
  -- -- -- --------

as found in Eq. ( 3.55 ), while for higher momenta

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus there are three regimes of momenta relevant for the problem, small
momenta @xmath , intermediate momenta @xmath , and large momenta @xmath
. In the first two [ 38 ]

  -- -------- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath         (4.15)
     @xmath   @xmath         (4.16)
  -- -------- -------- -- -- --------

In the limit of large frequencies and momenta, the square root structure
of the molecular propagator dominates, and in this limit it will no
longer be possible to separate the poles.

### 4.2 Corrections to the chemical potential and ground state energy

In this section the first corrections to the chemical potential and
ground state energy will be calculated in the low density expansion.
This will be done by a very direct method, utilizing the particle number
equation for the fermionic atoms, Eq. ( 3.46 ), and the Hugenholtz-Pines
relation, Eq. ( 3.44 ).

The chemical potential of the bosonic molecules was found in Eq. ( 3.44
) by requiring a gap-less sound mode in the BEC. The result was

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

The lowest order contribution to @xmath is of order @xmath . The two
non-trivial corrections to the chemical potential considered in this
chapter are of order @xmath and @xmath . Thus it is seen that the last
term in Eq. ( 4.17 ) does not influence these corrections to the
chemical potential and the Hugenholtz-Pines relation becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

The difference between the normal and anomalous self energy of the
bosons is needed at order @xmath . The diagrams contributing to the
normal self energy in this order are depicted in Fig. 4.2 . The diagram
in Fig. 4.2 a has no analogue in @xmath . Its value is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the factor 2 appears as a combinatorial factor and the exponential
factor ensures the correct order of field operators. The four-momentum
dependence of @xmath has not been made explicit. The @xmath -matrix has
the property that it is roughly constant at @xmath and @xmath , while it
drops quickly to zero for large frequencies and momenta. The value of
the integral may then be estimated by assuming that the main
contribution is from frequencies and momenta small compared with @xmath
and @xmath . Using Eq. ( 4.8 ) for the normal propagator, the frequency
integration is performed by closing the contour in the upper half plane.
The integration picks out the part of the propagator proportional to
@xmath which is suppressed at momenta @xmath , and the value of the
diagram is approximately

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using the asymptotic forms ( 4.13 ) and ( 4.14 ) of the excitation
spectrum @xmath , the integrand is seen to go as @xmath for @xmath and
as @xmath for @xmath . This means that the integral is dominated by
momenta of order @xmath and the assumption that @xmath could be taken
constant is justified. The diagram in Fig. 4.2 a then has the value

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

The diagram shown in Fig. 4.2 b is already contained in @xmath if the
iterated normal propagator is replaced by @xmath . To compute the
contribution to @xmath from the diagram, the part proportional to @xmath
must be subtracted and the value of the diagram is

  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------
           @xmath            (4.22)
           @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------

Again the integration is dominated by momenta of order @xmath . The sum
of the normal self energies gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

The only contribution to the anomalous self energy @xmath in this order
is given by the diagram shown in Fig. 4.3 .

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Assuming that the integration is dominated by small @xmath results in

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is formally divergent at large @xmath . However, the divergence is
proportional to @xmath and arises because the diagram shown in Fig. 4.4
, and belonging to @xmath , is included in the diagram in Fig. 4.3 . The
diagram should be subtracted and the anomalous self energy at order
@xmath becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.26)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

With the regularization, the diagram is dominated by @xmath .

The chemical potential up to order @xmath is found to be

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.27)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The particle number must be determined in the same order. @xmath
originates from only one diagram, shown in Fig. 4.5 , with the value

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.28)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where it has again been assumed that the integration over @xmath is
dominated by @xmath . The factor @xmath comes from @xmath while the
factor 2 is from the sum on fermion spins. Integrating over frequencies
and shifting the momentum @xmath to get rid of angular dependence, the
expression reduces to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.29)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The @xmath integration is indeed dominated by momenta @xmath of order
@xmath . The integration also results in terms of order @xmath and
higher which have been ignored.

The particle number to order @xmath is thus found to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

Combining this result with the result for the chemical potential, Eq. (
4.27 ), results in

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

exactly coinciding with the result in the standard dilute Bose gas [ 45
] .

The chemical potential is related to the ground state energy by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

Assuming a form @xmath the ground state energy is found to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

As this result is computed from the chemical potential it of course also
matches the usual dilute Bose gas result.

### 4.3 Next order corrections

An elegant derivation of the chemical potential and ground state energy
in the standard dilute Bose gas was presented by Hugenholtz and Pines in
Ref. [ 38 ] . These authors noticed that the two quantities are linked
by two equations. The first of these was given as Eq. ( 3.49 ) and is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

while the second equation is Eq. ( 4.32 ). The crucial observation was
that given the normal bosonic propagator in some order in the low
density expansion, when inserted in Eq. ( 4.34 ) the resulting relation
between the chemical potential and the ground state energy will be an
equation in the next order. This will be demonstrated below.

The method may be used to compute the results of section 4.2 above.
Inserting the propagator @xmath from Eq. ( 4.8 ), correct up to order
@xmath in Eq. ( 4.34 ), results in

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

where it has been assumed that only small @xmath contribute to the
integral. Carrying out the integration, the assumption is seen to be
valid, and the result is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.36)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

In the last step, @xmath has been traded for @xmath using Eq. ( 3.47 ).
This is correct at the current order in @xmath . Now assume the
following forms for the ground state energy and chemical potential

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.37)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.38)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Performing the differentiation in Eq. ( 4.32 ) gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

from which it is seen that @xmath . A second linear equation is provided
by comparing powers of @xmath in Eq. ( 4.36 ). Solving the equation
gives @xmath , and inserting @xmath and @xmath in the equations for
@xmath and @xmath , the resulting ground state energy and chemical
potential are seen to exactly match the results in Sec. 4.2 above.

#### 4.3.1 The logarithmic contributions

In the low density expansion, the next order contribution (computed by
Wu and Sawada [ 76 , 65 ] and denoted below by WS) to the chemical
potential and ground state energy is logarithmic, proportional to @xmath
. This in turn means that the correction arises from momenta in the
range @xmath . It should thus not come as a great surprise that the BEC
of weakly bound molecules also at this order coincides with the standard
dilute Bose gas since the precise structure of @xmath will not be probed
by these momenta.

As above, the normal molecular propagator is needed. Define

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

The propagator @xmath is the one considered above in calculating the
Lee-Huang-Yang (LHY) ground state energy ( 4.33 ), and is correct to
order @xmath . @xmath is the part of the molecular propagator leading to
the logarithmic corrections while the dots correspond to even higher
order parts of the normal propagator. The anomalous propagator @xmath is
defined in the same manner.

In Eqs. ( 3.36 ) and ( 3.37 ) the normal and anomalous molecular
propagators were related to the “bare” propagator @xmath and the exact
self energies, the result of Beliaev [ 8 ] . It is possible to derive an
analogous expression relating the exact propagators not to the bare
propagator but to @xmath and @xmath [ 38 ] . This requires the
definition of new effective self energies

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.41)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.42)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

since the self energies (at zero four-momentum) @xmath and @xmath are
already included in the LHY propagators @xmath and @xmath . In order to
compute the WS order, it is sufficient to approximate the normal
molecular propagator by [ 38 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.43)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Diagrammatically, the expansion is shown in Fig. 4.6 . Because of the
range of momenta relevant to the problem ( @xmath ), the propagators may
be expanded in powers of the density and become

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Inserting the resulting normal molecular propagator @xmath in Eq. ( 4.34
) results in an equation between the ground state energy and the
chemical potential in WS order

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.45)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The quantity in square brackets is @xmath and the normal propagator has
the property that any poles must lie slightly above the negative real
@xmath axis or slightly below the positive real @xmath axis. Looking at
the @xmath integration, which must be closed in the upper half plane, it
is then concluded that the following contributions to the self energies
need to be considered:

-   poles of @xmath above the negative real axis

-   poles of @xmath above the negative real axis, and

-   poles of @xmath above the negative real axis as well as the momentum
    dependence of @xmath .

The simplest class of diagrams entering the anomalous self energy sum to
give the molecule-molecule scattering @xmath -matrix. This reduces to a
constant at @xmath and this class of diagrams does not have any poles at
relevant momenta. Poles above the negative real exis become possible if,
in the molecule-molecule scattering problem, a pair of bare molecular
propagators are replaced by the iterated propagators @xmath , thus all
diagrams of the form depicted in Fig. 4.7 must be taken into account.
The leading of these diagrams is shown in Fig. 4.8 . Carrying out the
frequency integration, anticipating that the main contribution will be
from @xmath and @xmath , results in

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

For simplicity @xmath . The tilde signifies that this is the only
relevant part of the self energy at WS order. In the prefactor, the
factor 4 comes from combinatorics, @xmath from propagators, @xmath from
condensate lines, and @xmath from the two @xmath -matrices evaluated at
low momenta.

The normal self energy is constructed in the same way. The two leading
diagrams relevant for computing the poles of @xmath above the negative
real @xmath axis are shown in Fig. 4.9 . The sum of these diagrams is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

where it is again anticipated that only momenta small compared with the
inverse scattering length are relevant.

The final contribution from molecular self energies comes from @xmath
and here it is important to include the momentum dependence of the self
energy. This may be included by considering the relation between the
normal self energy and the scattering amplitude. This relation was first
derived by Beliaev [ 8 , 9 ] (and similar results for fermion scattering
by Galitskii [ 31 ] ) and at relevant momenta it takes the approximate
form [ 38 ]

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.48)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Here @xmath is a symmetrized scattering amplitude and reduces at small
momenta to @xmath . Note how the first term under the integral simply
corresponds to the diagram of Fig. 4.10 while the second term under the
integral is a kinematic term. The reasoning behind Eq. ( 4.48 ) is that
while the scattering amplitude between two particles contains the
possibility of multiple scattering, it is still an intrinsic two-body
quantity in the sense that it is assumed that after the scattering the
two particles are in the vacuum and on-shell which is certainly not true
in the many-body case. The proof by Beliaev of this equation is for a
dilute gas of bosons but it goes through in exactly the same way in the
problem of the weakly bound bosonic molecules, since the assumption is
that the potential between the bosons (which in the case of the fermion
problem is replaced by the two-boson irreducible diagram @xmath , see
chapter 3 ) reduces to a constant at momenta @xmath .

The imaginary part in the first term of Eq. ( 4.48 ) may be written in a
different way, as also found by Beliaev,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

The real part of the first term in Eq. ( 4.48 ) is simply the scattering
matrix @xmath which reduces to a constant and does not contribute to the
ground state energy.

At this point it is important to investigate whether the presence of the
fermionic atoms affects self energies at the current order. The effect
of replacing a bare molecular propagator insde the two-boson irreducible
diagram by an iterated propagator @xmath must be examined. As an
example, consider the diagrams in Fig. 4.11 . The fermionic propagators
in this diagram all have chemical potential @xmath in the BEC regime of
the gas, see Eq. ( 3.40 ). Equivalently, when a molecule in the vacuum
breaks into two atoms they equally share the binding energy @xmath . For
momenta small compared with the inverse scattering length, the fermionic
propagators are thus approximately constant and the diagram shown in
Fig. 4.11 a effectively shrinks to that of Fig. 4.11 b. The integration
over the normal propagator closed on itself was performed in Eq. ( 4.21
) and goes as @xmath . Thus the diagram in Fig. 4.11 a goes as @xmath
and is of higher order than the WS order. The same argument goes through
for all two-boson irreducible diagrams with molecular propagators
replaced by iterated propagators.

The fermionic atoms are also modified by their self energies. The
anomalous fermion self energy at lowest order is simply two fermions
coming in and a condensate line going out. Such anomalous self energies
must come in pairs and thus modifying the two-boson irreducible diagram
by the simplest two such anomalous self energies simply corresponds to
adding the possibility of three boson scattering. This in turn only
contributes at order @xmath . The normal fermion self energy consists of
atom-molecule scattering. Replacing a fermion propagator with the
atom-molecule scattering process inside the two-boson irreducible
diagram again results in a diagram belonging to the class of three boson
scattering. Furthermore, the atom-molecule diagram reduces to a constant
at @xmath . Thus the presence of this self energy does not change the
pole structure of the two-boson irreducible diagram in the range of
momenta and energies under consideration.

Each two-boson irreducible diagram will contain exactly one fermion
loop. The external four-momentum going into the two-boson irreducible
diagram may be contained completely inside the loop and since the
fermionic propagators are constant at @xmath , the pole structure of the
molecular self energies at small momenta is completely unchanged by the
presence of fermions in the problem.

The conclusion to this discussion is that the presence of fermionic
atoms does not change the chemical potential and ground state energy
from the results of the standard dilute Bose gas beyond replacing the
scattering length @xmath with @xmath .

The rest is mathematics. Inserting the self energies, Eqs. ( 4.46 ), (
4.47 ), and ( 4.48 ) in Eq. ( 4.45 ) and performing the integrals, the
result is [ 38 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

The range of integration is determined by @xmath being in the range
@xmath and with logarithmic accuracy @xmath and @xmath may be used as
the actual limits of integration.

Using the relation ( 4.32 ) between the ground state energy and the
chemical potential as well as the particle number equation ( 4.30 ) the
result of the usual dilute Bose gas [ 76 , 65 ] is reproduced

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.51)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.52)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

It has been assumed that @xmath does not contain terms of order @xmath .
Arguments similar to those given above show that this assumption is
indeed correct.

In conclusion, the LHY and WS terms in the low density expansion arise
from non-trivial renormalizations due to the infrared divergences of
molecular propagators. At low momenta the fermionic atoms in the BEC
regime are nearly constants and their dynamics do not affect the
low-density expansion of the chemical potential and ground state energy
at the order considered here. However, from the above discussion, and
also from the Hugenholtz-Pines relation ( 3.44 ), it is obvious that the
presence of fermions will affect next order quantities in a non-trivial
way.

## Chapter 5 Two-component Fermi gases with a mass imbalance

Since the experimental discovery of the BCS-BEC crossover in ultracold
mixtures of atoms in two different hyperfine states of e.g. @xmath K [
69 ] , a major effort has gone into creating other more exotic
superfluids. An example is a system with a mass imbalance, where instead
of studying two different hyperfine states of the same fermionic atom, a
mixture of two different atomic species is used. While experiments in
these mixtures are still in their infancy, these systems have received
considerable theoretical attention [ 56 , 59 , 39 ] . The interest in
these systems has several reasons. For instance, the advent of the use
of optical lattices in ultracold gases has opened up the possibility of
continuously changing the effective mass of one of the species
independently of the other, since the resonant frequencies of the atomic
species will be different.

One might naively expect that the presence of a mass imbalance would
serve only to modify the few-body coupling constants computed in chapter
3 . However, it turns out that beyond a certain mass ratio, the physical
picture becomes quite different. It was discovered in Ref. [ 57 ] that,
as the mass imbalance is increased, collisional losses of the Fermi gas
also increase. For small mass imbalances, the gas becomes more stable as
a Feshbach resonance is approached. Conversely, beyond a mass ratio of
12.33 the system becomes less stable as a Feshbach resonance is
approached and finally, beyond the mass ratio 13.6, the three body
system was found to display bound states in a manner very similar to the
Efimov phenomenon in systems of three bosons [ 25 ] .

For moderate mass ratios, the main effect of introducing a mass
imbalance is indeed to change the few-body coupling constants. Results
for the three and four fermion problems, calculated in coordinate space
using the Bethe-Peirls method, have been obtained in Refs. [ 56 , 58 ] .
The results for four fermions have been confirmed by Monte Carlo methods
in Ref. [ 75 ] . Thus, the results in this chapter for three- and
four-body scattering calculated using the momentum space formalism are
not new, rather they confirm already known results by the use of a
complimentary method.

Even though the Fermi energies will be different, in heteronuclear
mixtures with equal densities of the two atomic species, the Fermi
momenta will be equal. This means that the usual Cooper pairing is still
taking place on the BCS side and the picture of a BCS-BEC crossover is
valid. In this chapter the BEC regime with equal densities will be
examined.

### 5.1 Molecular propagator

The formalism presented here is very similar to that presented in
chapter 3 . Consider two species of fermionic atoms interacting close to
a heteronuclear Feshbach resonance. For simplicity of notation, even
though the particles are not different hyperfine states of the same
isotope, the particles will be called @xmath and @xmath . Let the
particles have masses

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

and chemical potentials @xmath .

To calculate the molecular propagator, the polarization bubble which
appears in the repeated scattering between the two species of atoms is
needed (see Fig. 3.1 ). The polarization bubble has the value

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.2)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where it has been used that @xmath can be shifted such that the angular
integration becomes trivial (let @xmath ). Here

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

is the reduced mass and @xmath is the mass of the molecule.

The scattering length between the two species of atoms is related to the
vacuum polarization bubble (for which @xmath ) by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The molecular propagator is then given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

which reduces to the usual form ( 3.16 ) in the limit of equal masses.
According to Hugenholtz and Pines [ 38 ] , the molecular propagator
should have a pole at @xmath . This leads to the relation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

for the binding energy of the molecule.

In the limit of small momenta and energies, @xmath and @xmath , the
underlying structure of the molecule is not probed. In this limit the
propagator reduces to

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath is the residue and the remainder is the free propagator of a
particle with mass @xmath as expected.

### 5.2 Three-body problem

Assume an atom of type @xmath scatters off the bound molecular state.
The general integral equation for the atom-molecule scattering matrix
with kinematics as shown in Fig. 5.1 is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

@xmath is here used both as the total energy and as the total
four-momentum @xmath . The symmetry factors are the same as in the
mass-balanced case.

As in chapter 3 , in the notation for the @xmath -matrix the dependence
on the total energy has been suppressed. Also, @xmath in order for
processes in which the molecule and atom scatters into a final state of
three free atoms to be forbidden.

The frequency @xmath can be integrated out by closing the contour in the
upper half plane, where the only pole is the pole of @xmath . This
results in

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath .

Consider first the @xmath -wave scattering length which is proportional
to @xmath evaluated at @xmath . The incoming momentum and frequency may
be taken to vanish but the outgoing should be kept finite in order to
have a solvable integral equation. The result is the equation

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

where momenta are measure in units of inverse scattering length. Here
the integral equation for @xmath is solved with @xmath to make the
dependence on momentum the same on both sides of the equation. This
point has been discussed in detail in section 3.5 .

Having solved Eq. ( LABEL:eq:inteqmass ) at a certain mass ratio, to
calculate the scattering amplitude each external molecular propagator
has to be renormalized by the square root of the residue of the pole of
the molecular propagator. The scattering amplitude at vanishing momentum
is thus

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

The relationship between the scattering amplitude and the scattering
length is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath being the three-body reduced mass. The three-body scattering
length is found to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

The result is shown in Fig. 5.2 and exactly matches the result of Petrov
[ 56 ] .

#### 5.2.1 @xmath-wave scattering and collisional relaxation

Up to now the only bound molecular two-atom state considered has been
the weakly bound and large state of size comparable with the scattering
length @xmath . This state is the state appearing at a Feshbach
resonance and is the highest ro-vibrational state. Additionally, in the
two body problem there are tightly bound states of size @xmath , the
scale at which short distance physics becomes important. Through
collisions the weakly bound molecules can fall into these deeply lying
states and in the process a binding energy of order @xmath is converted
into kinetic energy. The released energy is quite large and the
colliding atoms will escape the system. This process is called
collisional relaxation and is the process which determines the lifetime
of the Bose gas of weakly bound molecules [ 57 ] .

The rate at which the collisional relaxation occurs is conventionally
written as either

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

or

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Both versions are natural; for the first, two molecules need to approach
each other closely for the relaxation process to occur and @xmath is the
probability for this to occur. For the second @xmath is the
characteristic relaxation time. Below, the result will be presented in
the form ( 5.14 ).

For equal masses of the constituent fermions the relaxation rate @xmath
decreases with increasing @xmath as [ 57 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

This ensures the stability of the Fermi gas in the vicinity of a
Feshbach resonance as opposed to the case of Bose gases which become
unstable close to a Feshbach resonance. The reason for the stability of
the Fermi gas is that the relaxation process requires three particles to
approach each other within a distance of order @xmath , while the
remaining particle in the molecule-molecule scattering will typically be
at a distance of order @xmath . The probability for three fermions to
approach each other is suppressed because of the Pauli principle, since
two of the fermions will necessarily be identical.

It was shown in Ref. [ 56 ] that the leading relaxation channel at large
@xmath is scattering through the @xmath -wave channel. In general the
relaxation rate may be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

The power @xmath is a function of the mass imbalance. @xmath is related
to the power-law behavior @xmath satisfied by (the @xmath -wave part of)
the three-body wave function in the range @xmath by @xmath . This can be
seen from estimating the probability for the three particles to be
within a distance of @xmath of each other. This probability is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

The relation between the outgoing part of the wavefunction and (the
@xmath -wave part of) the @xmath -matrix is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.19)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

This relation is illustrated in Fig. 5.3 . If the @xmath -matrix scales
as @xmath at large momenta, @xmath , then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

The collisional relaxation rate may be calculated by noting that the
scattering @xmath -matrix can be written as the sum over partial waves

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath is the angle between @xmath and @xmath . @xmath are the
Legendre polynomials of which the first few are

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

These satisfy the orthogonality relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

To see that the integral equations for the partial waves decouple,
consider the general integral equation, Eq. ( 5.8 ). Let @xmath denote
the angle between @xmath and @xmath and likewise @xmath the angle
between @xmath and @xmath . Then the angle @xmath between @xmath and
@xmath satisfies @xmath . With this definition of angles, only the
@xmath -matrix under the integral depends on the azimuthal angle and the
corresponding integration may be carried out as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here the addition theorem for Legendre polynomials [ 44 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

has been used. The integral equations are now decoupled by using the
orthogonality relation 5.22 with the result

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.25)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath .

To solve the integral equation for the @xmath -wave contribution, let
@xmath . For simplicity let also @xmath . The @xmath -wave contribution
to the @xmath -matrix satisfies

  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------
           @xmath            (5.26)
           @xmath   @xmath   
                    @xmath   
                    @xmath   
  -- -- -- -------- -------- --------

at @xmath . Fig. 5.4 shows the dependence of @xmath on the mass
imbalance found by solving Eq. ( 5.26 ). The curve matches the result of
Ref. [ 58 ] .

It is seen that above a mass ratio of @xmath the relaxation rate
increases with increasing scattering length. This is nicely explained in
the Born-Oppenheimer picture [ 58 ] ; in the case of a large mass ratio,
if the two heavy atoms are separated by a distance much smaller than
@xmath , then the presence of the light atom will mediate an effective
attractive @xmath potential between the heavy atoms. On the other hand,
the Pauli principle results in the centrifugal barrier, which is a
repulsive @xmath potential. The mass imbalance of 12.3 corresponds to
the cancellation of these potentials in the Born-Oppenheimer picture. As
the mass ratio is further increased, the attractive potential is also
increased and at a mass ratio of approximately 13.6 one encounters the
phenomenon of the fall to the centre [ 44 ] : The system displays a
behavior characteristic of the Efimov phenomenon [ 25 ] where a
hierarchy of three-body bound states appear [ 58 ] . The short distance
physics becomes very important and a short range three-body parameter is
needed in order to accurately describe the physics, see e.g. Refs. [ 7 ,
12 ] .

### 5.3 Scattering of composite molecules

Consider now the 4-body problem with a mass imbalance. The present
calculation follows closely the mass-balanced molecule-molecule
scattering calculation presented in section 3.6 . Thus some intermediate
steps in the calculation will be skipped.

The governing integral equation is formally identical to the problem of
equal masses, Eq. ( 3.67 ), that is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

The difference from the previous calculation is that now both the
molecular propagator and the two-boson irreducible vertex, @xmath ,
depend on the mass-ratio.

Below, the convention is used that all atomic propagators have their
frequency shifted by a quarter of the energy going into the scattering,
while the molecules have their frequency shifted by half the energy.
That is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.28)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.29)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The relation between @xmath and @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the vertex @xmath satisfies

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.31)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The vertex @xmath may again be split into parts @xmath [ @xmath ]
analytic in the upper [lower] half planes of @xmath , with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

To achieve this use Eq. ( 3.73 ). Now insert Eq. ( 5.32 ) into Eq. (
5.30 ) and perform the frequency integrations over simple poles
(fermionic propagators). The iterated terms in the integral equations
for @xmath evaluated at the values of frequency dictated by the simple
poles will then only depend on an on-shell vertex

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

Again, as in section 3.6 , the on-shell frequencies would have been
obtained had @xmath and @xmath been attached to the vertex @xmath and
their frequencies been integrated out using a contour around their
simple poles.

The solution of the integral equation for the on-shell vertex @xmath is
now possible with the substitution

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

The equation for the on-shell vertex is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.35)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath and @xmath .

The relation between @xmath and @xmath is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.36)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Again @xmath and @xmath and @xmath is a free parameter. @xmath is the
result of calculating the Born diagram,

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.37)
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

with

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.38)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.39)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.40)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Finally, to relate the scattering amplitude to the scattering @xmath
-matrix at vanishing incoming energy and momentum use

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

while the scattering amplitude is related to the scattering length by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath is the reduced molecular-molecular mass. The result is shown in
Fig. 5.5 and matches the result of Refs. [ 58 , 75 ] .

## Chapter 6 Superfluidity close to a @xmath-wave resonance

Attention will now be turned to atomic Fermi gases interacting close to
a @xmath -wave Feshbach resonance. At low energies, because of the
angular momentum barrier, typically @xmath -wave scattering will
dominate. However, in gases consisting of identical fermionic atoms, the
Pauli exclusion principle prevents @xmath -wave scattering. At low
temperatures in these systems, @xmath -wave scattering will dominate
over higher angular momentum scattering, and the study of @xmath -wave
resonantly paired Fermi gases is therefore of fundamental interest.

The @xmath -wave resonantly coupled superfluid state has not yet been
observed experimentally in degenerate atomic gases, but @xmath -wave
Feshbach resonances have been observed in both @xmath K [ 69 ] and
@xmath Li [ 67 ] . Considerable theoretical attention has been given to
the subject [ 36 , 22 , 35 , 17 , 34 ] , particularly since it was
pointed out [ 35 ] that the two-dimensional @xmath -wave superfluids may
display phases which are candidates for quantum computing systems.
Below, only three-dimensional systems will be considered.

The gas of @xmath -wave resonantly paired fermions is in many ways a
richer system than the @xmath -wave system considered in the previous
chapters. In the @xmath -wave paired superfluid, the BCS and BEC phases
were merely different limits of the same phase, but this is no longer
true in @xmath -wave systems. The order parameters now correspond to
different projections of angular momentum and distinct symmetries. This
allows for the possibility of genuine phase transitions which in some
cases can even be topological [ 74 , 62 , 22 , 35 ] and the phase
diagram becomes much richer.

An interesting theoretical feature of the @xmath -wave Feshbach
resonances is that they are naturally narrow, whereas most @xmath -wave
resonances studied in experiments are wide. This means that a
quantitatively correct perturbative approach may be used across the
whole crossover [ 34 ] . However, as discussed below, the Feshbach
resonances fall into categories of weak and strong, and while the weak
resonances are amenable to a mean field treatment, as performed in Ref.
[ 34 ] , the strong resonances must be treated more carefully. In
particular, it will be shown in chapter 7 that the system close to a
strong resonance will contain three-body bound states (trimers), an
effect first noticed by Y. Castin and co-workers [ 16 ] .

In this chapter, the two-channel model for @xmath -wave Feshbach
resonances will be introduced and its parameters related to those of
basic scattering theory. Next the important distinctions between wide
and narrow and between weak and strong Feshbach resonances will be
discussed.

### 6.1 A two-channel model for @xmath-wave resonances

Consider a system of @xmath identical (atoms in the same hyperfine
state) spin-less fermions of mass @xmath . At low energies, the
scattering will proceed entirely in the @xmath -wave channel, since
@xmath -wave scattering is excluded due to the Pauli principle and
higher order scattering is suppressed. As in the @xmath -wave problem,
it is convenient to describe the system by a two-channel model. For the
@xmath -wave resonantly coupled superfluid the two-channel Hamiltonian
is given by [ 71 , 70 , 37 , 35 , 17 , 34 ]

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

The operators @xmath , @xmath are creation and annihilation operators of
the fermionic atoms of momentum @xmath . Similarly, @xmath , @xmath are
creation and annihilation operators of the bosonic spin 1 molecules with
the vector index @xmath being the spin projection on some axis. The
coupling @xmath appears as the amplitude for the transition from a pair
of identical fermions with relative momentum @xmath and orbital angular
momentum 1 into the bare closed-channel molecular state with internal
angular momentum 1.

The superfluid described by the two-channel Hamiltonian ( 6.1 ) is
controlled by four parameters. The first of these is the bare detuning
@xmath . This may in principle have a directional dependence, however
for simplicity it will be taken constant in this thesis. The second
parameter is the particle number @xmath , which is the expectation value
of the operator

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

It is convenient to trade the particle number for the energy scale

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

In the absence of the Feshbach molecules this would have been the Fermi
energy. The remaining two parameters are contained in the coupling
constant @xmath . Taking @xmath constant would imply that the
interactions take place at a point in space, as if the molecules were
infinitesimally small. However, in practice the molecules have a finite
size set by the range of the interactions, @xmath . @xmath is in turn
proportional to the wave function of the molecule in momentum space and
should be taken approximately constant for @xmath while quickly dropping
to zero for @xmath . Thus define a cut-off function

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

In this introductory chapter to the physics of @xmath -wave resonantly
coupled superfluids, the simplest cut-off function, a step function,
will be used. This choice is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is 1 for @xmath and 0 above. In chapter 7 both this and a “softer”
cut-off will be investigated.

#### 6.1.1 The diagrammatic approach

The propagator of fermionic atoms is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

From the Hamiltonian ( 6.1 ), the propagator of the bare closed-channel
molecule may be read off to be

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

As in chapter 3 , the bare molecular propagator needs to be corrected by
self energy insertions as shown in Fig. 3.2 . The physical dressed
propagator is then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (6.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The value of the self energy bubble is

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath            
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The factor 2 appears as the appropriate combinatorial factor; in the
@xmath -wave problem, the operators giving the propagators of the two
distinguishable fermionic atoms inside the bubble could be contracted in
only one way, in the present case there are two possible ways. Notice
how the physical molecular propagator will in general depend on the
chosen method of cut-off. To proceed, the cut-off function needs to be
specified. Using the simplest cut-off, Eq. ( 6.5 ), the self energy
becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (6.10)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The integral scales as @xmath for large momenta. Thus, two cut-off
dependent parameters have been defined,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath has dimensions of energy while @xmath is a very important
dimensionless parameter as will become clear below.

The propagator of bosons becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath            
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

which is diagonal in spin indices. It is seen that @xmath disappears
from the theory, it is absorbed in the physical detuning ¹ ¹ 1 In the
two-channel @xmath -wave model, a coefficient proportional to the
cut-off appeared to shift the bare detuning to the physical detuning,
see Eq. ( 2.16 ). No analogue of @xmath is present in the @xmath -wave
problem. as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath is an important parameter in the theory; a negative @xmath
implies the presence of a physical bound state in the two-body system.
On going through @xmath the bound state disappears and is replaced by a
resonance.

#### 6.1.2 @xmath-wave scattering

At low energies, the scattering amplitude between two identical
fermionic atoms may be approximated by [see Eq. ( 2.4 )]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath being the relative momentum of the two scattering atoms.
Whereas the @xmath -wave scattering amplitude @xmath as @xmath , @xmath
in the low-energy limit, demonstrating how @xmath -wave scattering, if
allowed, would dominate the scattering problem. The scattering volume
@xmath is the analogue of the @xmath -wave scattering length, diverging
and changing sign across the Feshbach resonance. The parameter @xmath is
a characteristic momentum and is analogous to the effective range @xmath
.

In the model above, with the choice of cut-off function Eq. ( 6.4 ), the
scattering amplitude is [ 35 , 34 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

from which it is possible to identify

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Again it is seen how @xmath is the physical position of the resonance,
the point at which the scattering volume changes sign. For @xmath the
system has a low-lying bound state and as @xmath changes sign, the bound
state turns into a resonance.

### 6.2 Properties of @xmath-wave Feshbach resonances

In the finite density atomic gas there will be three length scales, and
thus it is possible to construct two dimensionless parameters. The
interparticle separation is of order @xmath , a second length scale is
provided by @xmath , while a third is the range of the forces @xmath .
The first dimensionless parameter is @xmath defined in Eq. ( 6.11 ). The
second is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

In order for the results to be independent of the precise nature of
short-distance physics, the interparticle separation must be greater
than @xmath . This translates into the requirement

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (6.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

The value of @xmath determines the width of the Feshbach resonance in
the same manner as @xmath determines the width of @xmath -wave
resonances. The main difference between these is that while @xmath
increases with decreasing density, the opposite is true for @xmath .
Thus, @xmath -wave resonances may be made arbitrarily narrow by reducing
the particle density and it is possible to construct a pertubative
theory, accurate across the Feshbach resonance, for densities achievable
in current experiments.

That the @xmath -wave resonances are intrinsically narrow comes from the
presence of the centrifugal barrier, which adds a long ranged @xmath
tail to the interatomic potential, as in @xmath . The width of a low
lying resonance may then be estimated by computing the decay rate
through the effective potential and is found to be dominated by the
presence of the long-ranged tail [ 34 ] .

Note how, even after the shift to a physical detuning, the scattering
amplitude ( 6.15 ) still depends on the regularization scheme through
the parameter @xmath . If @xmath then the ultraviolet cut-off indeed
drops out of the problem. However, if @xmath then @xmath and the bare
molecule may be integrated out, resulting in a @xmath -wave single
channel model. Feshbach resonances with @xmath are called weak while
those with @xmath are termed the strong resonances. Unlike @xmath ,
@xmath is an intrinsic property of the Feshbach resonance in question
and depends only on the physics of the resonance, it cannot be changed
simply by changing the density.

Both of the parameters @xmath and @xmath control the perturbative
expansion in powers of the coupling constant @xmath . The usual approach
is to apply mean field theory to the system described by the Hamiltonian
( 6.1 ). This approach has been used in Refs. [ 35 , 17 , 34 ] . The
mean field approach relies on the smallness of the coupling @xmath which
means that both @xmath and @xmath must be small. This is not necessarily
the case since @xmath is an uncontrollable parameter.

The breakdown of mean field theory for strong @xmath -wave resonances
does not imply that no other techniques exist with which to investigate
the system. Fluctuational corrections arise from two distinct regimes of
momenta, of the order of the inverse interparticle spacing and of the
order of the ultraviolet cut-off. Corrections to the many-body problem
are governed by the former and are small as long as @xmath is small. At
momenta of the order of the ultraviolet cut-off only virtual particles
propagate and thus corrections to mean field theory from large momenta
must be few-body, resulting in a renormalization of the few-body
coupling constants.

The situation is quite similar to the wide resonance @xmath -wave
superfluid studied in chapter 3 . Here, the interactions between
fermions were strong (and the scattering problems studied dominated by
momenta of order @xmath ) and led to non-trivial renormalizations of the
few-body coupling constants, in particular it was seen how @xmath .
However, the many-body physics was dominated by physics at small momenta
( @xmath ) in a perturbative expansion in the gas parameter. As long as
the gas parameter was small, the mean field theory remained essentially
valid, with the few-body couplings non-trivially renormalized.

Finally, it should be mentioned that the @xmath -wave Feshbach resonance
investigated in the experiment [ 30 ] is narrow and strong. This
estimate was performed in Ref. [ 34 ] . The existing mean field theory
is valid for the narrow and weak Feshbach resonances, and is in
principle not valid for this particular Feshbach resonance. The few-body
physics leads to a non-trivial renormalization of coupling constants,
and indeed it also leads to bound states of three identical fermionic
atoms interacting close to a strong Feshbach resonance [ 49 , 41 ] . A
reliable method with which to investigate the strongly resonant @xmath
-wave condensates is thus needed and this is the subject of the next
chapter.

## Chapter 7 Strongly resonant @xmath-wave condensates

While the weak and narrow Feshbach resonances are amenable to a mean
field treatment [ 35 , 17 , 34 ] , it is the strong and narrow @xmath
-wave Feshbach resonances which are most relevant to current experiments
and properties of these are calculated in this chapter. The main results
of this chapter were presented in Ref. [ 49 ] .

An interesting effect in the vicinity of a strong resonance is the
appearance of bound molecule-atom (trimer) states with angular momentum
1. This effect was first noticed by Y. Castin and collaborators [ 16 ] .
These trimer states are quite unusual. They are very strongly bound,
with a size of the order of the short-disance physics, @xmath , the same
as the closed-channel molecule. The binding energy is very large (of the
order of @xmath ) and only weakly dependent on detuning from the
resonance. Below, the binding energy of the trimer as a function of the
strength of the resonance is found. In particular, the critical value of
the strength of the resonance at which the trimer state appears is
calculated.

The two-channel Hamiltonian ( 6.1 ) is valid both for weak and strong
resonances. In a manner similar to the @xmath -wave case (see chapter 3
) it reduces to a one-channel model in the limit of infinitely strong
resonces, i.e. as @xmath . However, it is interesting to investigate the
manner in which the physics evolves under the strengthening of the
Feshbach resonance, in particular the appearance of three-body bound
states for strong resonances. Thus the starting point will be the
two-channel Hamiltonian.

As discussed in the previous chapter, in order to study the two-channel
Hamiltonian ( 6.1 ), the coupling constant between the open and closed
channels needs to reflect the suppression of the molecule wave-function
outside the range of short-distance physics. Different regularization
schemes are possible. The two choices of cut-off functions used below
give results which are in qualitative agreement, although they do not
completely agree quantitatively. Arguments will be given as to why the
results are still qualitatively trustworthy.

A recent experiment [ 30 ] studied a gas of @xmath -wave Feshbach
molecules in @xmath . Unfortunately, the gas was found to be quite
short-lived, with a lifetime of about 2 ms. Ref. [ 30 ] studied whether
the short lifetime might be due to dipolar relaxation but found that the
lifetime was shorter than predicted from losses due to dipolar
relaxation alone. The presence of the trimer state opens up for the
possibility of inelastic collisions in which the scattering of two
molecules results in an atom and a trimer with large kinetic energies.
The lifetime of the @xmath -wave superfluid due to these decay processes
is estimated below.

One question which is not addressed below is the nature of the true
ground state of the system. In order to properly answer this question,
the molecule-molecule scattering problem needs to be studied and the
few-body coupling constants computed, as in Ref. [ 34 ] for weak
resonances. A diagrammatic technique similar to the one studied in
section 3.6 may be employed, but the solution of the resulting set of
integral equations will be technically very difficult.

In this chapter, first the diagrammatical expansion used to study
few-body problems will be discussed. Next, the three-body problem will
be solved for different choices of the ultraviolet cut-off and it will
be studied how the system evolves under the strengthening of the
Feshbach resonance. Finally, the stability of the gas will be
considered.

### 7.1 The three-body problem

In this section, the three-body problem consisting of three identical
fermionic atoms interacting close to a Feshbach resonance is studied. It
will be assumed that the system is tuned to the BEC side of the
resonance, that is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

and thus a physical bound two-body state exists.

It is convenient to explicitly write down the Feynman rules governing
the diagrammatic expansion. These may be derived from the Hamiltonian,
Eq. ( 6.1 ). In the Hamiltonian, each vertex converting two atoms into a
molecule (or vice versa) contains two fermionic operators. Thus the
vertices commute and they may be arranged in any desired order. The
atom-molecule scattering problem contains precisely one line of fermion
propagators. ¹ ¹ 1 This is also true for the two-boson irreducible
vertex @xmath appearing in the molecule-molecule scattering problem of
section 3.6 . The Feynman rules derived here apply equally well to
molecule-molecule scattering. Associate a number with each fermion line,
from incoming to outgoing, and also a number with each vertex, as
illustrated in Fig. 7.1 . Then the Feynman rules are read off from the
Hamiltonian:

1.  At vertex @xmath where a molecule of spin @xmath is created
    associate a factor of @xmath where @xmath is the numbered fermion
    momentum. At vertex @xmath where a molecule is annihilated,
    associate a factor @xmath .

2.  Fermion contractions give the same signs as in the @xmath -wave
    problem. In the three-body problem this is a factor @xmath where
    @xmath is the number of loops.

3.  Each vertex gives a combinatorial factor of 2 arising from
    indistinguishability of the fermions.

4.  Each fermion line gives a factor @xmath and each molecule a factor
    of @xmath .

5.  Finally, each vertex joining fermions of momenta @xmath and @xmath
    gives rise to a factor @xmath .

The atom-molecule scattering problem is studied in a similar manner to
the corresponding @xmath -wave problem of section 3.5 . The kinematics
is chosen as follows: An incoming molecule of spin @xmath has
four-momentum @xmath and the incoming fermion @xmath . The outgoing
molecule has spin @xmath and four-momentum @xmath and the outgoing atom
@xmath . To calculate the @xmath -wave scattering length, the total
energy @xmath reduces to a function @xmath (this ensures that the
molecular propagator is on-shell and will be defined precisely below)
and to look for bound states the total energy must be taken less than
@xmath . This is similar to the @xmath -wave problem where @xmath .

According to the Feynman rules above, the contribution to the scattering
amplitude from the Born diagram of Fig. 7.2 a has the value

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

For proper normalization of the external propagators in the scattering
amplitude, the residue @xmath of the molecular propagator at its pole is
included (as in the @xmath -wave three-body problem, see section 3.5 ).
The Born diagram is proportional to @xmath and goes to zero as @xmath
(except in the case of scattering at zero energy with vanishing
detuning).

The first loop diagram, shown in Fig. 7.2 b, takes the value

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.3)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Repeated spin indices indicate a summation over the corresponding spin.
The propagator of molecules has been defined as @xmath where it has been
used that the molecular propagator is diagonal in spin indices
(independent of the particular choice of regularization).

Using the Feynman rules above, it is seen that the generalization to an
integral equation is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.4)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Exactly as in the @xmath -wave problem, it is possible to integrate over
the loop frequency with the result @xmath . Let @xmath to achieve the
same frequency dependence in both @xmath -matrices of the equation.
Define the “on-shell” scattering amplitude @xmath . In order to proceed,
it is advantageous to scale out the cut-off by measuring momenta in
units of the cut-off, @xmath . Additionally, measure the total energy in
units of @xmath . Then the integral equation is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.5)
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

In writing this equation, for simplicity the dimensions of the
propagators @xmath and @xmath have been extracted and the remaining
@xmath and @xmath are dimensionless. The integration @xmath denotes an
integration over directions of @xmath .

The tensor @xmath must have the general form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

with a set of basis tensors defined as @xmath and @xmath . It is then
possible to derive two coupled integral equations for the coefficients
@xmath and @xmath . Multiply Eq. ( 7.5 ) by @xmath and sum over spin
indices. On the left hand side a product of basis tensors appears:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

The matrix @xmath is clearly invertible. Upon further multiplying the
integral equation by the inverse matrix it becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.8)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

which is a set of two coupled integral equations. The matrix @xmath is
dimensionless and is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.9)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

In order to proceed, it is necessary to specify the precise form of the
cut-off function @xmath , as this affects both the integration kernel,
through the matrix @xmath , and the molecular propagator.

#### 7.1.1 The hard cut-off

The coupling constant is now assumed to be constant up to the
ultraviolet cut-off after which it drops to zero. That is,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the usual step function, and properties of the gas
calculated with this assumption.

With the hard cut-off, the molecular propagator was found in Eq. (
LABEL:eq:molpropp ) to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

The physical on-shell molecule in the presence of the medium must have a
pole as its four-momentum vanishes [ 38 ] . That is, the molecule is
affected by the detuning @xmath and should be evaluated at a
four-momentum @xmath such that @xmath . From Eq. ( LABEL:eq:molpropp )
it is seen that @xmath satisfies the implicit relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

For @xmath the function @xmath reduces to the physical detuning.

The residue of the molecular propagator at its pole is also found from
the molecular propagator. It takes the value

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

and reduces to @xmath as @xmath .

##### The simplest hard cut-off

The solution of the integral equation ( 7.8 ) requires the determination
of the matrix @xmath , Eq. ( 7.9 ). Note that this matrix does not
depend on the strength of the resonance, @xmath . It is instructive to
first consider the approximation in which the momenta appearing in the
integral equation are cut off at the value @xmath . Strictly speaking
this approach is not correct, as the momenta going through the vertices
are not treated in a manner invariant under Galilean transformations.
Instead it corresponds to the approximation @xmath in Eq. ( 7.9 ).

Using this approximation, the matrix @xmath may be evaluated to give

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
                       @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
                       @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.14)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Note that since the total energy @xmath there are no poles in the
angular integration.

The integral equation ( 7.8 ) may then be solved at any given value of
the strength of the Feshbach resonance, @xmath , the total energy,
@xmath , and the detuning @xmath . Fig. 7.3 shows the functions @xmath
and @xmath in the limit of very strong resonances with a small detuning.
The @xmath -wave scattering length is determined from

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

evaluated at @xmath . For the specific choice of parameters

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

The scattering length only weakly depends on the detuning as will be
discussed below.

Bound trimer states are found as solutions to the homogenous integral
equation at @xmath . One bound state is found in the problem, at

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

The binding energy is seen to be proportional to @xmath , thus this
three-body bound state is of size of the order of @xmath . The method
used to find the binding energy is the following (also discussed in
chapter 3 ): A bound state in the problem shows up as a pole of the
scattering amplitude at a negative total energy, the binding energy
@xmath . This in turn corresponds to a solution of the homogenous
integral equation at that energy, thus to an eigenvalue equal to 1 of
the integration kernel. Fig. 7.4 shows the behavior of the largest
eigenvalues as functions of the total energy @xmath . It is seen that an
eigenvalue equal to 1 is obtained for a total energy of @xmath .

##### The invariant hard cut-off

It is now interesting to see if the simplified approach above indeed
captured the correct physics. Therefore, the matrix @xmath of Eq. ( 7.9
) is now evaluated in an invariant way, using

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is seen that the maximum possible value of the momenta is now @xmath
and the integral equation is solved on the interval @xmath . The matrix
@xmath may again be obtained exactly. For @xmath it reduces to the
result ( 7.14 ) above. For larger @xmath the limits of angular
integration depend on the cut-off and, although the integration is
simple to perform, the resulting expressions are not very enlightening
and will not be written here.

In the limit of very strong resonances ( @xmath ) the integral equation
( 7.8 ) reduces to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (7.19)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

It is of interest to study the behavior of the physics as the strength
of the resonance is increased. Had @xmath been zero, the only diagram
which would have contributed is the Born diagram whose value was
computed in Eq. ( 7.2 ) above. The Born contribution does not have a
pole at a negative energy and thus the bound state is absent for weak
resonances. It follows that the bound state found for strong resonances
must develop at a certain critical value of @xmath . This is indeed the
case as depicted in Fig. 7.5 . The scattering length @xmath vanishes for
@xmath since the Born term is purely proportional to @xmath , see Eq. (
7.2 ). @xmath becomes negative for small values of @xmath and diverges
to @xmath at the critical value

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

The scattering length then reemerges from @xmath to go asymptotically
towards the value of

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

as @xmath approaches @xmath . The critical value of @xmath is exactly
the value at which the bound state appears. For large values of @xmath
the binding energy saturates at

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

The values obtained here in the large @xmath limit are somewhat
different from the ones obtained above using the simplified hard
cut-off, but the results are still qualitatively consistent.

#### 7.1.2 Softening the cut-off

The above results may be tested by applying a different cut-off
function. In this section, the coupling constant @xmath is chosen to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is more smooth than the hard cut-off used above.

The first order of the day is to compute the propagator of molecules
using the new cut-off. To this end, the fermionic loop @xmath is needed
and according to Eq. ( 6.10 ) it becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The coefficients @xmath and @xmath are the analogues of @xmath and
@xmath calculated in chapter 6 for the hard cut-off. They are slightly
changed and take the values

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

The function @xmath replaces the @xmath present in the hard cut-off
propagator and is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath is the complementary error function

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note that @xmath while @xmath .

Using Eq. ( 6.8 ) the molecular propagator becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

As above, @xmath . The on-shell molecular propagators must be evaluated
at @xmath with @xmath satisfying the implicit relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

The residue of the molecular propagator at its pole takes the value

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

and reduces to @xmath as the detuning vanishes.

In the limit @xmath and @xmath the scattering amplitudes @xmath and
@xmath are shown in Fig. 7.6 . These are obtained by solving the
integral equation ( 7.8 ) using the exponential cut-off. The functions
are seen to approximately match those obtained in the simplified hard
cut-off problem, see Fig. 7.3 .

Fig. 7.7 depicts the scattering length as a function of the strength of
the resonance. The detuning has here been taken to vanish. The critical
strength of the resonance, above which the bound trimer state is
present, is found to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

The results presented above for the hard and exponential cut-offs do not
match completely, yet the qualitative behavior is found to be the same.
It should be emphasized that the binding energy for strong resonances
goes as @xmath and is very large. The binding energy is thus sensitive
to the physics at large momenta, i.e. to the specific choice of the
regulator @xmath . The question is then, does the existence of the
trimer depend on the choices of @xmath presented above, that is, is it
an artifact of the model and not the actual physical phenomena? To
answer this question, consider the system close to the formation of the
trimer, i.e. @xmath close to @xmath . Here, the binding energy of the
trimer may be arbitrarily small and is a low energy phenomenon,
insensitive to the choice of regulator (on the other hand, the precise
value of @xmath , being proportional to @xmath , does depend on the
choice of @xmath ). As @xmath is increased from @xmath , the binding
energy @xmath quickly becomes large. However, once the trimer has
formed, changing the regularization scheme to make the model more
realistic at short distances does not make the trimer disappear. Indeed,
in order for the trimer to disappear at some @xmath , the binding energy
would have to first become large and then again drop to zero. The
disappearance of the trimer would then again be a low energy phenomenon
and would be predicted by the theory, contrary to what was found above.
In this sense, even though the binding energy of the trimer is large,
the existence of the trimer is a result of low energy physics. In
conclusion, although the precise value of the binding energy of the
trimer depends on the choice of regulator, the presence of the trimer
state for strong resonances does not.

### 7.2 Stability of the @xmath-wave superfluid

It is important to estimate the lifetime of the @xmath -wave superfluid.
In the strongly resonant BEC regime studied here, one of the main decay
channels will be inelastic collisions in which two molecules turn into
an atom and a trimer. In the process, the large binding energy of the
trimer will be released as kinetic energy and the particles are lost
from the system.

As in the case of @xmath -wave collisonal losses studied in section
5.2.1 the loss rate will be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath is again the density of bosonic molecules. The inelastic
relaxation rate is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath is defined as the relative momentum of the incident
molecules and the average is taken over @xmath . The inelastic
scattering cross section is given by [ 44 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath is the inelastic scattering amplitude into the final relative
momentum @xmath and is of order @xmath , just like the three-body
scattering length above was found to be proportional to @xmath . This
may be seen from estimating the behavior of diagrams of the type shown
in Fig. 7.8 . These diagrams are similar to the form studied in the
@xmath -wave four-fermion problem but in the @xmath -wave formalism. The
final relative momentum arises from the kinetic energy released in the
binding of three fermionic atoms into a trimer, thus @xmath and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (7.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

Additionally, there are inelastic decay channels similar to those
studied in section 5.2.1 in which a molecule decays into a deeply bound
molecular state in the presence of an additional atom or molecule.
Estimates similar to the above show that the decay rate due to these
processes are of the same order as @xmath . Note that these are present
both for weak and strong resonances, unlike the decay to the trimer
state.

Consider the experiment described in Ref. [ 30 ] in which it was found
that the lifetime of diatomic molecules was quite short, of the order of
2 ms. It is interesting to estimate whether this could be explained by
the losses due to the inelastic processes. The decay rate is @xmath and
is density dependent. The atomic density in the experiment was @xmath
and @xmath estimated by the size of the molecules to be .02 @xmath .
Thus the decay rate is of the order of 10 Hz, corresponding to a
lifetime of about 100 ms. However, the prefactor to the estimate is
uncertain and it is also unknown whether the losses observed in Ref. [
30 ] would depend on the density. In conclusion, it is uncertain whether
the observed lifetime of diatomic molecules in Ref. [ 30 ] is limited by
inelastic collisions.

Shortly after Ref. [ 49 ] , containing the work described in this
chapter, became available on-line, the paper [ 41 ] by Jona-Lasinio et
al appeared in which similar conclusions were obtained for the @xmath
-wave superfluid.

## Chapter 8 Conclusions and outlook

In this thesis, the @xmath - and @xmath -wave paired superfluids have
been investigated. In the wide-resonance @xmath -wave crossover,
properties of the BEC regime were computed in the gas parameter
expansion. Higher order corrections were found, and the mass imbalanced
BEC was considered. It was studied how @xmath -wave resonances naturally
fall into categories of weak and strong depending on the precise details
of the Feshbach resonance, and it was demonstrated how the strongly
resonant superfluid is unstable towards the formation of strongly bound
trimers with angular momentum 1. The rate of losses arising from
collisional relaxation was estimated and it was seen how the predicted
lifetime of the gas was slightly overestimated compared with the
relevant experiment.

A prominent element throughout the thesis has been the constant
interplay between few- and many-body physics. This was observed in the
@xmath -wave BEC regime, where few-body physics determined the
molecule-molecule scattering length @xmath in terms of the atom-atom
scattering length @xmath . Once @xmath was known, the many-body physics
was derived in terms of this few-body parameter. The decay rate of the
superfluid due to collisional relaxation in both the @xmath - and the
@xmath -wave superfluids was also demonstrated to depend on few-body
physics.

Possible future directions of study in the @xmath -wave case include
finite temperature extensions of the work. A study of the excitation
spectrum at momenta of the order of the inverse scattering length, for
which the underlying structure of the composite bosons is probed, might
prove fruitful. Finally, it would be interesting to compute higher order
corrections to the chemical potential and ground state energy which
explicitly demonstrate the underlying fermionic structure of the BEC of
composite bosons.

An exciting prospect is to restrict the @xmath -wave superfluid to two
spatial dimensions. Here, the BCS phase has been shown to be topological
and will support vortices with non-Abelian excitations [ 62 , 35 ] ,
both necessary ingredients for a fault tolerant quantum computer [ 42 ]
. It remains to be seen whether a stable, two-dimensional @xmath -wave
superfluid can be achieved.