In this thesis we describe how minimal surface techniques can be used to
prove the Penrose inequality in general relativity for two classes of
3-manifolds. We also describe how a new volume comparison theorem
involving scalar curvature for 3-manifolds follows from these same
techniques.

The Penrose inequality in general relativity is closely related to the
positive mass theorem, first proved by Schoen and Yau in 1979. In
physical terms, the positive mass theorem states that an isolated
gravitational system with nonnegative local energy density must have
nonnegative total energy. The idea is that nonnegative energy densities
“add up” to something nonnegative. The Penrose inequality, on the other
hand, states that if an isolated gravitational system with nonnegative
local energy density contains a black hole of mass @xmath , then the
total energy of the system must be at least @xmath .

Given a @xmath -manifold @xmath , we consider the function @xmath equal
to the minimum area required for a surface in @xmath to contain a volume
@xmath . We find that lower bounds on the curvature of @xmath yield
upper bounds on @xmath . Furthermore, in the case of an asymptotically
flat manifold which has nonnegative scalar curvature (which is the
condition needed for nonnegative energy density), we find that the
behavior of @xmath for large @xmath describes the total mass of the
manifold. In this way we are able to use the curvature bounds of the
manifold to achieve lower bounds on the total mass. We can also use
Ricci and scalar curvature bounds on a compact @xmath -manifold @xmath
to bound the total volume of @xmath . Since @xmath equals zero when
@xmath is either equal to zero or the total volume of @xmath , upper
bounds on @xmath force the roots of @xmath to be close together, giving
an upper bound on the volume of @xmath .
