# Acknowledgments

I would like to say my thanks and express sincere appreciation to my
supervisor Dr. Hendrik Grundling for all his time, effort and patience.
I would like to express my gratitude to Professor Klaus Fredenhagen for
his insights into the correct statement of the BRST charge. Thanks also
to Dr. Ben Warhurst for many stimulating discussions along the way.
Finally, I am very grateful to the School of Mathematics and Statistics
at the University of New South Wales and the University for their
support.

###### Contents

-    Abstract
-    Acknowledgments
-    1 Introduction
-    2 Heuristics
    -    2.1 Set-up
    -    2.2 Charge
    -    2.3 Superderivation
    -    2.4 Example 1: Heuristic BRST-QEM
        -    2.4.1 Basic fields
        -    2.4.2 The QEM field
        -    2.4.3 BRST Extension of QEM
        -    2.4.4 @xmath and State space
    -    2.5 Example 2: Hamiltonian BRST
        -    2.5.1 Setup
        -    2.5.2 Physical subspace and @xmath
    -    2.6 Discussion of the Examples
    -    2.7 General Discussion and Directions
    -    2.8 Appendix: Proofs
-    3 General BRST Structures
    -    3.1 Ghost Algebra
        -    3.1.1 Gradings
        -    3.1.2 Finite Dimensional Ghost algebras
        -    3.1.3 Connection to Berezin Superfunctions
    -    3.2 Charge and dsp -decomposition
    -    3.3 Operator Cohomology and @xmath -decomposition
        -    3.3.1 Example - Abelian Hamiltonian Constraints
        -    3.3.2 Alternative Physical Algebra
-    4 KO Abelian BRST and Electromagnetism
    -    4.1 Test functions
        -    4.1.1 QEM Test Functions
        -    4.1.2 Lorentz condition
        -    4.1.3 Ghost Test Functions
    -    4.2 Fock-Krein BRST
        -    4.2.1 Fock-Krein CCR’s
        -    4.2.2 KO Abelian BRST test function space
        -    4.2.3 BRST Extension
        -    4.2.4 Superderivation
        -    4.2.5 BRST charge
        -    4.2.6 State space
        -    4.2.7 Physical algebra
        -    4.2.8 Example: Finite KO Abelian BRST
    -    4.3 Electromagnetism
        -    4.3.1 Covariance
        -    4.3.2 Example: Constraints for Massive Abelian Gauge Theory
    -    4.4 Finite KO Abelian BRST and Finite Abelian Hamiltonian BRST
-    5 @xmath -BRST
    -    5.1 Bounded @xmath
    -    5.2 Resolvent Algebra
        -    5.2.1 States, representations and regularity
        -    5.2.2 Further structure.
        -    5.2.3 Constraint theory.
    -    5.3 Constraints I: Symplectic Form @xmath
        -    5.3.1 @xmath -procedure I
        -    5.3.2 QEM and Covariance I
        -    5.3.3 @xmath -BRST I
        -    5.3.4 Superderivation I
        -    5.3.5 States
        -    5.3.6 A problem with the Physical Algebra
    -    5.4 @xmath -BRST II
        -    5.4.1 @xmath -prodedure II
        -    5.4.2 Superderivation II
        -    5.4.3 Strongly Regular States and Charge
        -    5.4.4 BRST-Algebra for QEM II
        -    5.4.5 QEM and Covariance II
    -    5.5 General BRST for unbounded @xmath
        -    5.5.1 Examples
-    6 Results and Conclusion
    -    6.1 Summary of Results
    -    6.2 Conclusions
    -    6.3 Further Issues with Quantum BRST
    -    6.4 Directions for Further Analysis
-    7 Appendix
    -    7.1 Superstuff
    -    7.2 Indefinite Inner Product Spaces
    -    7.3 Symplectic Spaces
    -    7.4 Quantum Dirac Constraints
    -    7.5 Covariance for @xmath -BRST II

## Chapter 1 Introduction

This thesis describes the structures of the quantum BRST constraint
method in a mathematically consistent manner, ultimately formulating it
in a @xmath -algebraic context. The BRST quantum constraint method is
widely used in modern theoretical physics, finding application in many
areas such as renormalization of gauge theories [ 11 , 68 , 104 ] ,
constraint theory in classical and quantum Hamiltonian constraint
systems [ 55 , 8 , 102 , 72 ] and constraint theory in string theory [
64 , 37 , 34 ] . As a general quantum constraint method it suffers from
the problems that it comes in a multitude of varieties, is commonly
defined in the context of a specific model rather than in an independent
algorithmic manner and often requires the addition of model-dependent
constraints. Although there has been analysis of quantum BRST in varying
degrees of mathematical rigour, as discussed below, there is still a
lack of unification of the various results as well as a lack of
comparison to alternative quantum constraint methods in mathematically
precise manner. The following develops a mathematical framework to
address these issues. First this framework is developed in the setting
of operators acting on a Krein space, which is used to analyse common
BRST examples and to discuss problematic issues related to BRST in the
literature. The framework is then extended to an abstract @xmath
-algebraic context where is used to compare quantum BRST to the Dirac
quantum constraint method in a mathematically consistent setting, and to
further investigate the formulation of an abstract quantum BRST
algorithm.

We start with a brief historical survey of BRST. As the BRST related
literature is vast, the account given here covers the part which is
central to the development of most branches of BRST. BRST theory
officially began with the work by Becchi, Rouet and Stora (BRS) [ 11 ,
10 ] , and separately by Tyutin (T) [ 100 ] , in relation to
renormalization of gauge theories using path integral methods. In [ 11 ]
these authors discovered that it was possible to define a
superderivation @xmath (or @xmath in their notation) on the fields
involved (gauge, ghost, etc) such that @xmath ; that the Lagrangians
were @xmath invariant; and that @xmath produced the Slavnov-Taylor
identities which correspond to gauge invariance in perturbation theory.
In this way these authors were able to prove the renormalizability and
unitarity of the @xmath -matrix in gauge theory models that satisfy the
Slavnov-Taylor identities, which they demonstrate explicitly for the
example of the @xmath -Higgs-Kibble model.

Following this, Kugo and Ojima formulated BRST as a constraint theory,
published in a series of papers [ 66 , 67 , 69 , 48 , 68 ] including the
major work [ 68 ] (referred to here as K&O [ 68 ] ) that exhibits many
of the general structures associated to BRST today. They work in an
operator formalism, where fields are operator valued distributions
acting on some inner product space @xmath , and the construction @xmath
for non-abelian gauge theories is interpreted as ‘replacing the gauge
parameter by ghost parameter’ in the gauge transformations. An explicit
formula for the BRST charge @xmath is given such that it generates
@xmath , is such that @xmath , and hermicity assignments for the ghost
fields are assumed which make @xmath hermitian. The latter two
conditions are incompatible with a Hilbert inner product and thus forces
the inner product on @xmath to be indefinite. As @xmath we have @xmath
and K&O then go on to assume formally the the physical subspace is
@xmath and to investigate consequent structures. They find that the
physical subspace has a positive definite inner product using an
argument based on a specific structure associated to the gauge theory
set-up called the ‘quartet mechanism’ applied to non-interacting
theories and invoking asymptotic completeness (K&O [ 68 ] p46). Under
the assumption that the observables should be be those operators that
factor to @xmath , they prove that the local observables (as defined on
K&O [ 68 ] p46) are the same as @xmath factored to @xmath , which is
used to give a proof colour confinement, K&O [ 68 ] Theorem 5.11 p69.

The results in K&O [ 68 ] , while undoubtedly of great importance, rely
on formal arguments as well as special features associated to gauge
theories. It is natural to consider how these results can be extended to
other theories with constraints and once done, to see if the inner
product on @xmath is positive definite, if the operators which factor to
@xmath always are in @xmath , how to make the structures rigorous, what
the relation is to other constraint methods such as Dirac. As the K&O
approach is based upon modifying a symmetry of the Lagrangian, we refer
to similar approaches as the Lagrangian approach to BRST . Following K&O
[ 68 ] the Lagrangian BRST structures are further analysed and developed
by many authors such as [ 70 , 3 , 4 , 1 , 2 , 78 , 81 , 80 , 64 , 92 ,
79 , 97 ] . Positivity of the physical space for gauge and string models
is studied in [ 78 , 97 , 4 , 2 ] where it is noted that positivity is
not guaranteed to hold in general [ 97 , 78 ] , and that perturbative
arguments may not be applicable to gauge theories in [ 97 , 2 ] . Kugo
and Uehara [ 70 ] investigate the observable algebra for Yang-Mills type
gauge theories and find that a further restriction to ghost number zero
BRST observables is needed to guarantee correspondence to the expected
algebra ( [ 70 ] Theorem 1 p1398). Also noteworthy is [ 64 ] , where the
authors apply the Lagrangian BRST approach to bosonic string theory and
find that 2-nilpotence of the BRST charge requires the critical
dimension condition of @xmath and that the physical subspace has
positive definite inner product via a ‘quartet mechanism’-like argument.

Concurrently with the development of the Lagrangian BRST approach,
Fradkin et al. [ 31 , 32 , 9 , 8 ] , published a series of papers with a
general method for proving unitarity of the @xmath -matrix for arbitrary
gauge fixing conditions for degenerate Hamiltonian systems. This method
extends the original system by ghost variables and uses the bracket
structure of the constraints to construct an 2-nilpotent operator @xmath
( @xmath in their notation) to generate a superderivation @xmath . It is
argued that we can extend the Hamiltonian @xmath of the original
unextended system to @xmath , where @xmath is an arbitrary function of
the extended variables, and that the @xmath -matrix derived from the
extended system is independent of @xmath . In this way we achieve
independence of the @xmath -matrix from the ‘gauge fixing condition’, in
the form of the function @xmath . Although originally based on the path
integral formalism, this method was set in an operator formalism in [ 9
] where the basic objects @xmath and @xmath had strikingly similar
properties to the K&O construction, but where the the method now applies
to a general Hamiltonian system with constraints, and that the
construction of @xmath depended only on the commutation relations of the
constraints. We refer to the above approach as the BFV
(Batalin-Fradkin-Vilkovisky) approach to BRST .

The BFV and Lagrangian BRST approach to constraints were brought
together in the comprehensive paper by Henneaux [ 49 ] , in which the
BFV approach is reviewed and the major step of formulating it for
classical Hamiltonian constraint theories is taken. Quantum theory is
then considered in both operator and path integral formalisms where it
is shown how the BRST charge for Yang-Mills as in K&O [ 68 ] can be
arrived at using the BFV approach, that the extended system acts on a
space of Berezin superfunctions, and a heuristic argument for
equivalence between the Quantum Dirac constraint method and Quantum BRST
method is given. The BFV formalism as described in this paper, and its
subsequent development we will refer to as the Hamiltonian approach to
BRST .

Since [ 49 ] , Henneaux and many others have significantly extended the
analysis of Hamiltonian BRST, both in the classical and quantum case. An
exhaustive list of these works is not given here, but can be found in
H&T [ 55 ] which is the standard reference for Hamiltonian BRST theory
in the physics literature. The first half of this book summarises the
major structures now associated to classical BRST. The ghosts and
conjugate ghosts that appear in classical BRST are shown to arise
naturally from the geometric structures of Koszul-Tate and longitudinal
differentials associated to the constraint surface and gauge
transformations. Using homological perturbation theory, they show that
the BRST superderivation @xmath arises naturally as the sum of these
differentials plus higher order terms and satisfies @xmath . This
produces the BRST cohomology, and it is shown that the algebra of
observables of the original constraint theory is isomorphic to the BRST
cohomology at ghost number zero. The generator @xmath of @xmath is
canonically constructed as in H&T [ 55 ] and the analysis is extended to
cover the reducible case, i.e. where the constraint functions are
linearly dependent. We will not treat classical BRST further in this
thesis as it has already been put on a firm mathematical foundation,
e.g. [ 30 , 93 , 96 , 7 ] ; we refer the reader to these papers and
their bibliographies for details.

With classical BRST being well defined, most authors construct
Hamiltonian Quantum BRST structures by analogy to classical BRST with
particular emphasis on the cohomological aspects. For example, the BRST
observables are usually taken to be those @xmath -invariant operators of
ghost number zero rather than operators that factor to @xmath . While
Quantum Hamiltonian BRST is constructed in several heuristic formalisms,
such as the path integral, we are only concerned here with the operator
formalisms as this is most easily made rigorous. We study the operator
formalism for Hamiltonian BRST given in H&T [ 55 ] Chapter 13 as this
has the basic structures of most versions of Hamiltonian BRST. As in the
Lagrangian case, there are many questions to ask of the structure of
Hamiltonian Quantum BRST. Fundamental to a probabilistic interpretation
is the positivity of the inner product on the physical subspace.

Positivity of the inner product on the physical subspace is sometimes
assumed to be true, or that it will be only for ghost number zero states
in the physical subspace, but it is noted in several places, e.g. H&T [
55 ] p311, Grigore and Scharf [ 38 ] p644, that extra selection
conditions beyond this are still needed for this to hold. Henneaux [ 50
] (section 8) gives a discussion of this complication for the case of
the string model, along with a discussion of other difficulties related
to the superfunction representations commonly used in Hamiltonian BRST,
e.g. indefiniteness of the physical inner product and fractional ghost
number. Solutions are proposed to both problems. These problems are also
noted by other authors e.g. Landsman and Linden [ 71 ] p425, McMullan
and Paterson [ 74 ] p489 Fuster and van Holten [ 33 ] p7, p9, and
essentially the same solution is proposed as in Henneaux [ 50 ] . A
useful method for calculating the physical states which utilizes the dsp
-decomposition and the BRST Laplacian operator is noted in several
places, and treated most systematically for the Hamiltonian framework in
van Holten [ 102 ] Section 2.7, and for the Lagrangian framework in
Scharf [ 92 ] p21.

As well as issues related to the state space for both Lagrangian and
Hamiltonian BRST, calculation of the quantum BRST observable algebra is
not analysed in detail at the heuristic level. In the Lagrangian
picture, K&O [ 68 ] give Proposition 5.9 p68 which shows heuristically
that BRST invariant observables only act on @xmath by their restriction
to the subspace with no gauge particle creators, Scharf [ 92 ] p127
proves unitarity of the physical @xmath -matrix using a similar argument
and the dsp -decomposition. In the Hamiltonian picture, H&T [ 55 ]
Section 14.2.1b, gives a structure theorem that relates the dsp
-decomposition to the operators in @xmath , but does not compare this to
the Dirac method of selection of observables. These results all rely on
essentially the same idea, expressed below in Theorem ( 3.3.11 ) and
Theorem ( 4.2.27 ). In [ 53 , 52 ] a heuristic proof is given to show
that restricting to ghost number zero operators in @xmath for the
physical observables removes the ghost part of the algebra for Quantum
Yang-Mills theory. The proof does not use the structure theorem in H&T [
55 ] . However in Henneaux and Teitelboim [ 54 ] it is shown that @xmath
must be restricted to the original observables (without ghosts) to
obtain the correct results for the example of quantization of
generalised magnetic monopoles.

Mathematically consistent treatment of BRST structures is needed to deal
with the above issues. As BRST theory has existed for 30 years, work in
this direction has of course been done. General BRST structures has been
examined by Horuzhy et al. in a series of papers [ 57 , 6 , 60 , 58 , 61
, 62 , 103 ] , in particular in Horuzhy and Voronin [ 57 ] the BRST
charge is analysed @xmath as a possibly unbounded Hermitian operator
acting on a Krein space, and various results including the dsp
-decomposition are obtained. Ghost number operators are studied in
Azizov and Khoruzhii [ 6 ] and conditions for the existence of these
operators are given. The natural Lie superalgebra generated by @xmath ,
its Hilbert-adjoint @xmath , ghost number operator @xmath and the
BRST-Laplacian @xmath is @xmath and its representation theory is
carefully analysed in Horuzhy and Voronin [ 61 ] where a general
description of how these representations decompose is given. A concrete
example of BRST for the Schwinger model is discussed Horuzhy and Voronin
[ 58 ] in the Lagrangian approach, where the BRST charge is constructed
along the lines of ‘replacing the gauge parameter by ghost parameter’. A
problem is found in applying this approach to the LS solution (as
defined in [ 58 ] ), but it works well for the CF solution [ 19 ] with
the result that the correct physical space is selected. It should be
noted that the BRST charge for the Schwinger models has the same form as
that for BRST-QEM when written in terms of creators and annihilators
which is why we get the correct physical result. The BRST physical
algebra is not discussed in this example, however the selection of the
physical algebra is considered in [ 60 ] where it is shown that for
theories with structures similar to QEM, the operator cohomology is what
we expect. The proof of this fact relies on using an ‘operator dsp
-decomposition’ and is entirely algebraic. It is conjectured at the end
of [ 60 ] that the spatial dsp -decomposition can be used to simplify
the operator cohomology calculation. We do this here using a structure
theorem similar to the one mentioned in H&T [ 55 ] , but extended to
cover the infinite dimensional case. Further papers [ 62 , 103 ] are
mainly concerned with studying @xmath .

In contrast to the direct study of the general structures of Quantum
BRST, a second avenue to investigate Quantum BRST rigorously is to apply
a well-defined quantization scheme to classical BRST. As classical BRST
is mathematically sound and gives results equivalent to Dirac, it is
natural to see if this will carry over to the quantum theory, and this
is studied in [ 15 , 27 , 65 ] . Duval, Elhadad and Tuynman [ 27 ] found
that by using Geometric Quantization as well as the BRST procedure gave
they obtained the same problems with the indefinite metric of the
physical subspace, fractional ghost number, etc, mentioned above with
respect to Hamiltonian BRST ( [ 27 ] p543), but could obtain the desired
results by modifications made on a case by case by basis. This seems a
natural approach to take, however due to obstruction results in
quantization [ 36 , 35 ] , and the fact that there are quantum
constraint systems with no classical analogue, direct analysis of
quantum BRST structures is still of primary importance.

Quantum BRST ideas have been applied to the rigorous formulations of
perturbation theory. The idea of calculating interacting quantum field
theories (QFT’s) via perturbations of free theories is fundamental to
all approaches to interacting QFT, and the well known divergences
associated to the process are the bane of rigorous formulations of QFT.
The approach taken in [ 92 , 26 , 25 , 24 , 56 ] is to define
interacting objects via formal power series in such a way that each term
satisfies certain properties we expect from our final theory, such as
gauge invariance. Scharf [ 92 ] does this using the Epstein-Glaser [ 28
] approach to constructing the @xmath -matrix where the terms in the
@xmath -matrix are smeared time ordered operator valued distributions
constructed iteratively without the use of a ultraviolet cut-off
function by the use of causality. BRST structures are used to define
perturbative gauge invariance (PGI). For given models, the @xmath
-matrix is defined as the formal power series of the appropriate smeared
time ordered free matter, gauge, and ghost fields with the @xmath -th
order term in the series denoted by @xmath . Both @xmath and @xmath are
constructed using the Lagrangian method of ‘replacing the gauge
parameter by ghost parameter’. PGI is then defined to be that @xmath is
a divergence of particular form (cf. [ 92 ] equation (3.1.18) p99) and
is justified as it implies more traditional expressions of PGI, e.g. the
Ward-Takahashi identities in the case of Quantum Electrodynamics (QED)
(cf. [ 92 ] p100). PGI as defined in [ 92 ] for a general theory also
ensures that smearing the @xmath -matrix terms @xmath over the Schwartz
functions @xmath and taking the limit @xmath gives that @xmath (cf. [ 92
] equation (3.1.25) p 100). That is, the terms in the @xmath -matrix
perturbation series are such that @xmath in the adiabatic limit. Scharf
makes the point that PGI defined using @xmath and @xmath this way makes
sense even when the @xmath -matrix does not exist in the adiabatic
limit, e.g. for the massless field case ( [ 92 ] p101). Hence BRST
structures, such as the superderivation @xmath , are fundamental to the
meaning of gauge invariance in this approach. Similar ideas are used in
[ 24 , 25 ] where observables, physical state space, and BRST charge
@xmath for interacting theories are constructed via formal power series
derived from the free theory. These ideas are also used in [ 56 ] which
provides an extensive analysis of renormalization of Yang-Mills in
curved space time. It is assumed throughout these approaches that the
physical interpretations require that the physical subspace, @xmath ,
has positive definite inner product, and also that the physical algebra
is defined to be @xmath .

This concludes our brief historical review of the current BRST
literature relevant to this thesis. Some other important works not
mentioned so far are e.g. [ 106 , 104 , 79 ] . For a more extensive
guide to the BRST literature, the interested reader can consult consult
the bibliographies of [ 55 , 79 , 102 , 7 , 8 ] .

From the preceeding discussion it is clear that the quantum BRST
constraint method needs a mathematically rigorous treatment for several
reasons. We need to investigate positivity of the physical subspace in
the Lagrangian and Hamiltonian frameworks. We need to investigate the
selection of the algebra of BRST observables. We need to interpret
Lagrangian BRST structures in a well-defined mathematical framework, and
give an account of free theories such as QEM as in Scharf [ 92 ] in this
framework. We need to be able to compare the different approaches to
quantum BRST in a mathematically precise way, as well as compare quantum
BRST to the quantum Dirac method.

This thesis pursues these aims and is orgainized broadly in two parts.
Chapter 2 , Chapter 3 and Chapter 4 make up the first part, and are
aimed at developing clear consistent mathematical structures in a
concrete representation. Initially, the standard quantum BRST examples
are defined formally as found in the literature, then the model
independent structures of quantum BRST common to the standard BRST
examples in the literature are defined. The standard quantum BRST
examples are then developed rigorously in light of these frameworks,
facilitating discussion of problematic issues related to BRST in the
literature from a consistent viewpoint.

Much insight can be gained from analysing QFT structures in a
representation-free setting, and the second part is aimed at analysing
quantum BRST in such a setting. Chapter 5 encodes the structures of the
previous chapters in a @xmath -algebraic context, and gives an abstract
formulation of the general structures of the quantum BRST constraint
method. This is a non-trivial mathematical problem for the case of
BRST-QEM as most of the basic objects are defined as unbounded operators
acting on a Krein-Fock space. The formulation of quantum BRST in @xmath
-algebraic structures allows a comaparison to the quantum Dirac
constraint algorithm from a general and rigorous standpoint.

This is not to say that a @xmath -algebraic framework is the only way to
analyse quantum BRST rigorously, as evidenced by the many other
approaches to rigorous quantum BRST already mentioned in the
introduction. The @xmath -algebraic viewpoint, however, gives a
methodology to draw together and analyse in a consistent mathematical
framework coming from the different varieties of quantum BRST.

A summary of the contents of the Chapters is as follows:

Chapter 2 gives an account of the standard heuristic BRST structures
such as the BRST charge @xmath , BRST superderivation @xmath , and ghost
structure. The Lagrangian and Hamiltonian BRST approaches will be
discussed by giving an example of each. The purpose of this chapter is
to motivate the rigorous developments in later chapters and to connect
with standard examples as found in the literature. We will see that at
the heuristic level, BRST for Quantum Electromagnetism (QEM) selects the
correct physical subspace, while for Hamiltonian BRST with a finite
number of bounded constraints, BRST has problems with indefiniteness of
the physical inner product and that extra selection criteria are
required to specify the correct physical space.

Chapter 3 makes the heuristic structures rigorous in terms of operators
acting on a Krein space. There are several technical difficulties
involved in this as many of the basic objects involve algebras of
unbounded operators acting on Krein spaces. We first give an account of
the ghost algebra as the CAR algebra [ 16 ] smeared over a Krein test
function space with a certain simple structure motivated by the BRST-QEM
example. We connect this with the Berezin superfunction representations
that are also commonly used for the Ghost Algebra. The natural spatial
decomposition associated to the BRST charge @xmath , the dsp
-decomposition, is given as well as its connection to the physical
operator cohomology. Using this we give a simple example of where
Hamiltonian BRST will not coincide with the Dirac constraint method at
the spatial, or algebra level.

Chapter 4 is devoted to make the heuristic BRST-QEM example rigorous as
well as other Bose-Fock theories with similar one-particle test function
space. We find that in this rigorous formulation, the BRST-physical
state space and BRST-physical algebra are what we would expect using
other constraint methods such as the Gupta-Bleuler method. Other
examples fit easily into this framework. Finally, we combine Hamiltonian
BRST with a finite number of bounded abelian constraints with abelian
Bose-Fock BRST in a natural way which yields a BRST charge @xmath that
selects the correct physical subspace. Hence this yields a
BRST-algorithm for a general finite number of bounded abelian
constraints that selects the correct physical subspace without the need
of imposing any further constraint conditions. This is an interesting
result as it is not the case for the usual Hamiltonian BRST algorithm
(cf. MCPS problem as discussed in Subsection 2.5.2 below). To author’s
knowledge, this algorithm, using the combination of Hamiltonian and
Bose-Fock BRST, is an original construction.

Chapter 5 is then devoted to encoding the previous structures and
examples in a @xmath -algebraic framework. There are major obstacles in
doing this such as that the BRST charge @xmath is unbounded and that the
superderivation @xmath maps bounded operators to unbounded operators in
physical examples such as BRST-QEM. To deal with these we first develop
@xmath -BRST theory with bounded structures to see what features we need
to encode. Unbounded superderivations with similar properties to the
BRST superderivation have been studied in relation to supersymmetry by
Buchholz and Grundling [ 17 ] using the Resolvent Algebra for the
canonical commutation relations developed in Buchholz and Grundling [ 18
] . Following a similar procedure we encode BRST for Abelian Bosonic
theories in a @xmath -algebraic way and analyse the resulting
structures. We find that when this is done in a way most natural with
respect to Poincaré covariance, the resulting BRST constraint procedure
does not remove the ghost part of the algebras. This is a surprise given
that the ghosts are removed in BRST-QEM example in Chapter 4 . The
reason for this is that we have taken ‘resolvents’ of Krein-symmetric
fields rather than Hilbert-symmetric fields (Appendix 7.2 ) when
constructing the corresponding Resolvent Algebra, and so the structures
involved do not directly correspond to those in the QEM example. However
we do find that Dirac constraining ( @xmath -procedure Appendix 7.4 )
produces the expected results. We modify the Resolvent Algebra so that
it corresponds exactly with the bosonic example in Chapter 4 and find
that BRST-constraining now gives the correct results for strongly
regular states (Theorem 5.4.19 ), but that now there are problems in
defining the Poincaré transformations at the algebraic level.

Finally, using the bounded BRST case and QEM examples as a guide, we
give a general formulation of what a @xmath -algebraic BRST theory looks
like, conditions for states to give physical representations, how the
physical algebra is defined at the algebra level, and how the examples
developed fit into the @xmath -framework.

We will use the following conventions in this thesis:

-   The metric tensor for Lorentz space is @xmath .

-   The mantle of the positive light cone is:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

-   Inner products @xmath are anti-linear in the first argument and
    linear in the second.

## Chapter 2 Heuristics

The aim of this chapter is to an outline of the heuristic structures
which are to be made rigorous. As this chapter is heuristic,
calculations will be formal in nature, with technicalities such as
domains of definition and boundedness issues postponed to the following
chapters. We will also relegate long proofs to an appendix so as not to
interupt the flow of the text. In following the chapters where we are
concerned with the technical details, all proofs will be given with the
statement of the fact. We first give an account of the features common
to the main quantum BRST approaches followed by examples of the
Lagarangian and Hamiltonian BRST. The first example given is heuristic
BRST quantum electromagnetism (BRST-QEM) done in the Lagragnian approach
as found in Scharf [ 92 ] , the second being the example of the
Hamiltonian set-up with a finite number of constraints which ‘close’ as
given in [ 55 , 102 , 71 , 73 , 74 , 8 ] . Finally we will discuss the
structures that need to be made rigorous, and issues that need to be
resolved in the following chapters.

### 2.1 Set-up

First, BRST begins as an extension procedure, where a quantum system
with constraints is extended by ‘ghost variables’, a description of
which is as follows.

We start with an involutive field algebra @xmath , with involution
@xmath , of possibly unbounded operators which describes the physical
observables of the system. This acts on a inner product space @xmath ,
with (possibly indefinite) inner product @xmath , where @xmath is the
adjoint with respect to @xmath . We then extend @xmath by tensoring on a
‘ghost algebra’,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is some index set determined by the constraints, and the
variables have the following anticommutation relations,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

We refer to the @xmath as ghost variables and @xmath as conjugate ghost
variables . The ghosts are chosen so that they are associated with the
‘unphysical degrees of freedom’ of @xmath in some manner, such as
associating a ghost to each linearly independent Dirac constraint.

Furthermore, we assume that @xmath acts as operators on a vector space
@xmath , called the ghost space , with indefinite inner product @xmath .
The involution with respect to this inner product is also denoted @xmath
and we assume the following hermicity assignments,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The total extended BRST algebra is @xmath and it acts on @xmath , with
the usual tensor inner product @xmath . The adjoint with respect to
@xmath is given on the elementary tensors as @xmath and extended
accordingly.

###### Remark 2.1.1

-   Usually the conjugate ghost variables are taken to be anti- @xmath
    hermitian ( [ 55 ] p190). That is @xmath and @xmath . By redefining
    @xmath we get the above equivalent algebra.

-   The equations ( 2.1 ) and hermicity assignments of the ghosts imply
    that @xmath must be indefinite. To see this first note that @xmath
    and so @xmath . Similarly, @xmath , and therefore if we let @xmath
    we have that @xmath and @xmath . So for @xmath we have @xmath , and
    so @xmath cannot be definite or semi-definite.

-   @xmath and @xmath are almost always assumed to be a Krein space with
    a Hilbert-topology (see Appendix ( 7.2 )). An explicit construction
    of the ghost algebra and @xmath will be given in chapter ( 3.1 ),
    where @xmath is a representation of the CAR algebra over a
    particular test function space. We will also show the connection to
    the usual representation on super function space as given in [ 55 ]
    p495.

@xmath

The full algebra @xmath is then given a ghost grading in the following
manner. Suppose that @xmath is a monomial of elements in @xmath ,
ghosts, and conjugate ghosts. Then @xmath is given ghost number @xmath =
number of @xmath - number of @xmath , and we define @xmath , the finite
linear combinations of such @xmath . We then get that @xmath . This
grading is referred to as the ghost grading , and the above is well
defined as a consequence of the relations ( 2.1 ), which will be seen
more explicitly in subsection ( 3.1.1 ).

We also have a @xmath grading of @xmath given by @xmath and @xmath .
@xmath and @xmath are referred to as the even and odd subalgebras
respectively, and it is not hard to see that the map @xmath given by:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

extends to an automorphism on @xmath such that @xmath . We call this the
@xmath -grading automorphism, and is essential for constructing the BRST
superderivation below.

There is also commonly assumed to be a ghost number operator, @xmath .
This is an operator such that, @xmath for @xmath , and with our ghost
hermicity assignment, @xmath . The existence of this will be discussed
in subsection ( 3.1.1 )

Furthermore @xmath is assumed to have a ghost grading, which is given by
the eigenspaces of @xmath , i.e. @xmath . Using @xmath , we see that
@xmath for @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . In particular, we see that @xmath
are neutral subspaces for @xmath . A good discussion of ghost number
structure and operators is given in [ 6 ] , and we will discuss it in
Subsection 3.1.1 .

### 2.2 Charge

After extending @xmath by the ghost variables @xmath , an element @xmath
is constructed from the constraints or gauge transformations in such a
way that @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . @xmath is one of the central
objects in heuristic BRST theory and is called the BRST Charge . The
purpose of @xmath is that it is used as a constraint condition to
determine the physical subspace in @xmath by:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Various arguments are used to derive formulas for @xmath . We will come
back to these formulas and reasoning in the following examples, but
first we list basic facts about structures derived from such @xmath :

1.  @xmath implies that @xmath . @xmath is almost always a Krein space,
    for which we assume the Hilbert-topology (see Appendix ( 7.2 )) on
    @xmath . @xmath is usually closed with respect to this hence @xmath
    is closed ( [ 20 ] Proposition X 1.13 p310) and @xmath .

2.  @xmath implies that @xmath , where @xmath denotes @xmath
    -orthogonality. In particular, as @xmath we have that @xmath is a
    neutral subspace.

3.  Define an indefinite inner product on @xmath as follows. Let @xmath
    and @xmath , then

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (2.2)
      -- -------- -- -------

    As @xmath is neutral this is independent of the choice of
    representatives @xmath . Therefore @xmath will be positive only when
    @xmath is a positive semidefinite subspace of @xmath .

4.  Let @xmath be the fundamental symmetry for @xmath (see Appendix (
    7.2 )). As @xmath , we get from lemma ( 7.2.1 ) that @xmath . It
    follows from this, the Krein structure of @xmath , and @xmath that
    @xmath has the decomposition,

      -- -------- -------- -- -------
         @xmath   @xmath      (2.3)
      -- -------- -------- -- -------

    where the direct sum @xmath is with respect to the Hilbert inner
    product, and @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . This extremely
    useful result is in the literature in many places [ 55 ] p328, [ 102
    ] p44, [ 57 ] p682, [ 92 ] p22, and following [ 80 ] it will be
    referred to as the @xmath -decomposition. Note that is also commonly
    referred to as the Hodge decomposition ( [ 102 ] p44, [ 55 ] p328).
    The proof of this is given in section ( 3.2 ), which is also in [ 57
    ] , and covers the case where @xmath can be unbounded.

5.  From the @xmath -decomposition it follows that @xmath is the
    isotropic subspace of @xmath . Hence @xmath is a Krein space with
    the indefinite inner product ( 2.2 ) (see Appendix ( 7.2 )). If
    @xmath is positive semidefinite, then @xmath is its neutral subspace
    (see Appendix ( 7.2 )), hence the indefinite inner product ( 2.2 )
    is positive definite.

6.  Note that @xmath by positivity, where @xmath

From the above remarks, we see that @xmath is degenerate with repect to
@xmath with isotropic part @xmath , and so the final physical state
space is defined to be,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If @xmath is to be an acceptable physical space, we would like it to
have positive definite inner product, and as discussed above, this will
be true only when @xmath is a positive semidefinite subspace. As we
shall see, this is not always true in simple examples such as the
example below for abelian Hamiltonian BRST (Remark ( 2.5.1 )).

Now @xmath and @xmath are usually not easy to calculate in examples,
however from the @xmath -decomposition we see that,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So there is a natural identification of @xmath with @xmath , and in many
examples it turns out that @xmath is straightforward to calculate in
contrast to @xmath .

###### Remark 2.2.1

The natural identification above motivates some authors to say that
@xmath and @xmath are equivalent definitions of the physical subspace (
[ 92 ] p22). However in examples, there are natural @xmath that @xmath
-automorphisms but not @xmath -automorphisms and are such that @xmath
but @xmath , e.g. the relativistic boosts for BRST-QEM.

Hence structures associated to @xmath naturally factor to @xmath but not
@xmath . Also it is not true in general that elements @xmath that factor
to @xmath are the same as the elements @xmath that preserve @xmath , and
so the different choices of the physical subspace may have different
physical algebras associated to them. For both these reasons we do not
use the definition of @xmath as the physical subspace. @xmath

### 2.3 Superderivation

Another fundamental feature of the BRST machinery is the BRST
superderivation (see Appendix ( 7.1 ) for superalgebra). If @xmath is
the @xmath -grading automorphism on @xmath , then this is defined as,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and we have that,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Basic facts about @xmath :

1.  It follows from @xmath , and the super-Jacobi identity (see Appendix
    ( 7.1 )), that @xmath and we have that @xmath .

2.  As @xmath we have that @xmath and @xmath are both @xmath -algebras,
    but as @xmath they are not @xmath -algebras.

3.  @xmath implies that @xmath and hence @xmath . Therefore @xmath and
    @xmath .

4.  For @xmath , @xmath we have that by the preceding remark that @xmath
    and so @xmath . Similarly @xmath and so we see that @xmath , where
    @xmath denotes that @xmath is an ideal of @xmath . To check if this
    is a proper containment, it turns out that we have to check whether
    @xmath is trivial or not. This non-trivial result is Corollary (
    3.3.12 ) below.

5.  It is easy to check that for @xmath we have @xmath and @xmath , and
    for @xmath , @xmath . Therefore we have that an @xmath factors
    through to an operator on @xmath and @xmath factors trivially.

Now as we are taking @xmath as our physical subspace, we see that by the
above comments @xmath will lift to the physical subpace and @xmath will
lift trivially. As we also have that @xmath , we define the heuristic
physical algebra as,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As we are still dealing with heuristics, we will not concern ourselves
with topologies on @xmath and @xmath . Also notice that as @xmath and
@xmath are not @xmath -algebras, it is not clear that @xmath will be a
@xmath -algebra under the usual quotient inner product. We will discuss
this further in Subsection 3.3 , where it turns out that under certain
assumptions @xmath has a @xmath -involution coming from the Hilbert
inner product on @xmath .

As in the state space case, @xmath turns out to be difficult to
calculate, the only complete explicit calculation in an example the
author has found is in [ 60 ] . This is done in a very direct manner
using some specific properties of the algebras involved in the example,
and not using the dsp -decomposition. It turns out however that the dsp
-decomposition can be used to give conditions on when @xmath for a
general BRST set-up, with @xmath playing a pivotal role (see Corollary (
3.3.12 )). This provides a more economical proof of the result in [ 60 ]
, and can be used more generally to show facts such as @xmath iff @xmath
(theorem ( 3.3.11 )).

###### Remark 2.3.1

The definition of the physical algebra is not uniform, when it is
defined at all. The above cohomological definition is motivated by the
classical BRST theory, as discussed in the introduction. The above
definition coincides with the Hamiltonian approach, H&T [ 55 ] p301, [
74 ] p490, and some authors using the Lagrangian approach [ 60 ] p1319.

Originally a more Dirac-like approach was assumed by K&O [ 68 ] p59,
which they proved to be equivalent to the above definition for local
observables in the field theories they were considering (Chapter 5.1-5.2
in particular proposition 5.4 and proposition 5.9). We will return to
this issue in Chapter ( 3.3.2 ). @xmath

With the basic objects of BRST defined in a heuristic fashion, we want
to investigate the correspondence between the results using @xmath and
@xmath and those using the traditional Dirac method. With this in mind
we give two examples which correspond to the two main approaches to
BRST, Lagrangian BRST and Hamiltonian BRST. These examples will be
analysed in a mathematically precise framework in the following
chapters. At this stage we will only investigate the state space claim,
leaving the analysis of the algebra until we have developed enough
rigourous theory for a meaningful discussion in Section ( 3.3 ).

The first example is heuristic BRST quantum electromagnetism (BRST-QEM)
as presented in Scharf [ 92 ] Chapter 1. This is an example of
Lagrangian BRST as described in Kugo & Ojima [ 68 ] p19, with abelian
gauge groups, and in this case we find that we get the expected state
space.

The second example is that of Hamiltonian BRST with Lie algebra of
constraints. Hamilitonian BRST also used to cover the case where the
constraints do not ‘close’, i.e. form a Lie algebra, but the example
given is sufficient to highlight the important features of Hamiltonian
BRST, some of which are problematic, without adding unnecessary
complication. We will see that for this example the BRST state space is
bigger than the Dirac state space, and has indefinite inner product, and
that even adding the extra condition of restricting to the ghost zero
subspace does not fix this problem. Therefore the approaches in these
two examples are not equivalent.

Following the examples there is a discussion of their differing
features. The next chapter then begins development of a rigorous setup
that incorporates these examples.

### 2.4 Example 1: Heuristic BRST-QEM

The following is a version of heuristic BRST-Quantum Electromagnetism
(BRST-QEM) as given in Scharf [ 92 ] Chapter 1. This is an example of
Lagrangian BRST, where the basic idea is, given a gauge field theory, we
‘replace the gauge parameter by ghost parameter’ K&O [ 68 ] p16. This is
a fairly vague concept given that rigorous interacting quantum gauge
field theory is still an open problem, but we describe the process for
electromagnetism below.

Note that [ 92 ] does not make reference to BRST but has all features
described in the preceeding sections. Moreover this treatment is
essentially the same as that in K&O [ 68 ] Chapter 2, for abelian gauge
group ( @xmath ), the differences essentially being in labelling. We use
Scharf’s treatment for which the labelling is straightforward, and it
makes use of the Hilbert space involution @xmath .

#### 2.4.1 Basic fields

For our basic ingredients, we follow [ 92 ] p9-p11, and assume that we
have a bosonic field on @xmath (momentum space) with the following CCR
relations,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

and a fermionic field with the following CAR relations,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

These act on the respective Fock spaces @xmath in the usual way, with
the @xmath denoting Hilbert involution. Note that the above are actually
operator valued distributions and so to make sense of them
mathematically we will smear them over a one-particle test function
space. As this chapter is aimed at describing formal structures, we
continue in the above manner leaving the mathematical precise treatment
for Chapter 4 .

We assume further that we can take tensor products of the fields above
acting on @xmath . A Krein space structure and involution @xmath will be
defined on @xmath below. Following the usual convention we will not
explicitly use @xmath to denote the operator products.

In this example, we will not define @xmath and @xmath as they would
correspond to pointwise products of operator valued distributions.

#### 2.4.2 The QEM field

We follow [ 92 ] p10 but with different metric convention @xmath ,

  ------ -------- -------- -- -------
         @xmath   @xmath      (2.8)
  and,                        
         @xmath   @xmath      
  ------ -------- -------- -- -------

Note that @xmath which reflects the fact that the @xmath -involution is
the Hilbert involution rather than the Krein involution.

So far we have been considering @xmath as the Hilbert-Fock space with
the fields @xmath acting as annihilation and creation operators. However
the Gupta-Bleuler (GB) version of EM is usually defined in terms of
creation and annihilation operators acting on a Krein-Fock space (see
Schweber [ 94 ] p246) . To see the connection we define a fundamental
symmetry @xmath so that @xmath becomes the GB Krein-Fock space and
@xmath .

As we are in Fock space we assume that we have an @xmath which is a
number operator for the @xmath and that @xmath (so @xmath is bounded).
It is easy to see that,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be the Hilbert inner product on @xmath , for which @xmath is
the adjoint, then we define a new inner product as,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and denote its adjoint by @xmath , and we have that @xmath , @xmath (see
Appendix ( 7.2 )).

Now it is straightforward to see that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and so in terms of @xmath -involutions we have

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- -------

From the definitions ( 2.8 ) we get that

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

All the @xmath ’s are Krein ( @xmath ) hermitian, but we now have that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

and so we do not have the usual CCR’s for the @xmath ’s with involution
@xmath .

If,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

then we can formally verify that:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.14)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

###### Proof.

See Appendix ( 2.8 ) ∎

That is, we have the correct commutation relations for @xmath and @xmath
generates the gauge transformations. Note that the definition of @xmath
is made to ensure we get a @xmath factor in ( 2.13 ) rather than @xmath
(as pointed out in [ 92 ] , p12).

To get we have to further impose Maxwell’s equations. Let @xmath then
the Maxwell’s equations are @xmath . In Gupta-Bleuler QEM we also impose
the Lorentz condition by by first selecting @xmath for all @xmath ,
@xmath and then defining the physical state space as @xmath where @xmath
is the neutral part of @xmath with respect to the indefinite inner
product on @xmath . See Schweber [ 94 ] p240-246 for details.

#### 2.4.3 BRST Extension of QEM

The idea in Lagrangian BRST is to replace the ‘gauge parameter’ @xmath
in ( 2.14 ) by an anti-commuting ‘ghost parameter’ @xmath , such that,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

The BRST charge @xmath is then the generator of the gauge
transformations with ‘ghost parameter’, and we will see below that
@xmath . The condition @xmath is motivated by @xmath .

To this end, using the fields @xmath in ( 2.6 ), we define:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can check that @xmath satisfies ( 2.15 ).

###### Remark 2.4.1

-   Note that we do not use @xmath and @xmath in the definition of
    @xmath as this will not give @xmath . This is in contrast to the CCR
    field @xmath .

-   We want a Krein structure such that @xmath is Krein Hermitian, to
    get features such as @xmath . To this end we choose a fundamental
    @xmath symmetry on @xmath such that @xmath . We will postpone the
    construction of @xmath to section ( 3.1 ).

-   Scharf defines a second ghost field as,

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.17)
      -- -------- -- --------

    (see [ 92 ] , p9) and notes that this is not the @xmath -adjoint of
    @xmath . Using the assignment @xmath we see that @xmath . Moreover,
    we have the anticommutation relations

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (2.18)
      -- -------- -- --------

    ###### Proof.
    See Appendix ( 2.8 )∎

    Also note that @xmath is not the conjugate ghost field, @xmath , in
    our treatment, but it is related as will be seen in Remark ( 4.1.13
    ).

@xmath

So now, replacing @xmath by @xmath in ( 2.14 ), we define,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and note that @xmath , and that now,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we are using the convention @xmath .

###### Proof.

See Appendix ( 2.8 ).∎

From this it follows that,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.20)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.21)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.22)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

###### Proof.

See Appendix ( 2.8 )∎

Now we have formally defined BRST-QEM and replaced the gauge parameter
by a ghost parameter. To complete the analysis we need to find the
physical state space. Usually we would also want to calculate the
physical observables, but as we have not defined the BRST
superderivation @xmath in this formal example we will leave this till we
have developed the appropriate machinery (subsection ( 4.2.7 )).

#### 2.4.4 @xmath and State space

We now turn to the task of calculating the physical state space. Since
the @xmath -decomposition (equation ( 2.3 ) ) gives @xmath , we now
calculate @xmath . To simplify notation we define,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

which satisfy the usual commutation relations.

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

and so we get that,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.25)
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

This is essentially the form of @xmath given in K&O [ 68 ] p19, H&T [ 55
] p464, [ 95 ] p584, [ 60 , 58 ] , [ 86 ] p218, and we use it now to
calculate,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

###### Proof.

See Appendix ( 2.8 ). ∎

We see that @xmath looks like a number operator with @xmath , that is
kernel consisting of states with no @xmath ’s or @xmath ’s.

More explicitly, let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath . Then we have that for @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and all other commutators are zero. This is not suprising as @xmath are
the ‘transversal photons’. Now we also have that formally @xmath is the
Fock space generated by on the vacuum state @xmath with @xmath ’s. This
statement is made precise in Subsection ( 4.1 ) using Proposition (
4.1.3 ) where the bosonic fields are smeared over @xmath with @xmath
corresponding to the @xmath ’s, @xmath ’s, @xmath ’s above and the ghost
fields smeared over @xmath where @xmath correspond to @xmath
respectively.

So we see from ( 2.4.4 ) that @xmath is the Fock space generated by the
@xmath ’s, @xmath , or the space of transversal photons which we would
expect from QEM.

To see that the above construction corresponds to QEM we need show that
the Maxwell equations are satisfied. We have formally,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.27)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

with @xmath as in equation ( 2.17 ).

###### Proof.

See Appendix( 2.8 ). ∎

Therefore we have that formally @xmath factors to @xmath and that @xmath
factors trivially to @xmath and thus the Maxwell conditions hold on the
BRST physical state space.

### 2.5 Example 2: Hamiltonian BRST

#### 2.5.1 Setup

Now we give the example of Hamiltonian BRST with closed constraint
algebra, which follows the treatment in H&T [ 55 ] chapter 14, as well
as many others, e.g. [ 102 , 71 , 73 , 74 ] .

We begin with a field algebra @xmath acting on the Hilbert space @xmath
with inner product @xmath . We are told that we should ‘not pay
attention to the the functional subtleties arising from the infinite
dimensionalitiy of the space of states’ and ‘proceed as if the space of
states were finite-dimensional’, [ 55 ] p302. Hence we will assume that
@xmath is a @xmath -algebra and so acts on all of @xmath . Let @xmath be
a finite set of self-adjoint, linearly independent elements in @xmath
that form a Lie algebra, ie,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

Note @xmath , and self-adjointness of the constraints imply that we must
have @xmath .

The class of Hamiltonian BRST systems includes the case where the
constraints do not ‘close’, i.e. the ‘structure constants’ @xmath are
actually operators [ 55 ] p317, but this will not be discussed further
as the example given is sufficient for our purposes.

We assume now that @xmath is our constraint set, which selects the
physical state space by @xmath . We then extend @xmath by tensoring on a
ghost algebra (cf. ( 2.1 )), with a ghost for every constraint, ie

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which act on a Krein space @xmath . Let the Krein-inner product on
@xmath be given by @xmath which has fundamental symmetry @xmath .
Therefore @xmath is a Hilbert-inner product, with Hilbert involution
denoted by @xmath . We let @xmath act on the Hilbert space @xmath . We
assume that @xmath has the usual tensor inner product and define the
Krein inner product by using @xmath as a fundamental symmetry.

Following [ 102 ] equation (2.116), we assume the Hilbert-adjointness
properties for @xmath as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

That this is consistent will be shown in Chapter ( 3.1 ), and it is
impicitly assumed in the usual Berezin representation which will be
discussed in Section ( 3.1.3 ).

We now construct the BRST charge as,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we use convention of summing over repeated indices. This formula
is given in numerous places, e.g. [ 55 ] p197, [ 102 ] , p48 [ 71 ] ,
p423.

It is obvious that @xmath , it is straightforward to check that @xmath ,
and with some work we check that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Proof.

see Appendix ( 2.8 ). ∎

Therefore @xmath fulfils the criteria for a BRST charge. For motivation
for this definition of @xmath via classical theory see H&T [ 55 ]
Chapters 1-12.

Another motivation for @xmath is that we begin with constraints @xmath
and we want to construct a 2-nilpotent constraint to develop
BRST-cohomology. We then take @xmath , but as @xmath we get 2-nilpotence
only when the structure constants vanish, hence we need to add a term to
cancel the terms coming from the non-commuting constraints @xmath and
this is @xmath .

#### 2.5.2 Physical subspace and @xmath

Recall that @xmath , and that the @xmath -decomposition gives a natural
isomorphism @xmath , by @xmath . Hence we would like to calculate @xmath
.

Case 1: Abelian Constraints, @xmath .

We consider first the simplest case where all the constraints commute,
i.e. @xmath . In this case we have that,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Remark 2.5.1

We show that @xmath is not a semidefinite subspace of @xmath : Note that
@xmath . So take a @xmath such that @xmath . As we have shown in Remark
( 2.1.1 ) (ii) we have that @xmath where @xmath , and hence for @xmath ,
@xmath . This is problematic as the final physical space @xmath now has
an indefinite inner product. This problem is noted in [ 55 ] p311, where
it is stated that an extra constraint condition maybe needed in specific
examples. One possibility given is to restrict to states of ghost number
@xmath . However, if we take @xmath to have @xmath then we see that
@xmath and hence the same problem arises. @xmath

Now @xmath , and we will now show that in fact @xmath . Note that:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.33)
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where the second equality follows from @xmath , and the third from
@xmath . So we see that,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is a problematic result since if we identify @xmath with @xmath for
any nonzero @xmath then we have a copy of @xmath in @xmath for every
nonzero @xmath , and so @xmath selects a larger constraint space than
@xmath . We will refer to this problem as the Multiple Copies of the
Physical Space Problem (MCPS problem). The MCPS problem is noted in [
102 ] p50 (who proves the same for the non-abelian case) and suggests
that we need to fix the ghost number of physical states to the correct
identification of the physical state space. However, as already noted at
the end of Subsection 2.1 , @xmath implies that subspaces with nonzero
ghost number, are neutral with respect to @xmath . Hence if we restrict
to vectors of a particular ghost number then this ghost number must be
zero. As discussed in the remark above, this is not a good restriction.
We will return to the MCPS problem and other choices for the physical
space in Subsection ( 3.1.3 ) Remark ( 3.1.21 ).

Also in [ 55 ] p311 it is mentioned that extra conditions beyond @xmath
and @xmath may be needed, a simple example of which is discussed in [ 55
] p330 Excercise 14.16. We will return to these issues in section (
3.1.3 ) remark ( 3.1.21 ).

Case 2: Non-abelian Constraints, @xmath .

We consider as above in ( 2.29 ) the case that the constraints form a
Lie algebra. For simplicity, further assume that @xmath is antisymmetric
in all indices as this makes the following proofs simpler. The more
general case of semi-simple Lie algebra is in [ 102 , 101 ] and we are
essentially following the treatment there. Following [ 102 ] p50, we
define,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

We also have,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we used @xmath . Then,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

###### Proof.

See Appendix ( 2.8 ). ∎

As @xmath and @xmath are @xmath -self adjoint operators, we see that
@xmath is the sum of @xmath positive operators and hence,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

So we see that in the non-abelian case we have the extra constraints
@xmath on @xmath . As @xmath through the dsp -decomposition this is an
extra constraint on the physical space. We will see in section ( 3.1.2 )
that @xmath is not one dimensional so again we have many copies of the
@xmath in @xmath and also that the restriction of @xmath to @xmath is
indefinite (see Remark ( 3.1.21 )).

### 2.6 Discussion of the Examples

We now list the major positives and negatives of the above examples and
then compare them to each other. The Lagrangian-BRST-QEM example has
positive features:

-   It formally corresponds to other versions of QEM. It gives a state
    space isomorphic to the transversal photons, which will will be made
    precise in Section 4.3 Theorem ( 4.3.3 ), where we see that this
    space is isomorphic to that given by the Gupta-Bleuler method in [
    46 ] p36. We have that @xmath and @xmath , so the field operators
    @xmath factor to the physical subspace, and the Maxwell equations
    hold as @xmath factors trivially.

-   It models the example of free QEM, an example containing many
    physical structures.

and difficulties:

-   Many of the basic objects are defined only heuristically: e.g.
    @xmath is defined as an integral of products of operator valued
    distributions; the fields @xmath are unbounded distributions and
    domains of definition need to be specified; we need a sensible
    definition of our ghost algebra to give meaning to odd and even
    elements; the algebras involved involve products of operator valued
    distributions so defining @xmath and its domain needs care.

-   Once defined on a specific representation, to move to a @xmath
    -algebraic setting, we need to encode the unbounded operator
    algebras in some bounded fashion. We also need to encode @xmath in a
    bounded fashion which is not a straightforward problem as it maps
    bounded elements to unbounded elements, see Definition ( 4.2.11 )
    below. The natural involution is the Krein- @xmath involution with
    associated objects such as @xmath -algebras not Hilbert- @xmath
    -algebras. Hence general @xmath -theory will not always apply
    directly but has to be arrived at by through the relation of @xmath
    -involution to @xmath -involution via @xmath .

-   The BRST extension of replacing the ‘gauge parameter’ @xmath by
    ‘ghost parameter’ @xmath relies on gauge theory structure and is not
    well defined in an algorithmic sense. Hence generalization is needed
    to be able to apply BRST to other theories with constraints.

The Hamiltonian BRST example has the following positive features:

-   It only depends on the number and bracket structure of the
    constraints for the ghost algebra extension and construction of
    @xmath and so lends itself to a general constraint algorithm.

-   The operators involved are in @xmath and so the structures can be
    encoded straightforwardly in a @xmath -algebraic setting.

-   We have an algorithm for dealing with the case where the constraints
    do not commute.

It has the following negative features:

-   The constraint condition does not remove the ghosts from the
    physical subspace. Therefore extended and unextended systems will
    not be equivalent.

-   The physical constraint space does not have positive definite or
    semidefinite inner product, and also suffers from the MCPS problem.

-   This leads to the BRST-physical algebra being not equivalent to the
    unextend constrained algebra for basic examples, as we shall see in
    Subsection 3.3.1 .

-   Adding the extra condition that physical states and algebras must be
    of ghost number zero does not solve the above problems.

Comparing the two examples we see that they both fit the general
description outlined in Section 2.2 , Section 2.1 , Section 2.3 , but
differ in crucial aspects:

A major difference between these two examples is that in the BRST-QEM
example @xmath removes the ghost space, whereas in the Hamiltonian BRST
example @xmath does not. This stems from the fact that while the @xmath
’s in the different frameworks are cosmetically similar, they are
derived from different reasoning. We will see below that this leads to
BRST-QEM removing the ghosts from the observable algebra, but not for
Hamiltonian BRST in general.

The Hamiltonian example is more clearly defined than BRST-QEM example
from a mathematical standpoint. In Hamiltonian BRST example both @xmath
, @xmath are constructed as finite sums of bounded operators, the
original field algebra is a @xmath -algebra and as we shall see in the
Section 3.1 the ghost algebra is easily seen to be a finite dimensional
CAR algebra. In contrast, the basic objects in the BRST-QEM example,
such as @xmath , involve integrals of products of operator valued
distributions and the field algebras are not clearly defined, however
the BRST-QEM example models many physical structures and hence needs a
mathematically rigorous treatment.

### 2.7 General Discussion and Directions

In light of the previous discussion we can discuss the issues related to
quantum BRST in greater depth as well as the general directions of this
thesis.

We need to give an account of the general BRST structures descriped at
the beginning of this chapter that is general enough to incorporate both
examples given above. In particular, we need to give a description of
the Ghost Algebra that will describe the smeared ghosts of the BRST-QEM
example as well as the connect this to the finite dimensional
superfunction representations used in Hamiltonian BRST. We need to give
the dsp -decomposition for the case of unbounded BRST charge @xmath ,
and also show its realation to the operator cohomology for the case of
unbounded Krein- @xmath algebras. There are results in these directions
as discussed in the introduction, but we need extend these and unify
them in order to incorporate both examples.

With the BRST structures well defined, in particular the ghost
structures, we can discuss problems for Hamiltonian BRST related to the
ghost space representations: ghost number zero restriction, neutral
subspace and the MCPS problem. Although discussions related to these
problems can be found in the literature in several places e.g. ( [ 71 ]
p425-429, [ 74 ] p489, [ 50 ] Section 8, H&T [ 55 ] Sections 14.2.5,
14.2.6, 14.5.3, 14.5.4), I feel that these need to be collected,
highlighted, and expanded as it is not always clear from the literature
that these are always problems faced by Hamiltonian BRST with heuristic
set-up as in Section 2.4 . The example of BRST applied to a constraint
set consisting of a finite number of canonical momentum variables is
often assumed to fit into heuristic Hamiltonian BRST e.g. H&T [ 55 ]
Section 14.4, and we do not have neutrality or MCPS problems with this
example at the heuristic level. However we cannot ignore boundedness
issues in this example and it turns out that this example fits better
into a Lagrangian framework rather than Hamiltonian. This is for reasons
such as that the momentum constraints are Krein-symmetric rather than
Hilbert-symmetric and quantum momentum variables with canonical
conjugates have trivial kernels. See Subsection 4.2.8 for more details.

We need a mathematically precise formulation of the BRST-QEM example so
we can compare the results to other rigorous versions of quantum QEM. We
do this first at the level of Krein representations in Fock-Krein space,
where we actually give an account that covers more general free abelian
bosonic theories with setup similar to KO  .

With BRST done for Hamiltonian and BRST-Bose-Fock theories, it is
natural to see if we can combine the two approaches in a way that
captures the positive features of both approaches, but avoids the
negative. We can do this by combining abelian Hamiltonian BRST with a
finite number constraints with the abelian BRST-Bose-Fock set-up to get
an general BRST algorithm such that selects @xmath the correct state
space.

We want to give a @xmath -algebraic formulation of BRST so as to connect
with the algebraic approach to QFT. We have many difficulties as already
mentioned in the introduction, but we can do this in terms of an
unbounded superderivation acting on a subalgebra @xmath of a @xmath
-algebra @xmath . A key to this construction is the ghost algebra as
developed in Section 3.1 , and the Resolvent Algebra as developed in [
18 ] . We identify the interesting states on the algebra, and how the
general structures from Chapter 3 are incorporated in the @xmath
-framework. We then apply these structures to the examples developed.

There are also major equivalence issues: how do Lagrangian and
Hamiltonian quantum BRST relate to each other and when do they give
equivalent results; and when will quantum BRST give equivalent results
to the Dirac algorithm. Using the general BRST structures above, we can
answer these questions on a case by case basis for given examples where
the ghost extensions have been made and @xmath , @xmath explicitly
constructed. However these are difficult questions to anwer in general
and we discuss this further at the end of this thesis when we have
developed and explored the examples and structures to a greater extent.

### 2.8 Appendix: Proofs

###### Proof.

(Proof of equations ( 2.13 )).

Recall @xmath , @xmath , and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In the following calculations we assume that @xmath .

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

(ii) This follows from @xmath

(iii) We use the notation @xmath .

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

This is the solution to the Cauchy problem of the 3-dimensional wave
equation with initial data @xmath and @xmath and so we get that,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(see Pinsky [ 84 ] p325 with @xmath ). ∎

###### Proof.

(Proof of equation ( 2.18 ))Recall the defintions of @xmath and @xmath
in equation ( 2.16 ) and equation ( 2.17 ) respectively, and the CAR’s

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

in equation ( 2.6 ). In the following calculations we assume that @xmath
:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where the last equality follows as the calculation of equation ( 2.13 )
(i) above. ∎

###### Proof.

(Proof of equation ( 2.19 )) Note that as @xmath we have @xmath .
Therefore, using ( 2.16 ) and ( 2.10 ) we get,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Now using @xmath , and the condition @xmath , @xmath , we get,

  ------------------------------- -------- -------- -- --
                                  @xmath   @xmath      
                                  @xmath   @xmath      
  and by the relations ( 2.9 ),                        
                                  @xmath   @xmath      
  ------------------------------- -------- -------- -- --

∎

###### Proof.

(Proof of equations ( 2.20 ), ( 2.22 ), ( 2.21 ), ( 2.23 ).) If we use
equation ( 2.19 ) to write,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath . Then it follows from the defining (anti-)commutation
relations ( 2.6 ), ( 2.4 ), that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.37)
     @xmath      (2.38)
     @xmath      (2.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

To prove @xmath ( 2.23 ) we write @xmath as,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and so,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now using @xmath and the above relations we get,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and similarly @xmath . Substituting back into @xmath we get,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where the last line follows as @xmath for @xmath .

Equations ( 2.20 ), ( 2.22 ), ( 2.21 ), follow in a similar manner. Note
that [ 92 ] p20 has a different proof of @xmath . ∎

###### Proof.

(Proof of ( 2.4.4 )) Using equations( 2.25 ) we have,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.40)
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Note that the above calculation uses the CCR’s ( 2.24 ). Substituting
back into @xmath gives,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

∎

###### Proof.

(Proof of equations ( 2.27 ) and ( 2.28 )) First,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Using the action of @xmath given in equations ( 2.37 ) it follows
straightfowardly that @xmath which is equation ( 2.27 ).

To prove equation ( 2.28 ) we differentiate the above equation to get

  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------- -------- -- --
                                                                                @xmath   @xmath      
                                                                                         @xmath      
                                                                                @xmath   @xmath      
  using @xmath for @xmath . Furthermore using equations ( 2.37 ) and @xmath ,                        
                                                                                @xmath   @xmath      
                                                                                @xmath   @xmath      
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------- -------- -- --

where @xmath is as in equation ( 2.17 ). ∎

###### Proof.

(Proof @xmath ( 2.32 ))

This is the proof as in masters thesis [ 85 ] . We will repeatedly use
the properties of superbrackets @xmath as in Appendix( 7.1 ) and for
ease of notation we will drop the @xmath for this proof. Recall that
@xmath is defined by equation( 2.31 ),

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where we have that,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Therefore we have that @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The last equality comes from equating the coefficients of each term in
the brackets. ∎

###### Proof.

(Proof of ( 2.5.2 )) We will drop the @xmath notation for this proof.
First we let,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

where,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now recall that,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using the ghost commutation relations ( 2.1 ), the constraint brackets (
2.29 ) and antisymmetry of @xmath in every index, we calculate @xmath
and @xmath .

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

By a similar computation we calculate,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Next we calculate,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.43)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Now,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.44)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Also by the antisymmetry of the structure constants and the Jacobi
identity,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.45)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

and,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.46)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Substituting equations ( 2.44 ), ( 2.45 ), ( 2.46 ) in equation( 2.8 )
gives that,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Substituting back in ( 2.42 ) we calculate,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

∎

## Chapter 3 General BRST Structures

The aim of this chapter is to obtain a mathematically consistent
definition of the heuristic BRST structures outlined above including the
ghosts, the charge @xmath , the dsp -decomposition, and the operator
cohomology.

### 3.1 Ghost Algebra

We first need to properly define the ghost algebra (cf. Section 2.1 ).
Recall the key heuristic features:

1.  There is a representation of an algebra @xmath acting on a Krein
    space @xmath with indefinite inner product @xmath such that the
    ghosts @xmath and conjugate ghosts @xmath are Krein-hermitian.

2.  There is a ghost number operator @xmath such that @xmath , @xmath
    where @xmath , and @xmath , @xmath .

Conditions for the existence of a ghost number operator have been
studied in [ 6 ] , where the structure of Krein spaces @xmath that admit
such a ghost number operators is determined. We will connect with these
results after we have constructed the ghost algebra in a well-defined
mathematical framework.

We start with a construction for even and infinite dimensional @xmath .
This construction will correspond to the smeared version of the ghosts
in the BRST-QEM example of the previous section (example ( 2.4 )). We
will then treat the odd degree case by restriction and finally, connect
to superfunction spaces as given in Berezin [ 12 ] sections 3.1, 3.2, HT
[ 55 ] Chapter 20.2, [ 73 ] p482.

We define the Ghost Algebra as a CAR algebra over a test function with
the following structures. Let @xmath be a Krein space with indefinite
inner product @xmath , a fundamental symmetry @xmath (see Appendix ( 7.2
)), i.e. @xmath is a Hilbert space with norm coming from the inner
product @xmath , @xmath where @xmath are closed subspaces of @xmath and
@xmath denotes Hilbert orthogonality, and @xmath where @xmath where
@xmath are the projections on @xmath respectively. Note that @xmath is a
unitary on @xmath such that @xmath , @xmath . We will denote @xmath ,
@xmath for Krein orthogonality, etc. and @xmath , @xmath , for Hilbert
orthogonality, etc.

###### Lemma 3.1.1

Let @xmath and @xmath have the same cardinality. Then there exist closed
subspaces @xmath such that @xmath , @xmath .

Both @xmath and @xmath are neutral with respect to the Krein inner
product @xmath and @xmath where @xmath are the projections on @xmath
respectively.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath and @xmath have orthonormal basis @xmath , @xmath
respectively for some index set @xmath . Now define,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We have that @xmath is an orthonormal basis of @xmath and @xmath .

Let @xmath and @xmath . Then @xmath . As @xmath by definition, it
follows that @xmath is neutral in the Krein inner product by @xmath .
Also for @xmath we have @xmath from which it follows that @xmath . ∎

The Fermi-Fock space for @xmath has a natural Krein structure associated
to @xmath :

###### Lemma 3.1.2

Let @xmath and @xmath be as above, that @xmath , and let @xmath be the
Fermi-Fock space with Hilbert inner product @xmath . Let @xmath be the
second quantisation of @xmath and define the indefinite inner product:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

on @xmath . Then @xmath is a Krein space with indefinite inner product
@xmath , and fundamental symmetry @xmath .

###### Proof.

We have that @xmath is @xmath -unitary implies that @xmath is @xmath
-unitary and furthermore @xmath and @xmath implies that @xmath and
@xmath . Hence by lemma ( 7.2.3 ) we have that @xmath is indefinite and
the @xmath is a Krein space with indefinite inner product @xmath and
fundamental symmetry @xmath . ∎

Let @xmath be the usual annihilators and creators on @xmath and define:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We have:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

(cf. [ 16 ] section 5.2). As @xmath is a Krein space, we can calculate
Krein adjoints by @xmath (cf. lemma ( 7.2.1 )). So:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

and hence:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Define the Krein-hermitian fermionic quantum field operators:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

on @xmath . Note that @xmath and so @xmath is Hilbert hermitian only
when @xmath . Then,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

which corresponds to a Clifford algebra with indefinite inner product.
Define the ghost fields as:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

then @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

Now take an orthonormal basis @xmath of @xmath , where @xmath is some
index set. The above relations justify the identification of @xmath as
our ghosts and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

as its conjugate ghost. That is, they are both @xmath -hermitian and,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.8)
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

which are the relations ( 2.1 ). Moreover @xmath . Note that we have
associated the Clifford algebra elements @xmath with @xmath arguments as
ghosts and with @xmath arguments as conjugate ghosts. Using @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath for all @xmath , we can recover the creators and
annihilators from the ghosts by:

  ------ -------- -------- -- --------
         @xmath   @xmath      
         @xmath   @xmath      (3.9)
  and,                        
         @xmath   @xmath      (3.10)
         @xmath   @xmath      
  ------ -------- -------- -- --------

We define our ghost algebra and Fock ghost space as:

###### Definition 3.1.3

The Fock ghost space is,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the ghost algebra is,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Denote @xmath and note that @xmath is dense in @xmath in the norm
topology. Also @xmath and @xmath will be denoted by @xmath and @xmath
respectively when no confusion will arise.

###### Remark 3.1.4

-   There is an automorphism @xmath given by

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (3.11)
      -- -------- -- --------

    That this is an automorphism follows from @xmath and [ 16 ] Theorem
    5.2.5. We will denote this automorphism by @xmath in the sequel
    unless specified otherwise. Note that we have @xmath for @xmath by
    which we define the Krein involution on the algebra independently of
    the representation @xmath .

-   Given an orthonormal basis @xmath of @xmath , the linearly
    independent set:

      -- -------- -------- -- --------
         @xmath   @xmath      (3.12)
         @xmath   @xmath      (3.13)
      -- -------- -------- -- --------

    generates, via equations ( 3.9 ) and ( 3.10 ), a dense subalgebra of
    @xmath , whereas the set,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    does not. This is easy to see by dimensional comparison in the
    finite dimensional case, which extends to the infinite dimensional
    case as for each @xmath we have that the set @xmath generates a
    proper norm closed subspace of
    @xmath .

@xmath

#### 3.1.1 Gradings

Next, we define useful gradings for @xmath . Recall that @xmath is the
projection onto @xmath ( @xmath ), and define,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath denote the domains of @xmath and @xmath
respectively and @xmath is the finite particle subspace of the Fock
space @xmath . We have:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath , making use of @xmath . Thus by @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now @xmath and @xmath on @xmath and @xmath respectively are just the
number operators which we combine:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

i.e. @xmath is the number operator on @xmath . Note that @xmath is
@xmath -symmetric on @xmath , so by @xmath (see Appendix ( 7.2 )) and
equation ( 3.14 ), we have that @xmath is @xmath -symmetric on @xmath .
Now @xmath induces the usual grading on @xmath :

###### Proposition 3.1.5

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath (possibly infinite), and,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Moreover @xmath for all @xmath .

###### Proof.

The standard definition of the number operator is to define @xmath for
@xmath in the @xmath -particle subspace of @xmath , and extend linearly
to the domain
@xmath [ 16 ] p7. It is then proved that @xmath on @xmath , and so the
above decomposition of @xmath follows.

Let @xmath be an orthonormal basis for @xmath , and let,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

be a monomial of creators and annihilators where @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath . As @xmath we have that @xmath are distinct and @xmath are
distinct. Also as @xmath for all @xmath we have that,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let @xmath and take @xmath . Now @xmath is the subspace of @xmath
spanned by the @xmath -particle vectors, hence by the definition of the
creators and annihilators:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

From this we have that @xmath for @xmath and @xmath for @xmath .
Therefore,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

where equation ( 3.16 ) is trivially true when @xmath . As @xmath was
arbitrary and @xmath we get that ( 3.16 ) is true for all @xmath . Hence
@xmath . Now by [ 16 ] Theorem 5.2.5 p15,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and we obviously have @xmath , hence,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we used equation ( 3.15 ) for the first inclusion. Therefore
@xmath .

By the definition of @xmath , @xmath is the @xmath -th component of a
vector in Fock space and so for @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the last inclusion follows as @xmath implies @xmath and that
@xmath is closed. That is we have @xmath and we are done. ∎

We will refer to these as the CAR gradings .

To the Ghost Gradings below we introduce the notation:

We define the ghost number operator as,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and note that @xmath is @xmath -symmetric on @xmath . By @xmath for
@xmath , we have that @xmath is @xmath -skew symmetric on @xmath . This
gives a grading of @xmath and @xmath as,

###### Proposition 3.1.6

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath (possibly infinite), and

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

###### Proof.

Suppose that @xmath and @xmath are the vacuum vectors of @xmath and
@xmath respectively, then @xmath is unitarily equivalent to @xmath by
defining the map,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath            
     @xmath            
  -- -------- -------- --

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . We then extend linearly to all of
@xmath . It is easily checked that @xmath is well defined and unitary,
the only thing to note is that the @xmath comes from the
antisymmetrization of components of elements in @xmath . Now we identify
@xmath with the subspace @xmath of @xmath and @xmath with the subpsace
@xmath of @xmath .

The result now follows similar to Proposition 3.1.5 if we recall that
@xmath and @xmath on @xmath are just the number operators when
restricted to @xmath and @xmath and that @xmath . ∎

We refer to these as the Ghost gradings . Note that @xmath .

The CAR and Ghost gradings of the spaces and Algebras give the following
structure

###### Lemma 3.1.7

Let @xmath be the ghost algebra with @xmath (possibly infinite). Let
@xmath , then:

-   @xmath .

-   @xmath and @xmath and @xmath .

-   @xmath and @xmath for all @xmath .

-   @xmath for @xmath . @xmath for @xmath where @xmath denotes Hilbert
    orthogonality and @xmath . Moreover @xmath for @xmath where @xmath
    denotes Krein orthogonality with respect to @xmath ,

where we take the convention that @xmath for @xmath , or @xmath .

###### Proof.

(i): Take @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Then using @xmath for all @xmath
, we get @xmath . Therefore @xmath hence @xmath . Similarly @xmath .

(ii): Let @xmath and @xmath . Then as @xmath is @xmath -symmetric,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus @xmath for all @xmath and hence @xmath . So @xmath and similar
arguments produce the rest of (ii) using the fact that @xmath is @xmath
-symmetric, @xmath is @xmath -symmetric, and @xmath is @xmath
-antisymmetric.

(iii): We have,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

from which we see that, for all @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.17)
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

for all @xmath , by @xmath , @xmath , etc.

(iv): Let @xmath , @xmath . Then as @xmath is @xmath -symmetric, @xmath
and so @xmath if @xmath . As @xmath is @xmath -symmetric, the analogous
argument shows that @xmath for @xmath , and as @xmath is @xmath
-antisymmetric we also get @xmath for @xmath . ∎

###### Remark 3.1.8

-   Let @xmath be an orthonormal basis of @xmath , and let @xmath be a
    monomial of the @xmath ’s and @xmath ’s. Then @xmath where @xmath is
    the difference between the number of @xmath ’s and the number of
    @xmath ’s in @xmath . By lemma ( 3.1.7 ) (i) and (iii) we get that
    @xmath . Thus the definition of the ghost grading above agrees with
    the heuristic definition given in Section 2.1 .

-   The identity @xmath for @xmath shows that the CAR grading and ghost
    grading are different as @xmath has ghost number one but no definite
    CAR grading number.

@xmath

Also we have,

###### Definition 3.1.9

The Ghost grading induces the @xmath -grading:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath (possibly infinite) and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We refer to this as the @xmath -grading in @xmath . We define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is easy to see that @xmath extends to a @xmath -automorphism on
@xmath such that @xmath . We refer to @xmath as the @xmath -grading
automorphism on @xmath .

###### Remark 3.1.10

It is easy to see that @xmath for @xmath and @xmath for @xmath .
Therefore @xmath for all @xmath . @xmath

These algebras and gradings are defined in the Fock representation. We
want to find conditions on states so that the ghost grading structures
can also be defined in the state space of their GNS representations. We
follow [ 39 ] lemma 6.1, p26,

###### Proposition 3.1.11

Let @xmath be the ghost algebra with @xmath (possibly infinite), and
suppose that @xmath where @xmath is defined in equation ( 3.11 ). We
define:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the GNS-data for @xmath , with Hilbert inner product
@xmath . Define @xmath where @xmath is the implementer for @xmath in
@xmath . Then we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

In this case we also have that @xmath is neutral with respect to @xmath
(i.e. @xmath for all @xmath ) , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath for @xmath ,
and we have the following decomposition,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Furthermore there exists a @xmath -symmetric, and @xmath -symmetric
operator @xmath with domain
@xmath such that @xmath for @xmath .

###### Proof.

First for @xmath , @xmath we have that,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath for @xmath , and let @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . By lemma (
3.1.7 ) (ii) we have that @xmath and so by lemma ( 3.1.7 ) (i) @xmath .
Therefore @xmath . As such @xmath are dense in @xmath and @xmath
respectively, we get that @xmath .

Conversely suppose that @xmath for @xmath . Now @xmath and so if @xmath
, then @xmath . So if @xmath then @xmath and we get that @xmath , where
we used @xmath and @xmath .

Observe that @xmath for @xmath implies that @xmath for all @xmath and so
@xmath is a neutral subspace for all @xmath . Next since @xmath we have:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we used @xmath in the first equality and lemma ( 3.1.7 ) (ii) in
the second last equality. Next,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we used Proposition 3.1.6 in the third equality.

Now we have that @xmath for @xmath by @xmath for @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath .

The decomposition,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

now follows from the above relations.

Finally, @xmath for @xmath defines a linear operator @xmath on @xmath .
As @xmath for @xmath this extends to a linear operator on @xmath . That
@xmath is @xmath -symmetric and @xmath -antisymmetric follows by direct
computation in the inner products @xmath and @xmath (This proof of the
existence of @xmath is based on that in Proposition 1 [ 6 ] p673-674). ∎

Hence we define,

###### Definition 3.1.12

Let @xmath be the set of states,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

That is, @xmath is the set of states with the correct ghost grading
structure, and with GNS cyclic vector with ghost number @xmath .

We connect the above abstract structures to the Fock structures at the
beginning of this chapter as follows. Let @xmath be the Fock
representation of @xmath , and the Fock state @xmath be defined by
@xmath . Then as @xmath and @xmath we have that @xmath , hence @xmath .
Moreover the GNS-representation @xmath is unitarily equivalent to @xmath
by a unitary @xmath with @xmath . Hence we recover all the concrete Fock
structures from @xmath and @xmath . The explicit spatial connection of
the Fock structures to Proposition ( 3.1.11 ) is,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The ghost number operators are connected by @xmath , where we have used
the symbol @xmath for the ghost number operator on @xmath and for the
ghost number operator defined in Proposition ( 3.1.11 ).

#### 3.1.2 Finite Dimensional Ghost algebras

Here we consider the case of finite dimensional ghost algebras. For
finite dimensional @xmath we have that all representations @xmath are
multiples of the Fock representation by [ 16 ] Theorem 5.2.14. Hence we
will only consider the Fock-ghost representation of @xmath on the Fock
space @xmath in this section, and not denote the representation
explicitly.

Suppose that @xmath has a complex orthonormal basis @xmath where @xmath
. So @xmath and @xmath has orthonormal basis @xmath . Then @xmath is
finite dimensional,

  ----- -------- -------- -- --------
        @xmath   @xmath      (3.18)
  and                        
        @xmath   @xmath      
                 @xmath      
                 @xmath      
  ----- -------- -------- -- --------

where the last equality for @xmath follows from equations ( 3.9 ) and (
3.10 ) and the brackets relations in equation ( 3.8 ).

###### Remark 3.1.13

-   The formula for @xmath in terms of the ghosts corresponds to the
    heuristic ghost number operator in HT [ 55 ] p313.

-   The reason why we did not choose

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    as our ghost number operator is that while it gives the correct
    commutation relation with elements in @xmath it does not annihilate
    the vacuum, and @xmath . That is it will not serve as a good number
    operator on the state space. In fact by the commutation relations we
    get @xmath .

@xmath

As @xmath is even dimensional, we have an even number of linearly
independent ghosts, i.e. @xmath . To deal with with an odd number of
ghosts define,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which we denote @xmath when no confusion will arise. Note that @xmath
makes sense for @xmath being either even or odd but in the case that
@xmath is odd we get @xmath has an odd number of ghosts @xmath . Hence
when we want an odd number of ghosts we use @xmath .

###### Remark 3.1.14

-   Note that @xmath is a proper subalgebra of @xmath since @xmath and
    @xmath are only real linear and @xmath is a complex basis. A problem
    with using @xmath is that we cannot recover the @xmath ’s and @xmath
    ’s from it.

-   A natural representation to consider is the action of @xmath on

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    for @xmath chosen such that @xmath , i.e. such that @xmath is a
    Krein space (note that @xmath is complete as it is finite
    dimensional). We can choose @xmath such that @xmath acts irreducibly
    on @xmath and the corresponding representation is isomorphic to the
    Berezin representation as will be discussed in the next section.
    However, we will see below that the choice @xmath does not give an
    irreducible representation.

@xmath

#### 3.1.3 Connection to Berezin Superfunctions

A common representation for the ghost algebra is of operators acting on
Berezin superfunctions, and is described formally for the case of finite
ghosts in Berezin [ 12 ] sections 3.1, 3.2, HT [ 55 ] Chapter 20.2, [ 73
] p482. In this section, we give a well-defined interpretation of these
formal definitions by constructing a representation of @xmath that can
be identified with the formal Berezin superfunction representation’s
vector space structure and indefinite inner product. This Berezin
representation is useful as it gives an irreducible representation of
the ghost algebra for an odd number of ghosts (cf. ( 3.1.17 )). We will
also discuss the formal formulas in the literature for the Berezin
integral, products of superfunctions and involution on superfunctions,
but we will not give rigorous interpretations of these as they are used
to construct the formal indefinite inner product and will not be needed
explicitly in this thesis.

The motivation and purpose for this section is so that we can connect to
the literature and discuss related problems, as done Remark ( 3.1.21 )
at the end of the section. After this section we will only use the
formal Berezin terminology when referring to the heuristic literature.
We summarize in Definition ( 3.1.22 ) below, the definitive ghost
stuctures used in the rest of this thesis.

Another rigorous treatment of the heuristic Berezin calculus is in [ 89
] but we do not discuss this here since this will take us too far
afield, as we would need to connect it to both our approach and the
heuristic approach. The Ghost-Fock algebras used here are sufficient for
our purposes.

In this subsection we consider both the cases of an odd and an even
number of ghosts. Note however that in the case of an even number of
ghosts the Berezin superfunctions are redundant as we can use the full
ghost algebra as discussed in the previous section.

Let @xmath be an orthonormal basis of @xmath where @xmath . Define
@xmath and @xmath . We will construct an irreducible representation for
@xmath with a cyclic vector @xmath such that @xmath annihilates @xmath
for all @xmath .

###### Lemma 3.1.15

Let @xmath . Then the unit vector
@xmath satisfies:

-   @xmath for @xmath , and

-   @xmath

###### Proof.

(i): follows from @xmath for all @xmath , in particular @xmath for all
@xmath . Using @xmath and @xmath we get @xmath .

Now using @xmath for @xmath we calculate,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where we used @xmath and @xmath for @xmath for the third equality, and
@xmath for the fourth equality, and applying the method of the previous
step.

Now define,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

As @xmath @xmath , we have that @xmath . Moreover @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath @xmath . That is @xmath acts as a ghost number operator with
@xmath at ghost number @xmath .

We calculate, for @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

hence @xmath . ∎

We define the Berezin ghost representation as,

###### Definition 3.1.16

Let @xmath be a ghost algebra with @xmath , and @xmath be as above. Then
@xmath and the Berezin representation @xmath of @xmath is this action of
@xmath on @xmath , with inner product @xmath .

###### Lemma 3.1.17

Let @xmath be a finite dimensional ghost algebra with @xmath . Then:

-   @xmath is a @xmath -linear basis for @xmath , hence @xmath .

-   @xmath , and @xmath , where @xmath is the fundamental symmetry on
    @xmath . Hence @xmath ,is a Krein space.

-   @xmath is irreducible.

###### Proof.

(i): For this proof we assume that we are in the representation @xmath
and not use the notation explicitly. For any @xmath with @xmath define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath denotes omission. Now using @xmath , @xmath and the
commutation relations ( 3.8 ) we calculate, @xmath . We have three
cases.

Case 1: @xmath such that @xmath . In this case we have that @xmath has a
ghost term @xmath , and so using the ghost anticommutation relations:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is a monomial of conjugate ghosts with indices @xmath and
ghosts @xmath .

Case 2: @xmath such that @xmath . Then @xmath contains a conjugate ghost
@xmath and so,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is a monomial of conjugate ghosts with indices @xmath and
ghosts @xmath , and we used @xmath .

Case 3: @xmath .

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where we used the fact that the ghosts and conjugate ghosts with
different indices anticommute in the first line, that @xmath and that
the conjugate ghosts annihilate the vacuum in the second, and lemma (
3.1.15 ) (ii) in the last line. Summarizing these three cases:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

To see that @xmath is linearly independent, let:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where @xmath . Now act with @xmath on this linear combination where
@xmath , then using equation ( 3.21 ) gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence @xmath and hence @xmath . Therefore the set @xmath is linearly
independent. Also @xmath spans @xmath as @xmath and @xmath , and so we
have @xmath @xmath the number of vectors in @xmath @xmath @xmath .

(ii): We have @xmath and the brackets @xmath for @xmath , and so

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath               
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Using @xmath , @xmath , and the brackets ( 3.8 ) we see that,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is the normalization constant, and we used ( 3.22 ) in the
third equality. Now if we take any vector @xmath , then it follows from
the above equality, @xmath , @xmath , and the ghost commutation
relations that @xmath .

(iii): Now let @xmath . Using equation ( 3.21 ) and the decomposition of
@xmath in terms of the basis @xmath as above, there exists @xmath such
that,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we used the ghost anticommutation relations and @xmath for the
last equality. Therefore we have that for all @xmath there exists @xmath
such that @xmath and as @xmath is cyclic we have that every vector in
@xmath is cyclic. Hence @xmath is irreducible. ∎

In equation ( 3.20 ) we defined @xmath and we will use the same notation
for its restriction to @xmath . Denote @xmath restricted to @xmath the
Berezin Ghost Number Operator and it gives a grading on @xmath :

###### Proposition 3.1.18

Let @xmath be the Berezin Ghost Number Operator. Then

-   @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath @xmath .

-    We have the decomposition:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where @xmath and @xmath .

-    Furthermore we have that @xmath for @xmath with respect to @xmath ,
    in particular each @xmath is a neutral space with respect to @xmath
    for @xmath .

-    Let @xmath . Then @xmath .

###### Proof.

(i): First @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath @xmath follow immediately
from lemma ( 3.1.15 ) equation ( 3.20 ) and the ghost anticommutation
relations ( 3.8 ). From these relations we see that @xmath where we are
using the notation as in the proof of lemma ( 3.1.17 ).

(ii): Now @xmath and so eigenspaces of @xmath with different eigenvalues
will be orthogonal with respect to @xmath . By lemma ( 3.1.17 ) (i), the
set @xmath spans @xmath and so the grading decomposition,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

follows.

(iii): This follows from @xmath .

(iv): It follows from @xmath for all @xmath and the definition of @xmath
(equation ( 3.20 )) that @xmath . Hence as eigenvectors with distinct
eigenvalues of @xmath are orthogonal, it follows that @xmath .

To complete the proof we need to show that @xmath . Recall from lemma (
3.1.15 ) that @xmath where @xmath and @xmath is the normalisation
constant. Using @xmath for @xmath (Proposition ( 3.1.6 )) we calculate,

  ------------------------------------------- -------- -------- -- --
                                              @xmath   @xmath      
                                                       @xmath      
                                              @xmath   @xmath      
                                                       @xmath      
  using @xmath and equation ( 3.22 ) gives,                        
                                              @xmath   @xmath      
                                              @xmath   @xmath      
  ------------------------------------------- -------- -------- -- --

where we used @xmath , @xmath for @xmath and that @xmath is unitary for
the last equality. ∎

We call the above decomposition @xmath the Berezin Ghost Grading . As
@xmath and @xmath have the same commutation relations with @xmath and
@xmath , we have that @xmath iff @xmath for @xmath , @xmath , we do not
need to define a Berezin ghost grading of @xmath as it would coincide
with the ghost grading already defined. Note however that the spatial
and algebra gradings do not match in the sense that,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which is due to the fact that @xmath is the state with ‘no ghosts’ but
has Berezin ghost number @xmath .

For the remainder of this section we will assume that we are in the
Berezin representation of @xmath and not denote it explicitly. Using the
Berezin representation of @xmath , we now define the space of Berezin
superfunctions which corresponds to the usual heuristic definitions (cf.
references at the beginning of this subsection). Assume that @xmath is a
fixed Hilbert space with inner product @xmath and define,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which has the tensor Hilbert inner product, @xmath , and Krein inner
product @xmath . Now by lemma ( 3.1.17 )(i), we have that a vector in
@xmath has the form,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , and the last line is the heuristic expression for a
superfunction, where the operators @xmath are now reinterpreted as
Grassman variables in a formal polynomial with coefficients in @xmath .

###### Remark 3.1.19

In the above definitions we have written the ghost terms in order of
increasing index. Another common convention is writing superfunctions
@xmath in sums of all permutations of indices, ie,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(see [ 12 ] p50, HT [ 55 ] p319). These are equivalent by using the
ghost commutation relations, but will have coefficient functions @xmath
differing by a constant. Also using increasing indices will give
slightly different formulas in the definition of the integrals and inner
products below. @xmath

We can check that lemma ( 3.1.15 ) ( 3.1.15 ) gives for @xmath , via the
decomposition in equation ( 3.23 ) that:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

We call the representation @xmath defined by @xmath the Berezin
superfunction representation of @xmath , and for the remainder of this
section we will not denote @xmath explicitly.

We connect the above construction with the usual description of the
Berezin superfunctions as follows. Formally, the Berezin superfunctions
are defined by the last line of equation ( 3.23 ) where @xmath is
assumed to be an @xmath space, and act as the coefficients of the
Grassman variables @xmath (cf. references at the beginning of this
subsection). Then a formal integration rule, formal multiplication, and
formal conjugation is assumed on @xmath and are used to give an
indefinite inner product on the @xmath . We give these formal rules
below but do not try to make sense of them rigorously, we just show that
they produce the same inner product as the formula ( 3.24 ).

The Berezin integral is formally defined on @xmath as,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and is referred to as integrating the ‘top function’. This is a formal
definition and we are not assuming that @xmath defines a measure on the
ghosts. Let @xmath . Formal multiplication @xmath is defined to be
multiplication of the terms in @xmath and @xmath with respect to the
decomposition given by equation ( 3.23 ), with the coefficients @xmath ,
@xmath being multiplied pointwise as ordinary @xmath functions producing
an @xmath function, and the @xmath terms being multiplied and rearranged
into increasing index order using the ghost anticommutation relations.
Note that repeated indices in multiplied terms (denoted @xmath ) will
give @xmath in the ghost part of that term, hence that term will equal
@xmath . See Example ( 3.1.20 ) below for a sample calculation. Formal
conjugation on @xmath is defined by:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is complex conjugation in @xmath and the formal conjugation
@xmath acts as @xmath .

Using the formal Berezin integral, multiplication and conjugation, the
formal inner product on @xmath is defined by:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A straightforward calculation shows that the above inner product on
@xmath defined using the formal Berezin integral agrees with the
rigorous equation ( 3.24 ). We give a sketch of the calculation below
for the case of @xmath (Example ( 3.1.20 )) with the general case
following in a similar way.

###### Example 3.1.20

Take @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath , i.e,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Therefore, the top function of @xmath is:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence the formal inner product is:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

which we see is the same as equation ( 3.24 ) with @xmath . The factor
of @xmath in front of the integral is needed to ensure that @xmath .
@xmath

In the calculation of @xmath for general @xmath , an important point is
that the only term that contributes @xmath is the integral of the ‘top
function’ of @xmath , and so this the only term we have to calculate in
the product. The sign factor @xmath in front of the @xmath term in
equation ( 3.24 ) formally comes from rearranging the indices of the
ghost terms in the top function into increasing order. This allows us to
identify the heuristic superfunctions with the Hilbert space @xmath .

Formally define left differentiation by Grassman variables by:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and extending linearly to @xmath (cf. [ 12 ] p51,57). Then @xmath is
heuristically assumed to act on @xmath via,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

From equation ( 3.23 ) we see that this corresponds to the
representation @xmath , hence we know that it extends to a well-defined
representation of @xmath . This provides a rigorous interpretation of
the Berezin superfunction formalism. What is more, from lemma ( 3.1.17 )
we know that @xmath is actually a Krein space, we have the explicit form
of its fundamental symmetry and we know that @xmath is an irreducible
representation of @xmath .

###### Remark 3.1.21

-   Another natural candidate for a space on which the restricted ghost
    algebra can act is @xmath , where @xmath is the Ghost-Fock vacuum
    vector. However this will not be an irreducible representation. This
    can be seen as @xmath implies that @xmath . But by Proposition (
    3.1.18 ) (iv) we have that the inclusion is proper. As @xmath
    preserves @xmath we get that action @xmath on @xmath is reducible,
    hence we see that the restriction of a pure state of @xmath to
    @xmath is no longer pure.

-   One of the main features of the Berezin representation is that

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (3.26)
      -- -------- -- --------

    which is an attractive feature since we can think of the ghost and
    conjugate ghosts as acting as creators and annihilators with vacuum
    @xmath . Hence the superfunction representation is often assumed in
    Hamiltonian BRST to identify a natural physical subspace amongst the
    ‘multiple copies of the physical space’ (see section ( 2.5.2 )). If
    we take a Hamiltonian BRST model with commuting constraints (cf.
    Section 2.5 ) with Berezin ghost space then we saw that @xmath
    (equation ( 2.34 )), i.e. the span of vectors of the form

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where @xmath are Dirac physical vectors.

    The choice of representative for the physical space is then the
    space spanned by the physical vectors with no ghosts, i.e. the
    @xmath vectors. Note that the subspace of @xmath with Berezin ghost
    number @xmath is spanned by @xmath and so we can also see this
    choice of representative space, i.e. @xmath , as restricting to the
    subspace with Berezin Ghost number @xmath , by which we get BRST
    physical space naturally isomorphic to the Dirac physical space. A
    significant problem with this choice is that if we have a
    representation of the ghost algebra with @xmath -adjoint ghosts and
    conjugate ghosts, and a vector @xmath such that @xmath for some
    @xmath , then:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    So the span of such vectors @xmath will not be a good physical
    subspace as it is neutral with respect to the indefinite inner
    product. This is exactly the case for @xmath in the superfunction
    representation. This problem is noted in [ 33 ] p7, and a correction
    is suggested. This problem also occurs due to the Berezin grading
    structure on @xmath which we discuss in the next item.

-   We have a grading structure on @xmath by using the Berezin ghost
    number operator @xmath (cf. equation ( 3.20 ) and Proposition 3.1.18
    (ii)). As @xmath we get that any eigenspace of @xmath with nonzero
    eigenvalue will be neutral. Hence the only subspaces with definite
    Berezin ghost number that are positive with respect to @xmath (hence
    can serve as a physical subspace) must have Berezin ghost number
    zero. This shows again that the usual choice of physical space
    @xmath is problematic, as it has Berezin ghost number @xmath .

    Restricting to the zero ghost subspace is problematic when there are
    an odd number of ghosts @xmath . Proposition ( 3.1.18 )(ii) shows
    that the eigenvalues of @xmath are fractional and hence the
    non-trivial ghost numbered subspaces have fractional number, i.e.
    the ghost number @xmath subspace is @xmath . Hence restricting to
    ghost number zero subspaces gives a trivial model (as noted in [ 71
    ] p425).

-   A second method to deal with the neutrality of the natural physical
    subspace @xmath has been suggested by [ 71 ] p426 and [ 33 ] p7. One
    takes a subspace of @xmath spanned by the ghost number @xmath and
    ghost number @xmath space, ie,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    (where @xmath in the notation of [ 71 ] p426). @xmath a subspace of
    indeterminate ghost number, which can be seen as a problem discussed
    in [ 33 ] p8.

    To the author, indeterminate ghost space number does not seem to be
    a serious objection for these reasons: First we have already graded
    our algebra so as to apply the BRST superderivation and so do not
    need the ghost space to do this. Second, the choice of zero ghost
    number for the physical subspace was arbitrary in the first place.
    Third and most importantly, @xmath is a subspace which is positive
    with respect to @xmath and corresponds to @xmath without the MCPS
    problem (cf. Subsection 2.5.2 ).

-   Consider the case of Hamiltonian BRST with a finite number of
    non-abelian constraints as in Subsection 2.5.2 (2). We have that
    @xmath . In fact we also have @xmath as defined in ( 2.35 ), and so
    @xmath and @xmath . Both @xmath and @xmath are neutral vectors and
    so we have that @xmath is not one-dimensional and that @xmath has
    indefinite inner product. So we have the MCPS problem for
    non-abelian Hamiltonian BRST as claimed in the end of heuristic
    Subsection 2.5.2 . Note that @xmath as defined in the preceding item
    is in @xmath and so is a good candidate for the choice to solve the
    MCPS problem, as long as we are not concerned with definite ghost
    number for the physical space.

-   The above construction for the Berezin space does not work in the
    infinite dimensional space as the construction of @xmath requires a
    finite number of @xmath ’s. Also the heuristic definition of
    integral does not work as we have no top function. This means that a
    choice such as @xmath to solve the MCPS for any formulation of
    Hamiltonian BRST with infinite constraints will become problematic.
    Infinite dimensional Berezin representations are dealt with in [ 89
    ] p136 onwards. We do not discuss these further as the infinite
    dimensional ghost algebras are sufficient for us and come from the
    motivating physical example.

@xmath

Above, we found the two conventions for the ghost algebra:

-   @xmath on @xmath with ghost operator @xmath and vacuum @xmath .

-   @xmath on @xmath with ghost operator @xmath and vacuum @xmath .

Both are used in the heuristic literature, but for the analysis below we
would like a unified terminology. So we summarize their essential
similarities and differences:

-   As remarked in Proposition ( 3.1.18 ), the ghost grading of @xmath
    with respect to @xmath coincides with the ghost grading of @xmath
    with respect to @xmath .

-   The spatial ghost gradings do not coincide;- whereas

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    we have:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

Hence the following unified terminology is appropriate with respect to
the general structure required to define the BRST superderivation.

###### Definition 3.1.22

A Ghost Space @xmath is either:

-    A Hilbert space @xmath where @xmath , and it is equipped with the
    grading structure, @xmath , and @xmath as given by Proposition(
    3.1.11 ).

-    The Berezin ghost space @xmath and it is equipped with the Berezin
    Ghost Number Operator @xmath and Berezin grading structure as given
    by Proposition ( 3.1.18 ).

Once it has been established that we are using the Berezin ghost space,
we will also refer to the restricted ghost algebra @xmath as the ghost
algebra and drop the ‘ @xmath ’ subscript when no confusion will arise.

###### Remark 3.1.23

In constructions it is preferable to use the full ghost algebra rather
than the Berezin representation of @xmath as we can recover the CAR
creators and annihilators, as discussed in Remark ( 3.1.14 )(i). However
the Berezin representation of @xmath is used in the odd number of ghost
case as this is the finite irreducible representation of @xmath . For
the even number of ghosts case we can use the full ghost algebra, but
may in examples still use the Berezin representation of @xmath so as to
stay as close as possible to the heuristic literature. @xmath

### 3.2 Charge and dsp-decomposition

In physical examples, such as BRST-QEM, the BRST charge is given as a
formal integral of unbounded operators (e.g. equation ( 2.19 )) which
suggests that any well-defined formulation will need to include the case
of an unbounded @xmath . The main aim of this section is to prove
rigorously a version of the dsp -decomposition which is general enough
to be applied to the subsequent QEM example. This has been done in [ 57
] , and here we give slightly different proofs. This includes the case
of bounded @xmath .

Initially we do not assume any Krein or ghost structure. Let @xmath be a
Hilbert space with inner product @xmath .

###### Theorem 3.2.1 (dsp-decomposition)

Let @xmath be a closed operator, @xmath , and @xmath . Then we have the
following decomposition,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath

###### Proof.

First, as @xmath is closed we have that @xmath ( [ 20 ] Proposition X
1.13 p310) and hence we get the first decomposition. As @xmath we have
that @xmath and so if @xmath is the orthogonal complement of @xmath in
@xmath we have,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now @xmath implies @xmath and so the above decomposition holds for
@xmath , therefore we have that @xmath . It is straightforward to check
that @xmath and so @xmath , which gives the decomposition. ∎

For the remainder of this subsection @xmath denote the same spaces as in
Theorem ( 3.2.1 ) and @xmath are their corresponding orthogonal
projections.

The heuristics in Chapter 2 use @xmath to select the physical subspace.
Correspondingly we define,

###### Definition 3.2.2

The BRST-physical space of @xmath is,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let @xmath be the factor map, and denote @xmath for all @xmath .

Further motivated by the heuristics, we assume that @xmath has a Krein
structure with fundamental symmetry @xmath and denote the indefinite
inner product by @xmath . Then we have,

###### Lemma 3.2.3

Let @xmath be a closed operator which is Krein symmetric on its domain
@xmath , i.e. @xmath . Moreover, let @xmath and @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath denotes orthogonality with respect to
the indefinite inner product @xmath .

###### Proof.

The first decomposition is given by Theorem ( 3.2.1 ). Next, assume that
@xmath , @xmath . Then as @xmath , we have @xmath . That is, @xmath . As
@xmath we have that it is continuous in both arguments and hence @xmath
. ∎

The Krein inner product on @xmath now induces an indefinite inner
product on @xmath , which is well defined by lemma ( 3.2.3 ).

###### Definition 3.2.4

Define an indefinite inner product on @xmath as,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that @xmath for all @xmath . Moreover, as @xmath and @xmath are
complete with respect to the Hilbert space topology, the factor space
@xmath is complete with respect to the factor topology.

An interesting case of the above constructions is when @xmath becomes a
Krein space with the inner product @xmath . The following example shows
that the assumptions of lemma ( 3.2.3 ) are not sufficient to imply that
@xmath is a Krein space.

###### Example 3.2.5

Let @xmath be a Hilbert space and @xmath be a closed, symmetric operator
with dense domain @xmath . Furthermore, let @xmath be such that @xmath
and @xmath ( [ 87 ] ). Define @xmath , @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

From these definitions it follows that @xmath and,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence @xmath . This shows that @xmath is a neutral space and that the
inner product @xmath is neutral on @xmath .

@xmath

###### Remark 3.2.6

In general, @xmath does not preserve @xmath (cf. Theorem ( 3.2.8 )
below) and so @xmath does not factor to @xmath . However, if @xmath
preserves a linear section of the factoring map @xmath then the
restriction of @xmath to that section can be used to define a
fundamental symmetry on @xmath . A fundamental symmetry defined this way
depends on the choice of section. @xmath

The following lemma is an example of the above remark, and will hold
when @xmath is Krein-selfadjoint (cf. Theorem ( 3.2.8 )).

###### Lemma 3.2.7

Let @xmath and define @xmath by @xmath for all @xmath . Then:

-   @xmath is a Krein space with fundamental symmetry @xmath , and
    Hilbert inner product:

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (3.28)
      -- -------- -- --------

-    The map @xmath is a Krein and Hilbert isometric isomorphism.

-    The space @xmath is a Hilbert space with respect to the inner
    product @xmath if and only if @xmath .

###### Proof.

(i) As @xmath is a fundamental symmetry @xmath . Combining this with the
assumption @xmath gives @xmath , hence @xmath and so @xmath is well
defined. Therefore @xmath and @xmath and so @xmath and @xmath . From:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we see that @xmath is a positive definite and hence @xmath is a Krein
space, as @xmath is complete with respect to the factor topology.

(ii): Obvious from (i)

(iii): As @xmath is a Krein space then @xmath where @xmath and @xmath
are the projections onto the positive and negative subspaces of @xmath
with respect to @xmath . @xmath is a Hilbert space with respect to
@xmath iff @xmath iff @xmath iff @xmath by the definition of @xmath . ∎

The above sufficient condition (lemma ( 3.2.7 )) is satisfied in many
examples, in particular it will be satisfied whenever @xmath is Krein
selfadjoint. Note however, that it is not satisfied in Example ( 3.2.5
).

###### Theorem 3.2.8

Let @xmath be Krein selfadjoint, i.e. @xmath . Moreover, let @xmath ,
and @xmath . Then:

-    We have the following decompositions,

      -- -- --
            
      -- -- --

    where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath denotes Krein
    orthogonality. Furthermore @xmath and @xmath , and hence @xmath and
    @xmath are Krein spaces, with respect to @xmath .

-    The inner product @xmath makes @xmath a Krein space.

###### Proof.

(i) Theorem ( 3.2.1 ) gives the first Hilbert decomposition.

Let @xmath and @xmath , then by @xmath we have @xmath , i.e. @xmath .
Similarly @xmath and so @xmath . Now the second decomposition follows
from the first.

From Appendix ( 7.2 ) we have @xmath , hence @xmath iff @xmath iff
@xmath iff @xmath hence @xmath . Also from @xmath we have @xmath and it
follows that @xmath , i.e. @xmath .

(ii): We have @xmath from (i) and so (ii) follows from lemma ( 3.2.7 )
(i). ∎

###### Remark 3.2.9

-   Any bounded @xmath satisfying the hypothesis of lemma ( 3.2.3 ) can
    be extended to a Krein selfadjoint operator on @xmath . Therefore
    Theorem ( 3.2.8 ) holds for bounded BRST charges and so @xmath is a
    Krein space in the case of bounded charges.

-   When @xmath is Krein-selfadjoint, Theorem ( 3.2.8 ) gives @xmath and
    @xmath , hence @xmath and @xmath have the following decompositions
    with respect to the @xmath -decomposition:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where @xmath is a (possibly unbounded) closed operator, @xmath is a
    unitary, @xmath and @xmath .

    Note that the above decomposition for @xmath is not guaranteed in
    the case where @xmath is not Krein-selfadjoint, as can be seen by
    example ( 3.2.5 ).

@xmath

Now @xmath is the physical state space and the inner product @xmath is
usually taken to be the physical inner product. A physicality
requirement is then that @xmath is positive definite, hence implying
@xmath is a Hilbert space. By lemma ( 3.28 ) (ii) this leads to:

###### Definition 3.2.10

The condition of physicality on @xmath is:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the heuristic picture a key object used to obtain @xmath is @xmath .
However it follows from (Ota [ 82 ] Theorem 3.3 p232) that in the case
of unbounded @xmath we do not have @xmath , so we need to take some care
in defining @xmath .

###### Lemma 3.2.11

Let @xmath be as in Theorem ( 3.2.8 ) and let there be a space @xmath
dense in @xmath and such that:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Define,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then @xmath is @xmath -symmetric on @xmath and @xmath .

###### Proof.

That @xmath is @xmath -symmetric is obvious.

By definition of @xmath we have @xmath . Conversely, if @xmath then
@xmath and so @xmath , thus @xmath . ∎

The assumptions above are of course realised in the case that @xmath is
bounded and will be realized in the example of KO Abelian BRST QEM below
(cf. lemma ( 4.2.22 )).

An interesting question is, given an operator @xmath as in Theorem (
3.2.1 ), can we find a fundamental symmetry on @xmath such that @xmath
is Krein self adjoint?

###### Lemma 3.2.12

Let @xmath be a closed operator on @xmath such that, @xmath , and @xmath
. Then there exists a fundamental symmetry @xmath (i.e. @xmath and
@xmath ) such that @xmath is Krein-selfadjoint with respect to the
indefinite inner product @xmath where @xmath is the original inner
product.

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be the decomposition given by Theorem ( 3.2.1 ). Let @xmath
be the polar decomposition ( [ 20 ] Theorem VIII 3.11 p242) for @xmath ,
i.e. @xmath is a partial isometry such that @xmath is isometric, and
@xmath . Furthermore let @xmath be the orthogonal projection onto @xmath
, then,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now define @xmath , then using the above identities we get that @xmath .
Obviously @xmath .

Now @xmath hence @xmath hence @xmath . Also, @xmath implies @xmath hence
Theorem ( 3.2.1 ) applied to @xmath gives that @xmath . Therefore @xmath
. Furthermore @xmath and so @xmath .

Therefore @xmath . Now by Appendix ( 7.2 ) lemma ( 7.2.1 ) we have that
@xmath and so @xmath is Krein-self adjoint. ∎

By this lemma we see that the assumptions in Theorem ( 3.2.1 ) are
enough to ensure that there is a Krein structure that makes @xmath Krein
self-adjoint and gives all the structure in Theorem ( 3.2.8 ).

### 3.3 Operator Cohomology and @xmath-decomposition

The formal operator cohomology is defined as @xmath , but we need to
consider domain issues when making sense of this rigorously. When we
have done this we will show the connection between the @xmath
-decomposition and the operator cohomology. We will decompose @xmath
into blocks with respect to @xmath , then use the block decomposition of
@xmath to construct elements in @xmath . This is basically the same
technique as in [ 51 ] p285, [ 92 ] p127, and K&O [ 68 ] Proposition 5.9
p68.

We describe here the basic mathematical structures used for the
BRST-constraint method. In practice, the actual spaces and operators are
constructed from the given field theory and constraints, where the
number of ghosts equals the number of constraints.

To investigate the operator cohomology, we first have to define @xmath
and the algebra it acts on explicitly.

-   Let @xmath be a Krein space with indefinite inner product @xmath
    with Krein involution @xmath , and definite inner product @xmath
    with Hilbert involution @xmath , and let @xmath be a dense subspace
    of @xmath .

-   Let @xmath be a Ghost space with ghost gradings and ghost number
    operator @xmath with domain @xmath as in Definition ( 3.1.22 ), i.e.
    @xmath can be either the full ghost space of Berezin ghost space. In
    the case that @xmath is the full ghost space, we use the full ghost
    algebra @xmath with dense subalgebra @xmath . In the case of the
    Berezin ghost space we use the restricted ghost algebra @xmath and
    by an abuse of notation use @xmath for this subsection only as the
    results it contains depend only upon the @xmath -grading of the
    Ghost algebra.

-   Let @xmath with natural indefinite inner product @xmath , positive
    definite inner product @xmath and fundamental symmetry @xmath
    induced by the indefinite inner products, positive definite inner
    products and fundamental symmetries on @xmath and @xmath .

-   Let @xmath be a Krein and Hilbert involutive unital subalgebra of
    @xmath defined on a common dense invariant domain @xmath , i.e. for
    @xmath we have @xmath , @xmath . In addition we will assume that all
    @xmath are closable on @xmath . Let @xmath be the algebraic tensor
    product where we are assuming no topology.

-   The ghost grading of @xmath naturally extends to @xmath , however we
    will need to enlarge our algebra by operators not in the tensor
    product (such as the charge @xmath ) and so we make the following
    definitions. Let @xmath , @xmath with @xmath and define:

      -- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- --

    ie, @xmath are the elements with difference between ghosts and
    conjugate ghosts is even, and similarly @xmath corresponds to
    elements with an odd difference. As @xmath , @xmath , @xmath for
    @xmath , @xmath it follows that @xmath and @xmath are both @xmath
    -closed and @xmath -closed subspaces of @xmath , moreover @xmath is
    a @xmath -closed and @xmath -closed subalgebra of @xmath . Define a
    @xmath -grading of @xmath by,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and define the grading automorphism on @xmath as:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where @xmath .

-   Now let @xmath be a @xmath -involutive subalgebra of @xmath such
    that @xmath . As @xmath we get that,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where @xmath and @xmath . We need to include the case of proper
    inclusion @xmath to handle the @xmath -algebraic BRST-QEM below
    where, for technical reasons, the BRST superderivation cannot be
    defined on all of @xmath (cf. Definition ( 5.3.4 ) and Definition (
    5.4.4 ) below).

###### Lemma 3.3.1

Let @xmath with domain @xmath be such that @xmath be a Krein symmetric
and 2-nilpotent operator, i.e. @xmath for all @xmath . Then:

-   @xmath is closable.

-   @xmath and @xmath for all @xmath .

-   @xmath for all @xmath

###### Proof.

(i): This follows from Proposition ( 7.2.4 ). (ii): Let @xmath for
@xmath . As @xmath is the closure of @xmath , we have a sequence @xmath
such that @xmath . By the assumptions on @xmath we have that @xmath and
so if we denote an element in the graph of @xmath as @xmath , then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As the graph of @xmath is closed we get that @xmath , i.e. @xmath and
@xmath , i.e. @xmath for all @xmath .

(iii): First recall that @xmath . Let @xmath and @xmath . Then by (ii)
@xmath . Hence it follows that @xmath and hence that @xmath . ∎

By this lemma, @xmath satisfies the conditions of Theorem ( 3.2.1 ) and
so we have the @xmath -decomposition for @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be the projection onto @xmath for @xmath . As @xmath there is
no guarantee that these projections preserve @xmath . To decompose the
@xmath into a convenient form we assume:

###### Assumptions 3.3.2

Let @xmath be as in lemma ( 3.3.1 ) and let:

-   @xmath for @xmath , and @xmath . Then the following are well
    defined:

    -   @xmath .

    -   As @xmath there exists an inverse @xmath . Let @xmath , with
        domain @xmath .

-   @xmath .

-   Let:

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (3.30)
         @xmath      
      -- -------- -- --------

    for @xmath .

@xmath

Note that @xmath , and so by Assumption ( 3.3.2 ) (ii) we get @xmath and
hence @xmath .

Assumption (iii) will allow us to enlarge @xmath by @xmath , e.g. below
in equation ( 3.31 ). In examples, the assumptions need verification,
and we now give conditions on @xmath for these to be true. These
conditions will hold in the QEM example below and the next lemma will
show that as well as in the case of bounded @xmath and @xmath ( i.e.
finitely many bounded constraints).

###### Lemma 3.3.3

Let @xmath preserve its domain @xmath , be Krein symmetric and let
@xmath for all @xmath . Assume that:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then,

-   @xmath for @xmath , and @xmath ,

-   @xmath .

-    We have that:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    for @xmath .

###### Proof.

(i): @xmath is closable by lemma ( 3.3.1 ). Hence @xmath by [ 87 ]
Theorem VIII.1 (c) p253, and so @xmath , moreover @xmath . As @xmath ,
@xmath for @xmath now follows. Furthermore @xmath , @xmath and @xmath by
lemma ( 3.3.1 ) (iii), hence @xmath by the assumed decomposition of
@xmath .

(ii): @xmath .

(iii): Let @xmath . It follows from @xmath and @xmath -adjoints that
@xmath . Hence we have @xmath .

It is sufficient to prove the remaining identities for @xmath such that
@xmath , @xmath if we recall that @xmath is spanned by linear
combinations of such vectors where @xmath runs over all the possible
ghost numbers we are considering (cf. Proposition ( 3.1.6 ) and
Proposition ( 3.1.18 ) (ii)). So for the remainder of the proof we let
the chosen @xmath be such that @xmath , @xmath and so by the assumption
on @xmath we have @xmath where @xmath and @xmath .

We want to show that @xmath for all @xmath . By (i) we have @xmath for
@xmath as above. So we need now only show @xmath . To do this we
calculate,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the first inequality comes from @xmath on @xmath using @xmath and
@xmath and its adjoint on @xmath . Therefore:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now @xmath and @xmath imply that @xmath . Also @xmath on @xmath implies
that @xmath . Hence as @xmath we have that @xmath implies that @xmath .
By @xmath on @xmath we have @xmath , and so @xmath .

Now by Theorem ( 3.2.8 ) we have @xmath which implies @xmath which
implies @xmath . By Proposition ( 3.1.11 ) (or Proposition ( 3.1.18 )
(i) for the Berezin ghost number operator) we have @xmath on @xmath ,
hence @xmath .

We have shown that @xmath and since @xmath we have that @xmath .

Lastly, @xmath where the last equality was proven above. Therefore
@xmath . ∎

###### Remark 3.3.4

-   For unbounded @xmath the above condition that @xmath needs
    verification, and will be done for the forthcoming BRST-QEM example
    by lemma ( 4.2.22 ). We can always restrict the domain of @xmath so
    that the above condition holds, however we then would have to check
    that @xmath preserves the restricted domain if we use @xmath to
    generate @xmath .

-   For the case of bounded @xmath and finitely many bounded constraints
    ( i.e. bounded @xmath ) we can restrict the domain of @xmath to
    @xmath , then extend ( 3.30 ) to all of @xmath by continuity.

@xmath

With the above assumptions we enlarge @xmath to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

and using the commutation relations ( 3.30 ) we can extend the @xmath
grading to @xmath which is a @xmath -algebra but not a @xmath -algebra.
Note that by assumptions, @xmath is an invariant domain for all the
elements in @xmath . By a slight abuse of notation we use the same
notation @xmath and @xmath for the extended even and odd algebras. Note
that @xmath and @xmath . We define the BRST superderivation as:

###### Definition 3.3.5

With definitions as above, the BRST superderivation is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

An interesting result is that we have a unique @xmath which generates
@xmath .

###### Lemma 3.3.6

Let @xmath have common dense invariant domain @xmath (as they are in
@xmath ), and be such that @xmath and @xmath for all @xmath and @xmath .
Then @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath , and calculate

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

From this we have that @xmath , i.e. @xmath . ∎

This result is interesting as it relies on @xmath being a super
derviation, in contrast to the case of derivations where the generators
are non-unique up to a central term.

Since the original algebra @xmath contains the physical information, we
will define the BRST-observable algebra using the restriction of @xmath
to @xmath .

###### Proposition 3.3.7

Define the BRST-physical observable algebra as:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath and @xmath be the factor maps and note that @xmath . Define
the dense subspace @xmath and for ease of notation,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then:

-    Both @xmath and @xmath have a natural actions on @xmath by,

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (3.33)
      -- -------- -- --------

    for all @xmath respectively @xmath and all @xmath .

-    The @xmath -involution on @xmath and @xmath factors to the @xmath
    -involution on @xmath respectively @xmath with respect the action
    defined in equation ( 3.33 ), i.e.

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    for all @xmath respectively @xmath where @xmath is the the adjoint
    of @xmath with respect to the inner product @xmath .

###### Proof.

(i): We check that the action given by equation ( 3.33 ) is well
defined. Now @xmath preserves @xmath and @xmath , hence factors to
@xmath . Furthermore @xmath and so factors trivially to @xmath hence the
action is well defined.

(ii): First @xmath implies that @xmath and @xmath are @xmath -algebras,
hence @xmath factors as an involution on @xmath . Moreover it factors to
the involution with respect to the indefinite inner product on @xmath by
equation ( 3.33 ) which can be seen by calculation:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath and all @xmath , where we have used that by definition
@xmath for all @xmath (cf. Definition ( 3.2.2 )). ∎

The fact that @xmath factors to an involution on @xmath in Proposition (
3.3.7 ) (ii) relies on @xmath . But @xmath implies that @xmath and
@xmath are not @xmath -algebras in general, hence the @xmath -involution
on @xmath does not factor to @xmath . This is problematic from the
mathematical standpoint as @xmath -algebras have more tools available
e.g. @xmath -algebra theory in their bounded representations. However as
@xmath is a Krein space it has a Hilbert inner product which we can use
to define a @xmath -involution on @xmath .

###### Lemma 3.3.8

Given notation above:

-    For @xmath we have:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (3.34)
      -- -------- -- --------

    Hence @xmath is an involution on @xmath which coincides with the
    @xmath -involution on @xmath with respect to the indefinite inner
    product @xmath . With respect to this involution, @xmath is a @xmath
    -algebra.

-    If the physicality condition @xmath holds (cf. equation ( 3.29 ))
    then the @xmath -adjoint on @xmath factors to the @xmath -adjoint on
    @xmath as defined in (i).

###### Proof.

(i): Let @xmath and @xmath . Using equation ( 3.28 ) we have,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we used the fact that @xmath implies that @xmath in the second
last inequality. It is easy to check that @xmath hence @xmath and we
have that,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As @xmath is @xmath -self adjoint and @xmath is a @xmath -algebra we get
that @xmath is a @xmath -algebra.

(ii): Let @xmath . Then lemma ( 3.2.7 ) (iii) gives that @xmath and it
follows that @xmath for all @xmath . ∎

###### Remark 3.3.9

-   If we use @xmath as the domain of @xmath then we have by lemma (
    3.3.8 ) (i) that @xmath is a @xmath -algebra. So although @xmath was
    not necessarily a @xmath -algebra, factoring out @xmath from @xmath
    produced a @xmath -algebra. Notice that we had to extend to @xmath
    to get this result in general, i.e. we do not have that @xmath is a
    @xmath -algebra in general and we would need to put more
    restrictions on the domain of @xmath .

    We will return to this point in the @xmath -theory (Proposition (
    5.1.11 )) as in the abstract theory we want the BRST physical
    algebra to be a @xmath -algebra with respect the @xmath -involution
    and norm defined in Proposition ( 5.1.12 ). We will find that a
    sufficient condition is for the physicality condition @xmath to hold
    (cf. Definition ( 3.2.10 ) and Example ( 5.1.14 ) (i)). In this case
    we also have that the @xmath -involution factors to the @xmath
    -involution on the final physical algebra.

-   When @xmath is Krein-selfadjoint, Theorem ( 3.2.8 ) gives @xmath and
    so the physicality condition is @xmath , hence in terms of the dsp
    -decomposition, the physicality condition states that:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where @xmath , @xmath .

@xmath

We want to decompose @xmath into a convenient form. To do this we
introduce the following algebra homomorphism.

###### Lemma 3.3.10

Define,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then @xmath is an algebra homomorphism on @xmath .

###### Proof.

That @xmath For @xmath we have @xmath and @xmath and so for @xmath we
have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and so it follows that @xmath is an algebra homomorphism on @xmath . ∎

The next theorem shows that the kernel of @xmath is @xmath .

###### Theorem 3.3.11

Let @xmath , @xmath satisfy Assumptions ( 3.3.2 ) and let @xmath ,
@xmath be as in equation ( 3.31 ) and lemma ( 3.3.10 ). In particular
@xmath is a 2-nilpotent Krein-symmetric (hence closable by Proposition (
7.2.4 )) operator with domain @xmath , and @xmath satisfies the
hypothesis of Theorem ( 3.2.1 ). Let @xmath for @xmath . If @xmath and
@xmath , then:

-   @xmath iff @xmath , i.e. @xmath iff @xmath . This implies that:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where @xmath .

-    Suppose that @xmath for all @xmath . Then:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where @xmath denotes an algebra isomorphism.

###### Proof.

(i): Given that @xmath for @xmath , where @xmath is the projection onto
@xmath , then with respect to the @xmath -decomposition of @xmath ,
@xmath has the representation:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath . Then it has the representation:

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Now as @xmath we find:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore if @xmath , then @xmath which implies @xmath as @xmath . As
@xmath , @xmath implies @xmath . Also @xmath is dense in @xmath . Let
@xmath and a sequence @xmath such that @xmath . As @xmath is @xmath
-involutive and @xmath , we get for any @xmath that:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we used the fact that @xmath and that @xmath is a @xmath
-automorphism in the first equality. As @xmath is dense in @xmath , we
have @xmath . As @xmath is an automorphism, @xmath .

Now @xmath implies @xmath and @xmath . Therefore,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now suppose @xmath . If we compare equations ( 3.35 ) and ( 3.36 ) we
see that @xmath . Conversely suppose that that @xmath . Then we would
like to choose a @xmath to produce @xmath . Consider:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

As @xmath preserves @xmath , and by the assumption @xmath we see that
@xmath and it follows that the bottom row of @xmath is well defined.
Also @xmath and so @xmath is well defined. Hence all the entries of
@xmath are well defined.

Assumption ( 3.3.2 ) (iii) gives that @xmath and @xmath , so as @xmath
we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Substituting @xmath into equation ( 3.35 ) gives,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we used @xmath and @xmath in the second equality. Hence we can
choose @xmath as above to get @xmath .

(ii): Let @xmath . As @xmath we have @xmath , hence @xmath . Therefore
by part (i) we have @xmath and so part (ii) follows.

(iii): Let @xmath and @xmath . Then by part (i) @xmath . Conversely, let
@xmath for some @xmath . As @xmath we have that @xmath hence @xmath . By
lemma ( 3.3.10 ), @xmath is an algebra homomorphism on @xmath , and so
part (iii) follows. ∎

We have the important corollary:

###### Corollary 3.3.12

Given the hypothesis of Theorem ( 3.3.11 ) then:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Remark 3.3.13

-   Note that while the definition @xmath involves only the unextended
    algebra @xmath , to prove the isomorphism @xmath needed the
    extension to @xmath . This is unsatisfactory as it requires us add
    extra elements to our algebra. In the @xmath -algebraic approach it
    desirable to do this as little as possible as it effects the
    representation theory of the algebras involved. If we want to take
    the minimal extension of @xmath for the same construction to work in
    Theorem ( 3.3.11 ), we see from equation ( 3.37 ), that we still
    need extend to @xmath .

    Note however that @xmath can be obtained algebraically in specific
    examples (cf. [ 60 ] ) without extending @xmath , but the price paid
    is much more intensive calculations which the dsp -decomposition
    construction avoids (cf. [ 60 ] p1322-1326).

-   Motivated by the last section, a natural direction to investigate is
    to see if there is an ‘operator dsp -decomposition’.

    This is the approach taken in [ 60 ] where the authors examine the
    structures as defined in the BRST-QEM example. They define a new
    superderivation @xmath and motivated by @xmath define @xmath . It is
    straightforward to calculate from superbracket properties (Appendix(
    7.1 )) that @xmath is a derivation and that @xmath . Unfortunately
    it turns out that @xmath , where the containment is proper ( [ 60 ]
    p1321). So @xmath is used to calculate a large part of @xmath , the
    remaining part being calculated directly using the properties of
    @xmath specific to the BRST-QEM setup. While this solves the
    problem, the last calculation involved is not straightforward, and
    it is not clear how to extend to the Hamiltonian BRST with general
    constraints. The calculations in [ 60 ] are algebraic and it is
    conjectured at the end of [ 60 ] that using the @xmath
    -decomposition of @xmath , the calculations could be done in a more
    economic way. We answer this in the affirmative using Theorem (
    3.3.11 ) below (cf. Proposition ( 4.2.28 ) (iii)).

@xmath

#### 3.3.1 Example - Abelian Hamiltonian Constraints

We have seen for abelian Hamiltionian BRST with a finite number of
constraints that @xmath is larger than the Dirac state space, and that
adding the extra condition of restriction to ghost number zero states
does not fix the problem (cf. MCPS problem and discussion in Subsection
2.5.2 ). We may however conjecture that the BRST physical algebra is
isomorphic to the Dirac physical algebra. An application of Theorem (
3.3.11 ) shows that this is not the case, i.e. @xmath is larger than
physical algebra associated to the Dirac algorithm and adding the extra
condition of restricting to elements with zero ghost number does not fix
the problem.

Let @xmath for a Hilbert space @xmath . Take @xmath where @xmath is a
projection and so the physical subspace is @xmath . If we now apply the
@xmath -procedure to @xmath (cf. Appendix ( 7.4 )) then for the Dirac
physical algebra we have the following isomorphism @xmath where @xmath
is the commutant in @xmath of @xmath (see example ( 7.4.7 ) (i)).

Following the Hamiltonian BRST method in Section 2.5 we extend @xmath by
tensoring on a ghost algebra @xmath with one ghost for the constraint
@xmath . The extended algebra is @xmath , and we identify @xmath with
@xmath (the norm on @xmath is unique as @xmath finite dimensional, hence
nuclear). As all operators involved are bounded, we take @xmath where
@xmath is a ghost space for @xmath . Note that by Definition ( 3.1.22 )
and lemma ( 3.1.17 ) @xmath and @xmath acts as an irreducible
representation @xmath , therefore @xmath . Now [ 99 ] p185 equation (10)
gives that @xmath for Hilbert space @xmath where @xmath is defined in [
99 ] Definition 1.3 p185. In fact as @xmath is finite dimensional we
have @xmath . So as the norm on @xmath is unique we have @xmath , hence
we do not need to extend @xmath to @xmath .

The BRST charge is @xmath , and @xmath with @xmath . As @xmath is
bounded we do not have domain problems with @xmath and we calculate as
in equation ( 2.34 ) that @xmath . Therefore we have that @xmath . From
this we see that @xmath with the obvious isomorphism from above. Now
@xmath so by Theorem ( 3.3.11 ),

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

and so the physical algebra produced by the @xmath -procedure is
contained in the physical BRST algebra.

We see this containment is proper as follows. Take @xmath such that
@xmath (e.g. take @xmath a projection orthogonal to @xmath ), and let
@xmath . Then:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

therefore @xmath . Now take @xmath . Then we have that @xmath and as
@xmath are linearly independent, @xmath . Now we have @xmath , and so by
Theorem ( 3.3.11 ) we have @xmath . Therefore @xmath and so the BRST
physical algebra properly contains @xmath if we take the natural
isomorphisms as in ( 3.39 ).

An important point is that @xmath and so restricting the BRST physical
algebra to ghost number zero elements will still imply that the physical
Dirac algebra is properly contained in the physical BRST algebra.

#### 3.3.2 Alternative Physical Algebra

So far we used the heuristic prescription of taking @xmath as the
physical algebra. We would like to motivate this from a more structural
point of view. Recall the previous definitions:

-   @xmath and has indefinite inner product @xmath (cf. Definition (
    3.2.2 ) and Definition ( 3.2.4 )),

-   @xmath and @xmath are the factor maps,

-   @xmath ,

-   @xmath is dense in @xmath ,

-   @xmath and @xmath

Now @xmath preserves @xmath and @xmath , hence factors to @xmath .
Furthermore @xmath and so factors trivially to @xmath . Therefore @xmath
has a natural action on @xmath by,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Define,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

that is @xmath . By lemma ( 3.3.10 ) we have that @xmath is a
homomorphism on @xmath , and:

###### Proposition 3.3.14

We have that:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath denotes an algebra isomorphism.

###### Proof.

As @xmath is a Krein space and @xmath is dense we have that @xmath iff
@xmath for all @xmath iff @xmath for all @xmath iff @xmath , where
@xmath is the projection onto @xmath . From this it follows that @xmath
, hence @xmath and @xmath are homomorphisms on @xmath with the same
kernel, and hence have isomorphic images. This proves the first
isomorphism, the second being obvious. ∎

By Theorem ( 3.3.11 ) (iii) and the Proposition ( 3.3.14 ) we get that
@xmath and so we see that the cohomological definition of the BRST
physical algebra is natural with repect to the constraint structure
corresponding to the physical representation @xmath .

To prove Theorem ( 3.3.11 ) (iii) however, we had to extend @xmath to
@xmath . In particular we had to include @xmath in the extended algebra.
In examples, such as QEM below, @xmath is an unbounded operator and so
constructing a proof similar to Theorem ( 3.3.11 ) (iii) in an abstract
@xmath -algebraic setting is not straightforward. So we take the point
of view from now on that the abstract definition of the BRST-physical
algebra is:

###### Definition 3.3.15

The alternative definition of the BRST physical algebra is:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The heuristic cohomological definition of @xmath is of physical interest
because of Theorem ( 3.3.11 ) (iii). Now we have that @xmath by Theorem
( 3.3.11 ) (iii), and so the notation @xmath is redundant at this point.
However when we move to the @xmath -setting, @xmath will be a @xmath
-algebra with superderivation @xmath acting on domain @xmath and @xmath
can be constructed using the universal representation of @xmath , hence
@xmath will be the natural definition the BRST physical algebra, and it
will only be in representations were we can construct the extra
unbounded elements in @xmath (e.g. @xmath ) in which the heuristic
cohomological definition will become equivalent.

###### Remark 3.3.16

Note the similarity of the definition of @xmath to equation ( 7.3 ) in
Appendix ( 7.4 ). This suggests we can take a more Dirac-like approach
to physical algebra selection for BRST. This natural question is to ask
is how a Dirac-like constraint procedure ( @xmath -procedure Appendix (
7.4 )) can be applied to using @xmath or @xmath as a constraint, and how
this relates to the BRST-observable algebra @xmath .

If we were to follow a Dirac-like constraint procedure using @xmath as a
constraint, we would then take observables as self-adjoint operators in
the field algebra preserving @xmath , and take the observable algebra as
the @xmath -algebra generated by these. @xmath would then be a
homomorphism on this @xmath -algebra and we would factor out @xmath to
get the constrained algebra. The @xmath -procedure is the abstract
@xmath -version of this process.

There is an extra complication with BRST in that we take @xmath as our
physical inner product. Hence following a Dirac-BRST like procedure,
observables will be @xmath -algebras and the trivial observables will be
those which map @xmath to @xmath . To incorporate this at the abstract
level means that we would have to modify the @xmath -procedure as well.
This can be done, but we will not pursue this here.

Note however that the Dirac-BRST approach to selection of observables as
described in the preceding paragraph is taken in K&O [ 68 ] p58. The
result is then that local observables , [ 68 ] p59, are in @xmath ,
which is proven by the authors using the Reeh-Schlieder theorem [ 68 ]
Proposition 5.4 p59. This is why we are motivated to define the
constrained observable algebra as @xmath . @xmath

## Chapter 4 KO Abelian BRST and Electromagnetism

In this chapter we give a mathematically consistent interpretation of
the BRST-QEM example in Section ( 2.4 ). We will smear the fields @xmath
and ghost field @xmath over appropriate test function spaces and give a
well-defined meaning to ‘replacing the gauge parameter by a ghost
parameter’. This is open to interpretation and we take the view that the
object of primary importance is the BRST superderivation @xmath as this
selects the physical algebra. We will define a superderivation @xmath
which gives the smeared versions of ( 2.20 ), ( 2.21 ), ( 2.22 ):

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

will find a BRST charge @xmath which generates the the superderivation
@xmath , show that @xmath , and that we have we have a smeared analogue
of equation ( 2.4.4 ):-

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Using the results of the previous chapter, such as the dsp
-decomposition, we will construct the physical space and algebra and
compare them to other approaches.

One could try to make sense of the formal definition,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

but as the integrand involves a pointwise multiplication of operator
valued distributions, this is not straightforward to define. Such a
definition of @xmath need not generate the correct superderivation, as
was found in the example [ 59 ] Theorem 1 p2827. Given the uniqueness of
the BRST charge associated to @xmath (lemma ( 3.3.6 )) and the central
importance of @xmath , it seems that the definition of @xmath is best
used as a guide for the form of @xmath .

Section 4.1 gives an account of the necessary structures for the BRST
method in the one particle test function space for QEM and the
associated Ghost algebra. In Section 4.2 we assume a general abstract
test function space with the relevant structures of the QEM and give a
description of the smeared bosonic fields in a Fock-Krein representation
as in the CCRs [ 75 ] . We do not fix the specific test function space,
so we can extend the method to other bosonic field theories with a
similar one particle test function space to QEM. We then tensor on an
appropriate ghost algebra, construct the BRST superderivation and show
that this gives the correct heuristic BRST-QEM superderviation for the
QEM test function space. We derive the physical subspace and algebra for
the general abstract test function space. We refer to this abstract
model as KO Abelian BRST as it based on the BRST constructions developed
in the foundational work KO [ 68 ] in the abelian case. Using the QEM
test function space we compare BRST-QEM with Gupta-Bleuler QEM as in [
46 ] . Using the construction based on the abstract test function space
we do the examples of KO Abelian BRST with a finite number of bosonic
constraints and BRST for massive abelian gauge theory and compare these
examples with the literature. Finally, we combine KO Abelian BRST with a
finite number of bosonic constraints with finite abelian Hamiltonian
BRST to avoid the MCPS problem of Hamiltonian BRST (cf. Subsection 2.5.2
).

### 4.1 Test functions

To make the formal BRST-QEM example in Section 2.4 well-defined, we
first smear the fields over test function spaces to get operator valued
distributions.

#### 4.1.1 QEM Test Functions

Recall the formal definition of the QEM gauge potential in equation (
2.10 ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the Krein involution with respect to the heuristic
Krein-Fock space @xmath , and has CCR’s (equation ( 2.13 )),

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is the Pauli-Jordan distribution.

For the following mathematical developments, the previous pointwise
objects need to be understood in the sense of distributions. Hence we
next define the appropriate 1-particle test function space over which to
smear @xmath . We use the notation for inner product spaces and
symplectic spaces as in Appendices ( 7.2 ) and ( 7.3 ).

Let @xmath and denote its Fourier transform by @xmath . Note the
unconventional inner product @xmath in the exponential term. We want to
smear our gauge potentials of over real vector valued test functions, so
we define:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Smear @xmath as:

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.2)
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , i.e. @xmath . The commutation relations ( 2.11 ) mean in
our present context,

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.3)
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The symplectic form for the smeared CCR’s for QEM is then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

and we call this the covariant symplectic form . Note that @xmath is the
Fourier transform of the Pauli-Jordan distribution, ie,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

We define @xmath on @xmath by:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using this we define a second inner product and symplectic form on
@xmath by:

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.7)
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

and we see that @xmath is positive semidefinite. We call @xmath the
auxiliary symplectic form . We want our inner products and symplectic
forms to be non-degenerate so we define,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and let @xmath be the factor map. By slight abuse of notation denote
@xmath factored to @xmath also by @xmath .

Note that @xmath consists of all the functions in @xmath which vanish on
the forward light cone @xmath , so @xmath can be thought of as
restricting @xmath to @xmath . @xmath is also the degenerate part of
@xmath with respect to both @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , and so the
latter forms factor to @xmath and we still denote the factored forms by
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath respectively. The inner product @xmath is now
positive definite on @xmath .

It is easy to check that @xmath preserves @xmath , hence it factors to
an operator on @xmath , which we denote still by @xmath . Then @xmath
preserves both inner products, is symplectic in both symplectic forms
and:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As it stands, @xmath is a real symplectic space with respect to @xmath ,
however in subsequent constructions we will need a complexified version
of it. We have that @xmath where @xmath is the usual multiplication by
@xmath . We extend @xmath from @xmath to @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now @xmath is the subspace of functions in @xmath vanishing on @xmath .
Let @xmath be the factor map @xmath and define,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Multiplication by @xmath in @xmath preserves @xmath and so factors to an
operator also denoted by @xmath on @xmath . Note that @xmath is a
complex structure on @xmath . Now @xmath and @xmath are both
homomorphisms on @xmath with the same kernel and hence @xmath . We will
always assume this identification and not denote it explicitly.
Therefore we have that,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We also factor the indefinite inner product @xmath and the symplectic
form @xmath to @xmath , and denote the factored forms with the same
symbol as their corresponding unfactored counterpart.

Now @xmath extends to @xmath in the obvious way and @xmath . On @xmath
we can define the positive definite inner product,

  -------------------------------- -------- -------- -- --
                                   @xmath   @xmath      
  that is,                                              
                                   @xmath   @xmath      
  and define the symplectic form                        
                                   @xmath   @xmath      
  -------------------------------- -------- -------- -- --

Let @xmath where closure is with respect to the norm given by @xmath ,
hence @xmath is a Hilbert space. Now @xmath is @xmath -isometric on
@xmath and @xmath . Therefore @xmath extends to a @xmath -unitary on
@xmath such that @xmath and @xmath . Therefore by lemma ( 7.2.3 ) @xmath
is a Krein space with fundamental symmetry @xmath .

###### Remark 4.1.1

Note that @xmath is causal on @xmath but not its complexification @xmath
. That is @xmath for all @xmath and @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath
have spacelike separated supports (this follows from the fact that the
Jordan-Pauli distribution has support on @xmath where @xmath is the
positive light cone, cf. [ 88 ] Theorem IX.34 and p71-72 where the
Pauli-Jordan distribution is denoted @xmath ). This is not the case for
all @xmath . Although we will make constructions using field algebras
with test functions in @xmath , when we restrict finally to the physical
objects, the resulting physical fields will have test functions in
@xmath and so causality will not be violated for physical objects.
@xmath

Let @xmath be the Hilbert space of square integrable functions on the
positive light cone with respect to unique @xmath -invariant measure,
@xmath on @xmath as defined in [ 88 ] p70, ( i.e. @xmath in [ 88 ]
notation). We identify @xmath with a dense subspace of @xmath as
follows. Recall that @xmath is the factor map and identify @xmath with
@xmath . This identification is independent of the representative @xmath
for a given @xmath and it is linear, injective, and is isometric with
respect to the @xmath norm. Hence we can identify @xmath with a dense
subspace of @xmath , and so by taking closures we have that @xmath . In
effect, we are thinking of @xmath as the ‘Schwartz functions on @xmath
’. We will assume this identification in the sequel, will not denote the
isomorphism explicitly, and will identify @xmath with a subspace of
@xmath .

Also @xmath acts on @xmath as in equation ( 4.6 ) and by lemma ( 7.2.3 )
acts as a fundamental symmetry that makes @xmath into a Krein space. The
Hilbert inner product on @xmath is the extension of equation ( 4.7 ) on
@xmath which we also denote by @xmath . The indefinite inner product
@xmath is the extension of equation ( 4.1 ) from @xmath to @xmath , and
@xmath for @xmath . The symplectic forms @xmath and @xmath are the
extended from @xmath to @xmath via equation ( 4.4 ) and equation ( 4.7
).

We need scalar valued test functions for the ghosts, and obtain these as
follows. Let:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

i.e. @xmath is the projection onto the first component of @xmath . So
@xmath factors to @xmath and we define:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- -------

The inner product on @xmath induces one on @xmath by:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Similarly we have symplectic forms @xmath and inner products @xmath
induced by @xmath and @xmath respectively on @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
and @xmath . Then @xmath is positive definite on @xmath hence generates
a norm @xmath , and we define @xmath where closure is with respect to
@xmath . The map @xmath is continuous with respect to @xmath and so
@xmath extends to an orthogonal projection @xmath . As in the vector
valued case, we identify @xmath with @xmath and @xmath with a dense
subspace of @xmath .

Summarizing the discussion above:

-   @xmath is a real vector space corresponding to the Fourier
    transforms of @xmath restricted to the light cone @xmath . @xmath is
    a real vector space corresponding to the Fourier transforms of
    @xmath restricted to the light cone @xmath .

-   @xmath and @xmath are complex vector spaces.

-   @xmath and @xmath have a non-degenerate indefinite inner product
    @xmath , a positive definite inner product @xmath and non-degenerate
    symplectic forms @xmath and @xmath . Furthermore, @xmath and @xmath
    have a non-degenerate positive definite inner product @xmath and a
    non-degenerate symplectic form @xmath .

-   @xmath and @xmath correspond to the Fourier transformed smeared
    Jordan-Pauli distribution,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and are causal but @xmath is not causal.

-   @xmath and @xmath correspond to the closures of @xmath and @xmath
    respectively in @xmath respectively. There exists a unitary @xmath
    such that @xmath , @xmath preserves @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath ,
    @xmath .

-   @xmath and @xmath can be identified with @xmath and @xmath
    respectively, and so @xmath and @xmath are identified with dense
    subspaces of @xmath and @xmath respectively.

Pointwise multiplication of the components of vectors in @xmath and
@xmath by @xmath preserves @xmath , and so factors to @xmath and @xmath
. Hence we have that multiplication by @xmath is an unbounded operator
on @xmath which preserves the dense domain @xmath . Note that we need
the @xmath factor if we want multiplication by @xmath to preserve @xmath
. Similarly we have that pointwise multiplication by @xmath is an
unbounded operator on @xmath that preserves @xmath .

To analyze the Lorentz condition, we need the following notation:

###### Definition 4.1.2

Let @xmath be a measure space with positive measure @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath .

-    Let @xmath with components @xmath , @xmath . When @xmath we use the
    usual convention that @xmath is the @xmath -th component of @xmath
    for @xmath , and @xmath is the @xmath -th component of @xmath .

-    Let @xmath be measurable with respect to @xmath . Define:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and the multiplication operator @xmath by:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    for @xmath . Note that @xmath when @xmath .

-    Define the bounded functions @xmath by @xmath for @xmath and @xmath
    , where @xmath . Define @xmath by:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Then @xmath and @xmath @xmath . These are bounded since
    @xmath .

We now decompose @xmath :

###### Proposition 4.1.3

Define a map @xmath by:

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where we are summing over @xmath . That is,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Then @xmath is a projection on @xmath , @xmath is a projection and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath , @xmath . Furthermore @xmath , @xmath , and we have the
following decomposition of @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . Furthermore we have,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.10)
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where the above multiplications are understood to be a.e.

###### Proof.

For @xmath , we have that @xmath hence @xmath so the operator @xmath
defined by,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is bounded and so @xmath . Now for @xmath we get that @xmath from which
it follows that @xmath . As @xmath is real valued we have that @xmath .

Now as @xmath we have that @xmath is a projection and @xmath . The
explicit form of @xmath follows directly by calculating @xmath for
@xmath .

Since @xmath for @xmath , we have for @xmath that:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

hence @xmath . To prove the relations ( 4.10 ) we proceed as follows. By
definition,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

For the reverse inclusion let @xmath for some @xmath then we calculate:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

using again that @xmath for @xmath , hence @xmath .

The equality for @xmath follows from @xmath and the action of @xmath on
@xmath .

For the @xmath equality we take @xmath and let @xmath then,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and hence @xmath . For the reverse inclusion let @xmath and @xmath .
Then for all @xmath we have,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath            
  -- -------- -------- --

hence @xmath and hence @xmath .

For the @xmath equality we adapt the argument in [ 46 ] (p1193-1194).
Let @xmath then @xmath implies @xmath , hence

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Therefore if we let @xmath we get that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Also as @xmath this implies that @xmath , and so @xmath . The reverse
inclusion follows by direct verification of the orthogonality relations,
using the equalities in ( 4.10 ) already obtained. ∎

We would now like to obtain an analogous decomposition of the original
test function space @xmath . However we have the complication that for
@xmath with @xmath , the @xmath factor in @xmath poses the problem of
whether there exists @xmath such that @xmath due to differentiability
problems at @xmath . So it is not evident that @xmath preserves @xmath .
To deal with this, we extend @xmath to a more mathematically convenient
test function space dense in @xmath . Criteria that need to be taken
into account when extending are:

-   Poincaré invariance: The Poincaré transformations on @xmath are
    given by:

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (4.11)
      -- -------- -- --------

    which obvioulsy preserve @xmath . As @xmath for all @xmath we have
    that @xmath iff @xmath for all @xmath and hence @xmath factors to
    and preserves @xmath . We denote the factored transformations with
    the same symbol, hence we have that the Poincaré transformations
    preserve @xmath . Now we can use formula ( 4.11 ) to define the
    Poincaré transformations on any function in @xmath (and adding the
    appropriate ‘a.e.’). This is because @xmath maps @xmath to @xmath
    functions for all @xmath as @xmath is @xmath invariant for all
    @xmath . We require that any extension of @xmath will be preserved
    by all the Poincaré transformations so defined.

-   Causality: Causality of @xmath on @xmath means that for any @xmath
    with spacelike separated support, we have that @xmath . That is,
    spacelike separated support refers to the support of @xmath in
    @xmath -space rather that support of @xmath in @xmath -space. So to
    be able to give meaning to causality of @xmath on an extension of
    @xmath we will define the extension by first extending @xmath to an
    appropriate space for which the inverse Fourier transform exists,
    and then restrict this space to the light cone.

The following extension incorporates both these criteria and produces a
physically reasonable model for QEM after applying the BRST procedure in
Section 4.3 . Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and define the bounded functions:

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

and,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that:

-   @xmath .

-   @xmath where @xmath is the identity in @xmath .

-   @xmath for all @xmath as @xmath is bounded.

###### Remark 4.1.4

The space of Schwartz functions @xmath is an algebra with product
defined by pointwise multiplication, as follows from [ 88 ] Theorem IX.3
(a) and (b) p6 and the fact that @xmath is preserved by the Fourier
transform ( [ 88 ] Theorem X.1 p3) @xmath

###### Proposition 4.1.5

Let @xmath for @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Let:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

which is well defined as an algebra by Remark ( 4.1.4 ). Furthermore,
let

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Let @xmath where @xmath is given by:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and there is a summation over the repeated index @xmath .
Note that @xmath is bounded as @xmath for all @xmath .

Then:

-   @xmath , hence @xmath for all @xmath where @xmath is the inverse
    Fourier transform of @xmath .

-   @xmath for @xmath .

-   @xmath and @xmath for all @xmath .

-   @xmath and @xmath are self-adjoint projections such that @xmath and
    @xmath .

-   @xmath for @xmath and all @xmath where @xmath and @xmath are the
    projection from Proposition ( 4.1.3 ). Hence @xmath and @xmath
    preserve @xmath and @xmath .

###### Proof.

(i) and (ii): As @xmath we get that @xmath for all @xmath , @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath and all @xmath . As @xmath we get that the
components of elements in @xmath are in @xmath hence (i) follows.

Similarly @xmath for all @xmath and @xmath for all @xmath , @xmath and
all @xmath which implies (ii).

By [ 90 ] Theorem 9.6 p182 and that the Fourier transform is a unitary
in @xmath , we have @xmath .

(iii): Suppose @xmath . Then @xmath and as @xmath is preserved by the
Poincaré transformations, we get that @xmath is preserved by the
Poincaré transformations hence @xmath for all @xmath .

Let @xmath and @xmath @xmath with respect to the Lebesgue measure on
@xmath . Then @xmath @xmath with respect to the Lebesgue measure on
@xmath for all @xmath . Hence @xmath for all @xmath .

(iv): That @xmath is obvious from the definitions. As @xmath is a real
valued function,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

for all @xmath , and so @xmath is self-adjoint. We get that @xmath by
using @xmath and direct substitution in the defining formulas. We give
the calculation for the @xmath -th component:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The calculations for the other components are similar.

It follows from @xmath , @xmath and @xmath that @xmath is a self-adjoint
projection. As @xmath we get @xmath .

(v): Now @xmath for @xmath and so @xmath . Substituting this into the
defining formula for @xmath (equation ( 4.9 )) and substitution @xmath
for @xmath in the formula for @xmath we get that @xmath , e.g. for the
@xmath -th component,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Similarly @xmath . By (iv) @xmath , hence @xmath .

Let @xmath and @xmath @xmath with respect to the Lebesgue measure on
@xmath . Then,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where @xmath above is with respect to Lesbegue measure, where we used
that @xmath @xmath with respect to the Lesbegue measure on @xmath .
Therefore @xmath . As @xmath we also get @xmath . ∎

Given Proposition ( 4.1.5 ) (v) we get a decomposition of @xmath and
@xmath analogous to @xmath in Proposition ( 4.1.3 ).

###### Theorem 4.1.6

Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
              
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the projection on @xmath . Then:

-    We have the decompositions:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where @xmath denotes orthogonality with respect to the @xmath inner
    product on
    @xmath .

-    We have that @xmath and @xmath are all @xmath -null subspaces.

-   @xmath and @xmath . Also @xmath , and @xmath where @xmath .

###### Proof.

(i): As @xmath are projections on @xmath , we get for @xmath that @xmath
, so by Proposition ( 4.1.5 ) (v) we get the decompositions of @xmath
and @xmath . As @xmath we similarly get the decomposition of @xmath and
@xmath .

(ii): We have that @xmath follows from @xmath . From (i) we get @xmath
hence @xmath is a @xmath -null subspace. Similarly @xmath are all @xmath
-degenerate subspaces.

(iii): @xmath and @xmath follow as @xmath and @xmath .

Let @xmath . Then @xmath for some @xmath . By the definition of @xmath
in Proposition ( 4.1.5 ) that @xmath and hence @xmath for @xmath . Hence
@xmath and @xmath follows similarly. ∎

Lastly, we verify that extending @xmath by @xmath preserves causality.

###### Lemma 4.1.7

Let @xmath where @xmath is the inverse Fourier transform of @xmath , and
define @xmath for all @xmath . Let @xmath be such that @xmath and @xmath
have spacelike seperated supports, then @xmath . That is @xmath is
causal on @xmath .

###### Proof.

Proposition ( 4.1.5 ) (i) gives that @xmath is well defined. Let @xmath
be such that @xmath and @xmath have spacelike seperated supports. Now
@xmath implies that @xmath and @xmath with respect to the Lesbegue
measure on @xmath , which in turn implies that @xmath is real valued.
That is @xmath .

Using notation @xmath , we have by [ 88 ] Theorem IX.48 p107 that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath            
  -- -------- -------- --

where @xmath are symbolic notations for the Jordan-Pauli distribution
and advance Jordan-Pauli distributions ( @xmath and @xmath in [ 88 ]
notation), and the fourth equality follows as @xmath and @xmath have
spacelike seperated supports hence @xmath is given as integration
against the function @xmath given in [ 88 ] Theorem IX.48 (c). ∎

#### 4.1.2 Lorentz condition

The Lorentz condition of classical electromagnetism is @xmath , which is
well known to be problematic in the quantum context ( [ 98 ] ). Smearing
against @xmath gives:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where @xmath . Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and so @xmath corresponds to the smeared @xmath .

Now by Theorem ( 4.1.6 ) and the expression for @xmath in equation (
4.10 ) we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As we extend the test function space to @xmath in the following QEM
examples and so from the above expressions we associate @xmath with the
smeared @xmath . Similarly we will associate @xmath with extended
Lorentz condition when we are considering @xmath , the complexified
version of @xmath .

###### Remark 4.1.8

Note that,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is properly contained in @xmath , as shown in [ 46 ] p1193 remark 5.4
(ii). As the above set corresponds to the smeared Maxwell equations, we
see that the Maxwell conditions are a proper subset of the Lorentz
conditions. @xmath

#### 4.1.3 Ghost Test Functions

To construct the BRST superderivation we first need to choose the test
function space to use in the ghost algebra in Section 3.1.1 . Recall the
formal superderivation @xmath defined by equations ( 2.20 ), ( 2.21 ), (
2.22 ):

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Smearing equation ( 2.20 ) against @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath .

Smearing equation ( 2.21 ) is trivial.

Smearing equation ( 2.22 ) with @xmath gives:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is defined by @xmath .

These relations suggest using a scalar valued test function space
contained in @xmath to smear the heuristic fields @xmath and @xmath
against. While this is a plausible direction to take, if we consider the
expression for @xmath in lemma ( 4.1.3 ), then for @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the same as in the RHS of equation ( 4.12 ). So we see
that there is a connection between @xmath and the test functions on the
RHS of @xmath . We will make this connection explicit below in lemma (
4.1.12 ) where we show that there exists unitary @xmath where the
closure in @xmath is with respect to the norm defined below in
Proposition ( 4.1.11 ). As @xmath is unitary, the Ghost Algebra @xmath
will have the same CAR’s as if we constructed a Ghost Algebra using the
scalar test function space @xmath for the ghosts. We will use the Ghost
Algebra @xmath in the BRST extension below and show, after defining the
BRST superderivation as a map, that it gives the correct smeared
relations above, cf. the discussion after Definition ( 4.2.11 ).

Two reasons for prefering to smear the ghosts over the vector valued
function space @xmath rather than a scalar test function space as the
heuristics suggest are:

-   As @xmath corresponds to the smeared @xmath (Subsection ( 4.1.2 )),
    we get that using @xmath as the ghost algebra follows the philosophy
    of associating a ghost-conjugate ghost pair to each constraint.

-   Generalisation will be easier and we will use the constructions
    below for other examples where there is no corresponding scalar test
    funcion space @xmath , e.g. finite KO Abelian BRST in Subsection
    4.2.8 .

We now analyze the relation between @xmath and the scalar valued
function space @xmath as defined in Theorem ( 4.1.6 ) and give explicit
formulas that connect them.

###### Definition 4.1.9

-    Let @xmath and define

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (4.14)
      -- -------- -- --------

-    Let @xmath be defined by:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

###### Remark 4.1.10

-   Note that the containment @xmath is proper since for any @xmath with
    @xmath we have @xmath . Moreover, @xmath is dense in @xmath in the
    @xmath -topology by a simple approximation argument smooth bump
    functions with support outside outside an open set containing the
    origin.

-   We have that @xmath is well defined by the definition of @xmath and
    Theorem ( 4.1.6 ) (iii). That @xmath follows as @xmath for all
    @xmath which verified using the defining formula for @xmath above,
    @xmath for @xmath and the formula for the components of @xmath in
    Proposition ( 4.1.3 ).

@xmath

Let @xmath and @xmath be defined by @xmath . Then using equation ( 4.9 )
it is immediate that @xmath , that is @xmath maps the smearing function
for @xmath (cf. equation ( 4.12 )) to a function in @xmath . To use
@xmath as the test function space with which to smear the ghosts we
would like @xmath to have dense range and to be isometric so that ghost
algebras generated using test functions from @xmath or @xmath have
equivalent CAR’s. However it is straightforward to see that @xmath is
not isometric with respect to the @xmath norm on @xmath and @xmath norm
on @xmath . Hence we will define a new inner product on @xmath with
respect to which @xmath is isometric and has dense range in the closure
of @xmath with respect to this inner product.

###### Proposition 4.1.11

Let @xmath and define,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then:

-   @xmath is a positive ( @xmath ) and a Krein( @xmath ) self-adjoint
    operator with @xmath . Furthermore we have @xmath and @xmath on
    @xmath . Hence @xmath for @xmath .

-    Define a new inner product on @xmath by:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    We have that @xmath is positive definite and

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where @xmath denotes @xmath orthogonality. Let @xmath be the closure
    of @xmath with respect to this inner product, then:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where @xmath , @xmath and the closure is with respect to the @xmath
    topology.

-    We have that @xmath is @xmath -isometric on @xmath and @xmath
    extends to an @xmath -unitary operator on @xmath such that @xmath .
    Define an indefinite inner product on @xmath by:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    which makes @xmath into a Krein space. Furthermore @xmath , @xmath
    are neutral subspaces. We denote @xmath for @xmath for orthogonal
    projections on @xmath and note that @xmath we have @xmath , @xmath .

###### Proof.

(i):That @xmath on @xmath is obvious. We have that @xmath
-self-adjointness follows from Proposition 1 [ 87 ] p259. Hence @xmath .
@xmath as @xmath iff @xmath for @xmath , i.e. the multiplier function
@xmath only for a set of measure zero.

As @xmath is a multiplication operator of a polynomial in @xmath it
follows that @xmath and @xmath on @xmath .

(ii): As @xmath is positive, @xmath and @xmath , we get that @xmath is a
positive definite inner product on @xmath .

As @xmath , we get a @xmath -decomposition from @xmath .

(iii): As @xmath is @xmath -isometric on @xmath and @xmath , it follows
that @xmath is @xmath -isometric on @xmath . Therefore @xmath extends
isometrically to @xmath and it follows that this extension is @xmath
-unitary as @xmath . Hence @xmath is a Krein space by lemma ( 7.2.3 ).
Using @xmath on @xmath , that @xmath and that @xmath we get that @xmath
and hence @xmath and @xmath are @xmath -neutral spaces. ∎

The reason why we give @xmath a special symbol @xmath is that we want to
use the same notation for more general test function spaces below. We
show that @xmath is the appropriate ghost test function space:

###### Lemma 4.1.12

Let @xmath be defined as in Definition ( 4.1.9 ). Then @xmath is an
@xmath -isometric isomorphism (but is not @xmath -isometric) with @xmath
dense in @xmath . Hence it extends to a unitary @xmath . Furthermore,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

for all @xmath and,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.16)
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

###### Proof.

Let @xmath , then using @xmath on @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
                       
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and so @xmath is a @xmath -isometric (but not @xmath isometric).

We want to show that @xmath is dense in @xmath . By the definition of
@xmath we know that @xmath and we now show that @xmath . Let @xmath and
@xmath . Then as multplication by polynomials preserves Scwhartz space
and commutes with the operators @xmath it follows that @xmath . Now as
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath for @xmath , we get that @xmath where we have
summed over @xmath and we use Theorem ( 4.1.6 ) (iii). Therefore by the
definition of @xmath we get that @xmath . Using equation ( 4.9 ) it is
immediate that @xmath and so @xmath , hence @xmath .

As @xmath is @xmath -isometric and @xmath we get that it extends to a
unitary @xmath and so @xmath in the @xmath -topology.

The equation for the @xmath can be checked by direct calculation of
@xmath for @xmath using the definitions of @xmath and @xmath and that
@xmath for @xmath .

Equations ( 4.16 ) follow as @xmath for @xmath and for all @xmath
Proposition ( 4.1.3 ) gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and for all @xmath , @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we used @xmath . ∎

We will now show how @xmath connects the heuristic scalar ghosts in
Subsection 2.4.3 with the Ghost Algebra @xmath . Recall that the
heuristic ghost field was given by equation ( 2.16 ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath correspond to the creators and annihilators of
distinct scalar fermionic fields in @xmath -space (cf. equations ( 2.6
)). Accordingly, we would usually smear each of these scalar fields over
a separate copy of @xmath . However, by lemma ( 4.1.12 ) and @xmath , we
have the following unitary equivalences

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

using the unitaries @xmath and @xmath . So instead of using separate
copies of @xmath to smear the fields over, we use @xmath and @xmath and
identify the heuristic fermionic fields @xmath with the CAR algebra
@xmath and @xmath with @xmath . We combine these into the single
fermionic field @xmath . Explicitly, using equation ( 2.16 ) the smeared
the heuristic ghost field @xmath is:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath and we use equation ( 3.3 ) in the last
equality. Hence we define the smeared scalar ghost field by:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

(note that @xmath )

Also recall in formal BRST-QEM the second ghost field @xmath (equation (
2.17 )) which is not the conjugate ghost and does not anticommute with
@xmath , given by the formula:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Smearing we obtain:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath , @xmath and we used that @xmath is antilinear and @xmath
is linear in the fourth equality.

Hence we define the smeared second ghost field as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Remark 4.1.13

Note that @xmath for @xmath , hence @xmath where @xmath is the conjugate
ghost as defined in equation ( 3.7 ). Hence we see that we can recover
the second ghost field from the conjugate ghost field as stated in
Remark ( 2.4.1 ) (iii). @xmath

With the above definitions we get

###### Proposition 4.1.14

The definitions of the ghost fields in equation ( 4.18 ) and equation (
4.20 ) give that for all @xmath :

-   @xmath and @xmath .

-   @xmath .

-    The CAR’s:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where @xmath , where we recall @xmath is the inner product on @xmath
    ..

###### Proof.

(i): These follow from @xmath (cf. equation ( 3.3 )) and the defining
equation ( 4.18 ) and equation ( 4.20 ).

(ii): This follows by:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where the first equality used that @xmath is unitary, the second that
@xmath for all @xmath and the last that @xmath and @xmath .

(iii): Using the CAR’s given by equation ( 3.4 ), equation ( 4.18 ) and
the @xmath is isometric gives for @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we used @xmath , @xmath and @xmath in the last equality. Similarly
using @xmath we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Lastly we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we used that @xmath is isometric in the second equality. ∎

Note that @xmath is the Fourier transform of the Pauli-Jordan
distribution. That is, let @xmath and by a slight abuse of notation
denote @xmath by @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is given by equation ( 2.12 ).

Hence, comparing Proposition ( 4.1.14 ) with the formal equation ( 2.15
) and Remark ( 2.4.1 ) (iii) shows that the Ghost Algebra @xmath has the
correct anticommutation relations and ghost hermicity assignments when
using the identifications given by equation ( 4.18 ) and equation ( 4.20
). Therefore we are justified using @xmath as the Ghost Algebra for QEM.

The formal smeared formula for @xmath in equation ( 4.12 ) and equation
( 4.13 ) will be connected below to the well-defined construction of
QEM-BRST in Subsection 4.2.4 .

### 4.2 Fock-Krein BRST

#### 4.2.1 Fock-Krein CCR’s

We now give an account of the smeared Fock-Krein CCR’s, which follows
the treatment as given in [ 75 , 46 ] .

Assume @xmath is a Krein space with Hilbert inner product @xmath
indefinite inner product @xmath and fundamental symmetry @xmath . The
Bose-Fock space @xmath of the Hilbert space @xmath is a Krein space with
respect to the indefinite inner product @xmath , cf. lemma ( 7.2.3 ).

We define the creators and annihilators on the finite particle space
@xmath with respect to the Krein inner product, as in [ 75 ] . That is
we define the creation and annihilation operators as usual, except for
the replacement of the Hilbert inner product @xmath on the 1-particle
space @xmath with the Krein inner product @xmath . On the symmetric
@xmath -particle space @xmath they are, for @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.21)
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the symmetrization projection on @xmath . Note that on
@xmath , @xmath is the Krein adjoint of @xmath (analogous to the usual
@xmath -adjoint case).

###### Lemma 4.2.1

Let @xmath for @xmath as above. Then for all @xmath :

-    We have,

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (4.22)
      -- -------- -- --------

    where @xmath is the adjoint of @xmath with respect to the Hilbert
    inner product @xmath on @xmath .

-    We have,

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (4.23)
         @xmath      
      -- -------- -- --------

###### Proof.

(i): Let @xmath on @xmath . Then by equations ( 4.21 ) and @xmath ,
@xmath is the usual annihilator with respect to the Hilbert inner
product on @xmath . Hence @xmath on @xmath .

(ii): These follow from (i) and the standard commutation relations for
smeared Fock space creators and annihilators as in [ 16 ] p8-p10. ∎

We now define the Krein @xmath -symmetric field operators as

###### Definition 4.2.2

Let

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The field algebra is then the non-normed @xmath -algebra @xmath which
preserves the common dense domain @xmath .

With these definition we get all the properties in [ 75 ] section 4,
Theorem 1.

###### Theorem 4.2.3

We have for @xmath , @xmath :

1.   The operator @xmath is closable ,

2.  @xmath is a set of analytic vectors for @xmath ,

3.   If @xmath and @xmath then,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

4.   The vacuum vector @xmath is cyclic with respect to @xmath .

5.  @xmath

6.   We have,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where @xmath for all @xmath .

###### Proof.

The first four statements are proved in [ 75 ] Theorem 1. The fifth is
immediate from the definition. The commutation relations ( 4.23 ) give,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

∎

###### Remark 4.2.4

-   From Theorem ( 4.2.3 ), ( 5 ) @xmath is @xmath -symmetric if and
    only if @xmath .

-   If we let @xmath with inner products and symplectic form @xmath as
    in Section 4.1 , then @xmath corresponds to the smeared gauge
    potentials for QEM.

@xmath

#### 4.2.2 KO Abelian BRST test function space

The BRST model we develop below will be able to be used for other
abelian bosonic theories e.g.: the case of a finite number of
Krein-symmetric bosonic constraints as in Subsection 4.2.8 and H&T [ 55
] p313-316, and also for the case of Massive Abelian Gauge Theory as in
Subsection 4.3.2 and [ 92 ] p28. We will prefer to use a general test
function space in the @xmath -algebraic theory (Chapter 5 ). Hence we
will not assume the specific QEM test function space as above, but
instead use a general test function space with useful structures
(already present on the QEM test function space). We refer to this as
the KO  test funtion space.

1.  Let @xmath be a non-degenerate real symplectic space with symplectic
    form @xmath , and suppose there exists two idempotents, @xmath on
    @xmath such that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    We let @xmath . Note that @xmath , and that @xmath .

2.  Let @xmath have the decomposition:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where @xmath , @xmath and @xmath is the degenerate part of @xmath .
    As @xmath is symplectic we get that, @xmath is the degenerate part
    of @xmath . Denote the algebraic projections onto @xmath as @xmath
    where @xmath . Note that @xmath denotes the algebraic direct sum,
    and that @xmath . We will call @xmath with the above structure the
    covariant symplectic space and @xmath the covariant symplectic form
    . This terminology is motivated by the fact that the Poincaré
    transformations in subsection ( 4.3.1 ) are symplectic with respect
    to the corresponding QEM test function space.

3.  Define a second symplectic form:

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (4.24)
      -- -------- -- --------

    on @xmath , and note that @xmath is also @xmath -symplectic. We call
    a symplectic space with structure such as @xmath , where @xmath is
    related to the covariant form via @xmath , the auxiliary symplectic
    space and the form the auxiliary symplectic form .

4.  Let @xmath be a complex structure of type @xmath (cf. [ 63 ] p327
    but where the roles of @xmath and @xmath are reversed), i.e. @xmath
    is a symplectic operator on @xmath such that:

    1.  @xmath

    2.  @xmath and for any @xmath , @xmath , where equality holds if and
        only if @xmath

    Suppose further that @xmath for @xmath . We define scalar
    multiplication and a complex IIP on @xmath by,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    We denote the complexified @xmath as @xmath . As @xmath and @xmath
    and @xmath on @xmath we have that @xmath is isometric and @xmath on
    @xmath . Due to property ( 4b ) we see that,

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (4.25)
      -- -------- -- --------

    is a positive definite inner product on @xmath , and so @xmath is a
    pre-Hilbert space. Denote the closure of @xmath with respect to
    @xmath as @xmath . As @xmath is isometric and @xmath on @xmath , it
    follows that @xmath extends to a unitary on @xmath such that @xmath
    . Hence by lemma ( 7.2.3 ), @xmath extends to @xmath and @xmath is a
    Krein space. Note that the covariant and auxiliary symplectic forms
    extend to @xmath via @xmath on @xmath and equation ( 4.24 ).

    ###### Remark 4.2.5
    Note that for the QEM test function space we have a different sign
    convention in the correspondence between the symplectic form and
    inner product, i.e. we have @xmath . We have done this to satisfy
    the correspondence with the Jordan-Pauli distribution and to mantain
    the convention of the second argument in the inner product @xmath
    being linear. In the abstract case we have used the usual convention
    to avoid confusion in the many calculations in the following
    Chapters below. To get the explicit correspondence of the QEM test
    function space with the KO Abelian BRST test function space, let
    @xmath where the @xmath subscript correspondends to the Jordan-Pauli
    symplectic form and @xmath to the abstract @xmath symplectic form.
    @xmath

    Let @xmath for @xmath .

    ###### Lemma 4.2.6
    We have:

    -    The decomposition:

          -- -------- -- --------
             @xmath      (4.26)
          -- -------- -- --------

        where @xmath denotes @xmath -orthogonal sum, and @xmath , @xmath
        .

    -    Let @xmath in the norm coming from @xmath . Then

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

        where @xmath where @xmath . Furthermore @xmath extend to @xmath
        -orthogonal projections and @xmath .

    ###### Proof.
    (i): For @xmath , @xmath implies @xmath , and we get the
    decomposition in equation ( 4.26 ) as an algebraic direct sum, and
    that @xmath is the @xmath -isotropic part of @xmath . To prove
    orthogonality, note @xmath implies @xmath and @xmath , hence,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and @xmath . As @xmath preserves @xmath we have by the definitions
    of the inner products that @xmath with respect to @xmath . Hence
    @xmath in equation ( 4.26 ) is an @xmath -orthogonal sum.

    (ii): The decomposition of @xmath is obvious. As @xmath we get that
    @xmath hence @xmath extend to the orthogonal projections on @xmath
    and @xmath . As @xmath is bounded we get @xmath by (i) and so @xmath
    on @xmath . ∎

    Hence we we see that @xmath have the same decompositions as in QEM
    test function case (cf. Theorem ( 4.1.6 ) ) with respect to the
    definite and indefinite inner products, and symplectic forms.

5.  We define the ghost test function space as follows.

    ###### Definition 4.2.7
    Let @xmath be a possibly unbounded positive (w.r.t. @xmath ) and
    Krein (w.r.t. @xmath ) self-adjoint operator with domain @xmath ,
    @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . Suppose further that @xmath on @xmath .
    Define a new inner product on @xmath :

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    As @xmath is strictly positive, @xmath , and @xmath , we get that
    @xmath is a positive definite inner product on @xmath . As @xmath ,
    we get that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where @xmath signifies @xmath -orthogonality.

    ###### Lemma 4.2.8
    Let @xmath be the closure of @xmath with respect to @xmath . Then:

    -   @xmath is a Hilbert space and we have:

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

        where @xmath for @xmath and the closure is with respect to the
        @xmath -topology.

    -   @xmath extends to a unitary on @xmath such that @xmath is a
        Krein space where

          -- -------- --
             @xmath   
          -- -------- --

    -    We have that @xmath are neutral subspaces of @xmath with
        respect to @xmath .

    ###### Proof.
    (i):Obvious as @xmath is positive definite on @xmath .

    (ii): Now @xmath is @xmath -isometric and @xmath and @xmath on
    @xmath , hence @xmath is @xmath -isometric and invertible on @xmath
    , hence extends to a unitary on @xmath . That @xmath is a Krein
    space, follows from lemma ( 7.2.3 ).

    ∎

    We will use the same notation @xmath for the adjoint of an operator
    @xmath with respect to the inner products @xmath and @xmath ,
    explicitly making note of the inner product where confusion may
    arise. Similarly for @xmath where @xmath .

    We denote @xmath for @xmath for orthogonal projections on @xmath .
    Note that for @xmath we have @xmath , @xmath . Also as @xmath on
    @xmath we have that the @xmath -adjoints of @xmath with respect to
    @xmath and @xmath coincide on @xmath for @xmath . Similarly for the
    @xmath -adjoints with respect to @xmath and @xmath .

A useful lemma for the future,

###### Lemma 4.2.9

Given @xmath we have,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Expand @xmath and @xmath in terms of @xmath and @xmath and collect the
terms. ∎

#### 4.2.3 BRST Extension

We next define the BRST-extension of this system (as in Chapter 3 ).
Assume that we have a one-particle test function space @xmath with the
structures in Subsection 4.2.2 . Recall that @xmath and take the
Fock-Krein CCR algebra @xmath as in Subsection 4.2.1 with one particle
Krein space @xmath . Take the Fock representation of the ghost algebra
with one-particle space @xmath (cf. Definiton ( 3.1.22 )). We are
assuming the full ghost algebra here and so will have integer valued
ghost spaces.

Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and we have used notation of Section 3.3 . Then:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the algebraic tensor product of @xmath and @xmath , i.e.
the linear span in of the elementary tensors in @xmath .

Let @xmath where @xmath and @xmath are the cyclic vacuum vectors for
@xmath and @xmath respectively. Denote the Hilbert inner product on
@xmath by @xmath and Krein inner product by @xmath , where @xmath ,
where we have used the @xmath subscripts on the @xmath ’s to denote if
they are the second quantization of @xmath . We use the subscript @xmath
to avoid confusion with the one particle inner products.

Then the BRST field algebra is the algebraic tensor product,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where which acts on @xmath . Then @xmath has the gradings described in
Section 3.3 .

###### Remark 4.2.10

Important points to keep track of for the remainder of Chapter 4 are:

-   The 1-particle indefinite inner product for the bosonic fields is
    @xmath while the 1-particle indefinite inner product on the ghost
    fields is @xmath .

-   For subalgebras @xmath and @xmath , @xmath denotes the algebraic
    tensor product and does not assume any topology. @xmath -algebraic
    tensor products will be used in Chapter 5 .

@xmath

#### 4.2.4 Superderivation

We now want to make a well-defined version of the BRST superderivation
that models the formal example BRST-QEM as in Section 2.4 . To define
the superderivation we proceed with a method similar to [ 17 ] Section
4. First define a map @xmath on the generating elements of @xmath by:

###### Definition 4.2.11

We define a map on the generating elementary tensors of @xmath by:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

This map extends to a superderivation on @xmath as proved below in
Theorem ( 4.2.15 ). Before we proceed we have to show that @xmath
defined above is a smeared version of the formal superderivation in the
case of QEM. That is, where we identify the data @xmath , @xmath with
the objects with the same labels as in Subsection 4.1.1 .

Recall that by Proposition ( 4.1.14 ), we identified the Ghost Algebra
@xmath with the formal scalar ghosts via:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath , where @xmath is the unitary given in lemma ( 4.1.12 ).
Also recall for @xmath , lemma ( 4.1.12 ) gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Therefore, using the definition of
@xmath (Definition ( 4.2.11 )) we calculate,

  --------------------------- -------- -------- -- --
                              @xmath   @xmath      
  and for the ghost algebra                        
                              @xmath   @xmath      
                              @xmath   @xmath      
                                       @xmath      
                                       @xmath      
  --------------------------- -------- -------- -- --

Restricting to @xmath and @xmath and by a slight abuse of notation,
denoting @xmath and @xmath by @xmath and @xmath , for @xmath , @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

If we compare the above with the formal superderivation @xmath defined
by equations ( 2.20 ), ( 2.21 ), ( 2.22 ):

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and consider the ghost smearing formulas given in equation ( 4.19 ) and
equation ( 4.17 ), then we see that these are the correct smeared
relations for @xmath . Hence we see that Definition ( 4.2.11 ) gives the
correct mathematically well-defined relations.

###### Remark 4.2.12

Note that we could have used a scalar test function space in Definition
( 4.2.11 ), but this will make calculations below much more cumbersome
and obscure the fact the KO Abelian BRST is really a constraint theory
that uses test function spaces with structures such as @xmath with
neutral subspace @xmath which corresponds to the smearing functions for
the constraint set. @xmath

Now that we have checked that the map @xmath agrees with the formal
superderivation for QEM on the generating tensors, we want to show that
@xmath extends to a superderivation on all of @xmath . So we return to
the general context of the data @xmath , @xmath as in Subsection 4.2.2 .

###### Lemma 4.2.13

Let @xmath be a finite @xmath -orthonormal basis of a subspace @xmath .
Define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then:

-   @xmath is Krein symmetric, and 2-nilpotent.

-    We have

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Furthermore @xmath is independent of the choice of basis @xmath of
    @xmath .

###### Proof.

(i): Krein symmetry is obvious. Now @xmath is a neutral space in both
the respective indefinite inner product’s on @xmath and @xmath , so it
follows that,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath . Note that this also implies that @xmath . Using these we
get,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

(ii): Using @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath for all @xmath
, then in terms of creators and annihilators we have,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

As orthonormal bases of @xmath are related by unitary matrices, it
follows directly from the above formula that @xmath is independent of
the choice of basis @xmath . ∎

Now we have the following superderviations on @xmath :

###### Lemma 4.2.14

Let @xmath be a finite @xmath -orthonormal basis of @xmath . Define the
superderivaton @xmath by:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then we have:

-    For @xmath , @xmath and @xmath we get,

      -- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- --

-    For @xmath , @xmath we get,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    i.e. in this case @xmath coincides with the map in Definition (
    4.2.11 ).

###### Proof.

(i): These follow easily by writing everything in terms of creators and
annihilators via lemma ( 4.2.13 ) and direct calculation. We give the
calculation for @xmath . Let @xmath and @xmath , then

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where the fourth used @xmath and @xmath , and the last used @xmath for
all @xmath .

The identity for @xmath follows similarly but with the @xmath factor
appearing as @xmath for @xmath .

(ii): Let @xmath . Then as @xmath is an orthonormal basis for @xmath we
get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and for @xmath we get @xmath as @xmath . The result follows from (i). ∎

Using this we have that

###### Theorem 4.2.15

There is a superderivation @xmath with respect to the @xmath -grading on
@xmath as described in Section 3.3 , which coincides with @xmath in
Definition ( 4.2.11 ) on the generating @xmath . Furthermore @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be any finite dimensional subspace and consider the
subalgebra,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Every elementary tensor @xmath is in @xmath for some @xmath . Hence
lemma ( 4.2.14 ) (ii) gives that @xmath for all @xmath and this @xmath .
As elements @xmath are finite polynomials in the elementary tensors, we
see that @xmath given by definition ( 4.2.11 ) extends to a
superderivation on @xmath .

Also @xmath (cf. lemma ( 4.2.14 ) (i)) implies @xmath . ∎

###### Remark 4.2.16

Note that the appearance of the @xmath appears in @xmath , is due to the
fact that on the ghost space we are using the inner product @xmath .

@xmath

#### 4.2.5 BRST charge

We want to construct @xmath such that @xmath generates @xmath . Once
this is done we can connect to results in Section 3.2 such as the @xmath
-decomposition, and Section 3.3 such as the extended algebra @xmath and
Theorem ( 3.3.11 ). First a useful lemma,

###### Lemma 4.2.17

Let @xmath be a finite dimensional subspace of @xmath . Then there
exists an @xmath -orthonormal basis @xmath of @xmath where @xmath such
that @xmath is a @xmath -orthonormal basis of @xmath ,

###### Proof.

As @xmath is positive, we have that @xmath defines a positive quadratic
form (cf. [ 16 ] p27) on @xmath . Therefore we have that there exists a
positive self adjoint operator @xmath such that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

for @xmath . As @xmath , we get that @xmath . Now @xmath is a self
adjoint operator on a finite dimensional space @xmath and so has a
complete set of orthonormal eigenvectors @xmath that span @xmath . By (
4.27 ) we see that @xmath is the basis we are looking for. ∎

###### Remark 4.2.18

Note that as @xmath does not in general preserve the finite dimensional
subspace @xmath , @xmath in the above proof need not be equal to @xmath
. @xmath

Now define:

###### Lemma 4.2.19

Let @xmath be a finite dimensional subspace of @xmath , let @xmath be an
@xmath -orthonormal basis of @xmath , and let,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

by the algebra generated by the above creation operators. Furthermore
let,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the cyclic vacuum vector for @xmath . Then

-   @xmath and @xmath do not depend on the choice of @xmath , and so we
    will only use the @xmath subscript when we want to emphasize the
    basis we are using in a proof.

-    For all @xmath there exists a finite dimensional subspace @xmath
    such that @xmath . Moreover

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

-   @xmath where @xmath is the fundamental symmetry on @xmath .

###### Proof.

(i): Follows as @xmath is finite dimensional and @xmath and @xmath are
linear.

(ii): Let @xmath . Then @xmath where @xmath is a polynomial of a finite
number of creators @xmath and @xmath where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . As
@xmath we can choose a finite dimensional subspace @xmath such that
@xmath contains all the arguments of the creators and annihilator in the
polynomial @xmath . Hence @xmath and @xmath .

(iii): We have @xmath for @xmath , @xmath for @xmath and @xmath and
@xmath . As @xmath it follows that @xmath , hence as @xmath we get that
@xmath . ∎

We want to define @xmath so that it is independent of a basis of @xmath
.

###### Lemma 4.2.20

Let @xmath be finite dimensional subspaces of @xmath then:

-    For all @xmath

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

-   @xmath and @xmath .

###### Proof.

(i): Take @xmath , and suppose that @xmath . Now by lemma( 4.2.17 ),
take an @xmath -orthonormal basis @xmath of @xmath such that it is also
a @xmath -orthogonal basis for @xmath , and take an @xmath -orthonormal
basis @xmath of @xmath such that it is also a @xmath -orthogonal basis
for @xmath . Therefore @xmath is an @xmath -orthonormal basis and @xmath
-orthogonal basis for @xmath . Now,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.28)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

By the way we chose @xmath we have that @xmath and @xmath for @xmath ,
@xmath . So as @xmath where @xmath , we see that we can (anti-)commute
all the terms in the RHS of ( 4.28 ) through the terms in @xmath to
@xmath , which they annihilate. Therefore

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(ii): Let @xmath . Then @xmath where @xmath , and so using the
(anti)commutation relations for @xmath and @xmath (cf. ( 4.23 ) and (
3.1 )) and that the annihilators annihilate @xmath , we have @xmath .
Also we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we have used lemma ( 4.2.19 ) (iii) and @xmath on @xmath (cf.
lemma( 4.2.13 ) (i)). ∎

Using this lemma we construct the BRST charge @xmath .

###### Theorem 4.2.21

Let @xmath , let @xmath be a finite dimensional subspace of @xmath such
that @xmath , and define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then @xmath extends to well defined operator with domain @xmath and:

-   @xmath preserves @xmath , is Krein symmetric (hence closable by
    Proposition ( 7.2.4 )) and @xmath for all @xmath .

-   @xmath is Krein symmetric (hence closable) and preserves @xmath and
    @xmath for all @xmath . Hence @xmath has dsp -decomposition (cf.
    Theorem ( 3.2.1 ))

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

-   @xmath for all @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath , then by lemma ( 4.2.19 ) (ii) we have there exists a finite
dimensional subspace @xmath such that @xmath , and so @xmath . We check
that @xmath is independent of the choice of this @xmath . Suppose that
@xmath is another finite dimensional subspace such that @xmath and
suppose that @xmath where @xmath is a finite dimensional subspace of
@xmath . Then by lemma ( 4.2.20 )

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and so @xmath is independent of the choice of this @xmath . That @xmath
extends to a well defined linear operator on @xmath is now obvious.

(i): Let @xmath . Then @xmath for some finite dimensional subspace of
@xmath . So we have that @xmath , hence @xmath . Furthermore by lemma (
4.2.20 ) (ii) we have that @xmath hence @xmath , and @xmath is @xmath
-symmetric as @xmath is for all finite dimensional subspace @xmath .
Also, @xmath is closable by Proposition ( 7.2.4 ).

(ii) and (iii) now follow from lemma ( 3.3.1 ) and Theorem ( 3.2.1 ). ∎

#### 4.2.6 State space

By Theorem ( 4.2.21 ) (ii) @xmath and @xmath satisfy the conditions of
the dsp -decomposition (Theorem ( 3.2.1 )). We want to be able to
calculate @xmath explictly since @xmath via the natural isomporphism
@xmath in lemma ( 3.2.7 ) (ii). Also to use Theorem ( 3.3.11 ), we need
to extend @xmath to @xmath to include the above projections, etc, as in
lemma ( 3.3.3 ). For this, we need the following decomposition of @xmath
:

###### Lemma 4.2.22

-   @xmath has the decomposition

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

-    We have

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where @xmath is the projection onto @xmath for @xmath .

###### Proof.

(i): Let @xmath , then by lemma ( 4.2.19 ) (ii) there exists a finite
dimensional subspace @xmath such that @xmath where @xmath . Hence it
suffices to show that for all monomials of generating tensors @xmath we
have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We drop the tensor product @xmath notation for the remainder of the
proof.

Case 1:

Now by lemma ( 4.2.17 ), we can choose an @xmath -orthonormal basis
@xmath of @xmath such that @xmath is also a @xmath -orthogonal basis of
@xmath . Suppose that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where

-   @xmath ,

-   @xmath . Note that the arguments of the @xmath ’s may be repeated,
    but that the arguments of the @xmath ’s may not as the CAR’s imply
    @xmath for all @xmath .

-   @xmath and @xmath ,

-   We use the convention that @xmath means that there are no
    corresponding creator terms in the monomial @xmath .

That is @xmath is a monomial of ‘ @xmath -unphysical creators’.

Now motivated by the formal calculation of @xmath in equation ( 2.40 )
we calculate as follows, where we rely heavily on the (anti)commutation
relations for @xmath and @xmath (cf. ( 4.23 ) and ( 3.1 )) and that the
@xmath ’s and @xmath ’s commute:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now @xmath and hence,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.30)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where the second equality can be checked by expanding the respective
brackets and the third follows from the (anti)commutation relations for
@xmath and @xmath (cf. ( 4.23 ) and ( 3.1 )), the @xmath -orthonormality
and @xmath -orthogonality of @xmath , and the unitarity of @xmath .

Now by the definition of @xmath (Theorem ( 4.2.21 )) and lemma ( 4.2.20
) we have that @xmath . By lemma ( 4.2.19 ) (ii) and (iii) it follows
that @xmath . Hence, by Theorem ( 4.2.21 ) (ii) and lemma ( 7.2.1 ) it
follows that @xmath on @xmath . Furthermore, @xmath (cf. lemma ( 4.2.19
) (iii)), hence we have that @xmath . We calculate,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (4.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a @xmath -orthonormal basis of @xmath .

Note that the above formula looks similar to a number operator but with
the @xmath factors. This motivates the following calculation. Let @xmath
and suppose that @xmath has @xmath creators @xmath where @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we calculated similar as for number operators in the last equality
using the CCR’s (cf. equation ( 4.23 )). We also have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we used the CAR’s (cf. equation ( 3.1 )) @xmath , that @xmath is
an orthonormal basis of @xmath and that @xmath can have at most one
@xmath term with the identity being trivial when there is no @xmath .

Using equation ( 4.32 ) and equation ( 4.33 ), the similar equations for
the orthonormal basis @xmath of @xmath , and that @xmath and @xmath we
can calculate using equation ( 4.31 ),

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is some positive constant. Therefore we have,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

Case 2:

Suppose @xmath is a monomial of @xmath ’s with arguments in @xmath ,
then @xmath . By ( 4.30 ) we also see that @xmath .

Combining Case 1 and Case 2 gives that for any monomial @xmath we have
that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

hence, as dicsussed at the beginning of the proof, @xmath has the
decomposition we require.

(ii): Immediate from (i). ∎

###### Remark 4.2.23

-   The calculation in equation ( 4.31 ) is the rigorous version of the
    formal equation ( 2.40 ). This is the equation that shows that the
    ghosts are removed in the final physical space @xmath in BRST-QEM
    case, and is the crucial calculation in showing that BRST gives the
    correct physical results for QEM below, e.g. Theorem ( 4.2.27 ).

-   Also @xmath is assumed to follow in a slightly different context in
    [ 61 ] Proposition 6 p203 in a very similar manner to lemma ( 4.2.22
    ). The difference with the approach taken in [ 61 ] is that only
    representations of the algebra @xmath is considered rather than the
    whole algebra @xmath which will correspond to the smeared gauge
    potentials in the BRST-QEM example.

@xmath

Using this we can calculate @xmath .

###### Corollary 4.2.24

-    We have,

      -- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- --

-    If @xmath is the factor map then,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where the above isometric isomorphism is given by @xmath . Moreover,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where the above isometric isomorphism is also given by @xmath .

-    If @xmath then @xmath where @xmath is the fundamental symmetry on
    @xmath . That is the physicality condition given by equation ( 3.29
    ) holds.

###### Proof.

(i): From lemma ( 4.2.22 ) we have,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As @xmath and @xmath are closed we have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and so, as @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

(ii): Obvious.

(iii): If @xmath we have that @xmath on @xmath . Therefore @xmath . ∎

#### 4.2.7 Physical algebra

By lemma ( 4.2.22 ) and lemma ( 3.3.3 ) we can extend the @xmath
-grading from @xmath to @xmath and extend the domain @xmath to @xmath as
done in Section 3.3 . To investigate the BRST operator cohomology,
recall that from Theorem ( 3.3.11 ) we have an algebra isomorphism:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

To calculate this we need make some definitions. Let,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath is a subspace of @xmath . Note that @xmath . Now recall that
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath (cf. Subsection 4.2.3 ). Define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and note that @xmath , and @xmath , since @xmath .

Now let,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that @xmath is not a @xmath -algebra and @xmath . Furthermore, it
is not hard to see that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Remark 4.2.25

We need to include @xmath in RHS above, otherwise we can’t (anti)commute
elements and we don’t get a @xmath -algebra. This is not done in [ 60 ]
p1321 for the 1-cell case, and is why the authors have the result that
@xmath which is Theorem 1 of that paper. This is not to say that the
result in [ 60 ] is wrong, just that the domain of @xmath is in that
paper is not the whole field algebra @xmath . @xmath

###### Lemma 4.2.26

We have:

-    Let @xmath and @xmath , and @xmath . Then

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

-    For all @xmath there exists @xmath such that,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

###### Proof.

(i): First note that by normal ordering, we can write @xmath where
@xmath , @xmath . Now @xmath , so we get that @xmath where @xmath , and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now we calculate,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where we used that @xmath and @xmath on @xmath .

(ii): Let @xmath , where @xmath . @xmath and @xmath . Then we have that
for all @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where we have used that @xmath on @xmath for the first line and (i) for
the second. Now if we let @xmath and @xmath , then it is clear from the
above calculation that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As all elements in @xmath are of the form of @xmath we are done. ∎

From the above lemma

###### Theorem 4.2.27

We have,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the above algebra isomorphism is as given in Theorem ( 3.3.11 ).

###### Proof.

Take @xmath , @xmath @xmath . Then by lemma ( 4.2.26 ) (ii) we have that
there exists @xmath such that,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By Corollary ( 4.2.24 ) @xmath , hence by the above identity @xmath . As
@xmath is a polynomial in creators and annihilators over @xmath , we get
that @xmath by the definition of @xmath (cf. Definition ( 4.2.11 )) and
@xmath .

Hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the last equality follows from @xmath and @xmath . By Theorem (
3.3.11 ) the result follows. ∎

#### 4.2.8 Example: Finite KO Abelian BRST

The following example is KO Abelian BRST for a finite number of bosonic
constraints. The corresponding test function spaces for the fields and
the ghosts for this situation are as follows:

-   Let

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    be an abstract test function space with all the structures as in
    Subsection ( 4.2.2 ), and with @xmath where @xmath . It is easy to
    see that such test function spaces exist if we recall the
    construction in lemma ( 3.1.1 ). In particular, @xmath has positive
    definite inner product @xmath giving @xmath for @xmath and

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Also there exists a fundamental symmetry @xmath such that @xmath is
    a Krein space, where @xmath . Furthermore @xmath and @xmath .

-   For the ghost test function space let @xmath and so as @xmath we
    have @xmath where @xmath is defined as in Subsection ( 4.2.2 ).

Using the constructions and results of previous sections we construct
the BRST extension, superderivation and charge and calculate @xmath and
easily @xmath for this @xmath .

###### Proposition 4.2.28

Let @xmath and @xmath be as above. Then:

-    Let @xmath be an orthonormal basis for @xmath . Then

      -- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- --

-    We have @xmath where the isomorphism is given as in Corollary (
    4.2.24 ), and @xmath where the isomorphism is as in Theorem ( 4.2.27
    ).

-    If @xmath then @xmath and @xmath , i.e. we have a trivial theory.

###### Proof.

(i): As @xmath is finite dimensional we let @xmath and it follows from
Theorem ( 4.2.21 ) that @xmath . The first formula for @xmath is then
the defining formula for @xmath , the second comes from lemma ( 4.2.13 )
(ii).

(ii): Follows by Corrollary ( 4.2.24 ) and Theorem ( 4.2.27 ).

(iii): Let @xmath . Then @xmath and so by (ii) @xmath . Futhermore,
@xmath and so (ii) gives @xmath . ∎

###### Remark 4.2.29

-   Proposition ( 4.2.28 ) (iii) ( i.e. @xmath ) corresponds to H&T [ 55
    ] p313-316 (though the operator algebra is not calculated here), and
    [ 60 ] though with the different result that @xmath . This also
    answers in the affirmative the conjecture at the end of [ 60 ] ,
    i.e. the dsp -decomposition can be used to efficiently calculate the
    physical algebra @xmath (cf. Remark ( 3.3.13 ) (ii)).

-   Also note that while the formula for @xmath looks cosmetically very
    similar to that given for abelian Hamiltionian BRST there are key
    differences:

    1.  We have that @xmath , and @xmath for @xmath , hence we get that
        @xmath if we were to assume that these were constraints. This is
        why the Gupta-Bleuler approach is used in the Dirac constraint
        version of QEM.

    2.  The @xmath ’s are Krein symmetric, but not Hilbert symmetric.
        This effects the calculation of @xmath in equation ( 2.33 ) and
        this is why we do not have the result that @xmath as may be
        expected (wrongly) from the abelian Hamiltionian BRST example
        (c.f equation ( 2.34 )).

    3.  We did not use the Berezin representation of the restricted
        ghost algebra. We used the Ghost algebra that comes from
        smearing the CAR creators and annihilators over the appropriate
        test function space.

@xmath

We see that finite KO Abelian BRST differs from Hamiltonian BRST in
several significant ways.

### 4.3 Electromagnetism

Now that we have constructed the appropriate well-defined BRST
structures, we substitute the QEM test function space @xmath and ghost
test function space @xmath (cf. Subsection ( 4.1.1 ) and Subsection (
4.1.3 )) to calculate the BRST physical space and BRST physical algebra
for BRST-QEM and compare this to Gupta-Bleuler QEM as done in Section
5.6.

Recall for QEM:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath (cf. ( 4.10 )).

###### Proposition 4.3.1

We have that:

-    The physical state space for BRST-QEM is:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where the above isomorphisms are as Corrollary ( 4.2.24 ).

-    The physical algebra for BRST-QEM is:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where the isomorphism as in Theorem ( 4.2.27 ).

-    The physicality condition @xmath holds where @xmath is the
    fundamental symmetry for the Krein space @xmath (cf. Definition (
    3.2.10 ) and Subsection 4.2.3 ). Hence the Hilbert and Krein inner
    products coincide on @xmath , i.e. @xmath . Moreover, the Krein
    @xmath -adjoint on @xmath corresponds to the Hilbert @xmath
    -adjoint.

By the expression for @xmath above, the BRST physical space and algebra
correspond to the transversal photons and have Hilbert inner product and
adjoint respectively.

###### Proof.

(i): By Corollary ( 4.2.24 ) (ii).

(ii): By Theorem ( 4.2.27 ).

(iii): By equation ( 4.10 ) we have that @xmath hence by Corollary (
4.2.24 ) (iii) the physicality condition @xmath holds. By lemma ( 3.2.7
) (iii) the inner product is positive definite and by lemma ( 3.3.8 )
(ii) the Krein @xmath -adjoint on @xmath corresponds to the Hilbert
@xmath -adjoint. ∎

We compare this to QEM using Gupta-Bleuler constraints as done in
Section 5.6. A technicality in making this comparison is that defines
the unconstrained fields on Fock-Krein space with 1-particle test
function space @xmath rather than @xmath that we have been using (see
Subsection 4.1 ). We assume that this technicality is only a minor
difference due to @xmath , and the fact that by Theorem ( 4.2.3 ) ( 3 )
gives @xmath is continuous for all @xmath . The results and proofs in
Section 5.6 are virtually identical using @xmath as 1-particle space and
we now give a summary using our notation.

Let @xmath , where we are identifying @xmath with its image in @xmath as
done in Section 4.1 . That is, @xmath is the set of smeared
Gupta-Bleuler constraints as in [ 94 ] p246. Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be the neutral part of @xmath with respect to the indefinite
inner product @xmath on @xmath . If we recall @xmath (cf. Theorem (
4.1.6 )) then,

###### Proposition 4.3.2

We have,

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

-    Let @xmath be the projection on @xmath and let @xmath for @xmath
    where @xmath is the factor map. Then

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    for all @xmath is a well defined isomorphism.

###### Proof.

By Proposition ( 4.1.3 ) and Theorem ( 4.1.6 ) (i),

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath            
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

(i) and (ii): The Proposition follows from Proposition 5.19 and
Proposition 5.21 in .

(iii): As @xmath it follows that @xmath , and as @xmath it follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now @xmath and @xmath and so by the above we see @xmath . Now from
@xmath it follows that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

From the above we see that @xmath is the projection on @xmath and so the
map @xmath is a well defined isomorphism. ∎

The physical state space in the Gupta-Bleuler approach is @xmath and so
we see that the BRST phsycial state space is naturally isomorphic.

We now define and calculate the physical algebra for the Gupta-Bleuler
approach.

###### Theorem 4.3.3

The observables of @xmath in the Gupta-Bleuler approach is the
subalgebra of @xmath that factors to @xmath i.e.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The trivial observables are

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The natural physical representation of @xmath is defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath . With these definitions we have:

-   @xmath . Hence @xmath is a two-sided ideal.

-    The following algebra isomorphisms

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where we are assuming no topology.

###### Proof.

(i): Obvious.

(ii): First, @xmath is obvious from (i).

Next recall from the end of the proof of Proposition ( 4.3.2 ) (iii)
that @xmath is the projection on @xmath . Define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If we replace @xmath by @xmath , @xmath by @xmath , @xmath by @xmath ,
and @xmath by @xmath in the proof of lemma ( 3.3.10 ) we see that @xmath
is an algebra homomorphism.

From the proof of Proposition ( 4.3.2 ) (iii) we know

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

Moreover @xmath and so it follows @xmath . Conversely, let @xmath . We
want to show @xmath . By the definition of @xmath we know @xmath . So
given equation ( 4.35 ) above we need only show @xmath . But as @xmath
we have @xmath hence @xmath hence @xmath hence @xmath . Therefore we
have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

But @xmath we see that @xmath , and so we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the above is an algebra isomorphism. Hence the statement of (ii)
follows. ∎

If we compare Theorem ( 4.3.3 ) (ii) and Proposition ( 4.3.1 ) (ii) we
see Gupta-Bleuler algebra, @xmath , is isomorphic to the BRST-physical
algebra above. So the BRST approach and Gupta-Bleuler approach to QEM
give equivalent results at the level of the CCR unbounded field
operators acting on Fock-Krein space.

###### Remark 4.3.4

Different choices of @xmath can give equivalent results for the final
physical objects but do necessarily give the same smeared @xmath . To
see this take the QEM test function space @xmath but let @xmath , hence
we have ghost test function space @xmath as @xmath ( cf. Subsection
4.1.3 ). We still get from Corollary ( 4.2.24 ) that:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and from ( 4.2.27 ),

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the difference being that the ghost spaces, ghost algebras, and @xmath
are now different. That is using @xmath gives equivalent physical
results to the usual BRST-QEM with @xmath defined in Subsection 4.1.1 .

However using @xmath does not give the usual smeared heuristic formulas
for @xmath . We can calculate this directly, but first we show what
using @xmath corresponds to heuristically. If we look at how @xmath is
constructed, we see that it is by summing smeared creators and
annihilators over finite orthonormal basis @xmath of @xmath . However
these basis vectors correspond to

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is an orthonormal basis of @xmath rather than the smeared
constraints in @xmath , ie

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is has @xmath norm equal one. That is we have constructed a
rigorous version of

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

rather than ( 2.25 )

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

To see the problem rigorously let @xmath . Then @xmath and @xmath though
still well defined (cf. lemma ( 4.1.12 )), is no longer isometric and
does not extend to a unitary from @xmath to @xmath (now @xmath ). Hence
we are no longer justified in using the identifications of @xmath and
@xmath for @xmath with the formal scalar ghosts as the anticommutation
relations will not be preserved (cf. Proposition ( 4.1.14 ) (iii)
requires that @xmath be isometric).

To get an @xmath -isometric operator @xmath that goes from the scalar
@xmath to @xmath we define,

###### Definition 4.3.5

Let @xmath be

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

then we define @xmath . From @xmath , @xmath , we can calculate:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore Definition ( 4.2.11 ) and the above equation give:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where the last line is what we would need for the previous formal
correspondence. @xmath

#### 4.3.1 Covariance

Consider the Poincaré transformations generated by the transformations
on @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As @xmath is a constant matrix, @xmath preserves @xmath . By the
covariance of the formula for @xmath (cf. Subsection 4.1.1 ) @xmath is
@xmath -Krein-unitary on @xmath . It is not however @xmath -Krein
unitary on @xmath . As @xmath is the ghost test function space, and the
ghosts are unphysical, we are free to construct any unitary
representation of @xmath on @xmath . We do this by using the Poincaré
transformations on the scalar space @xmath , i.e. let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

then @xmath defines a unitary representation @xmath , (recall @xmath ).
Using this and the fact that @xmath is also unitary, we define @xmath by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now

###### Lemma 4.3.6

We have:

-   @xmath is both @xmath -unitary and @xmath -unitary, for all @xmath .

-   @xmath defines a representation @xmath , which is both @xmath
    -unitary and @xmath -unitary.

###### Proof.

(i): Let @xmath . By the definition of @xmath (Definition ( 4.1.9 )) we
have that @xmath and @xmath . As @xmath , @xmath are isometric and
@xmath we get that,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and so @xmath is @xmath -unitary.

From @xmath and the definition of @xmath it follows that @xmath , hence
@xmath therefore @xmath and similarly @xmath , hence @xmath is @xmath
-unitary .

(ii): Let @xmath . As @xmath is a representation and as @xmath implies
@xmath , we get:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

Similarly using @xmath we calculate:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.38)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Combining equation ( 4.37 ) and equation ( 4.38 ) with the definition of
@xmath gives that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and hence @xmath is a representation @xmath , which is both @xmath
-unitary and @xmath -unitary by (i). ∎

So given that @xmath and @xmath are Krein unitary in their respective
IIP’s, we see via [ 75 ] section 4 that @xmath is well defined on @xmath
, preserves @xmath and is @xmath -unitary ( i.e. Krein-unitary on @xmath
cf. Section 4.2.3 ). Moreover as @xmath and @xmath are representations
of @xmath we get that and @xmath is a @xmath -unitary representation
@xmath . We define:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that the for @xmath above formula extends to a @xmath -automorphism
on all of @xmath (cf. Section 4.2.3 ), and that as @xmath is a
represention of @xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

defines a representation of @xmath .

We see that @xmath commutes with the relativistic transformations.

###### Lemma 4.3.7

We have for all @xmath , and all @xmath .

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Clearly it suffices to check the statement on the generating elementary
tensors in @xmath . Suppose that @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . Recall
that @xmath for @xmath . Now from Definition ( 4.2.11 ) we have that for
@xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Also,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

To complete the proof we must show that @xmath for @xmath and @xmath for
@xmath , which we do by direct calculation.

@xmath :

Using Proposition ( 4.1.3 ) we calulate,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Also,

  -- -------- -------- -- --
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --

hence @xmath .

@xmath for @xmath :

Now @xmath implies @xmath for @xmath . Hence by the definition of @xmath
we have @xmath , from which it follows similar to the above calculation
that,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and also,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and so @xmath . ∎

Using this lemma we show that @xmath is relativistically invariant and
hence that BRST-QEM is ‘manifestly covariant’.

###### Proposition 4.3.8

We have for all @xmath :

-    For all @xmath ,

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (4.39)
      -- -------- -- --------

    hence @xmath and @xmath .

-    We have @xmath factors to a @xmath -unitary operator @xmath on the
    dense set @xmath , which extends to a @xmath -unitary on @xmath .
    Hence @xmath is a Hilbert unitary representation of @xmath .

-    We have:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Hence @xmath factors to an automorphism, @xmath on @xmath , that is
    implemented by @xmath when @xmath acts on @xmath as described in
    Proposition ( 3.3.7 ) (i). Furthermore @xmath is a representation
    @xmath .

###### Proof.

(i): Let @xmath , where @xmath is a polynomial in @xmath ’s and @xmath
’s. Then using the fact that the vacuum is invariant, i.e. @xmath for
all @xmath and @xmath , we get that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we use lemma ( 4.3.7 ) in the third last equality.

(ii): Part (i) implies that @xmath factors to a @xmath -unitary operator
@xmath on the dense set @xmath . Proposition ( 4.3.1 ) (iii) gives that
@xmath on @xmath , hence the @xmath -adjoint and @xmath -are the same on
@xmath and so @xmath is a @xmath -unitary operator on @xmath hence
extends to a @xmath -unitary operator on @xmath . Furthermore, @xmath is
a representation of @xmath as @xmath is.

(iii): By lemma ( 4.3.7 ) we have for all @xmath .

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The rest of the statements are obvious. ∎

Part (iii) of the above Proposition says that the physical BRST
representation is relativistically covariant.

Another useful result is,

###### Lemma 4.3.9

We have that @xmath , for all @xmath .

###### Proof.

By Theorem ( 4.1.6 ) and Proposition ( 4.1.3 ) we know that,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath . Therefore for @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now using the formula for @xmath given in lemma ( 4.1.3 ),

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where we used @xmath for @xmath . As @xmath and @xmath preserve @xmath
we get thatand so @xmath . ∎

The above result is unsurprising as @xmath is the test function space
corresponding to the Lorentz condition (subsection ( 4.1.2 )) and so it
shows that the Lorentz condition is covariant in our setup.

#### 4.3.2 Example: Constraints for Massive Abelian Gauge Theory

We show that massive abelian gauge theory has test function space with
structure as above, and that applying the preceding KO Abelian
BRST gives the smeared version of the superderivation as in [ 92 ] p28.
We do not go through all the steps in detail as they are similar to
those done for BRST-QEM.

Suppose again that @xmath and @xmath are as given in subsection ( 4.1 ),
i.e.

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let the mass hyperboloid be for @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Remark 4.3.10

Note that the convention of @xmath gives the @xmath term in the above
definition of the mass hyperboloid. To define the mass hyperboloid using
a positive @xmath term we can use the metric @xmath as is commonly done,
however this conflicts with the definition of @xmath (cf. equation ( 4.6
)), hence our convention. @xmath

Let @xmath be the unique @xmath invariant measure on @xmath (see [ 88 ]
p74). Define the inner product on @xmath by:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and define the symplectic form

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Let @xmath . These are now the ‘Schwartz functions on @xmath ’ and
@xmath can be completed to @xmath . To define @xmath for the massive
theory, we need to add in an extra field as will be seen by the
following. Define the inner product on @xmath by:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and define the symplectic form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We define @xmath . Let @xmath for @xmath , @xmath , then @xmath and
@xmath are defined on @xmath as in Subsection 4.1 and factor to @xmath .
Using @xmath we get a massive gauge theory with 4-component vector field
@xmath . We would like to impose the Lorentz condition @xmath which
corresponds to the subspace (cf. @xmath in Subsection 4.1.2 ) ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

However this presents a problem as for @xmath we have @xmath and so
@xmath is not a @xmath -degenerate subspace. Hence there exist @xmath
such that,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

if we are in the Fock-Krein representation in subsection ( 4.2.1 ). This
tells us that the Lorentz condition is heuristically a second class
constraint set in Dirac sense ( [ 44 ] ) and so problematic. It is also
problematic for rigorous theory as it means that we cannot apply [ 46 ]
Theorem 4.5 in the case of the Weyl Algebra or Proposition ( 5.2.18 ) in
the case of the Resolvent Algebra below.

The way around this problem, both formally and rigorously, is to
introduce a new scalar field with mass @xmath , @xmath , called the
Stueckelberg field [ 91 ] p3272 and replace the Lorentz condition with
@xmath . We now have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and so this is formally first class. Actually in the formal non-BRST
version ( [ 91 ] p3272) we use the constraints @xmath similar to the
Gupta-Bleuler version of QEM. In BRST we impose the whole condition.

Rigorously, adding the new field involves adding another component to
@xmath , i.e. we define:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and the symplectic form,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath . Now define @xmath on @xmath . It follows that @xmath
factors to @xmath and we denote it by the same symbol, and we define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now the smeared version of @xmath corresponds to,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is easy to check using @xmath that @xmath is a @xmath -neutral
subspace and so we can now use this in the @xmath -procedure [ 46 ]
Theorem 4.5 or Resolvent Algebra Proposition ( 5.2.18 ), or in KO
Abelian BRST as above. For KO Abelian BRST we define @xmath and @xmath .
Let @xmath and define

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

that is,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Note above that we are deviding by the factor @xmath and so we do not
have differentiability problems at @xmath in the massive case, hence we
do not have to enlarge @xmath as in Proposition ( 4.1.5 ) to decompose
the test function space analogously to Theorem ( 4.1.6 ). Using @xmath
for @xmath , it is easy to see that @xmath is a an algebraic projection
on @xmath and extends to a Hilbert space projection on @xmath . Now
defining @xmath and the projection @xmath gives the following
decomposition ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath for @xmath . Similarly we have the decompositions:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath , @xmath for @xmath . We use @xmath as the test function
space for the smeared massive gauge fields, and note that it has all the
structures of the abstract test function space discussed in Subsection
4.2.2 . For the ghosts we define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This factors to @xmath which we also denote by @xmath , and using this
define and define @xmath in the @xmath -topology as in Subsection 4.2.2
.

Using these test function spaces we construct the BRST extension,
superderviation, charge as in Section 4.2 and calculate the
BRST-physical subspace and BRST-physical algebra using Corollary (
4.2.24 ) (ii) and Theorem ( 4.2.27 ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

To connect with the formal picture in [ 92 ] p28 we want a scalar ghost
(similar to QEM) so we define @xmath by,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that in the massive case we do not have to restrict @xmath to
define @xmath as @xmath and we have:

-   @xmath for @xmath , as can be verified by substitution.

-   @xmath extends to @xmath using the same defining formula and @xmath
    can easily checked to be @xmath -isometric using @xmath . As @xmath
    is also invertible we get that it extends to a unitary @xmath .

Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As @xmath is an isometry we have that using @xmath for the ghost algebra
is equivalent to using @xmath as @xmath preserves the anticommutation
relations (cf. Proposition ( 4.1.14 )). Let @xmath be that vector with
all @xmath entries except @xmath in the @xmath -th entry. We now find
using the definition of @xmath and Definition ( 4.2.11 ), the action of
@xmath is:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

If we associate @xmath with the smeared Stueckelberg field @xmath then
these are the smeared version of the formal equations in [ 92 ] p28,
i.e.

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Covariance can be treated similarly as in the QEM case, cf. Subsection (
4.3.1 ).

### 4.4 Finite KO Abelian BRST and Finite Abelian Hamiltonian BRST

We have seen in the previous sections that finite abelian Hamiltonian
BRST (Subsection 2.5.2 ) has attractive features as it assumes little
structure, only beginning with a finite set of commuting self adjoint
constraints. However the BRST-physical subspace it selects is larger
than that selected by the original constraints and has indefinite inner
product. Restricting to ghost number zero states does not fix the
problem. On the other hand KO Abelian BRST selects the correct physical
state space, however much more structure is assumed and there are
difficulties associated with unboundedness of the operators involved.
The aim of this section is to combine finite abelian BRST with finite KO
Abelian BRST (Example ( 4.2.8 ) ) to get a general BRST constraint
algorithm that selects the correct physical state space. This is done by
enlarging the orignal constraint system by tensoring on a ghost algebra
and a bosonic field algebra. @xmath is then constructed in a natural way
with all the usual properties and we see that @xmath from the dsp
-decomposition is naturally isomorphic with the original Dirac physical
state space.

As before begin with a unital @xmath -algebra @xmath acting on the
Hilbert space @xmath with inner product @xmath , and let the constraint
set @xmath be a finite linearly independent set of self-adjoint
commuting operators. The physical state space is @xmath . We extend by
tensoring on a ghost algebra and a CCR field algebra. We assume the
structures of finite KO Abelian BRST as in Subsection ( 4.2.8 ).

Suppose that @xmath is a positive integer, and let @xmath be a Hilbert
space with @xmath and Hilbert inner product @xmath . If we recall the
construction in lemma ( 3.1.1 ) then:

-   There exists a decomposition @xmath

-   There exists a unitary @xmath with @xmath such that @xmath and
    @xmath has Krein inner product @xmath , hence @xmath .

-   Let @xmath so @xmath where @xmath is defined as in Subsection (
    4.2.2 ).

It follows now that @xmath has all the structure of @xmath in Subsection
( 4.2.2 ) with @xmath and with ghost test function space @xmath . Also
let @xmath be an orthonormal basis of @xmath .

Now let,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note @xmath as @xmath is finite dimensional, let @xmath , and let @xmath
be the its usual Hilbert space inner product. Let @xmath . Then @xmath
is a fundamental symmetry that makes @xmath a Krein space. Let the
indefinite inner product be @xmath which has associated involution
@xmath . Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath and we are assuming the algebraic tensor
product. Note that @xmath as @xmath finite dimensional ( [ 16 ] Theorem
5.2.5). To connect to the terminology in Chapter 3 we define @xmath and
grade @xmath as in Section 3.3 . Define,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is an orthonormal basis of @xmath and,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

We have that @xmath and @xmath are the the KO Abelian BRST and
Hamiltonian BRST charges respectively. Following the proofs as in lemma
( 4.2.13 ) and Section 2.5 we see that these are both Krein symmetric
and 2-nilpotent with dense domains. Now we define the BRST charge as the
sum of these two charges, ie

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

with domain @xmath .

For the remainder of this section we drop the tensor product @xmath for
ease of notation.

###### Lemma 4.4.1

@xmath is an odd 2-nilpotent and Krein symmetric.

###### Proof.

That @xmath is odd and Krein symmetric is obvious. We have that for all
@xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath . It follows that @xmath for all @xmath similarly as in
lemma ( 4.2.13 ). ∎

Therefore we have that @xmath is Krein symmetric, hence closable by
Proposition ( 7.2.4 ), and that @xmath has an dsp -decomposition @xmath
with respect to @xmath (cf. lemma ( 3.3.1 ) and Theorem ( 3.2.1 )). We
want to calculate @xmath . As @xmath is densely defined, @xmath exists.
We can easily check that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath and hence @xmath preserves @xmath . To calculate @xmath we
will calculate @xmath on @xmath as in lemma ( 3.2.11 ). To do this we
first need:

###### Lemma 4.4.2

Let @xmath and @xmath . Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the annihilator in @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath be the number operator on @xmath ( [ 16 ] Chapter 5.2.1). Let
@xmath be the extension to @xmath . Then @xmath where @xmath are the
eigenspaces of @xmath with integer eigenvalue @xmath . It clear that
@xmath and @xmath for @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

Let @xmath . As @xmath we have for some @xmath , that @xmath where
@xmath . Therefore,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

As @xmath for @xmath we get

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.41)
     @xmath   @xmath      (4.42)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Combining @xmath for @xmath and equation ( 4.42 ) gives

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Substituting @xmath gives @xmath by ( 4.41 ). Now @xmath hence @xmath ,
and so @xmath implies @xmath . Using equation ( 4.42 ) again gives
@xmath .

Summarising we have @xmath and @xmath . We can iterate the above
arguments using equations ( 4.41 ) and ( 4.42 ) to get that @xmath for
@xmath and hence @xmath .

This shows that @xmath . The reverse inclusion is obvious.

∎

Using this lemma we can prove that

###### Proposition 4.4.3

Let @xmath be defined as in the dsp -decomposition. Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the vacuum vector in @xmath and @xmath is the vacuum
vector in @xmath , and @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where the obvious correspondence between the terms in the two RHS
identities are made. Since @xmath has the same structure as @xmath in
lemma ( 4.2.13 ), the proof of equation ( 4.30 ) adapts immediately to
give:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using the CAR relations @xmath for all @xmath (cf. equation ( 3.4 )) we
get that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now from the action of the BRST superderivation for Bose-Fock theories
(cf. Definition ( 4.2.11 )) we have that @xmath and by taking @xmath
-adjoints @xmath . Therefore using @xmath for @xmath gives:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Also, using the linearity of @xmath and antilinearity @xmath we get that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore we get that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

which can be checked by expanding, using equation ( 4.43 ) and the
expressions for @xmath .

Now this is a sum of positive operators and so:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where the last equality follows from @xmath . By lemma ( 4.4.2 ) to get
that @xmath . But @xmath . Therefore we have that,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and so by lemma ( 3.2.11 ) we have that @xmath . ∎

The above Proposition tells us that the BRST charge constructed above
will select the correct physical space for an arbitrary finite commuting
set of constraints @xmath without adding ghost number restrictions and
does not suffer the MCPS problem and neutrality problems of usual
Hamiltonian BRST (cf. Subsection 2.5.2 , Remark ( 3.1.21 ) (ii) ).

###### Example 4.4.4

We revisit the example in subsection ( 3.3.1 ), and we want to show that
adding this extended BRST now selects the correct physical algebra. Let
@xmath be a Hilbert space and that @xmath . Let @xmath be a finite self
adjoint set of commuting constraints and so @xmath . Let @xmath be the
projection on @xmath , and apply the @xmath -procedure (section ( 7.4 ))
to @xmath . As @xmath it is straightforward to see that for the Dirac
physical algebra we have the following isomorphism @xmath (see example (
7.4.7 ) (i)).

We have @xmath constraints and so @xmath and we construct the BRST model
above.

###### Proposition 4.4.5

Let @xmath be as above, and let @xmath have domain @xmath and be defined
by equation ( 4.40 ). Then:

-    We have @xmath . Therefore

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where @xmath are the projections onto @xmath , @xmath .

-    Define @xmath for @xmath as in Subsection ( 3.3 ), then

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where we are using the alternative definition of the BRST
    observables in Subsection 3.3.2 , and @xmath for all @xmath .

###### Proof.

(i): That @xmath follow by Proposition ( 4.4.3 ). And as @xmath is the
projection on @xmath this implies @xmath hence @xmath where @xmath are
the projections onto @xmath , @xmath .

(ii): Let @xmath . Using the commutation relations for @xmath we can
write,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath , @xmath is normally ordered monomial of creators and
annihilators corresponding the ghosts and bosonic field. As the @xmath
are normally ordered we have that @xmath for @xmath and so,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Also, @xmath for @xmath and so as @xmath , we have that @xmath .
Combining this with the above calculation gives that,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

∎

Proposition ( 4.4.5 )(ii) shows that the combined KO Abelian BRST and
Hamiltonian BRST charge @xmath selects the Dirac physical space and
algebra in this example. It is important to note that we chose our
original algebra to be @xmath so that @xmath which in turn gave @xmath .
This was crucial for the above isomorphism. @xmath

###### Remark 4.4.6

-   It would be nice to extend the above procedure in two directions:
    The Hamiltonian case where the constraints do not commute, and the
    case of an infinite set of constraints @xmath . This is work still
    in progress.

@xmath

## Chapter 5 @xmath-Brst

In this chapter we will cast the above structures into a @xmath
-algebraic context.

So far we have given an account of the general structures of quantum
BRST in a given representation in Chapter 3 and constructed and examined
explicitly rigorous examples for basic abelian Hamiltionian BRST (cf.
Subsection 3.3.1 ), and abelian Bose-Fock theories, such as QEM, in
Chapter 4 . In the algebraic approach we would like to be able to move
beyond a given representation and construct BRST structures at the
@xmath -algebraic level. For the case of Hamiltionian BRST given in
Section 2.5 , this is straightforward as all have already assumed that
our operators, etc are bounded. However for BRST-QEM we have that the
basic objects, such as the fields, the BRST charge @xmath , etc. are
unbounded and so we need more elaborate constructions.

We first have to interpret the structures of Chapter 3 in an abstract
setting. As already discussed in the introduction to Chapter 4 , we take
that the BRST superderivation @xmath to be of primary interest and so
aim to make a formulation of BRST as a superderivation acting on a
@xmath -algebra @xmath . Once this is done we need to identify the
correct states on @xmath . To motivate our definitions we investigate
what a BRST theory with bounded @xmath looks like and what the physical
states on this theory will be.

With bounded BRST as a guide we aim to construct BRST for QEM. For this,
we need to find a @xmath -form for the superderivation in definition (
4.2.11 ):

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Due to unboundedness, there are several technical hurdles to overcome,
such as domain issues related to the unboundedness of the fields @xmath
. The main tool used for dealing with these issues is the Resolvent
Algebra [ 18 , 17 ] , which encodes the CCR relations in bounded form
similar to the Weyl algebra. Using the QEM test function space we
perform the @xmath -procedure (cf. Appendix 7.4 ) on the Resolvent
Algebra, calculate the physical algebra and see that this gives the
results we expect from other examples [ 46 ] .

We then encode the KO Abelian BRST structures in bounded form, following
an approach similar to [ 17 ] . A surprise is that KO Abelian BRST using
the symplectic test function space with covariant symplectic form @xmath
(cf. Subsection ( 4.2.2 )), produces more BRST-observables than what we
get from the @xmath -procedure. This is because the BRST-procedure does
not remove the ghosts.

To resolve this issue we study a second the Resolvent Algebra using the
auxiliary symplectic form, i.e. @xmath as in Subsection 4.2.2 . In this
case we get that BRST-procedure and the Dirac procedure produce the same
physical algebra, but we pay the price that we have to work harder to
encode the Poincaré transformations.

Finally, we give a general formulation of a BRST-theory motivated by
these results, and show how the examples we have seen so far fit into
this framework.

We use the following notation with respect to @xmath -algebras:

###### Definition 5.0.1

Let @xmath be a @xmath -algebra:

-   @xmath is the set of states of @xmath .

-    Let @xmath be a @xmath -subalgebra of @xmath and @xmath . Then
    @xmath .

-   @xmath is the GNS-representation associated @xmath , @xmath is its
    cyclic generating vector, and we denote its inner product by @xmath
    for all @xmath .

-    Let @xmath be @xmath -automorphism and @xmath . Then there exists a
    unitary @xmath such that @xmath for all @xmath and @xmath . We call
    @xmath the implementer of @xmath in @xmath .

-    Let @xmath be @xmath -automorphism, @xmath , and @xmath . Let
    @xmath be the implementer of @xmath . It follows that @xmath and
    @xmath . We define the indefinite inner product @xmath ,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    By lemma ( 7.2.3 ) we have that @xmath with @xmath is a Krein space
    with fundamental symmetry @xmath . This will always be the Krein
    structure we associate to a @xmath -automorphism such as @xmath . We
    define an involution on @xmath by

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (5.1)
      -- -------- -- -------

    and note that by lemma ( 7.2.1 ),

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where @xmath is the Krein adjoint of @xmath in @xmath . Therefore
    equation ( 5.1 ) is the natural way to define the Krein involution
    with respect to @xmath on @xmath in a representation independent
    way.

### 5.1 Bounded @xmath

We first cast the BRST structures of Chapter 3 in a @xmath -algebra
setting, for the case where @xmath is a @xmath -algebra. We assume that
@xmath is a unital @xmath -algebra and that @xmath is a @xmath
-automorphism such that @xmath . @xmath encodes any Krein structure
present in @xmath , and we define an involution on @xmath by @xmath for
all @xmath . When we have no relevant Krein structures we will set
@xmath .

The Unextended Field Algebra is @xmath and we assume that it has some
kind of degeneracy, such as constraints. Depending on the example we are
modelling we will take the @xmath -tensor product of @xmath with either
the ghost algebra @xmath or the restricted ghost algebra @xmath (cf.
Subsection 3.1.2 ), where @xmath corresponds to the degrees of
degeneracy, i.e. @xmath number of linear independent constraints in the
Hamiltonian case (cf. Definition 3.1.3 ). As @xmath is a CAR algebra and
@xmath is finite dimensional we have that these are both nuclear @xmath
-algebras, the norm on the tensor product is unique. Let @xmath be the
automorphism that corresponds to the Krein-ghost stucture (cf. equation
( 3.11 )), hence @xmath .

###### Definition 5.1.1

The BRST-Field Algebra is either @xmath or @xmath and we let @xmath have
the @xmath -grading with grading automorphism @xmath (cf. Definition (
3.1.9 )). Let @xmath and note that @xmath . Define the involution on
@xmath by:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We assume that there exists a BRST-charge @xmath such that @xmath is
2-nilpotent, @xmath and @xmath , i.e. @xmath .

###### Remark 5.1.2

The tensor @xmath -norm on @xmath is unique as @xmath is a CAR algebra
hence nuclear (cf. [ 13 ] Example II.8.2.2 (iii), Example II.9.4.2 and
II.9.4.5). Also @xmath is only used in the case of a finite number of
ghosts, hence @xmath is finite dimensional and hence nuclear. @xmath

This is the situation as for Hamiltonian BRST in Section 2.5 . Now as
@xmath is bounded we have:

###### Lemma 5.1.3

Let @xmath be as in Definition ( 5.1.1 ). Then @xmath generates a
bounded superderivation @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that:

-   @xmath .

-   @xmath .

-   @xmath . This identity encodes that @xmath .

###### Proof.

First, as @xmath is a @xmath -algebra @xmath , hence @xmath is bounded
as a linear map @xmath .

(i) Let @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where used @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

(ii): Follows as @xmath .

(iii): We calculate using @xmath and @xmath that:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

∎

We now want to select states from which we can construct structures as
in Chapter 3 . In the usual heuristic setup, the extended state space is
the original state space tensored with a ghost state space. In terms of
states on @xmath this corresponds to the set:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is definied in Definition 3.1.12 , and so @xmath implies
that @xmath hence @xmath is a Krein space with fundamental symmetry,
@xmath , implementing @xmath and @xmath . Thus @xmath is positive in the
Krein inner product on @xmath (cf. Definition ( 5.0.1 )). Assuming
@xmath gives analogous Krein structures for @xmath (cf. Definition (
5.0.1 )). We choose states that have GNS-cyclic vectors in @xmath .

###### Definition 5.1.4

The BRST-states @xmath are states of the form @xmath , where @xmath ,
@xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since, for @xmath then @xmath and so @xmath for all @xmath , hence
@xmath corresponds to a state such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We can rephrase the @xmath condition in terms of @xmath alone [ 39 ] :-

###### Lemma 5.1.5

Let @xmath , where @xmath , @xmath . Then the following are equivalent:

-   @xmath .

-   @xmath @xmath .

-   @xmath @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath @xmath then,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which proves one direction for both equivalence statements.

Conversely, let @xmath . We have that @xmath , hence @xmath , and hence
@xmath . Therefore by Cauchy-Schwartz we get that @xmath , and so @xmath
@xmath . Therefore (ii) @xmath (iii) @xmath (i) and we are done. ∎

With the appropriate states chosen, we would like to describe the
structures of Chapter 3 algebraically.

###### Definition 5.1.6

-    Define the representation @xmath by:

      -- -- --
            
      -- -- --

    and denote the Hilbert inner product on @xmath by @xmath .

-    We have @xmath for all @xmath , hence @xmath is unitarily
    implemented in each @xmath so @xmath is unitarily implemented in
    @xmath . Denote the implementer for @xmath in @xmath by @xmath . As
    @xmath it follows from @xmath that @xmath and @xmath . By lemma (
    7.2.3 ) @xmath is a Krein space with fundamental symmetry @xmath and
    indefinite inner product @xmath .

-    Let @xmath and @xmath be the dsp -decompositions with respect to
    @xmath and @xmath where @xmath (cf. Theorem ( 3.2.1 )). Let @xmath ,
    @xmath , @xmath be the corresponding projections on @xmath .

-    Let @xmath . For @xmath define,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and let @xmath be the factor map. Denote @xmath for @xmath and
    @xmath for @xmath .

###### Remark 5.1.7

As @xmath it is obvious that @xmath for @xmath , and hence @xmath ,
@xmath . @xmath

To get the spatial structures of Chapter 3 :

###### Proposition 5.1.8

We have that @xmath is a Krein space with indefinite inner product:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

fundamental symmetry @xmath and Hilbert inner product,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

and norm @xmath . The space @xmath is a Hilbert space with respect to
the inner product @xmath if and only if @xmath if and only if

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Hence the physicality condition for the abstract BRST system is equation
( 5.3 ).

###### Proof.

As @xmath we have that @xmath is Krein self adjoint with respect to
@xmath . Hence, we have that @xmath and @xmath satisfy the hypothesis of
Theorem ( 3.2.8 ), and so the Proposition follows from Theorem ( 3.2.8
), Definition ( 3.2.2 ) and lemma ( 3.2.7 ). ∎

To get the algebraic structures as in Chapter 3 we define:

###### Definition 5.1.9

Define the linear map:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By lemma ( 3.3.10 ) we have that @xmath is an algebra homomorphism on
@xmath . We define the BRST-physical algebra as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let the factor map be @xmath , and denote @xmath for @xmath .

###### Remark 5.1.10

The above definition corresponds to the alternative definition of the
phsyical algebra in Subsection 3.3.2 . To connect with the cohomological
definition of the physical algebra we extend @xmath to @xmath as in
Section ( 3.3 ). Then @xmath by Theorem ( 3.3.11 ) (see also Remark (
3.3.16 )). @xmath

As @xmath is not in general a @xmath -subalgebra of @xmath ( e.g. @xmath
but @xmath for @xmath ) we do not get that @xmath is a @xmath -algebra
using the usual factor norm. To get a natural norm for @xmath we use the
norm on @xmath .

###### Proposition 5.1.11

Define the representations,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath . Define the seminorm on @xmath by:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then @xmath is a norm on @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

and @xmath is a Banach algebra where closure is with respect to @xmath .
Moreover @xmath where the isomorphism is isometric. Thus @xmath is a
faithful representation of @xmath and all calculations can be done in
this representation.

###### Proof.

First @xmath , hence

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Using this we see that @xmath is a norm by the calculation:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

for @xmath , where we have used that @xmath for @xmath by equation ( 5.2
) for the second equality, and equation ( 5.5 ) for the third. Therefore
@xmath iff @xmath iff @xmath iff @xmath , and so @xmath is a norm. Let
@xmath . As @xmath we have that:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Thus @xmath is a Banach algebra where closure is with respect to @xmath
. The last isomorphism comes from equation ( 5.4 ). ∎

Now for @xmath we have that @xmath need not be in @xmath ( e.g. @xmath
). Hence we have to be careful of how we define a @xmath -involution on
@xmath (cf. lemma ( 3.3.8 )).

###### Proposition 5.1.12

We have:

-   @xmath and @xmath . Hence @xmath on @xmath factors to the @xmath
    -involution on @xmath which coincides with the @xmath -involution
    with respect to the representation @xmath , i.e.

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    for all @xmath where @xmath is the the adjoint of @xmath with
    respect to the inner product @xmath . Furthermore,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where the above is an isometric @xmath -isomorphism.

-    Let @xmath be a subalgebra such that @xmath . Given @xmath , define

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (5.6)
      -- -------- -- -------

    where @xmath for some @xmath . This defines an involution on @xmath
    such that @xmath is a @xmath -algebra where closure is with respect
    to @xmath .

-    Let the physicality condition @xmath hold (equation ( 5.3 )). Then
    @xmath satisfies the conditions on @xmath in (ii), hence @xmath is a
    @xmath -algebra with respect to the norm @xmath . Moreover, the
    @xmath -involution from (i) and @xmath -involution from (ii)
    coincide.

###### Proof.

(i): @xmath follows from @xmath . By Theorem ( 3.2.8 ), we have @xmath ,
hence @xmath and so it follows that @xmath is a @xmath -subalgebra of
@xmath . Hence the involution @xmath factors to an involution on @xmath
. Moreover, it coincides with the @xmath -involution with respect to the
representation @xmath which can be seen by the calculation:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath and all @xmath , where we have used that by definition
@xmath for all @xmath (cf. Proposition ( 5.1.8 )).

Let @xmath . Then using @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we used @xmath in the last line. Combining this with Proposition (
5.5.8 ) gives that there is a isometric @xmath -isomorphism such that
@xmath . (ii): Let @xmath then by assumption there exists @xmath such
that @xmath . Now by equation ( 5.5 ) we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

hence for all @xmath we have by equation ( 5.2 ),

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.7)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

and hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we used equation ( 5.6 ) and that @xmath . This shows that @xmath
is a @xmath -algebra. Furthermore, Proposition ( 5.1.11 ) gives that
@xmath is an isometric isomorphism, and so we have proved that @xmath is
a @xmath -isometric isomorphism. Hence as @xmath is a @xmath -algebra so
is @xmath .

(iii): Now @xmath implies @xmath and by equation ( 5.3 ) @xmath .
Therefore we can apply (ii) with @xmath and @xmath to get that @xmath
with norm @xmath is a @xmath -algebra. Moreover by Proposition ( 5.1.12
) (i) and the defining equation ( 5.6 ), @xmath . ∎

###### Remark 5.1.13

-   Note that the above Proposition does not assume that @xmath is a
    @xmath -algebra. If is factoring out by @xmath and using the the
    Hilbert @xmath -involution coming from the BRST physical space
    @xmath that gives a @xmath -algebra.

-   Proposition ( 5.1.12 ) (iii) shows that equation ( 5.3 ) is a good
    physicality condition as it ensures that the @xmath -involution
    factors to a @xmath -involution on the physical algebra @xmath .

@xmath

###### Example 5.1.14

Extend @xmath by defining @xmath . We drop the notation @xmath here, and
extend all the structures such as @xmath and @xmath to @xmath by using
@xmath and @xmath , etc.

As @xmath we have that @xmath hence we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

hence @xmath . By taking adjoints we see

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and so by extending @xmath by @xmath , we get from Proposition ( 5.1.12
) (ii) that @xmath is a @xmath -algebra with norm @xmath . Notice again
that we did not assume that @xmath was @xmath -algebra to begin with.
@xmath

Summarising the above discussion we get:

###### Theorem 5.1.15

Let @xmath be as in Definitions ( 5.1.1 ), ( 5.1.4 ) and ( 5.1.6 ), and
let,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as in Definition ( 5.1.9 ). Then:

-   @xmath is a homomorphism on @xmath and on @xmath .

-    Let @xmath and @xmath be as in Proposition ( 5.1.11 ). Then @xmath
    has norm

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    with respect to which @xmath it is a @xmath -Banach algebra and we
    have a @xmath -isometric isomorphism such that @xmath

-    If @xmath , then @xmath is a @xmath -algebra with norm @xmath and
    involution denoted by @xmath as defined in equation ( 5.6 ).

    1.   When @xmath we have that @xmath and so @xmath is a @xmath
        -algebra.

    2.   When we extend @xmath to @xmath as we have that @xmath and so
        @xmath is a @xmath -algebra.

###### Proof.

(i): Follows from lemma ( 3.3.10 ) applied to for @xmath and @xmath .
(ii) is Proposition ( 5.1.11 ) and Proposition ( 5.1.12 ). (iii) follows
from Proposition ( 5.1.12 ) and Example ( 5.1.14 ). ∎

We may want a more intrinsic description of @xmath , i.e. one that does
not involve @xmath .Define,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath denotes the vector state of @xmath , i.e. @xmath . The
above definition implies that if @xmath then @xmath for @xmath ( [ 20 ]
II Proposition 2.15 p34). Hence if @xmath is the factor map @xmath ,
i.e. @xmath are trivial BRST observables. We will see that these are all
the trivial observables.

###### Proposition 5.1.16

We hav,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

hence @xmath is a two-sided ideal in @xmath and,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Let @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . Since @xmath we have @xmath . As @xmath
we have @xmath and as @xmath was arbitrary @xmath . As @xmath (cf.
Remark ( 5.1.7 )) it follows that @xmath .

Conversely, let @xmath and @xmath . @xmath and so @xmath . Hence @xmath
. ∎

###### Example 5.1.17

We are now in a position to formulate Hamiltonian BRST with finite
constraints (cf.Section 2.5 ) in a @xmath -algebra format. Let @xmath be
a quantum system with constraints (cf. Appendix 7.4 ) where @xmath is a
set of finite set of self-adjoint constraints that form a Lie algebra,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is antisymmetric in all indices. Let @xmath be the set of
Dirac states and let @xmath be the open projection from Theorem ( 7.4.6
). Therefore @xmath is such that @xmath iff @xmath .

Let @xmath be a complex Hilbert space with @xmath . If we recall the
construction in lemma ( 3.1.1 ) then given any decomposition

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

such that @xmath , there exists a unitary @xmath with @xmath such that
@xmath and @xmath has Krein inner product @xmath , hence @xmath .

Given such a choice of decomposition @xmath and @xmath , then @xmath has
all the structure of the ghost test function space @xmath in Section 3.1
.

Let @xmath be the restricted ghost algebra as in Definition ( 3.1.3 )
and let @xmath , @xmath . Let the BRST-Field Algebra be @xmath with
@xmath where @xmath is the automorphism associated to the ghost-Krein
structure (cf. Defintion ( 5.1.1 )). Note that the tensor norm on @xmath
is unique as @xmath is finite dimensional. Define the BRST charge as in
equation ( 2.31 ):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

and we have as in ( 2.32 ) that @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . Then we have
all the structures as in Theorem ( 5.1.15 ) as well as the
representations @xmath as in Proposition ( 5.1.11 ) for @xmath

###### Lemma 5.1.18

In the case of abelian constraints, i.e. @xmath @xmath we have:

-   @xmath ,

-   @xmath ,

where @xmath is the restriction to @xmath of the projection from Theorem
( 7.4.6 ).

###### Proof.

(i) Let @xmath and @xmath . Recall that @xmath . From lemma 5.1.5 we
know that if @xmath then @xmath . Conversely, if @xmath then by
positivity we have @xmath hence @xmath . Now, as in Subsection 2.5.2 ,
we have @xmath and therefore for any @xmath iff @xmath , hence @xmath .

(ii) Let @xmath . Then @xmath is the projection onto

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

hence @xmath . ∎

From this it follows that is we restrict ourselves to @xmath then we get
that the restricted BRST observables are equivalent to the traditional
Dirac observables.

###### Proposition 5.1.19

For abelian constraints we have:

-   @xmath ,

-   @xmath

where @xmath is the commutant of @xmath in @xmath and @xmath is defined
as in Appendix 7.4 , and @xmath is a @xmath -isomorphism.

###### Proof.

(i) Take @xmath . Then @xmath . As @xmath are linearly independent we
get that @xmath iff @xmath .

(ii) Using lemma ( 5.1.18 ) we have that @xmath by Theorem ( 7.4.6 )
(v). This is obviously a @xmath -isomorphism. ∎

@xmath

###### Remark 5.1.20

-   From lemma ( 5.1.18 ) we see that @xmath for @xmath . As @xmath is
    simple we get that @xmath is faithful and we still get the MCPS
    problem for abelian BRST as in Subsection 2.5.2 and neutrality
    problems as in Remark ( 3.1.21 )). It is not hard to see that this
    also follows for non-abelian constraints from equation ( 2.5.2 ) in
    the same way as described in Subsection 2.5.2 .

-   Proposition ( 5.1.19 ) tells us that if we restrict @xmath to our
    original algebra that the BRST method selects a physical algebra
    equivalent to the one obtained using the traditional Dirac method,
    i.e. the commutant of the constraints. The problem with this
    approach is that it does not handle equivalent sets of constraints
    well because different sets of constraints which select the same set
    of physical states may have different commutants. This is the reason
    why the @xmath -procedure defines the observable algebra as the
    abstract version of the weak commutant of the constraints [ 41 ]
    p100, and a significant advantage which this generalized Dirac
    method of constraints has over Hamiltonian BRST.

@xmath

### 5.2 Resolvent Algebra

To cast the structures of Chapter 4 into a @xmath -algebraic setting we
have several hurdles to overcome. The main difficulty is that the
objects so far defined are unbounded operators, hence analytically
difficult. Here we want to find a @xmath -algebra that which encodes the
algebraic information of the operators involved, i.e. it can reproduce
the above structures in the appropriate representations. We will use
notations for inner product spaces and symplectic spaces as in
Appendices 7.2 , 7.3 .

The main relation we would like to model is the superderivation action,
given in Definition ( 4.2.11 ),

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

These are awkward relations because:

-   They involve Krein-symmetric unbounded operators such as @xmath .
    Unboundedness gives domain technicalities and spectral theory for
    Krein-symmetric operators is more complicated and less well
    understood than for the Hilbert space case.

-   The equation @xmath maps bounded operators to unbounded operators,
    and so @xmath will be hard to interpret even after the CCR relations
    have been cast into a bounded form. This problem has been previously
    analyzed for the supersymmetry superderivation (cf. [ 18 ] , instead
    leading to the Resolvent algebra.

We start with a brief description of the structure of Resolvent Algebras
of CCR’s. Proofs can be found in [ 18 ] . One observes that resolvents
of self-adjoint operators can be used as ‘mollifiers’ in the following
sense. Let @xmath be a self-adjoint operator acting on a Hilbert space
@xmath with domain @xmath . Since @xmath has real spectrum, @xmath for
@xmath , and by functional calculus we get that @xmath . Thus @xmath
carries the information of @xmath in bounded form and ‘mollifies’ @xmath
, i.e. @xmath . Recall from [ 21 ] that @xmath is affiliated with a
@xmath -algebra @xmath if @xmath . It makes sense to look for a @xmath
-algebra @xmath which contains the resolvents @xmath of all self-adjoint
operators @xmath which we need. The mollifying property will prove key
ingredient for BRST in making sense of the identities @xmath as will be
seen in Subsection 5.3.4 .

A bosonic field is often described by operators satisfying the CCR as in
[ 16 ] . That is given @xmath a real symplectic space with symplectic
@xmath a field @xmath is a linear map from @xmath to a linear space of
self-adjoint operators on some common dense invariant core @xmath in a
Hilbert space @xmath , satisfying the relations

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A common way to encode the CCR-fields in a bounded way is to study the
Weyl Algebra [ 16 ] which is the algebra we get from exponentiating the
@xmath , ie

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This is can be defined abstractly and is commonly denoted by @xmath . It
is not optimal for modelling the @xmath as it does not contain
mollifiers [ 18 ] Proposition 2.1. More useful is the algebra we get
from taking resolvents of @xmath , ie

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that as @xmath , the spectrum of @xmath is real and hence the
resolvents @xmath are well defined.

The Resolvent Algebra can be defined abstractly as follws:

###### Definition 5.2.1

Given a symplectic space @xmath , define @xmath to be the universal
@xmath -algebra generated by the set @xmath subject to the relations:

1.  @xmath ,

2.  @xmath ,

3.  @xmath ,

4.  @xmath ,

5.  @xmath ,

6.  @xmath

where @xmath and @xmath , and for (6) we require @xmath . That is we
start with the free unital algebra generated by @xmath and factor out by
the ideal generated by the relations (1) to (6). We also denote @xmath
by @xmath when no confusion will arise.

###### Remark 5.2.2

-   @xmath has non-trivial representations as can be seen by taking
    resolvents of the fields @xmath in the Fock representation.

-   let @xmath in equation ( 4 ). Then we have that

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (5.9)
      -- -------- -- -------

@xmath

We want a norm on @xmath such that we can complete it to a @xmath
-algebra. Let @xmath be the set of functionals @xmath such that @xmath
and @xmath . Then for each @xmath its GNS-representations is bounded ( [
18 ] Proposition 3.3) and hence we can define:

###### Definition 5.2.3

The universal representation @xmath is given by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

denotes the enveloping @xmath seminorm of @xmath . Define the resolvent
algebra @xmath as the abstract @xmath -algebra generated by @xmath ,
i.e. we factor @xmath by @xmath and complete with respect to the
eveloping @xmath seminorm @xmath .

Useful properties of the Resolvent Algebra are:

###### Theorem 5.2.4

Let @xmath be a given nondegenerate symplectic space, and define @xmath
as above. Then for all @xmath we have:

-   @xmath . Substitute @xmath to see that @xmath is normal.

-   @xmath .

-   @xmath .

-   @xmath is analytic in @xmath . Explicitly, the series expansion (von
    Neumman series)

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    converges absolutely in norm whenever @xmath .

-    Let @xmath be a symplectic transformation. Then @xmath extends to
    an automorphism @xmath .

In constrast to the Weyl algebra, the Resolvent algebra is not simple.
We have the following ideal structure.

###### Theorem 5.2.5

Let @xmath be a given nondegenerate symplectic space. Then for each
@xmath and @xmath we have that the closed two–sided ideal generated by
@xmath in @xmath is

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

where @xmath indicates the closed linear span of its argument. This
ideal is proper. Moreover the intersection of the ideals @xmath , @xmath
for distinct @xmath is the ideal @xmath .

From these ideals we can build other ideals, e.g. for a set @xmath we
can define the ideals @xmath as well as @xmath . Ideals of a different
structure will occur in the following sections. Thus @xmath has a very
rich ideal structure.

#### 5.2.1 States, representations and regularity

Any operator family @xmath , @xmath on a Hilbert space which satisfies
the resolvent equation ( 4 ) is called by Hille a pseudo-resolvent and
for such a family we know (cf. Theorem 1 in [ 105 , p 216] ) that:

-   All @xmath have a common range and a common null space.

-   A pseudo-resolvent is the resolvent for an operator @xmath iff
    @xmath for some (hence for all) @xmath , and in this case @xmath for
    all @xmath .

This leads us to an examination of @xmath for representations @xmath .

###### Theorem 5.2.6

Let @xmath be a given nondegenerate symplectic space, and define @xmath
as above. Then for @xmath and @xmath we have:

-    If for a representation @xmath of @xmath we have @xmath , then
    @xmath reduces @xmath . Hence there is a unique orthogonal
    decomposition @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath is invertible.

-    Let @xmath be any nondegenerate representation of @xmath , then

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    exists, defines a central projection of @xmath , and it is the range
    projection of @xmath as well as the projection of the ideal @xmath .

-    If @xmath is a factorial representation of @xmath , then @xmath or
    @xmath and such @xmath are classified by the sets @xmath .

-    There is a state @xmath such that @xmath . Moreover, given a state
    @xmath with @xmath , then @xmath .

Given a @xmath with @xmath we define a field operator by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

with domain @xmath , and it has the following properties:

###### Theorem 5.2.7

Let @xmath be as above, and let @xmath satisfy @xmath for given @xmath
Then

-   @xmath is selfadjoint, and @xmath .

-   @xmath for all @xmath .

-   @xmath for all @xmath .

-    The space @xmath is a joint dense domain for @xmath and @xmath and
    we have: @xmath on @xmath

-   @xmath for @xmath . Then @xmath is defined, @xmath is a core for
    @xmath and @xmath on @xmath Moreover @xmath

-   @xmath on @xmath .

-   @xmath on @xmath .

Thus we define:

###### Definition 5.2.8

A representation @xmath is regular on @xmath if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A state @xmath of @xmath is regular on @xmath if its GNS–representation
@xmath is regular on @xmath . A regular representation (resp. state) is
a representation (resp. state) which is regular on @xmath . Given a
Hilbert space @xmath we denote the set of (nondegenerate) regular
representations @xmath by @xmath The set of regular states of @xmath is
denoted by @xmath

Obviously many regular representations are known, e.g. the Fock
representation. The class of all regular representations of @xmath is
not a set, hence the necessity to fix @xmath Thus for @xmath all the
field operators @xmath @xmath are defined, and we have the resolvents
@xmath .

From Theorem 5.2.7 , we can now establish a bijection between the
regular representations of @xmath and the regular representations of the
Weyl algebra @xmath

###### Corollary 5.2.9

Let @xmath be as above. Given a regular representation @xmath define a
regular representation @xmath by @xmath (using Theorem 5.2.7 (viii)).
This correspondence establishes a bijection between @xmath and @xmath
which respects irreducibility and direct sums. Its inverse is given by
the Laplace transform,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

By an application of this to the GNS–representations of regular states,
we also obtain an affine bijection between @xmath and the regular states
@xmath of @xmath and it restricts to a bijection between the pure
regular states of @xmath and the pure regular states of @xmath

Note that whilst we have a bijection between the regular states of
@xmath and those of @xmath , there is no such map between the nonregular
states of the two algebras. In fact, fix a nonzero @xmath and consider
the two commutative subalgebras @xmath and @xmath , then these are
isomorphic respectively to the continuous functions on the one point
compactification of @xmath , and the continuous functions on the Bohr
compactification of @xmath . Note that the point measures on the
compactifications without @xmath produce nonregular states (after
extending to the full C*–algebras by Hahn–Banach) and there are many
more of these for the Bohr compactification than for the one point
compactification of @xmath , (cf. Theorem 5 in [ 23 , p 949] ). So the
Weyl algebra has many more nonregular states than the resolvent algebra.

Some further properties of regular representations and states are:

###### Proposition 5.2.10

Let @xmath be as above.

-    If a representation @xmath of @xmath is faithful and factorial, it
    must be regular.

-    If a representation @xmath is regular then @xmath for all @xmath
    @xmath .

-    A state @xmath of @xmath is regular iff @xmath for all @xmath and
    @xmath .

Thus regular states restrict to regular states on subalgebras generated
by the Resolvents.

We also find the the following decomposition of the test function space
with regards to a given representation useful,

###### Proposition 5.2.11

Let @xmath be a nondegenerate representation. Then

-    the set @xmath is a linear space. Hence if @xmath then @xmath for
    all @xmath .

-    The set @xmath is a linear space. Moreover if @xmath then @xmath
    for all @xmath with @xmath . Thus @xmath .

-    If @xmath is factorial, then @xmath for all @xmath and @xmath for
    all @xmath . Moreover @xmath .

-    Let @xmath be finite dimensional and let @xmath be a basis for
    @xmath . If @xmath is factorial, we can augment this basis of @xmath
    by @xmath into a symplectic basis of @xmath i.e. @xmath , @xmath .
    Then we have the decomposition

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (5.11)
      -- -------- -- --------

    into nondegenerate spaces such that @xmath and @xmath .

Clearly @xmath is the part of @xmath on which @xmath is regular, @xmath
is the part on which it is “trivially regular”, @xmath is the part on
which it is singular, and these have a particularly nice form when
@xmath is factorial. This proposition can be used to prove the following
theorem.

###### Theorem 5.2.12

Let @xmath be a nondegenerate symplectic space of arbitrary dimension.
Then

-    The norms of @xmath and @xmath coincide on @xmath for each finite
    dimensional nondegenerate subspace @xmath . Thus we obtain a
    containment @xmath

-   @xmath is the inductive limit of the net of all @xmath where @xmath
    ranges over all finite dimensional nondegenerate subspaces of @xmath

It follows therefore from Fell’s theorem (cf. Theorem 1.2 in [ 29 ] )
that any state of @xmath is in the w*-closure of the convex hull of the
vector states of @xmath , hence of the regular states. The following
result is relevant for physics.

###### Theorem 5.2.13

Let @xmath be any nondegenerate symplectic space, and @xmath as above.
Then every regular representation of @xmath is faithful.

The importance of this result lies in the fact that the regular
representations are taken to be the physically relevant ones, and the
images of @xmath in all regular representations are isomorphic. Thus,
since we can obtain the quantum fields from @xmath in these
representations, we are justified in taking @xmath to be the observable
algebra for bosonic fields. Usually one argues that for a C*–algebra
@xmath to be an observable algebra of a physical system, it must be
simple (cf. [ 47 , p 852] ). The argument is that by Fell equivalence of
the physical representations, the image of @xmath in all physical
representations must be isomorphic. However, if one restricts the class
of physical representations (as we do here to the regular
representations of @xmath then the latter isomorphism does not imply
that @xmath must be simple.

This theorem also has structural consequences, e.g. it implies that
@xmath has faithful irreducible representations, hence that its centre
must be trivial. For many applications one needs regular representations
where there is a dense invariant joint domain for all the fields @xmath
and this leads us to a subclass of the regular representations as
follows. We will say that a state @xmath on the Weyl algebra @xmath is
strongly regular if the functions

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

are smooth for all @xmath and all @xmath . Of special importance is that
the GNS-representation of a strongly regular state has a common dense
invariant domain for all the generators @xmath of the one parameter
groups @xmath (this domain is obtained by applying the polynomial
algebra of the Weyl operators @xmath to the cyclic GNS-vector). By the
bijection of Corollary 5.2.9 , we then obtain the set of strongly
regular states on @xmath and we denote this by @xmath

#### 5.2.2 Further structure.

Here we want to explore the algebraic structure of @xmath .

###### Theorem 5.2.14

Let @xmath be a given nondegenerate symplectic space, and let @xmath for
@xmath a nondegenerate subspace. Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the tensor product uses the minimal (spatial) tensor norm. The
containment is proper in general.

Thus we cannot generate @xmath from a basis alone, i.e. if @xmath is a
symplectic basis of @xmath , then @xmath is in general a proper
subalgebra of @xmath though in any regular representation @xmath it is
strong operator dense in @xmath by Theorem 5.2.7 (v).

Note that since @xmath (easily seen in any regular representation), and
we have that @xmath it follows from Theorem 5.2.14 that any @xmath of a
finite commuting set of variables is in @xmath . More concretely, we
have the following result which will be used later.

###### Proposition 5.2.15

Let @xmath satisfy @xmath for all @xmath . Then for each @xmath there is
a (unique) @xmath such that in any regular representation @xmath we have
@xmath .

Thus the resolvent algebra contains in abstract form all @xmath of
commuting fields. Note that such a result neither holds for the Weyl
algebra nor for the corresponding twisted group algebra (in the case of
finite dimensional @xmath ).

###### Theorem 5.2.16

Let @xmath be a given nondegenerate symplectic space and let @xmath such
that @xmath . Then

-   @xmath , i.e. the ideals separate the rays of @xmath ,

-   @xmath , and if @xmath we have equality.

-   @xmath is nonseparable.

#### 5.2.3 Constraint theory.

In this subsection we assume the structures associated to the @xmath
-procedure (quantum Dirac constraint procedure) as described in Appendix
( 7.4 ).

For linear bosonic constraints, we start with a nondegenerate symplectic
space @xmath and specify a nonzero constraint subspace @xmath . Our task
is to implement the heuristic constraint conditions

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

to select the subspace spanned by the physical vectors @xmath . There
are many examples where these occur, e.g. in quantum electromagnetism,
cf. [ 42 , 40 , 46 ] . Now in a representation @xmath of @xmath for
which @xmath we have by Theorem 5.2.7 (vi) that @xmath on @xmath . Hence
the appropriate form in which to impose the heuristic constraint
condition in the resolvent algebra is to select the set of physical
(“Dirac”) states by

  -- -- -- --------
           (5.12)
  -- -- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath denote the GNS–representation and GNS–cyclic
vector of @xmath Thus @xmath iff @xmath , where @xmath . Note that
@xmath .

###### Proposition 5.2.17

Given the data above, we have:

-   @xmath .

-    If @xmath , then it is not regular. In particular, if @xmath for
    some @xmath then @xmath for all @xmath .

-   @xmath iff @xmath .

Henceforth we will assume that @xmath and hence @xmath .

###### Proposition 5.2.18

With notation

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

from the @xmath -procedure we have: @xmath with the proper ideal @xmath
, and @xmath where @xmath .

So Dirac constraining of linear bosonic constraints is considerably
simpler in the resolvent algebra @xmath than in the CCR–algebra @xmath
cf. [ 42 ] .

### 5.3 Constraints I: Symplectic Form @xmath

We want to use the Resolvent Algebra to model a Fock-Krein bosonic field
algebras of the type discussed in Section 4.2.1 . Hence for the
remainder of this chapter we will assume that @xmath and @xmath are test
function spaces with all the structures as in Subsection 4.2.2 . Now we
have a technical difficulty that @xmath as defined in Section 4.2.1 are
Krein symmetric but not Hilbert selfadjoint in general, and hence their
spectrum need not be a subset of the real line, hence @xmath is need not
be defined for all @xmath . This means that although the Resolvent
Algebra exists using the QEM test function space, there is no reason it
maps to ‘resolvents’ @xmath and this poses the problem of what Resolvent
algebra to use to model the @xmath ’s.

The Resolvent Algebra exists for any non-degenerate symplectic space. So
given the CCR’s in Section 4.2.1 are:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

we will first try using the Resolvent Algebra @xmath to model the
Fock-Krein fields given in Section 4.2.1 .

Before we use @xmath to develop a @xmath -algebraic model for the
structures in in Chapter 4 , we apply the @xmath -procedure to @xmath as
in Subsection 5.2.3 . This will establish a reference point for
comparison with subsequent results.

#### 5.3.1 @xmath-procedure I

In this subsection we assume the structures associated to the @xmath
-procedure (quantum Dirac constraint procedure) as described in Appendix
( 7.4 ).

Motivated by the Lorentz condition in Subsection 4.1.2 , we want
implement the heuristic constraint @xmath . As described in Subsection
5.2.3 , this corresponds in the Resolvent Algebra to the T-procedure
with constraint set,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As @xmath we have that Dirac states exist by Proposition ( 5.2.17 ) and
that the physical (constrained algebra) is:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

by Proposition ( 5.2.18 ). We next construct @xmath more explicitly for
comparison with other results. By equation ( 5.12 ) we have that for
@xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

However we can get the stronger statement:

###### Corollary 5.3.1

Let @xmath , then for all @xmath , @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

Since @xmath is an ideal of @xmath (Proposition ( 5.2.18 )) and @xmath
for all @xmath , it follows by [ 22 ] 2.4.10 that @xmath hence that
@xmath for all @xmath . ∎

Now @xmath and @xmath are non-degenerate and @xmath @xmath
-symplectically. Hence we have by Theorem ( 5.2.14 ) that

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

Let @xmath be this @xmath -isomorphism, and define @xmath and @xmath .

To characterize the physical observable algebra @xmath , we prove the
following lemmma. Recall the notation @xmath where @xmath and @xmath is
a @xmath -subalgebra of @xmath (cf. Definition ( 5.0.1 )).

###### Lemma 5.3.2

We have:

-    For every @xmath there exists an @xmath such that @xmath .
    Furthermore we have that,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

-    Define the representation of the observables as @xmath by:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Then @xmath , the closure in the first equality with respect to the
    uniform norm of @xmath .

-    Let @xmath , i.e. @xmath is a pure Dirac state. Then for all @xmath
    , @xmath and @xmath we have:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

###### Proof.

(i): We have that @xmath and so we can use @xmath as the constraint set
for the @xmath -procedure in @xmath . As @xmath Proposition ( 5.2.17 )
implies that Dirac states @xmath exist. Take @xmath and @xmath and let
@xmath . We can extend @xmath to @xmath by the Hahn-Banach theorem, and
it is easy to check that @xmath and @xmath .

For the last statement in (i) let @xmath and @xmath such that @xmath .
By the above there exists @xmath such that @xmath , hence @xmath . As
@xmath is a @xmath -algebra, @xmath .

(ii): By the definition of @xmath we see that @xmath where the last
equality follows by Theorem ( 7.4.2 ). Hence by (i) we see that @xmath ,
and hence @xmath is isometric. As @xmath the result follows.

(iii): Let @xmath and let @xmath . By Corollary ( 5.3.1 ) we have @xmath
for all @xmath and @xmath . As @xmath is pure, @xmath or @xmath is
invertible by Theorem ( 5.2.6 ) (i).

Consider the case that @xmath is invertible. Note that @xmath is
invertible, hence @xmath exists and @xmath . Therefore,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where we used Theorem ( 5.2.7 ) (v) in the third equality.

Next consider the case that @xmath . Note that @xmath is invertible if
and only if @xmath is, since in each case @xmath exists, hence since
@xmath is pure @xmath if and only if @xmath . So by assumption we have
@xmath . Proposition ( 5.2.11 ) (i) gives @xmath where @xmath defined as
in Proposition ( 5.2.11 ) and so @xmath . Therefore

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

A similar argument shows that @xmath implies @xmath for all @xmath , and
we are done. ∎

From these lemmas we can characterize the Dirac physical observable
algebra:

###### Proposition 5.3.3

We have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where ‘ @xmath ’ denotes (isometric) @xmath -isomorphism.

###### Proof.

First, by a slight abuse of notation we will write @xmath for @xmath as
by Theorem ( 5.2.12 ) (i), we have that the norms of @xmath and @xmath
coincide. Let @xmath and let @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . Consider

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath . By assumption we have that @xmath is @xmath
-nondegenerate and that @xmath , so if @xmath then there exists a @xmath
such that @xmath . Hence by Proposition ( 5.2.17 ) we have for all
@xmath that @xmath and hence @xmath . Now assume @xmath , i.e. we
consider

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By lemma ( 5.3.2 ) (iii) and that @xmath is a representation we have
that @xmath for all @xmath , and hence that @xmath by Corollary 3.13.8 [
83 ] , where we recall that @xmath where the last equality is by
Proposition ( 5.2.18 ). Let @xmath be the factor map. By the arguments
in the preceding paragraph, and as @xmath is a continuous @xmath
-homomorphism, we get that:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By lemma ( 5.3.2 ) (i) we have that @xmath where @xmath , hence
@xmath is injective hence isometric (cf. [ 76 , Theorem 3.1.5, p80] ).
Therefore

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where ‘ @xmath ’ denotes @xmath -isomorphism (automatically isometric by
[ 76 , Theorem 3.1.5, p80] ). Putting these together we get that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The last isomorphism statement follows as @xmath is the @xmath
degenerate part of @xmath . ∎

#### 5.3.2 QEM and Covariance I

We take @xmath as in Subsection 4.1 and hence we get that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Recall that for @xmath as in Subsection 4.1 , the Poincaré
transformations defined by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(cf. equation ( 4.11 )). As the measure @xmath is Lorentz invariant, it
is straightforward to see that @xmath is @xmath -unitary on @xmath and
so @xmath -symplectic on @xmath . Hence we have by Theorem ( 5.2.4 ) (v)
that,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

extends to an automorphism on @xmath for all @xmath . Also as @xmath
preserves @xmath (lemma ( 4.3.9 )), we have that @xmath and hence @xmath
factors to an automorphism on @xmath . Hence the Poincaré
transformations are defined naturally on the constrained algebra and we
use representations that satisfy the spectral condition for physical
representations.

#### 5.3.3 @xmath-Brst I

We want to construct a @xmath -algebraic version of Fock-Krein BRST as
in Section 4.2 . The definition of @xmath in ( 4.2.11 ) uses the
complexified test function space @xmath (cf. Subsection 4.2.4 ), hence
we use will use the Resolvent algebra @xmath to define the @xmath
-algebraic @xmath and restrict to @xmath once done.

A complication with this approach is, as already discussed at the
beginning of Subsection 5.3 , that @xmath as defined in Subsection 4.2.1
is @xmath -symmetric but not necessarily @xmath -symmetric. Hence the
operators @xmath need not necessarily exist nor does @xmath into which
@xmath naturally maps. We can however think of @xmath ‘ @xmath ’ @xmath
as a heuristic formula and use it as guideline to construct a rigorous
BRST superderivation and investigate the results, comparing the final
constrained BRST-physical system with that in Subsection 5.3 .

To begin the construction to define the abstract BRST-Field Algebra:

-   Let @xmath and @xmath have all the structures as in Subsection 4.2.2
    . Let @xmath and let @xmath be the ghost algebra (Section 3.1 ) with
    all the definitions as there, in particular

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and @xmath for all @xmath

-   We define the BRST-Field Algebra as

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    The tensor norm on @xmath is unique as the CAR algebra is nuclear.
    We define a grading on @xmath by extending the ghost grading on
    @xmath (cf. Definition ( 3.1.9 )), i.e. we define a grading
    automorphism @xmath on @xmath as @xmath equal to the identity on
    @xmath , and equal to the @xmath -grading automorphism on @xmath
    (cf. Definition ( 3.1.9 )).

-   As @xmath is symplectic, we have that @xmath defines a unique
    automorphism on @xmath (cf. Theorem ( 5.2.4 ) (v)), and we let
    @xmath . Also, as @xmath defines a unitary on @xmath , we get that
    @xmath defines a unique automorphism on @xmath , and we let @xmath .

#### 5.3.4 Superderivation I

We next define the BRST superderivation. As it will be unbounded we
first specify its domain.

###### Definition 5.3.4

Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath are as in Subsection 4.2.2 , and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath .

###### Remark 5.3.5

-   Note that @xmath but that @xmath is a @xmath -algebra whereas @xmath
    is not, and that neither is norm dense in @xmath .

-   Note that @xmath for @xmath . This implies that @xmath for @xmath .

-   Recall that @xmath is the grading automorphism on @xmath , hence
    @xmath and @xmath for all @xmath and @xmath (cf. Remark ( 3.1.10 )).
    Hence @xmath and @xmath .

@xmath

Now recall the Definitions ( 4.2.11 ),

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The second identity is problematic and we want to encode it in bounded
form. To do so we construct a mollified version of @xmath . To motivate
this we make the heuristic identification of @xmath ‘ @xmath ’ @xmath ,
and use the mollifying property of resolvents in the following heuristic
calculation: For @xmath

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where we used the mollifying properties of the resolvent in the last
equality. The LHS and RHS are both well defined elements in @xmath .
Similarly we can use heuristic calculations on all the generators of
@xmath to rigorously define @xmath as map. We can then recover the
algebraic structure of superdrivation as given in Definitions ( 4.2.11 )
in regular representations. Note however this will not correspond
exactly as resolvents in the Resolvent Algebra correspond to Hilbert
essentially selfadjoint fields, while the @xmath in Chapter 4 are Krein
symmetric.

###### Theorem 5.3.6

Define a map on the elementary tensors in @xmath by:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

for @xmath , @xmath , @xmath . This extends to a superderivation on
@xmath such that:

-   @xmath on @xmath .

-   @xmath on @xmath .

-   @xmath on @xmath .

###### Proof.

First we verify that @xmath is a superderivation on @xmath . We follow [
17 ] p708. Let @xmath be a strongly regular (hence faithful)
representation of @xmath . As @xmath is regular we have that @xmath
exists for all @xmath and have the properties given by Theorem ( 5.2.7
). Furthermore, as @xmath is strongly regular, there exists a dense
invariant domain @xmath for all @xmath , @xmath . Thus by Theorem (
5.2.7 ) (i), the resolvents @xmath map @xmath back into @xmath for all
@xmath . Thus we can define a second dense invariant domaint @xmath by
applying all polynomials in @xmath and @xmath to @xmath .

We define the non-normed @xmath -algebra

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which acts on the common dense invariant domain @xmath , and we have the
CCR’s

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now let @xmath be any faithful representation of @xmath , and so @xmath
is a faithful representation of @xmath . Furthermore @xmath is a common
dense invariant domain for @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . For
convenience of notation we will drop the @xmath and @xmath , @xmath for
the remainder of this proof and define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We now define the map, @xmath from the generators of @xmath to @xmath
by:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and show that this extends to a well defined superderivation on @xmath .
To do this we show that @xmath is linear and satisfies the graded
Leibniz rule on any finite polynomial in the operators @xmath where
@xmath .

Let @xmath be a finite-dimensional subspace of @xmath and let @xmath .
Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and let @xmath be a finite orthonormal basis for @xmath and define,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This is the same formula as the one for @xmath in lemma ( 4.2.13 ), but
we have substituted @xmath for @xmath . Since @xmath and @xmath satisfy
the same CCR’s, we obtain by the same calculations in the proof in lemma
( 4.2.13 ) that @xmath .

Given @xmath then @xmath and @xmath , and we calculate:

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ -------- -------- -- --
                                                                                                                                                                                 @xmath   @xmath      
                                                                                                                                                                                          @xmath      
                                                                                                                                                                                          @xmath      
                                                                                                                                                                                          @xmath      
  where we have used the CCR’s (equation ( 5.13 )) for @xmath , the definition of @xmath (cf Subsection 4.2.2 ) and @xmath (equation ( 4.25 )) for the first identity. To get                         
                                                                                                                                                                                 @xmath   @xmath      
  we use @xmath on @xmath (Theorem ( 5.2.7 ) (vii)). Noting that the CAR’s for the @xmath use the inner product @xmath on @xmath , we get (similar to calculation for @xmath )                        
                                                                                                                                                                                 @xmath   @xmath      
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ -------- -------- -- --

So we see that @xmath agrees with @xmath on the generating elements of
@xmath and as @xmath was arbitrary we see that @xmath extends to all of
@xmath as a graded derivation and coincides with @xmath on each @xmath .

For @xmath we calculate the identity:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where we used use the mollifying properties of the Resolvent Algebra in
the last line.

The identities @xmath for @xmath , @xmath are obvious. Now @xmath
preserves @xmath , hence defines a superderivation @xmath by @xmath
which agrees on the generating elements @xmath with the given equations.

(i) and (ii): These follow from @xmath and calculations as in lemma (
5.1.3 ) (ii) and (iii). Alternately, these can be easily verified
directly for the generating tensors on of @xmath and so extend to all
@xmath

(iii): For all finite dimensional subspaces @xmath we have @xmath on
@xmath , hence @xmath , hence it follows that @xmath on @xmath ∎

###### Remark 5.3.7

Some important points to note about the above superderivation:

-   From the definition above we see that @xmath preserves @xmath but
    not @xmath . So @xmath makes sense on @xmath but not on @xmath . The
    reason we define @xmath is that it is a @xmath -algebra whereas
    @xmath is not.

-   Property (iii) above states

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (5.14)
      -- -------- -- --------

    for @xmath . It should be pointed out that although @xmath , @xmath
    and so the @xmath on the RHS of equation ( 5.14 ) does not give us
    domain problems.

@xmath

To define the Poincaré transformations on @xmath recall the
representations of @xmath

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the group of unitaries in @xmath (cf. Subsection 4.3.1
and equation ( 4.36 )). Using these we define the Poincaré
transformations by the following action:

###### Proposition 5.3.8

There exists a homomorphism @xmath such that for all @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

Moreover:

-   @xmath and @xmath .

-   @xmath on @xmath and @xmath , hence @xmath .

-   @xmath , where we recall that @xmath for @xmath is such that @xmath
    for all @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath . Before we begin the proof we recall several properties of
@xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.16)
     @xmath      
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

but also recall @xmath and @xmath need not be zero. The first line above
follows from lemma ( 4.3.9 ) and the definition of @xmath (equation (
4.36 )). The second follows from the definition of @xmath , lemma (
4.3.6 ) (ii) which proves that @xmath is both @xmath -unitary and @xmath
-unitary, and @xmath follows directly from the definition. The
statements in the last line were proved as cases in lemma ( 4.3.7 ).

Since @xmath we have by Theorem ( 5.2.4 ) (v) that there exists @xmath
such that @xmath . As @xmath is @xmath -unitary we get that the exists
@xmath such that @xmath (as it preserves the CAR’s). Let @xmath which
satisfies equation ( 5.15 ). Furthermore @xmath is a homomorphism of
@xmath as @xmath and @xmath are representations.

(i): For @xmath , @xmath and @xmath we calculate @xmath on the
generators of @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where we have used the equations ( 5.16 ) above, in particular @xmath in
the second and third identities, and @xmath in the last identity.

As @xmath and @xmath preserves the generators of @xmath and @xmath , we
have that (i) follows.

(ii): For @xmath , @xmath and @xmath we calculate on the generators of
@xmath :

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where we used @xmath in the second line.

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where we have used @xmath as calculated above. Furthermore using the
calculation of @xmath on the generators in (i) we get:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Hence we have proved that @xmath on the generators of @xmath and @xmath
. As @xmath is an automorphism that preserves @xmath and @xmath , and as
@xmath is a superderivation we get that this extends to @xmath .

As this is true for all @xmath we have that @xmath .

(iii): As @xmath (iii) follows. ∎

#### 5.3.5 States

We want to define the set of states that will give us the correct ghost
gradings on the ghost space and also serve as vacuum vectors, hence be
Krein positive. These states should be in the kernel of the BRST charge
if this exists in a given representation. Now in the above construction,
we do not have a BRST charge @xmath to select physical states, but
motivated by the bounded case (lemma ( 5.1.5 )) we define

###### Definition 5.3.9

Let @xmath be the set of states on @xmath of the form @xmath such that
@xmath , and @xmath .

Note that we have defined the Krein involution on @xmath via @xmath and
so we do not require that @xmath . The reason that we do not associate
any Krein structure in the physical representations with @xmath is that
the Hilbert involution of the resolvents in @xmath corresponds to the
Krein involution on the fields @xmath that we have heuristically
associated them to.

We immediately get the following

###### Lemma 5.3.10

Let @xmath and @xmath . Then:

1.  @xmath

2.   We have @xmath where we have assumed Dirac constraints @xmath as in
    Subsection 5.3.1 . Furthermore, @xmath is nonregular.

3.  @xmath .

4.  @xmath

5.  @xmath .

###### Proof.

(i): This follows from @xmath .

(ii): It follows from (i) that @xmath for all @xmath . Hence if we take
@xmath as our test function constraint space as in Subsection 5.3.1 ,
then by Proposition ( 5.2.17 ) (i) @xmath . Moreover, by Proposition (
5.2.17 ) (ii) @xmath is nonregular.

(iii): Follows by (ii) and Corollary ( 5.3.1 ).

(iv): As @xmath we have that @xmath . By the definition of the inner
products on @xmath (cf. Subsection 4.2.2 (4)) we have for this @xmath
and @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

By (ii) we have @xmath , and so by Proposition ( 5.2.17 ) (ii) and
@xmath we get @xmath .

(v): Assume @xmath . By part (i) and part (iii), @xmath for all @xmath .
∎

Lemma ( 5.3.10 ) (v) says that state in @xmath do not have GNS-cyclic
vectors that are positive with respect to the Krein-structure associated
to @xmath . As discussed at the beginning of this subsection, @xmath
does not encode the involution on @xmath associated to the heuristic
correspondence with @xmath , hence lemma ( 5.3.10 ) (v) is not
unreasonable.

#### 5.3.6 A problem with the Physical Algebra

The above structure gives

###### Proposition 5.3.11

We have:

-   @xmath , where @xmath are the Dirac states of @xmath using @xmath as
    a constraint test function space as in Subsection 5.2.3 .

-    Let @xmath . Then @xmath on @xmath .

###### Proof.

(i): First @xmath follows from lemma 5.3.10 (ii). Conversely, let @xmath
. Suppose @xmath and @xmath . Then for @xmath we have @xmath (cf.
equation ( 5.17 )). So by Proposition 5.2.17 (ii) (taking @xmath ), we
get that @xmath for all @xmath . Using Theorem ( 5.3.6 ), we get that,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

But if we suppose that @xmath then @xmath and we can see from the first
equality above that again @xmath . Therefore we have that,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where the second line follows from lemma 5.3.10 (ii). Now @xmath on all
the generators of @xmath , so @xmath and hence @xmath on @xmath which
proves (i). (ii) is immediate from the argument above. ∎

Proposition ( 5.3.11 ) (ii) is a big problem as it says that if @xmath
for @xmath , then @xmath and so @xmath which contains ghost terms, etc,
and @xmath so when passing to the physical algebra, we won’t factor out
anything! To be more precise and also consistent with previous
definitions we make the following definition.

###### Definition 5.3.12

Suppose @xmath . Let @xmath be the generator of @xmath given above and
let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

be the dsp -decomposition with respect to @xmath . Then we define,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the above isomorphism is assumed to be algebraic, and we have
assumed no topology on @xmath .

At this stage we do not assume a topology or involution on @xmath and so
the above isomorphism are purely algebraic. We address these issues in
the next section (cf. Theorem ( 5.5.12 )). As @xmath we have that @xmath
hence @xmath and @xmath . Therefore @xmath . As @xmath we have that
@xmath by the same arguments as in Proposition ( 5.3.3 ), hence

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

However as @xmath is simple it only has faithful representations and
there do not exist representations such that @xmath . Hence if @xmath
then @xmath , and hence there are non-zero ghost number elements in
@xmath .

We see that @xmath selects the same resolvent part of the algebra as the
Dirac method as in Proposition ( 5.3.3 ), but does not remove the ghost
terms. Hence BRST for QEM defined as in Subsection 5.3.4 and Subsection
5.3.5 does not give the same results as the Dirac method as it does not
remove the ghosts. This is somewhat surprising as we found that BRST
gave the correct results for QEM when viewed from the operator point of
view in Chapter 4 .

The explanation for the difference is that we used the heuristic
identification of @xmath ‘ @xmath ’ @xmath when defining @xmath and as
already discussed, there is no reason to think that @xmath is well
defined in a representation having BRST structures.

We will leave the discussion of relativistic covariance for BRST Section
5.5 (cf. Proposition ( 5.5.16 )) .

###### Remark 5.3.13

It is of course possible to do BRST purely at an algebraic level, i.e.
to take @xmath as the physical algebra, and considering its
representations. However, this does not correspond to any
BRST-constraining at an operator level. @xmath

### 5.4 @xmath-Brst Ii

#### 5.4.1 @xmath-prodedure II

As we have seen in the previous section, using the algebra @xmath in the
construction of BRST-QEM does not lead to the correct results for QEM as
the ghosts were not removed when passing to the final BRST-Physical
Algebra @xmath . One reason for this is that we have assumed that @xmath
should in some sense represent the resolvent of the Krein-symmetric
field @xmath and so have defined our BRST superderivation accordingly.
It turned out to give results different from operator model in Chapter 4
and the @xmath -procedure in Subsection 5.3.1 , in that it did not
remove the ghosts.

To remedy this problem we take an approach that more directly connects
to the Krein-symmetric field operator construction in Chapter 4 . We use
for the algebra of bosonic fields, @xmath where @xmath is the auxiliary
symplectic form (cf. Subsection 4.2.2 ). Heuristically the fields
producing the symplectic form @xmath from its commutators are of the
form

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath , rather than

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which produces @xmath from its commutators. Since @xmath , its
resolvents @xmath make sense, so we can use @xmath to model the field
@xmath . Solving @xmath and @xmath for each other gives:

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.19)
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

using @xmath . In the Krein space formulation BRST-QEM of @xmath is
defined in terms of its action on the @xmath ’s and @xmath ’s
(Definition 4.2.11 ) and so we will use the above equations to make a
rigorous definition of @xmath on @xmath . The idea of using auxiliary
fields to generate a @xmath -algebra for a quantum system was used in a
different context in [ 45 ] p505 where the @xmath -algebra under
consideration in that case was the Weyl Algebra.

First, we need to apply the @xmath -procedure to constraints in @xmath .
For this we need to specify the constraints corresponding to the smeared
Lorentz condition as follows.

Observe that for @xmath we have,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

via @xmath . Now @xmath so @xmath hence we can restate the heuristic
condition @xmath as @xmath . Define the subspaces of @xmath as,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.20)
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.21)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

then we associate @xmath with the smeared complexified Lorentz condition
for the symplectic form @xmath . We would like to perform the @xmath
-procedure using Proposition ( 5.2.18 ) using @xmath and @xmath as the
test function spaces corresponding to the constraints. Unfortunately
@xmath is not @xmath -symplectically neutral since @xmath and @xmath ,
@xmath . Hence Proposition ( 5.2.17 ) (iii) shows that are no Dirac
states for these constraints.

We would like to find @xmath -neutral subspaces of @xmath and @xmath to
use for constraints in the @xmath -procedure, cf. Proposition ( 5.2.18
). In QEM there exists a conjugation on @xmath by which we can do this.

Let @xmath be the test function spaces for QEM as in Subsection 4.1 ,
with all the structures assumed there. It follows from Proposition (
4.1.3 ) and Theorem ( 4.1.6 ) that we have

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.22)
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Note that @xmath where @xmath is Hilbert orthogonality with respect to
@xmath . Now define for the scalar functions @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so that @xmath is a well defined real linear (but not complex linear)
operator such that @xmath . Furthermore, as @xmath we have that if
@xmath then @xmath . Hence we have that @xmath factors to a (real)
linear operator on @xmath which we will still denote by @xmath .

###### Proposition 5.4.1

Define the real linear operator @xmath by:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath . Then

-   @xmath .

-   @xmath and so @xmath extends to @xmath as an antilinear operator.

-   @xmath for all @xmath .

-    Let @xmath be a complex linear subspace such that @xmath and define

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Then @xmath and @xmath where @xmath means algebraic direct sum of
    real linear spaces. Furthermore @xmath and @xmath are @xmath
    -neutral real linear spaces.

-   @xmath and @xmath hence we have the decomposition:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where @xmath means algebraic direct sum of real linear spaces.
    Furthermore if we define @xmath then:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and @xmath

###### Proof.

(i) and (ii): Obvious.

(iii): By @xmath and the polarization identity (R&S [ 87 ] p63) we have
that,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we recall @xmath is the inner product given by @xmath , and so
(iii) follows.

(iv): Let @xmath . Now @xmath and as @xmath we get @xmath (uniqueness of
the decomposition is a trivial exercise). Furthermore, as @xmath and
@xmath we get @xmath . From (iii) we have for @xmath or @xmath that,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and so @xmath and @xmath are @xmath -neutral spaces.

(v): Using equation ( 5.22 ) above we see that @xmath , @xmath hence the
decomposition:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

follows by (iv), hence @xmath .

Finally, it follows from @xmath , that @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , that
@xmath is @xmath -symplectic and the above decompositions of @xmath .

∎

###### Remark 5.4.2

Note that the use of @xmath to decompose @xmath into neutral subspaces
as above requires that @xmath preserve @xmath . By Proposition ( 4.1.3 )
and Theorem ( 4.1.6 ) we have,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and so @xmath does not preserve @xmath or @xmath and hence we do not get
an analogous lemma using @xmath in place of @xmath . @xmath

By the argument leading to equation ( 5.20 ) we have that the use of
@xmath as test function constraint space corresponds heuristically to
the constraint set @xmath . So rigorously we take the quantum system
with constraints to be @xmath where @xmath is the set,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proposition 5.4.3

Let @xmath be a quantum system with constraints as in Appendix 7.4 .
Then the Dirac observable algebra is:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the maximal @xmath -algebra of physical observables.

###### Proof.

By Proposition ( 5.4.1 ) (v) we have @xmath , and @xmath does not
symplectically commute with @xmath . These are the analogous inputs in
the arguments that lead to Proposition ( 5.3.3 ) with @xmath replaced by
@xmath . Hence we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

∎

Therefore we have that the @xmath -procedure applied to @xmath or @xmath
give the same result.

#### 5.4.2 Superderivation II

To construct BRST-QEM using the auxiliary symplectic space we follow a
similar procedure to Subsection 5.3.3 except now we use the Resolvent
Algebra with the auxiliary symplectic form @xmath . For notational
efficiency, we use much of the same notation as in Subsection 5.3.3 ,
e.g. @xmath will denote the generating elements of @xmath :

-   Let @xmath and @xmath have all the structures as in Subsection (
    4.2.2 ). Let @xmath be the ghost algebra with all the structures
    defined in Section 3.1 , e.g.

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

-   We define the BRST-Field Algebra as

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    The tensor norm on @xmath is unique as the CAR algebra is nuclear.
    We define a grading on @xmath by extending the ghost grading on
    @xmath , i.e. we define a grading automorphism @xmath on @xmath as
    @xmath equal to the identity on @xmath , and equal to the @xmath
    -grading on @xmath (cf. Definition ( 3.1.9 )).

-   As @xmath is symplectic, we have that @xmath defines a unique
    automorphism on @xmath (cf. Theorem ( 5.2.4 ) (v)). As @xmath also
    defines a unitary on @xmath , we get that @xmath defines a unique
    automorphism on @xmath and we let @xmath which encoded the Krein
    structure on @xmath . We define the involution:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

To define the BRST superderivation rigorously we first use equations (
5.19 ) and Definition ( 4.2.11 ) to get the heuristic equations:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath . We can interpret this rigorously using the
Resolvent Algebra, but first we must choose an appropriate domain in
@xmath for @xmath . Again there is a problem of defining bounded
operators corresponding to @xmath since the @xmath ’s on the RHS of this
expression are unbounded operators. We will use mollifiers to encode
this expression in @xmath .

###### Definition 5.4.4

Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath for @xmath .

###### Remark 5.4.5

We have:

-   @xmath but @xmath is a @xmath -algebra whereas @xmath is not.
    Neither is norm dense in @xmath .

-   Note that by @xmath @xmath for @xmath , and @xmath we have

      -- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   
         @xmath   @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- --

    for all @xmath .

-   Using @xmath and @xmath we have for all @xmath that @xmath . This
    implies that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    as @xmath . Furthermore @xmath .

-   From (ii) and (iii) and @xmath , we have that @xmath for all @xmath
    that are generators of @xmath and hence all @xmath .

-   Recall that @xmath is the @xmath -grading automorphism on @xmath ,
    hence @xmath and @xmath for all @xmath and @xmath (cf. Remark (
    3.1.10 )). Hence @xmath and @xmath . This says that @xmath is a
    @xmath -algebra.

@xmath

To reduce notation we define for all @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Also note that as @xmath we get using Definition ( 5.2.1 ) ( 5 ) that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which we will use frequently in calculations. We will also drop the
tensor product @xmath in Theorem ( 5.4.6 ) below. We define the
mollified version of the BRST superderivation for this context, the
proof of which follows the method in Theorem ( 5.3.6 ).

###### Theorem 5.4.6

Define a map on the generating elements of @xmath as follows, for @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath , @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

The image of this map is a subset of @xmath , and furthermore this
extends to a superderivation on @xmath such that:

-   @xmath on @xmath .

-   @xmath on @xmath .

-   @xmath on @xmath .

###### Proof.

First we verify that @xmath is a superderivation on @xmath . We follow [
17 ] p708 (cf. proof of Theorem ( 5.3.6 ) also). Let @xmath be a
strongly regular (hence faithful) representation of @xmath . As @xmath
is regular we have that @xmath exists for all @xmath and have the
properties given by Theorem ( 5.2.7 ). Furthermore, as @xmath is
strongly regular, there exists a dense invariant domain @xmath for all
@xmath , @xmath . Thus by Theorem ( 5.2.7 ) (i), the resolvents @xmath
map @xmath back into @xmath for all @xmath . Thus we can define a second
dense invariant domaint @xmath by applying all polynomials in @xmath and
@xmath to @xmath . In particular, we can form the non-normed @xmath
-algebra,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

which acts on the common dense invariant domain @xmath .

Let @xmath be any representation of @xmath (which is faithful as @xmath
is simple), and so @xmath is a faithful representation of @xmath .
Furthermore @xmath is a common dense invariant domain for @xmath ,
@xmath , and @xmath . For convenience of notation we will drop the
@xmath and @xmath , @xmath for the remainder of this subsection. Let,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and define the map @xmath from the generators of @xmath to the
generators of @xmath as follows: For @xmath , @xmath

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and show that this extends to a well defined superderivation on @xmath .
To do this all we have to is show that @xmath is linear and satisfies
the graded Leibniz rule on any finite polynomial in the operators @xmath
where @xmath .

Let @xmath be a finite-dimensional subspace of @xmath and let @xmath .
Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and let @xmath be a finite orthonormal basis for @xmath and define,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This is the same formula which defined @xmath in lemma ( 4.2.13 ), but
we have substituted @xmath for @xmath . Thus by the same calculations as
in the proof of lemma ( 4.2.13 ) we get @xmath

Theorem ( 5.2.7 ) (iv) gives that @xmath on @xmath , so given @xmath
then @xmath and @xmath , and we calculate

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where we have used that @xmath in the second last line, and @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath in the last. Noting that the CAR’s for the @xmath use
the inner product @xmath on @xmath , we get for @xmath (similar to
calculation for @xmath ),

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now Theorem ( 5.2.7 ) (vii) gives that,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

by which we calculate the identity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

for @xmath , similar to the calculation for @xmath above. Using that
@xmath , the fact that @xmath is antilinear and @xmath is linear for all
@xmath , and @xmath we get that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

hence from equation ( 5.23 ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Since @xmath agrees with @xmath on the generators @xmath for @xmath this
shows that @xmath extends to a superderivation on each @xmath , hence to
a superderivation on @xmath . Since @xmath , this allows us to define a
graded derivation @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath . We check that @xmath agrees with the stated values on the
generators

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

of @xmath . We give the calculation for @xmath where @xmath , the
calculation for the other generators being similar.

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

using

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

by Theorem ( 5.2.7 ) (vi).

(i): As already noted for @xmath a finite dimensional subspace of @xmath
, we have that @xmath . Now for @xmath we have that @xmath for some
finite dimensional @xmath . Therefore @xmath and as @xmath is faithful,
we get that @xmath on @xmath .

(ii) and (iii): These follow from @xmath and calculations as in lemma (
5.1.3 ) (ii) and (iii). Alternately, these can be easily verified
directly for the generating tensors on of @xmath and so extend to all
@xmath ∎

###### Remark 5.4.7

Some important points to note about the above superderivation:

-   From the definition above we see that @xmath preserves @xmath but
    not @xmath . So @xmath makes sense on @xmath but not on @xmath . The
    reason we define @xmath is that it is a @xmath -algebra whereas
    @xmath is not.

-   Theorem ( 5.4.6 ) (iii) above states

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (5.24)
      -- -------- -- --------

    for all @xmath . By Remark ( 5.4.5 )(iv) we have that @xmath for all
    @xmath and so the @xmath on the RHS of equation ( 5.24 ) does not
    give us domain problems.

@xmath

#### 5.4.3 Strongly Regular States and Charge

Now that the BRST structures are defined at the @xmath -algebraic level
using @xmath , we will investigate what states give the structures as in
Section 4.2.3 , and also calculate their BRST-physical subspace and
BRST-physical algebra. We will define the BRST physical states as those
which:

-   Produce the natural Krein structures as related to the @xmath
    -automorphisms in their GNS representation.

-   Produce ghost gradings as in Subsection 3.1.1 .

-   Have associated cyclic vector being positive with respect to the
    Krein structure.

-   Have a (possibly unbounded) BRST charge @xmath in the associated
    representation which generates @xmath on @xmath in that
    representation, and has GNS-cyclic vector in @xmath ( i.e. @xmath
    selects the vacuum).

Guided by the bounded @xmath case we define (cf. Section 5.1 , in
particular lemma ( 5.1.5 )):

###### Definition 5.4.8

Let @xmath be the set of states on @xmath of the form @xmath such that
@xmath , @xmath , and @xmath .

We easily see that the above definition of @xmath give representations
that satisfy the first three criteria above:

-   Recall the Definition ( 5.0.1 ). For @xmath we have that @xmath
    where @xmath is the automorphism that encodes the Krein structure on
    @xmath , i.e. @xmath for all @xmath . From @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
    and @xmath , @xmath , @xmath we see that @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
    are all Krein spaces as in Definition ( 5.0.1 ).

-   By @xmath we have the correct ghost gradings on @xmath (cf.
    Proposition ( 3.1.11 )).

-   Also @xmath implies that @xmath and so @xmath is positive with
    respect to the inner product @xmath .

We need to examine the existence of a BRST charge. This will be done for
a subset of states in @xmath for which we can construct a charge as in
Subsection 4.2.5 . More general exitence criteria for the BRST charge
will be examined in Section 5.5 Theorem ( 5.5.3 ).

The structers of Section 4.2.3 are constructed in the Fock
representation using the fields @xmath of the resolvents in @xmath . So
we start by investigating representations in which fields exist for all
the resolvents, i.e. the regular representations (cf. Definition ( 5.2.8
)). We recall some useful facts and define terminology for these
representations:

-   Let the regular states of @xmath be denoted by @xmath and let the
    strongly regular states be denoted @xmath (cf. Definition ( 5.2.8 )
    and Section 5.2.1 ). Recall that for @xmath we have that @xmath
    exists for all @xmath . In particular we can form the non-normed
    @xmath -algebra

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

-   For @xmath we have that there exists a dense invariant domain @xmath
    for all @xmath , @xmath . Moreover the cyclic GNS-vector @xmath ,
    and so

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    as @xmath is invariant for all @xmath , @xmath . By Theorem ( 5.2.7
    ) (i) we get

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (5.25)
      -- -------- -- --------

    is an invariant domain for @xmath , and as @xmath we get that @xmath
    is dense in @xmath .

-   For strongly regular states we can define the creators and
    annihilators of the fields. Let @xmath ,then we define:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where by Theorem ( 5.2.7 ) (v) we have that @xmath is a dense
    invariant domain for @xmath . We have that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    which preserves @xmath . For @xmath ,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where @xmath . For consistency in notation we will denote @xmath for
    @xmath and @xmath (cf. Section 3.1 for definition of @xmath ).

-   Take @xmath such that @xmath . Let @xmath . Then

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (5.26)
      -- -------- -- --------

    is a common dense invariant domain for @xmath , @xmath , and
    @xmath (cf equation ( 5.25 )).

-   Let @xmath be a subspace of @xmath and let @xmath . Let

      -- -- --
            
      -- -- --

-   Define @xmath and extend the ghost grading on @xmath to @xmath in
    the obvious way.

###### Remark 5.4.9

Note that for @xmath and @xmath , a monomial of generating tensors of
@xmath , we can choose a monomial of @xmath ’s, @xmath , such that
@xmath . We can also take the @xmath ’s to be arbitrarily large.

To see this we first take @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath
. We show the above statement holds for @xmath and @xmath .

We have that @xmath . Also, for @xmath , we have that @xmath .

Now @xmath are elements of @xmath . Moreover, we can always multiply
@xmath by the appropriate monomial @xmath of resolvents corresponding
@xmath and @xmath in @xmath so that @xmath , and using the fact that
@xmath and Theorem ( 5.2.7 ) (vii) to pair the resolvents in @xmath with
their corresponding terms in @xmath . @xmath

By the same construction as in the last subsection we now define a
superderivation on @xmath :

###### Theorem 5.4.10

Let @xmath is such that @xmath .

Define a map @xmath by:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

for @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

Let @xmath be a finite dimensional subspace of @xmath , let @xmath be a
finite @xmath -orthonormal basis for @xmath and define

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where @xmath . Define the superderivation

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

on @xmath , graded with respect to the @xmath -grading coming from the
ghosts. Then:

-    There exists a superderivation @xmath with respect to the @xmath
    -grading coming from the ghosts that agrees with the map @xmath
    defined on the generating tensors of @xmath above. Moreover @xmath
    for @xmath .

-   @xmath is 2-nilpotent, closable, Krein symmetric with respect to
    @xmath and

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

-   @xmath and

      -- -------- -------- --
         @xmath   @xmath   
                  @xmath   
      -- -------- -------- --

    on @xmath .

-    For all @xmath ,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

-    We have

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    for all @xmath , hence @xmath .

###### Proof.

(i): We need only to check that the map @xmath extends to a
superderivation on polynomials on the generating tensors in @xmath .
This was done in Theorem ( 5.4.6 ).

(ii) and (iii): That @xmath is 2-nilpotent follows as in lemma ( 4.2.13
) substituting @xmath for @xmath .

For the remaining statements we note that @xmath , that @xmath is
symmetric on @xmath and @xmath for @xmath . Using these and that @xmath
is a finite sum, we easily get that @xmath and @xmath is given by the
expression in (iii) on @xmath . Now @xmath and so @xmath is dense in
@xmath . Hence by [ 87 ] Theorem VIII.1 p253 we get that @xmath is
closable.

For Krein symmetry we use that @xmath for @xmath and so

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

using these on the terms in @xmath gives that @xmath is Krein-symmetric.

The expression for @xmath in terms of creators and annihilators follows
from the proof of lemma ( 4.2.13 ) (ii), since the algebraic input is
the same.

(iv): Take a monomial @xmath of generating tensors of @xmath . Now by
Remark ( 5.4.9 ) we can choose an appropriate monomial @xmath such that
@xmath , i.e. @xmath for some @xmath . Thus

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

by the defining property of @xmath . As @xmath is a monomial in a finite
number of generating elements, there exists a finite dimensional
subspace @xmath of @xmath such that @xmath . Hence

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (5.27)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

since @xmath is even so @xmath and by part (iii) that @xmath .

Now @xmath is a function of the @xmath ’s, and by Remark ( 5.4.9 ) we
have that @xmath , for all @xmath , and so equation ( 5.27 ) holds for
all @xmath , @xmath .

By Theorem ( 5.2.7 ) (ii) we have that, for all @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Take the limits @xmath of @xmath to get that,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As any @xmath is a sum of monomials, this proves (iv).

(v): Take @xmath , and let @xmath . Therefore @xmath and so as @xmath we
have @xmath . Hence if we let

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

then we have that @xmath .

As @xmath , we have that @xmath and so following a calculation similar
to equation ( 4.30 ) we get

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Now by part (iv) we have that

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

As @xmath was arbitrary, and the RHS of @xmath above is the sum of
positive operators, we get that,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath . Hence, @xmath by the expression for @xmath in (ii). ∎

Now Theorem ( 5.4.10 ) (v) says that strongly regular BRST physical
states are Fock states when restricted to @xmath . Using this we can
construct a BRST charge @xmath that generates @xmath for these
representations. We follow Subsection 4.2.5 , in particular we have an
almost identical version of lemma ( 4.2.20 ).

###### Lemma 5.4.11

Let @xmath and @xmath . Let @xmath be finite dimensional subspaces of
@xmath . Then we have that,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath .

###### Proof.

Take @xmath , and suppose that @xmath . Now by lemma ( 4.2.17 ), take an
@xmath -orthonormal basis @xmath of @xmath such that it is also a @xmath
-orthogonal basis for @xmath , and take an @xmath -orthonormal basis
@xmath of @xmath such that it is also a @xmath -orthogonal basis for
@xmath . Therefore @xmath is an @xmath -orthonormal basis and @xmath
-orthogonal basis for @xmath . Now,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.28)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

By the way we chose @xmath we have that @xmath and @xmath for @xmath ,
@xmath . So as @xmath where @xmath , we see that we can (anti-)commute
all the terms in the RHS of ( 5.28 ) through the terms in @xmath to
@xmath , which they annihilate by Theorem ( 5.4.10 ) (v). Therefore

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

∎

Now every @xmath is also in @xmath for some finite dimensional subspace
@xmath (cf. equation ( 5.26 )), and so using the above lemma we
construct the BRST charge:

###### Theorem 5.4.12

Let @xmath and @xmath . Let @xmath , let @xmath be a finite dimensional
subspace of @xmath such that @xmath . Define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then @xmath extends to well defined operator on with domain @xmath such
that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath and @xmath . Furthermore:

-   @xmath preserves @xmath , is Krein symmetric (hence closable by
    Proposition ( 7.2.4 )) and @xmath for all @xmath .

-   @xmath preserves @xmath and @xmath for all @xmath . Hence @xmath has
    dsp -decomposition (cf. Theorem ( 3.2.1 ))

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

-   @xmath for all @xmath .

###### Proof.

Let @xmath , then there exists a finite dimensional subspace @xmath such
that @xmath . We check that @xmath is independent of the choice of this
@xmath . Let @xmath be another finite dimensional subspace such that
@xmath and suppose that @xmath where @xmath is a finite dimensional
subspace of @xmath . Then by lemma ( 5.4.11 )

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and so @xmath is independent of the choice of this @xmath . That @xmath
extends to a well defined linear operator on @xmath is now obvious.

Let @xmath and @xmath and take a finite dimensional subspace @xmath such
@xmath and @xmath . Then @xmath , and so @xmath and @xmath . Therefore
by Theorem ( 5.4.10 ) (i) @xmath .

(i), (ii) and (iii): Let @xmath . Then @xmath for some finite
dimensional subspace of @xmath . So we have that @xmath , hence @xmath .
By the definition of @xmath we have that @xmath and so we have that
@xmath . Furthermore @xmath is @xmath -symmetric as @xmath is for all
finite dimensional subspaces @xmath .

Now (i), (ii) and (iii) follow from lemma ( 3.3.1 ) and Theorem ( 3.2.1
). ∎

We want to calculate @xmath explicitly.

###### Proposition 5.4.13

Let @xmath and @xmath , and let @xmath and @xmath be as in Theorem (
5.4.12 ) above. Let @xmath , then:

-   @xmath if and only if,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    for all @xmath , hence @xmath . This implies that for @xmath , the
    vector state @xmath is a Fock state when restricted to @xmath .

-    Let

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Then

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

-    Let

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Then

      -- -------- -------- -- --------
                  @xmath      
         @xmath   @xmath      (5.29)
      -- -------- -------- -- --------

-    We have

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (5.30)
      -- -------- -- --------

###### Proof.

(i): Take @xmath . Then there exists a finite dimensional subspace
@xmath such that @xmath . Now as @xmath , we have @xmath and @xmath ,
and so @xmath if and only if @xmath .

Using lemma ( 4.2.17 ) we can choose a finite @xmath -orthonormal basis,
@xmath , which is also @xmath -orthogonal. So we calculate as in
equation ( 4.30 ),

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence, as the RHS of the above equation is a sum of positive operators
acting on @xmath we have that @xmath if and only if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As @xmath , the (anti)commutation relations for the @xmath ’s and @xmath
’s give that this statement extends to @xmath if and only if

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By Theorem ( 5.4.10 ) (v) we have that @xmath .

(ii): By (i) we have that @xmath is a Fock-state when restricted to
@xmath and so the result follows.

(iii): As @xmath is strongly regular and @xmath , Theorem ( 5.2.7 ) (v)
gives that @xmath . Hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the last equality follows from (ii) and @xmath on @xmath .

(iv): Define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

acting on @xmath . Equation ( 5.29 ) and (i) give:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let @xmath and @xmath where @xmath and @xmath . By definition, @xmath
where @xmath and @xmath . As @xmath with respect to @xmath on @xmath we
have that the CCR’s for the @xmath ’s give that @xmath on @xmath . Hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we used that @xmath is a polynomial of @xmath ’s and @xmath ’s
where @xmath and so @xmath .

Therefore we have that @xmath with respect to @xmath and so by equation
( 5.31 ) above we get that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

By (i) @xmath and @xmath . Using the CCR’s for the @xmath ’s and the
CAR’s for the @xmath ’s for @xmath , we see that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we recall that (i) implies that @xmath is the Fock-vacuum for
@xmath .

Hence by equation ( 5.32 ) above we get that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

∎

#### 5.4.4 BRST-Algebra for QEM II

Now that we have calculated @xmath for strongly regular states via
Proposition ( 5.4.13 ), we want to define and investigate what the
BRST-physical algebra will look like via constructions as in Section 3.3
.

To use the results from Section 3.3 we first have to define in a given
representation the superderivation we are using. To make streamline
notation, define @xmath and @xmath . Note that @xmath and @xmath are
@xmath -symplectic complements of each other. So by Theorem ( 5.2.14 ):

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Let @xmath be this @xmath -isomorphism, and define @xmath and @xmath .
Recall that for a subspace @xmath , we have that @xmath , and define:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.33)
     @xmath      
  -- -------- -- --------

###### Definition 5.4.14

Define: @xmath

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is as in Theorem ( 5.4.6 ).

###### Remark 5.4.15

The reason we do not define @xmath is that the domain restriction makes
calculations tractable. We do not lose information using the smaller
domain and strongly regular states since for @xmath and @xmath , we have
that @xmath is strongly dense in @xmath by Theorem ( 5.2.7 ) (v). @xmath

From Theorem ( 5.4.12 ) we have that if @xmath where @xmath , then
@xmath has a generator @xmath , which has dsp -decomposition @xmath .
Define

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where @xmath is the projection onto @xmath .

###### Definition 5.4.16

Let @xmath and @xmath . Let @xmath be the generator of @xmath given in
Theorem ( 5.4.12 ), and let,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

be the dsp -decomposition with respect to @xmath . We define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the above isomorphism is assumed to be algebraic, and we have
assumed no topology on @xmath .

###### Remark 5.4.17

-   By lemma ( 3.3.10 ) we see that @xmath is an algebra homomorphism,
    hence @xmath is well defined as an algebra.

-   The above follows the alternative definition of the physical algebra
    (Subsection ( 3.3.2 )). To connect with the @xmath we need to extend
    @xmath to
    @xmath as in Section ( 3.3 ), which then gives @xmath by Theorem (
    3.3.11 ) (see Remark ( 3.3.16 )).

@xmath

To calculate @xmath , we first need Proposition ( 5.4.13 ) to show that
BRST strongly regular states have a particularly simple form.

###### Lemma 5.4.18

-    Let @xmath be such that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where @xmath is the cyclic state in the GNS representation of @xmath
    . Then we have that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    for all @xmath and @xmath .

-    Let @xmath and @xmath . Then we have that for all @xmath there
    exists @xmath such that,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

###### Proof.

(i): Let @xmath be the GNS representation for @xmath . Define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

acting of dense domain @xmath constructed as in ( 5.25 ). By the
assumption that @xmath for all @xmath , we have that @xmath is a
Fock-state when restricted to @xmath which implies that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

If we take any element @xmath then we can write @xmath in a normal
ordering of @xmath for @xmath . That is

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath and @xmath is a polynomial with zero constant coefficient
and with all the @xmath ’s to the left of the @xmath ’s. Now using
@xmath for all @xmath , we get that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is a polynomial with zero constant coefficient but now only
in @xmath ’s. Thus:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now let @xmath , then

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.34)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

since @xmath for all @xmath and @xmath in the second equality. We have
shown above that @xmath is dense in @xmath , and so for @xmath there
exists a sequence @xmath such that @xmath and so,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we used ( 5.34 ) in the second equality.

(ii): By Proposition ( 5.4.13 ) (i) we get that @xmath for all @xmath .
Then part (i) gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

for all @xmath , @xmath and @xmath .

Let @xmath , @xmath @xmath . Let @xmath and let @xmath . Then we have
that for all @xmath ,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where we have used that @xmath for all @xmath and @xmath in the first
line and equation ( 5.35 ) in the second. As all elements in @xmath are
of the form of @xmath we are done. ∎

Using this we can calculate the algebra @xmath . Before we proceed, we
define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

i.e. we have extended the domain of @xmath to all of @xmath . Note that
@xmath is a linear transform not a homomorphism on @xmath . As @xmath we
have that @xmath is a @xmath -homomorphism on @xmath .

###### Theorem 5.4.19

Let @xmath and @xmath , and define @xmath . Then:

-   @xmath

-    There exists an isometric isomorphism

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where @xmath is the GNS-representation for @xmath .

-   @xmath as algebras with no topology.

###### Proof.

(i): let @xmath , where @xmath , @xmath . By lemma ( 5.4.18 ) (ii) we
have that there exists @xmath such that @xmath for all @xmath . By
Proposition ( 5.4.13 ) (ii) we have @xmath , hence @xmath and so

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

(ii): Let @xmath be the identity isomorphism. As @xmath (Proposition (
5.4.13 ) (ii)), the representation @xmath has an algebraic cyclic vector
@xmath (we take closures below.

Define @xmath , then for all @xmath

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where we used @xmath in the second equality (Proposition ( 5.4.13 )
(i)). Hence by [ 76 , Theorem 4.1.4, p143] we get that @xmath unitarily
equivalent to @xmath and so there exists an isomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Note that as @xmath and @xmath are @xmath -algebras, this isomorphism is
isometric [ 76 , Theorem 3.1.5, p80]

Now @xmath so in fact @xmath is an isometric isomorphism.

(ii): By definition @xmath contains only polynomials in resolvents with
test functions in @xmath . By the definition @xmath (cf. Theorem ( 5.4.6
))

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

so as @xmath for @xmath , we get that @xmath . From this and part (i) we
have,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This and the definition of @xmath (cf. Definition ( 5.4.16 )) gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

as algebras.

(iii): Combining equation ( 5.36 ) with the isomorphism @xmath above
gives that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as algebras. ∎

From this we see that for each @xmath and @xmath , we have that @xmath
is algebraically isomorphic to @xmath , which by Proposition ( 5.4.3 )
is isomorphic to a dense subalgebra @xmath of the Dirac physical
observables @xmath . Hence we see that the BRST physical observables
correspond closely to the Dirac physical observables from Subsection 5.4
. We make this correspondence precise in the next section, after we have
defined a the abstract BRST-physical algebra @xmath with suitable norm.

#### 5.4.5 QEM and Covariance II

A problematic feature of the auxiliary algebra @xmath is that the
Poincaré automorphisms do not define naturally on it. This section is
devoted to discussing this problem.

Firstly we note that there is a ‘back door’ solution to the problem. We
found that in the covariant algebra case the Poincaré transformations
define naturally and factor to the physical algebra (Subsection 5.3.2 ).
We have also found that the @xmath -procedure for the covariant algebra
and the auxiliary algebra produce the physical algebra, therefore we can
use the factored Poincaré tranformations coming from the covariant
algebra for the constrained auxiliary algebra also.

This deals with relativistic covariance for the auxiliary algebra case
but it is somewhat unsatisfactory from the standpoint that the covariant
algebra and auxiliary algebra come from the same algebra of unbounded
fields, and so either algebra should be able to contain the same
information. Therefore we would expect that the Poincaré transformations
should be able to be encoded as transformations on @xmath in some form.
Such an encoding is not straightforward and the remainder of this
subsection is devoted to a discussion of this issue.

Recall that we define the Poincaré transformations on the one-particle
test function space as:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath as given in Subsection ( 4.1 ). Also recall as in
Subsection 5.3.2 , that @xmath is @xmath -symplectic on @xmath and
@xmath and so generates @xmath by Theorem ( 5.2.4 ) (v). However note
that we do not have that for all @xmath , @xmath is @xmath -symplectic
on @xmath or @xmath , for example take @xmath to be a Lorentz boost.
Therefore we cannot use Theorem ( 5.2.4 ) (v) to generate automorphisms
for such @xmath .

At present the solution to directly encoding the Lorentz boosts for the
auxiliary algebra is still a work in progress. Pursuing the issue here
would be to great a digression, however strategies taken are discussed
in Appendix 7.5 . Briefly, these strategies are:

-   We defined

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where @xmath is a real linear operator such that @xmath is a real
    algebra isomorphism. Then @xmath is an real homomorphism of @xmath .
    Unfortunately, as @xmath is only real linear, it not extend to a
    complex homomorphism @xmath .

-   Now @xmath is defined in the Fock representation in Subsection 5.3.2
    . We see to what extent we define this on @xmath . It turns out that
    @xmath is unbounded for general boosts, @xmath does not preserve
    @xmath in the Fock representation and in fact maps bounded elements
    in @xmath to unbounded elements. A strategy is to encode @xmath in
    an infintesimal form (as a derivation) on parts @xmath from which we
    can recover a representation @xmath in certain representation. This
    strategy has difficulties discussed further in Appendix 7.5 .

### 5.5 General BRST for unbounded @xmath

In this section we give an abstract definition of @xmath -BRST for
unbounded superderivations @xmath , inspired by the bounded case and the
BRST-QEM examples. We identify a set of states for which @xmath has a
densely defined generating BRST charge @xmath , and define the abstract
BRST-physical algebra @xmath with a suitable norm. Then we can establish
the connection between the Dirac physical observables and BRST physical
observables for the examples of abelian Hamiltonian BRST, and both
versions BRST-QEM.

The treatment for unbounded @xmath is very similar to the bounded case
in Subsection 5.1 , but with differences due to the fact that we no
longer have a BRST charge in the field algebra. Motivated by the
BRST-QEM examples we modify the assumptions for bounded BRST in
Subsection 5.1 as follows.

-   Let @xmath be a unital @xmath -algebra and @xmath be an automorphism
    such that @xmath which encodes any Krein structure present in @xmath
    . We call @xmath the Unextended Field Algebra and we assume that it
    has a degeneracy, such as constraints.

-   We tensor on a ghost algebra @xmath where @xmath corresponds to the
    degrees of degeneracy, e.g. @xmath number of linear independent
    constraints in the Hamiltonian case (cf. Definition 3.1.3 ), and let
    @xmath be the automorphism that corresponds to the Krein-Ghost
    stucture (cf. equation ( 3.11 )), in particular @xmath .

###### Definition 5.5.1

The BRST-Field Algebra is @xmath or @xmath and we let @xmath have @xmath
-grading with grading automorphism @xmath (cf. @xmath (cf. Definition (
3.1.9 )). The norm on @xmath is unique as @xmath is a CAR algebra and
hence nuclear. Let @xmath and note that @xmath . Define the involution
on @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Furthermore we assume that there exists a subalgebras @xmath that are
not necessarily closed or norm dense in @xmath , but that @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath . We assume that there exists a (possibly unbounded)
superderivation:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

graded with respect to @xmath , and such that:

-   @xmath on @xmath ,

-   @xmath

-   @xmath

The motivation for defining the domains @xmath and @xmath for unbounded
@xmath is motivated by the BRST-QEM examples (cf. Definition ( 5.4.4 )
and Definition ( 5.3.4 )). The assumptions (i), (ii), (iii) correspond
to @xmath , @xmath and @xmath in the bounded case (cf. lemma ( 5.1.3 )).

We can try to calculate the cohomogical version of the BRST physical
algebra @xmath algebraically, however looking at examples such BRST-QEM
(Theorem ( 5.4.6 )) we see that this is not always a tractable problem.
The approach taken in the Hamiltonian BRST example and QEM-BRST II
example was to use the projection @xmath from the dsp -decomposition
(Theorem ( 3.2.8 )) for the charge @xmath (with @xmath and @xmath
defined in the appropriate representation) to calculate the
BRST-physical algebra @xmath . This can then be connected to the
cohomological BRST definition of the physical algebra via Theorem (
3.3.11 ). For this strategy to work in general we need to select states
such the projection @xmath exists in their corresponding
representations. Hence we choose states @xmath such that @xmath will
have a generator @xmath in the GNS-representations associated to @xmath
with the usual properties as in Section 3.2 .

As for the bounded case we want states that give a space on which @xmath
acts tensored to a ghost space, i.e. :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By Definition ( 3.1.12 ) @xmath implies that @xmath hence @xmath is a
Krein space with @xmath implementing @xmath and @xmath hence @xmath is
positive in the Krein inner product with fundamental symmetry @xmath on
@xmath . If we want the same for @xmath then we assume that @xmath . We
want to choose a subset of @xmath such that we can construct an operator
@xmath that generates @xmath .

###### Definition 5.5.2

Let @xmath be states of the form @xmath , where @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
@xmath and @xmath . Let @xmath and @xmath be the Krein inner product and
fundamental symmetry as in Definition ( 5.0.1 ).

The above definition is motivated by Defintion ( 5.1.4 ) and lemma (
5.1.5 ) (i). The following theorem justifies the above definition (the
proof similar to [ 39 ] p29).

###### Theorem 5.5.3

Let @xmath . Then there exists a @xmath -symmetric, 2-nilpotent operator
@xmath on @xmath which preserves the dense domain @xmath and is such
that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and for all @xmath . Moreover @xmath and:

-   @xmath is closable.

-   @xmath and @xmath for all @xmath .

-   @xmath for all @xmath

###### Proof.

As @xmath is dense in @xmath we define @xmath on @xmath . Take @xmath
where @xmath . We define,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and check that this is well defined. Linearity is obvious, so as @xmath
is dense in @xmath , we just have to check that @xmath implies that
@xmath for all @xmath . For all @xmath , @xmath we have

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and so @xmath and @xmath dense in @xmath imply that @xmath .

With @xmath well defined we use the above calculation and @xmath to
calculate,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

As @xmath is dense in @xmath , and as @xmath , we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and so @xmath is Krein symmetric.

Furthermore, let @xmath . Then @xmath for some @xmath . Therefore @xmath
, and so @xmath preserves @xmath . Furthermore @xmath , so we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and so @xmath is 2-nilpotent. Letting @xmath gives that @xmath .

Now (i), (ii) and (iii) follow from lemma ( 3.3.1 ) ∎

An extra complication in the unbounded @xmath case as compared to the
bounded @xmath case is that we would like to be able to restrict to
onvenient subsets of @xmath , e.g. the strongly regular states in the
BRST-QEM case II (cf. Subsection 5.4.3 ). We modify Definition ( 5.1.6 )
accordingly.

###### Definition 5.5.4

Let @xmath ,

-    Let the representation @xmath be defined by,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Denote the Hilbert inner product on @xmath by @xmath , and let
    @xmath denote the projection onto @xmath .

-    For @xmath , @xmath hence @xmath is unitarily implemented in each
    @xmath hence @xmath is unitarily implemented in @xmath . Denote the
    implementer for @xmath in @xmath by @xmath . As @xmath it follows
    from @xmath that @xmath and @xmath . By lemma ( 7.2.3 ) @xmath is a
    Krein space with fundamental symmetry @xmath and indefinite inner
    product @xmath .

-    For @xmath , let @xmath be the BRST charge as in Theorem ( 5.5.3 ),
    with dense domain @xmath . Let

      -- -- --
            
      -- -- --

    and

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

-    We have @xmath and @xmath is @xmath -symmetric as @xmath for each
    @xmath . Hence @xmath is Krein symmetric and and @xmath satisfies
    the conditions of the dsp -decomposition (Theorem ( 3.2.1 )) via
    lemma ( 3.3.1 ). Let @xmath , @xmath be the dsp -decompositions with
    respect to @xmath and @xmath where @xmath . Let @xmath , @xmath ,
    @xmath be the corresponding projections on @xmath .

-    Let @xmath . For @xmath define,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    and let @xmath be the factor map. Denote @xmath for @xmath and
    @xmath for @xmath .

###### Remark 5.5.5

As @xmath it is obvious that @xmath for @xmath , and hence @xmath ,
@xmath . @xmath

To get the spatial structures of Chapter 3 :

###### Proposition 5.5.6

We have @xmath in Definition ( 5.5.4 ) has an indefinite inner product
defined for all @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Furthermore, if @xmath then @xmath is Krein space with fundamental
symmetry, @xmath and Hilbert inner product

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

and norm @xmath . If

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

then @xmath hence @xmath , i.e. the Krein structure is the same as the
Hilbert structure.

###### Proof.

We have that @xmath and @xmath satisfy the hypothesis of lemma ( 3.2.3 )
hence @xmath is well defined by the above formula on @xmath . The rest
of the proposition follows from lemma ( 3.2.7 ). ∎

To get the algebraic structures as in Chapter 3 :

###### Definition 5.5.7

Define the linear map:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

By lemma ( 3.3.10 ) we have that @xmath is a homomorphism on @xmath . We
define the BRST-physical algebra as,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath above denotes an algebra isomorphism. Let the factor map be
@xmath , and denote @xmath for @xmath .

The above definition is motivated by the alternative definition of the
BRST-physical algebra, cf. Subsection 3.3.2 and Theorem ( 3.3.11 ) for
the connection to the usual cohomological definition of the
BRST-physical algebra.

Note that @xmath is not necessarily a @xmath -isomorphism as @xmath is
not necessarily a @xmath -algebra ( e.g. for the BRST-QEM example in
Subsection 5.3.4 we have for @xmath that @xmath , @xmath ). As in the
bounded case, to get a natural norm for @xmath we use the norm on @xmath
.

###### Proposition 5.5.8

Define the representation,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and the seminorm on @xmath by:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then @xmath is a norm on @xmath ,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

and @xmath is a Banach algebra where closure is with respect to @xmath .
Furthermore @xmath where the isomorphism is isometric. Thus @xmath is a
faithful representation of @xmath and all calculations can be done in
this representation.

###### Proof.

We adapt the proof of Proposition ( 5.1.11 ). First,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore @xmath , and so as @xmath and @xmath is dense in @xmath we get
that @xmath . Therefore

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using this we see that @xmath is a norm by the calculation:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

for @xmath where we have used in the second equality that @xmath for
@xmath by equation ( 5.38 ), and equation ( 5.41 ) in the third.
Therefore @xmath iff @xmath iff @xmath iff @xmath , and so @xmath is a
norm. Let @xmath . As @xmath we have,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

This shows that @xmath is a Banach algebra where closure is with respect
to @xmath . ∎

Note again that @xmath is not in general a @xmath -algebra, and so in
general @xmath is not a @xmath -isomorphism. Now @xmath is not a @xmath
-algebra in general so for @xmath , @xmath is not necessarily well
defined and so we have to be careful of how we define a @xmath
-involution on @xmath .

###### Remark 5.5.9

In order that the Krein involution @xmath on @xmath factors to @xmath we
assume below an extra condition that @xmath induces in indefinite innner
product such that @xmath is a Krein space in a natural way. This extra
condition is sufficient but it may not be necessary. It is a reasonable
condition to assume in this thesis as it holds for the all the examples
considered. @xmath

###### Proposition 5.5.10

We have:

-    Assume @xmath . Then @xmath and @xmath . Hence @xmath on @xmath
    factors to the @xmath -involution on @xmath which coincides with the
    @xmath -involution with respect to the representation @xmath , i.e.

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    for all @xmath where @xmath is the the adjoint of @xmath with
    respect to the inner product @xmath . Furthermore,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where the above is an isometric @xmath -isomorphism.

-    Let @xmath be a subalgebra such that @xmath . Given @xmath , define

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (5.42)
      -- -------- -- --------

    where @xmath for some @xmath . This defines an involution on @xmath
    such that @xmath is a @xmath -algebra where closure is with respect
    to @xmath .

-    Let the physicality condition @xmath hold (equation ( 5.3 )). Then
    @xmath satisfies the conditions on @xmath in (ii), hence @xmath is a
    @xmath -algebra with respect to the norm @xmath . Moreover, the
    @xmath -involution from (i) and @xmath -involution from (ii)
    coincide.

###### Proof.

We adapt the proof of Proposition ( 5.1.12 ) to this context. (i):
@xmath follows from @xmath (cf. Definition ( 5.5.1 ) (iii)). By the
assumption @xmath we have @xmath hence @xmath and so it follows that
@xmath is a @xmath -subalgebra of @xmath . Hence the involution @xmath
factors to @xmath . Moreover, it coincides with the @xmath -involution
with respect to the representation @xmath which can be seen by this
calculation:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath and all @xmath , since by definition @xmath for all
@xmath (cf. Proposition ( 5.5.6 )).

Let @xmath . Then using @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we used @xmath in the last line. Combining this with Proposition (
5.5.8 ) gives that there is a isometric @xmath -isomorphism such that
@xmath .

(ii): Let @xmath then by assumption there exists @xmath such that @xmath
. Hence for all @xmath we have by equation ( 5.38 ) and equation ( 5.41
) that,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.43)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we used equation ( 5.42 ) and that @xmath . This shows that @xmath
is a @xmath -algebra. Furthermore Proposition ( 5.5.8 ) gives that
@xmath is an isometric isomorphism, and so we have proved that @xmath is
a @xmath -isometric isomorphism. Hence as @xmath is a @xmath -algebra so
is @xmath .

(iii): Now @xmath implies @xmath , and by equation ( 5.39 )

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore we can apply (ii) with @xmath to get that @xmath with norm
@xmath is a @xmath -algebra. Moreover by (i) and the defining equation (
5.42 ), @xmath . ∎

###### Remark 5.5.11

-   Note that the above Proposition does not assume that @xmath is a
    @xmath -algebra. If is factoring out by @xmath and using the the
    Hilbert @xmath -involution coming from the BRST physical space
    @xmath that gives a @xmath -algebra.

-   Proposition ( 5.42 ) (iii) shows that equation ( 5.3 ) is a good
    physicality condition as it ensures that the @xmath -involution
    factors to a @xmath -involution on the physical algebra @xmath .

@xmath

Summarising we get:

###### Theorem 5.5.12

Let @xmath be as in Definitions ( 5.5.1 ),( 5.5.2 ), ( 5.5.4 ), and let

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

as in Definition ( 5.5.7 ). Then:

-   @xmath is a homomorphism on @xmath and on @xmath .

-    Let @xmath and @xmath be as in Proposition ( 5.5.8 ). Then @xmath
    has the norm

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    with respect to which @xmath it is a Banach algebra and we have a
    isometric isomorphism such that @xmath . Furthermore, if @xmath then
    @xmath is a @xmath -Banach algebra and is @xmath -isometrically
    isomorphic to @xmath .

-    If @xmath , then @xmath is a @xmath -algebra with norm @xmath and
    involution denoted by @xmath as defined in equation ( 5.42 ).

    When the physcality condition @xmath is satisfied, we have that
    @xmath , hence @xmath is a @xmath -algebra.

###### Proof.

(i): Follows from lemma ( 3.3.10 ) applied to for @xmath and @xmath .
(ii) is Proposition ( 5.5.8 ) and Proposition ( 5.5.10 ) (i). (iii)
follows from Proposition ( 5.5.10 ). ∎

###### Remark 5.5.13

-   Theorem ( 5.5.12 ) (iii) gives a condition to check if @xmath is a
    @xmath -algebra. For the case of bounded BRST charge @xmath , we saw
    in Example ( 5.1.14 ) that by extending @xmath to @xmath gives that
    this condition is satisfied hence @xmath defined using @xmath is a
    @xmath -algebra. In the bounded case, extension to @xmath is
    straightforward as @xmath and @xmath . However, in the unbounded
    case a similar extension is not straightforward it would use the
    unbounded charge @xmath to generate the extended structures, and
    would also require us to specify the extended domain of the
    unbounded @xmath . For this reason, in the unbounded case we leave
    extensions similar to Example ( 5.1.14 ) to a case by case basis.

-   An intrinsic characterization for @xmath without using @xmath is
    possible, although more complicated than in the bounded case (cf.
    Proposition ( 5.1.16 )). We do not pursue it further however, as we
    do not need it to analyze the following examples.

@xmath

#### 5.5.1 Examples

We have now constructed the abstract structures associated to the BRST
constraint process. Below we apply these to examples discussed so far:
abelian Hamiltonian BRST for a finite number of constraints, and both
versions of BRST-QEM. In particular we establish the connection between
the physical algebra produced by the @xmath -procedure (Dirac constraint
procedure) and the BRST-physical algebra.

-   To describe the relations between the different algebras below, we
    will state explicitly the nature of the homomorphisms, i.e. if they
    are algebra homomorphisms, @xmath -homomorphisms, @xmath
    -homomorphisms. The symbol ‘ @xmath ’ will denote isomorphism below
    but does not assume any adjointness property, e.g. @xmath
    -isomorphism. Any such property of the associated the isomorphism
    will explicitly stated along with the identity containing ‘ @xmath
    ’.

-   We will use the following basic result frequently (cf. [ 76 ]
    [Theorem 3.1.5 p80]:

    ###### Theorem 5.5.14
    Let @xmath and @xmath be @xmath -algebras. Let @xmath be an @xmath
    -homomophism with @xmath . Then @xmath is isomometric, i.e. @xmath .

Example 1:

For bounded @xmath let @xmath , and let @xmath . The definitions for
bounded BRST in Section 5.1 agree with the unbounded case above. Recall
abelian Hamiltonian BRST for a finite set of constraints in Example (
5.1.17 ). For this case we get by lemma ( 5.1.18 ) that @xmath and
@xmath hence,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the above isomorphism is a @xmath -isomorphism as given by
Proposition ( 5.5.10 ) (i) but not in general a @xmath -isomorphism as
@xmath is not a @xmath -algebra in general. Theorem ( 5.5.12 ) (iii)
gives that @xmath is a @xmath -algebra if @xmath . In Example ( 5.1.14 )
we see that we can satisfy this condition by extending @xmath to @xmath
.

Alternatively we can restrict to the original algebra and get the
traditional Dirac observables as in Proposition ( 5.1.19 ), that is
@xmath where ‘ @xmath ’ denotes a @xmath -isomorphism.

Example 2:

For BRST-QEM I in Section 5.3.3 let @xmath and @xmath as in Definition (
5.3.4 ) and let @xmath . We have by Proposition 5.3.11 that @xmath ,
where @xmath are the Dirac states of @xmath using @xmath as a constraint
test function space as in Subsection 5.2.3 . As discussed in Subsection
5.3.6 we have:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (5.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

for all @xmath (cf. equation ( 5.18 ) for equation ( 5.44 )). Using the
facts we show that the BRST-physical algebra strictly contains the Dirac
physical observables and is contained in the Dirac physical observables
tensored with the ghosts.

###### Proposition 5.5.15

Let @xmath are the Dirac physical algebra from Subsection 5.3 . Then

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

where the containment @xmath is proper, and the tensor norm is unique as
@xmath is nuclear. The above are @xmath -isomorphisms.

###### Proof.

As @xmath for all @xmath and @xmath we have that @xmath and so @xmath .

We show that @xmath . From the discussion above @xmath for all @xmath ,
and as @xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Also @xmath and so

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.45)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where we used equation ( 5.44 ) in the second equality. Note also that
the first containment need not be equality as @xmath where the
containment is proper.

Recall from lemma ( 5.3.2 ) the representation @xmath by:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

By @xmath we get,

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (5.46)
     @xmath   @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

where the first isomorphism follows from lemma ( 5.3.2 ) (ii) and the
third from Proposition ( 5.3.3 ). Also @xmath as @xmath is a CAR algebra
hence simple. Hence we have,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where all the isomorphisms are @xmath -isomorphisms, we used Theorem (
5.5.12 ) in the first isomorphism, @xmath in the first equality and
equation ( 5.45 ), equation ( 5.46 ) and that the tensor norm is unique
as @xmath is a nuclear.

We now show that @xmath , where the containment is proper. By @xmath and
the definition @xmath (cf. Theorem ( 5.3.6 )) we have that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

hence @xmath by equation ( 5.46 ).

To see that the containment is proper consider @xmath for @xmath . By
the definition of @xmath in Theorem ( 5.3.6 ) we have that @xmath . Now
by @xmath , lemma ( 5.3.10 ) (iii) and @xmath , we have that @xmath .
Hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we have used that @xmath as @xmath is simple. Hence the
containment @xmath is proper. ∎

Now by Proposition ( 5.5.10 ),

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

by a @xmath -isometric isomorphism, and so Propostion ( 5.5.15 )
therefore states that @xmath properly contains the Dirac observables
obtained using the @xmath -procedure @xmath as in Subsection 5.3 , and
is contained in the Dirac observables tensored with the ghost algebra.
This shows rigorously that BRST using the Resolvent Algebra @xmath does
not give equivalent results to the Dirac algorithm ( @xmath -procedure)
as it does not remove the ghosts.

By Proposition ( 5.3.8 ) we can also easily encode Poincaré covariance
in this picture.

###### Proposition 5.5.16

Let @xmath be the representation of @xmath as in Proposition ( 5.3.8 ),
i.e. @xmath has action

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath , @xmath . Then

-    We have

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    for all @xmath there exists @xmath such that

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Moreover, @xmath is a representation @xmath .

-    We have that @xmath factors to @xmath such that

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (5.47)
      -- -------- -- --------

    for all @xmath . This extends to a @xmath -automorphism @xmath ,
    which we still denote @xmath . Moreover

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    is a representation of @xmath in the @xmath -automorphisms of @xmath
    .

###### Proof.

(i): Let @xmath and @xmath . Then by Proposition ( 5.3.8 ) we have
@xmath on @xmath and @xmath , hence

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

for all @xmath . Furthermore, by Proposition ( 5.3.8 ) we have @xmath
and hence

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

Obviouly @xmath , which combined with equation ( 5.48 ) and equation (
5.49 ) shows that @xmath (cf. Definition ( 5.5.2 )). This shows

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The reverse inclusion is obvious. Now @xmath . As @xmath for all @xmath
we get that @xmath is @xmath with the direct summands permuted. Such a
direct summand can be done in @xmath by conjugation with a unitary,
which we denote @xmath . Conjugation by a unitary which preserves @xmath
is a @xmath -automorphism we get that @xmath , and as @xmath and @xmath
are representations, so is @xmath .

(ii): Let @xmath . By Proposition ( 5.3.8 ) (i) we have @xmath . As
@xmath and @xmath we have that @xmath . Hence @xmath factors trivially
to an automorphism @xmath on @xmath with action given by equation ( 5.47
).

Now by Proposition ( 5.47 ) (iii), @xmath . Hence,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where we have used that the @xmath -invoution factors to a @xmath
-involution on @xmath as in Proposition ( 5.5.10 ). Hence @xmath is a
@xmath -involution.

We now show that @xmath extends to an @xmath -automorhism on @xmath . By
(i), @xmath and the fact that @xmath , we have that @xmath is such that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As @xmath is defined by a unitary conjugation, it is a @xmath
-automorphism on the @xmath -algebra @xmath and so isometric and so
extends to an @xmath -automorphism on @xmath but not a @xmath
-automorphism as @xmath is not a @xmath -algebra. By definition @xmath
and so if @xmath is this isomorphism, then @xmath defines an
automorphism on @xmath . It is easy to check that this agrees with
@xmath on @xmath and so @xmath is the extension of @xmath to @xmath .

Now @xmath is a representation of @xmath which follows as @xmath and
@xmath are. ∎

Proposition ( 5.5.16 ) (ii) encodes the Poincaré transformations on the
BRST physical algebra @xmath .

Example 3:

For BRST-QEM II in Section 5.4 we take @xmath and @xmath as in
Definition ( 5.4.4 ). Recall from Definition ( 5.5.2 ) that we needed
@xmath and @xmath to be dense in @xmath for @xmath . We now show that if
@xmath is regular on the resolvent part of @xmath it has this property.

###### Lemma 5.5.17

Let @xmath and @xmath (cf. Definition ( 5.2.8 )). Then @xmath is dense
in @xmath .

###### Proof.

Recall from Definition ( 5.4.4 ) that for all @xmath , @xmath where

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and furthermore recall the defining property @xmath (cf. Definition (
5.2.1 ) ( 3 )). By Theorem ( 5.2.7 ) (ii), we have that for @xmath ,
@xmath

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and so @xmath .

A similar argument using @xmath , gives that for @xmath , @xmath and
hence @xmath .

In fact we can use the same argument to show that for any finite set
@xmath , we have,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

but

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

and so,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

∎

Hence we take for @xmath the set:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is as in Definition ( 5.5.2 ).

To calculate the BRST physical algebra explicitly as in Subsection 5.4.3
we restrict to BRST ground states that are strongly regular states on
@xmath , ie,

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

and restrict @xmath to the domains @xmath , for @xmath where @xmath as
in equation ( 5.33 ). To use the domains @xmath and @xmath in the
constructions above we prove.

###### Lemma 5.5.18

Let @xmath and @xmath . Then @xmath is dense in @xmath and

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

###### Proof.

The proof holds as for lemma ( 5.5.17 ), replacing @xmath by @xmath for
@xmath . ∎

We can now calculate the physical algebra.

###### Proposition 5.5.19

Let @xmath , @xmath be as above for BRST-QEM II and let @xmath have
domain @xmath . Then

-    The physicality condition @xmath is satisfied. Hence @xmath is a
    @xmath -algebra and the @xmath -involution coincides with the @xmath
    -involution on @xmath .

-    We have the @xmath -isomorphisms:

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    where @xmath is the Dirac physical algebra of observables for @xmath
    as in Subsection 5.4.1 .

###### Proof.

Recall @xmath and @xmath .

(i): Let @xmath , then by @xmath , and by @xmath (Proposition, hence we
have @xmath . Now for @xmath we have @xmath (cf. Proposition ( 5.4.13 )
(ii)), hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and so @xmath . By Definition ( 5.5.4 ) (i) and (iv) we have

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

from which it follows that @xmath for all @xmath . Hence we have that
@xmath hence @xmath , i.e. the physicality condition holds. The rest of
the statements in (i) follow from Theorem ( 5.5.12 ) (iii).

(ii): Theorem ( 5.4.19 ) (i) gives that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for all @xmath . Recall the definition

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Combining @xmath for all @xmath , @xmath and @xmath give:

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

So by Theorem ( 5.5.12 ) (ii), we get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the above is a @xmath -isomorphism as by (i) the @xmath
-involution coincides with the @xmath -involution on @xmath .

Now define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

i.e. we have extended the domain of @xmath to all of @xmath . Note that
@xmath is a linear transform but not a homomorphism on @xmath , but that
it is a @xmath -homomorphism on @xmath as @xmath for all @xmath .

We want to show @xmath . Let @xmath , then by Theorem ( 5.4.19 ) (ii) we
have a @xmath -isometric isomorphism

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the GNS-representation for @xmath . As @xmath is also
strongly regular we have that @xmath is faithful. Hence

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the last equivalence is clear from @xmath for all @xmath , @xmath
. Hence @xmath is faithful and so

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

where the above isomorphisms are isometric. Combining equation ( 5.51 )
and equation ( 5.50 ) gives that

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the above is a @xmath -isomorphism between @xmath -algebra and
hence isometric. Taking closures gives,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where the last isomorphism comes from Proposition ( 5.4.3 ). ∎

Poincaré covariance is a problem in this example. As in Subsection 5.4.5
, we do not have that the Poincaré transformations define naturally on
the auxiliary algebra @xmath , so it is not clear how to define them on
@xmath either. We do have the resolution to the problem that the final
BRST-physical algebra is the same as that using the @xmath -procedure
where the Poincaré transformations are naturally defined, as discussed
in Subsection 5.4.5 . This is solution is in some sense the converse of
a usual raison d’etre of BRST, that is that BRST is ‘manifestly
covariant’ while the Dirac method is not.

Summarising, the BRST physical algebra is equivalent to the @xmath
-procedure for
@xmath or @xmath in Subsection 5.3 Subsection 5.4 , and so we can say
that @xmath -BRST for QEM using the auxiliary @xmath gives equivalent
results to the Dirac method, but is not ‘manifestly covariant’.

## Chapter 6 Results and Conclusion

### 6.1 Summary of Results

A brief summary of the results in each chapter are as follows:

Chapter 2 : The heuristic BRST structures were described and the
examples of BRST-QEM and Hamiltonian BRST with constraints that close
were given. The Multiple Copies of the Physical Subspace (MCPS) problem
was discussed for Hamiltonian BRST. In this introductory chapter there
were no original results.

Chapter 3 : The heuristic structures in Chapter 2 were made rigorous.
The BRST charge @xmath was analysed and the dsp -decomposition was given
for an unbounded @xmath acting on a Krein space (as first proved in
Horuzhy [ 57 ] ). The BRST physical subspace @xmath was defined and
shown to be a Krein space. The condition for physicality was given in
equation ( 3.29 ) which implied that the Hilbert and Krein structure on
@xmath coincided.

The BRST superderivation was analysed. The basic spatial, algebraic and
@xmath -grading structures required to define @xmath was described at
the level of algebras of unbounded operators acting on a dense invariant
domain in a Krein space. Topological issues on the algebras were
postponed till Chapter 5 . The BRST physical algebra @xmath was defined
and its natural representation on @xmath given. The connection between
@xmath and the dsp -decomposition was given in Theorem ( 3.3.11 ). This
fundamental result can be found in the literature in [ 51 ] p285,
however the rigorous statement and proof for an infinite dimensional
Hilbert space with unbounded BRST charge @xmath is original.

As a consequence of Theorem ( 3.3.11 ) we showed that in a simple
example with a single constraint, Hamiltonian BRST does not remove the
ghosts at a spatial or algebraic level in the final constrained theory,
and that extra ghost number zero conditions do not fix the problem. This
example and problem were communicated to me by Dr. Hendrik Grundling,
however the proof via Theorem ( 3.3.11 ) is original and shows the
connection between the non-removal of the ghosts at the spatial and
algebraic level.

Chapter 4 : We developed a rigorous model for the heuristic BRST-QEM
model given in [ 68 , 92 ] . We analysed the QEM test function space and
defined the abstract KO Abelian BRST test function space with analogous
structures. We constructed the BRST superderivation @xmath and showed in
the case of QEM that it gave the correct smeared version of the
heuristic superderivation. We then constructed the BRST charge @xmath
for KO Abelian BRST , calculated @xmath and @xmath using Theorem (
3.3.11 ). We found that the KO Abelian BRST model and Gupta-Bleuler
model for QEM gave equivalent results, at both the spatial and algebraic
level. The calculation of @xmath using Theorem ( 3.3.11 ) is to the
author’s knowledge an original result.

Using KO Abelian BRST and Theorem ( 3.3.11 ) we were also easily able to
calculate the BRST physical subspace and algebra for the examples of
BRST with a finite number of bosonic constraints, and BRST for massive
abelian gauge theory.

We answered in the affirmative the conjecture at the end of [ 60 ] as to
whether the BRST-physical state space can be used to calculate the BRST
physical algebra more efficiently that by direct algebraic calculation
(cf. Remarks ( 4.2.29 )(i), ( 3.3.13 )(ii)).

Lastly, we synthesized Hamiltonian BRST with a finite set of commuting
selfadjoint constraints with KO Abelian BRST with a finite number of
bosonic constraints, to get an abstract algorithm BRST for a finite set
of commuting selfadjoint constraints that selects the correct physical
subspace without the need for extra selection criteria. That is, it does
not suffer the MCPS problem of the usual Hamiltonian algorithm and for
simple examples, @xmath for this algorithm also coincided with the
quantum Dirac physical observable algebra. This combined algorithm is an
original construction.

Chapter 5 : We developed a @xmath -algebraic framework for the
structures in Chapters 3 and 4 . We did this by first investigating the
case of bounded BRST charge @xmath . We used the selection criteria as
in [ 39 ] to give representations with all the structures of Chapter 3 ,
then defined @xmath as an abstract Banach algebra. We encoded KO Abelian
BRST in a @xmath -algebraic form.

To deal with issues related to the unboundedness of the fields we used
the Resolvent Algebra to construct a ‘mollified’ version of the BRST
superderivation @xmath . The first attempt at this gave a BRST-model on
which we could encode the Poincaré transformations, but did not give
equivalent results to the quantum Dirac constraint procedure ( @xmath
-procedure). The second attempt produced a BRST-model with BRST-physical
algebra equivalent to that selected by the @xmath -procedure, but did
not admit a natural encoding of the Poincaré transformations.

Finally, we developed an abstract @xmath -algebraic framework for BRST
for the case of an unbounded superderivation @xmath with non-norm dense
domain. We show that the examples of Hamiltonian BRST with a finite
number of constraints and @xmath -KO Abelian BRST Abelian (both
versions) fit into this framework. The correspondence between the
abstract BRST method and the @xmath -procedure for the examples is:
Hamiltonian BRST for a finite number of constraints suffers the MCPS
problem and is not equivalent to the @xmath -procedure; @xmath -KO
Abelian BRST with covariant symplectic space @xmath does not give
equivalent results to the quantum Dirac method as the ghosts are not
removed in @xmath ; @xmath -KO Abelian BRST with the auxiliary
symplectic space @xmath gives equivalent results to the @xmath
-procedure.

The results regarding both versions of @xmath -KO Abelian BRST are
original but with the construction of the mollified version of @xmath is
heavily influenced by [ 17 ] . The abstract construction of @xmath for
general unbounded @xmath , and its comparison with the physical
observable algebra selected by the @xmath -procedure in the given
examples is original.

### 6.2 Conclusions

We have now analysed the quantum BRST method of constraints in a
well-defined mathematical framework. This was first done in the setting
of a concrete Krein-space representation where the model independent
structures of quantum BRST common to the standard BRST examples in the
literature have been defined. The standard quantum BRST examples have
then been developed rigorously in light of these frameworks, enabling a
discussion of problematic issues related to BRST in the literature.

The analysis the quantum BRST constraint method was then extended to a
@xmath -algebraic setting. The construction of this setting was one of
the main goals of this thesis. This construction enabled a
mathematically rigorous comparison of the results produced by the BRST
method and the quantum Dirac constraint method ( @xmath -procedure),
which was the other main aim of the thesis. We found that the results
obtained from the different constraint methods were not equivalent for
the examples of Hamiltonian BRST with a finite number of constraints
that close, and BRST-QEM using the covariant Resolvent Algebra @xmath .

This is not to say that a @xmath -algebraic framework is the only way to
analyse quantum BRST rigorously, indeed there are many other approaches
to rigorous quantum BRST as mentioned in the introduction. The @xmath
-algebraic viewpoint, however, was a methodology to draw together and
analyse in a general and consistent mathematical framework examples
coming from the different varieties of quantum BRST found in the
literature.

Even for basic examples, we found that a consistent treatment of quantum
BRST was not straightforward. From the analysis, we draw several
important conclusions:

-   The quantum BRST method and quantum Dirac method of constraints are
    not equivalent in general. This has been seen in the rigorous
    examples given Subsection 5.5.1 .

-   Quantum Hamiltonian BRST always suffers the MCPS problem and needs
    extra selection criteria to select the correct physical space. In
    simple examples, the MCPS problem also leads to the non-removal of
    the ghosts in the BRST physical algebra @xmath .

-   Conversely, KO Abelian BRST selects the correct physical algebra
    without extra selection criteria both at the level of unbounded
    operators acting on a Krein space, and at the @xmath -algebraic
    level when using the auxiliary test function space @xmath . As KO
    Abelian BRST is a rigorous example of Lagrangian BRST, we see that
    quantum Lagrangian KO Abelian BRST and quantum Hamiltonian BRST are
    not equivalent constraint methods.

-   Quantum BRST does not incorporate equivalent constraints well (cf.
    Remark ( 5.1.20 )).

### 6.3 Further Issues with Quantum BRST

The inequivalence of quantum Hamiltonian BRST, Lagrangian BRST, and the
Dirac method is an interesting topic in need of further investigation,
particularly as all are equivalent at the classical level.
Characterization of when the quantum equivalence of the different
methods will hold has not been analysed in this thesis. This is
primarily because we have found no general algorithm that encompasses
all the varieties of methods labelled as ‘quantum BRST’.

The Lagrangian approach is used to model heuristically the important
physical examples of quantum gauge theories, but is the least well
understood mathematically. The @xmath and @xmath are defined by
‘replacing the gauge parameter by ghost parameter’. As already stated,
this is a vague concept and relies on gauge theory structures being
present, rather than being an explicit algorithm such as the @xmath
-procedure which begins with a field algebra @xmath and a set of
constraints @xmath that ultimately select the physical observable
algebra. In fact in KO, the classical constraint equation @xmath (cf. [
68 ] p14) is given but the quantum constraint set of the original
unextended system are never explicitly stated. Natural questions to ask
are: How do we do Lagrangian BRST-QEM with Gupta-Bleuler constraints? Or
Coulomb constraints? Will they give equivalent results? To answer these
questions, and the broader equivalence issues discussed above, we need
to formulate rigorously the method of ‘replacing the gauge parameter by
ghost parameter’ in a way that produces the heuristic Lagrangian BRST
structures in examples but is also valid when no gauge theory is
present.

Related to the issue above is to what extent we can make other examples
of heuristic Lagrangian BRST rigorous. We have done so for KO Abelian
BRST , but the main purpose for the use of BRST in KO  is to apply in
the case of non-abelian quantum gauge theories (NAQGT). Issues to
address with respect to Lagrangian BRST for NAQGT’s are: will the
physical subspace always be positive as in the abelian case; Will extra
constraint conditions beyond @xmath and @xmath be needed to select the
correct BRST-physical space and algebra which were not needed in the
abelian case, and if so what extra conditions? Resolving these issues,
however, is very difficult as constructing a rigorous realistic NAQGT is
a long standing open problem.

We should note that there is a standard heuristic argument that BRST
also gives the correct results for NAQGT based upon the ‘quartet
mechanism” and asymptotic abelianess [ 68 ] p46-47. Whether this can be
made rigorous is difficult to answer given the lack of rigorous NAQGT’s,
but there is evidence that extra selection conditions beyond @xmath and
@xmath will be needed in the non-abelian case [ 97 , 2 ] . While very
interesting and important to address, these issues are beyond the scope
of this thesis.

A further issue requiring attention is the matter of equivalent quantum
constraints and quantum BRST. It is easy to construct examples of
different constraint sets of operators that select the same physical
states, but have different commutants. This means that the corresponding
traditional Dirac observables ( i.e. the commutant of the constraints)
will be different although the physical states selected are the same.
This issue is resolved by the @xmath -procedure, which defines the
observable as the abstract version of the weak commutant of the
constraints (cf. [ 41 ] p100), and is a significant advantage which this
generalized Dirac method of constraints has over the traditional Dirac
method. In Remark ( 5.1.20 ) we see that quantum Hamiltonian BRST
suffers the same problem with respect to equivalent constraints and
poses the question of how to formulate a generalized version quantum
Hamiltonian BRST. Whether a weak version of Lagrangian BRST is necessary
is a difficult question to answer. Evidence against is that in both
versions of KO Abelian BRST for QEM, we found that the BRST method
selected the same part of the Resolvent Algebra as the @xmath
-procedure. However, in the QEM case the @xmath -procedure also selects
the traditional Dirac observables. Hence to investigate the equivalent
constraint issue for Lagrangian BRST we come back to need for a rigorous
Lagrangian BRST algorithm.

### 6.4 Directions for Further Analysis

The most important task in finding a mathematically transperant
understanding of the quantum BRST method is stating a well-defined
algorithm that encodes Lagrangian BRST for a general quantum gauge
theory as described by KO [ 68 ] . Until this is done, it is very
difficult to resolve any of the issues of equivalence, extra selection
conditions, positivity of the physical subspace, etc. as described above
except on a case by case basis. But to complete this task, the author
feels we must state what a quantum gauge theory is rigorously. As
already stated, this is an open problem that is very difficult to solve,
but should be first completed before we can feel confident that we fully
understand the quantum BRST algorithm. A direction to take in doing this
would be to further investigate the relationship between the structures
developed in this thesis and the rigorous work related to PGI such as
found in [ 92 , 26 , 25 , 24 , 56 ] , as this is developed in a
Lagrangian BRST context and gives examples beyond BRST-QEM that would
shed more light on the form of a general Lagrangian BRST constraint
algorithm.

On a less grand scale, an issue that needs resolution is the connection
between the Resolvent Algebra with covariant symplectic space @xmath and
the Resolvent Algebra with auxiliary test function space @xmath . As
both symplectic forms have act on the same vector space @xmath and are
related by the symplectic operator @xmath , it seems that they should
encode the same information. However, the @xmath -KO Abelian BRST models
constructed with the different Resolvent Algebras gave different
results, i.e. the @xmath -model selected the wrong physical algebra but
naturally admitted an encoding of the Poincaré transformations, while
the @xmath -model selected the correct physical algebra but did not
admit an encoding of the Lorentz boosts. Hence understanding the
correspondence is worth investigating. It will also have relevance in
other areas such as supersymmetry models constructed as in [ 17 ] , but
for cases where the bose fields are Krein-symmetric gauge fields rather
than Hilbert essentially-selfadjoint scalar fields.

With respect to quantum Hamiltonian BRST an interesting area to
investigate is how to generalize the algorithm in a way that takes into
account equivalent sets of constraints. It is not obvious to the author
that the cohomological definition of the BRST physical algebra @xmath
can be generalized in the direction of using a ‘weak’ version of @xmath
and @xmath similar to the weak commutant of the constraints in the
@xmath -procedure.

A final direction to follow is to see to what extent we can extend the
synthesized Hamiltonian BRST and KO Abelian BRST algorithm in Section
4.4 . We have constructed a general quantum BRST algorithm for the case
corresponding to a finite set of selfadjoint commuting constraints such
that @xmath selects the correct physical subspace with no extra
selection conditions ( i.e. it does not suffer the MCPS problem of
Hamiltonian BRST). It would be extremely useful to extend this to the
case where we have a finite set of constraints that close but do not
commute. Or to a general set of non-commuting constraints. We would also
like to extend the algorithm to infinite sets of constraints. This would
be a valuable area to investigate as results would lead towards a
general quantum BRST algorithm that removes the ghosts and selects the
correct physical objects with no extra selection conditions.

## Chapter 7 Appendix

### 7.1 Superstuff

Let @xmath be an algebra with @xmath -grading where @xmath denotes
algebraic sum. We call @xmath the even part of @xmath and @xmath the odd
part of @xmath . Define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then we can define graded brackets on @xmath with the following
properties:

-   Super Bracket

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    Note that,

      -- -------- -- -------
         @xmath      (7.1)
      -- -------- -- -------

-   Superderivation

      --------------------------------------------------------------- -------- -------- -- --
                                                                      @xmath   @xmath      
                                                                      @xmath   @xmath      
      in particular, for @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath we have                        
                                                                      @xmath   @xmath      
      --------------------------------------------------------------- -------- -------- -- --

-   Super Jacobi Identity

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

A preferred notation for @xmath -graded algebras and graded brackets is
the following. Define the grading automorphism on @xmath by

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

for @xmath and @xmath . Note that @xmath . Then we can equivalently
define the superbrackets

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Using this we can restate all the properties of the superbrackets and
superderivation above, such as the super Jacobi identity, using @xmath
notation instead on @xmath notation. In particular for @xmath such that
@xmath we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

### 7.2 Indefinite Inner Product Spaces

This appendix gives some basic facts about indefinite inner product
spaces relevent to the disussion in this thesis. For much more extensive
developments see in particular [ 14 , 5 ] .

Let @xmath be a vector space with inner product @xmath . A vector @xmath
such that @xmath is positive, negative, or zero, is called positive,
negative or null. A subspace @xmath is called positive, negative, or
null if the vectors in @xmath are positive negative or null. If @xmath
is such that @xmath or is both positive and negative then @xmath is
called positive definite, positive semi-definite, negative, negative
semi-definite or indefinite respectively.

Let @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , be the sets of positive, negative and
neutral vectors in @xmath . If @xmath is indefinite then none of these
sets are subspaces ( [ 14 ] Corollary 2.7 p7).

Let @xmath . Then @xmath is called the isotropic subspace of @xmath . If
@xmath then @xmath is called non-degenerate .

Now suppose that @xmath are two subspaces such that @xmath for all
@xmath , all @xmath and such that the sum of the two spaces is
non-degenerate. Then it follows easily that the sum is a direct sum,
which we denote by @xmath .

We still have to discuss topology on @xmath . We will only consider the
special case when @xmath can be completed to a Krein space. More general
cases are discussed in [ 14 ] . Suppose that @xmath non-degenenerate
and,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a positive subspace and @xmath is a negative subspace.
Let @xmath , @xmath be the projections on @xmath , @xmath respectively
and let,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We call @xmath the fundamental symmetry on @xmath corresponding to the
decomposition ( 7.2 ) ( [ 14 ] p52), or the fundamental symmetry when
the decomposition is understood.

Now we define,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

It is straightforward to check that @xmath , @xmath , @xmath .

Now @xmath is positive definite, and hence @xmath for @xmath is a norm
on @xmath . Let @xmath be the completion of @xmath with respect to
@xmath . We call @xmath a Krein Space . Note @xmath is isometric on
@xmath with respect to @xmath and so can be extended to a unitary on
@xmath . Likewise the indefinite inner product @xmath , and the
projections @xmath , @xmath can be extended to to @xmath . This is not
definition of a Krein space given in [ 14 ] p100, but is equivalent for
our purposes via [ 14 ] Theorem 2.1 p102.

As we now have two inner products on @xmath we have two notions of
orthogonality. Krein orthogonality will be used when we refer to
orthogonality with respect to the indefinite inner product, and we will
use square brackets @xmath @xmath when writing relations with respect to
Krein orthogonality. For example @xmath means that @xmath and @xmath
means that @xmath for all @xmath , @xmath . Hilbert orthogonality refers
to the usual notion of orthogonality with respect to @xmath .

As well as orthogonality, the two inner products on @xmath give rise to
two different notions of adjoints of operators. Let @xmath be a densely
defined operator on @xmath and let,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Then we define @xmath is the operator such that @xmath for @xmath , and
a similar for @xmath . We refer to @xmath as the Krein adjoint or @xmath
-adjoint of @xmath and @xmath as the Hilbert adjoint or @xmath -adjoint
of @xmath .

Similarly as above we will also prefix properties of operators, such a
self adjointness, symmetric, isometric, unitary with a Krein or Hilbert
depending on whether it is in reference to the indefinite inner product
@xmath , or Hilbert inner product @xmath .

We have the following relation between the two adjoints ( [ 14 ] lemma
2.1 p122)

###### Lemma 7.2.1

Let @xmath be a densely defined operator on a Krein space @xmath with
fundamental symmetry @xmath . Then we have that,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We also have ( [ 5 ] corollary 3.8 p105)

###### Corollary 7.2.2

Suppose that @xmath is @xmath -self adjoint. Then @xmath and @xmath are
@xmath -self adjoint.

We will also use,

###### Lemma 7.2.3

Let @xmath be a Hilbert space with inner product @xmath giving the norm
on @xmath . Let @xmath be a unitary operator such that @xmath , @xmath ,
and define the indefinite inner product,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

on @xmath . Then @xmath and @xmath is a Krein space with indefinite
inner product @xmath , and fundamental symmetry @xmath .

###### Proof.

The proof follows [ 14 ] Theorem IV.5.2 p89. First as @xmath is unitary
and @xmath we have that @xmath . Next as @xmath is unitary and self
adjoint with respect to the Hilbert inner product @xmath , it has
spectrum @xmath , where @xmath is the unit circle in @xmath . As @xmath
we have @xmath

Now by the spectral theorem for normal operators ( [ 20 ] Theorem IX.2.2
(a) p263) we have that,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is the spectral measure for @xmath ( [ 20 ] Definition 1.1
p256). Now we define @xmath and @xmath and @xmath , @xmath . Therefore
@xmath is a fundamental decomposition of @xmath with fundamental
symmetry @xmath , and so @xmath is a Krein space. ∎

A useful fact about Krein space operators is the following. Let @xmath
is a Krein space with fundamental symmetry @xmath . From [ 75 ]
proposition2, p1843.

###### Proposition 7.2.4

Every Krein symmetric operator is closable (in the @xmath topology).

### 7.3 Symplectic Spaces

The following is a collection of basic facts about symplectic spaces as
given in [ 18 ] . In this section @xmath will be a real linear space
with a nondegenerate symplectic form @xmath , and for any subspace
@xmath its symplectic complement will be denoted by @xmath . By @xmath
we will mean that all @xmath are nondegenerate and @xmath if @xmath and
each @xmath has a unique decomposition @xmath such that @xmath for all
@xmath .

###### Lemma 7.3.1

-    If @xmath is countably dimensional, then it has a symplectic basis,
    i.e. a basis @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath for all @xmath .

-    For any symplectic space @xmath we have that if @xmath is a
    nondegenerate finite–dimensional subspace, then @xmath

-    For any symplectic space @xmath and a finite linearly independent
    subset @xmath such that @xmath for all @xmath there is a set @xmath
    such that @xmath is a symplectic basis for @xmath .

Proof: (i) Let @xmath be a linear basis of @xmath . We construct the
basis elements @xmath inductively as follows. If @xmath and @xmath are
already chosen, pick a minimal @xmath with @xmath and put

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

to ensure that this element is @xmath -orthogonal to all previous ones.
Then pick @xmath minimal, such that @xmath , put

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and pick @xmath with @xmath . This process can be repeated ad infinitum
and produces the required basis of @xmath because for each @xmath , the
span of @xmath contains at least @xmath . (ii) Since @xmath is finite
dimensional and nondegenerate, we can choose by (i) a symplectic basis
@xmath for it. Given any @xmath then

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

and @xmath , i.e. @xmath . Thus @xmath , and as @xmath is nondegenerate
@xmath . Moreover, if @xmath where @xmath and @xmath , then @xmath , and
hence any decomposition of an @xmath as @xmath where @xmath @xmath is
unique. Thus @xmath . (iii) We first find via the method of part (i),
symplectic pairs @xmath such that the nondegenerate subspaces @xmath but
@xmath . We construct the basis elements @xmath inductively as follows.
If @xmath and @xmath are already chosen, put

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

to ensure that @xmath . By (ii), @xmath hence @xmath is nondegenerate,
so there is an element @xmath such that @xmath . It follows that @xmath
and that @xmath . This process can be repeated to produce the required
symplectic bases. Next, we want to show that in @xmath we can choose
@xmath such that @xmath is a symplectic basis for @xmath . Now @xmath
where henceforth the symplectic complements are all taken in @xmath . We
claim that the containment @xmath is proper. The map @xmath by @xmath is
a linear isomorphism by nondegeneracy of @xmath . Then for any set
@xmath we have @xmath i.e. the annihilator of @xmath in @xmath , hence
@xmath . Thus @xmath from which the claim follows. Thus there is an
@xmath such that @xmath . In particular, let @xmath be that multiple of
@xmath such that @xmath . Let @xmath then @xmath and by (ii) we have
@xmath where @xmath is nondegenerate. Thus we can now repeat this
procedure in @xmath starting from @xmath to obtain @xmath . This
procedure will exhaust @xmath to produce the desired symplectic basis
@xmath

### 7.4 Quantum Dirac Constraints

The following account of Quantum Dirac Constraints in the algebraic
context follows the survey [ 41 ] and references therin.

A brief heuristic outline of the Quantum Dirac Constraints is as
follows. Suppose that @xmath is a Hilbert space and that @xmath is a set
of operators that select a physical subspace, ie

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then the Dirac observables are traditionally taken as the commutant of
the constraints @xmath , but can be enlarged to be the algebra generated
by the self-adjoint operators that preserve @xmath . The final
constrained system is these observables restricted to @xmath . This
procedure can be problematic for reasons such as spectral issues (think
of trying to impose momentum @xmath when @xmath has a canonical
conjugate), hence we abstract the process to a @xmath -algebraic setting
that is independent of the defining representation, then look for
representations where the problematic issues are no longer present.

We give a summary of the relevant aspects of this abstraction found in
in the survey [ 41 ] . Much more can be said about @xmath -Dirac
constraints than will be given here, see [ 42 , 41 , 43 , 40 , 46 ] for
more.

###### Definition 7.4.1

A quantum system with constraints is a pair @xmath where the field
algebra @xmath is a unital @xmath -algebra containing the constraint set
@xmath . A constraint condtion on @xmath consists of the selection of
the physical state space by:

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath denotes the state space of @xmath , and @xmath denotes the
GNS -data of @xmath . The elements of @xmath are called Dirac states .
The case of unitary constriants means that @xmath for a set of unitaries
@xmath , and for this we will also use the notation @xmath .

Now observe that we have,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Here @xmath is the left kernel of @xmath and @xmath , and the @xmath
denotes the annihilator in the dual of @xmath .

We now have the equality @xmath . Since @xmath is self-adjoint and
contained in @xmath we have @xmath . We can use these facts to get,

###### Theorem 7.4.2

We have

-   @xmath iff @xmath iff @xmath .

-   @xmath iff @xmath .

-    An extreme Dirac state is pure.

A constraint set is first class if @xmath which by the above theorem is
the assumption that the constraints are non-trivial.

Now we define the observable algebra as,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We get

###### Theorem 7.4.3

We have

-   @xmath is the unique maximal @xmath -algebra in @xmath . Furthermore
    @xmath is a hereditary @xmath -algebra of @xmath .

-   @xmath , i.e. it is the relative multiplier algebra of @xmath in
    @xmath .

-   @xmath .

-   @xmath .

-    For the case of unitary constraints, i.e. @xmath , we have @xmath
    and @xmath where @xmath .

Therefore @xmath is a closed two-sided ideal in @xmath and the
traditional observables @xmath where @xmath is the commutant of @xmath
in @xmath .

Define the maximal @xmath -algebra of physical observables as

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

The factoring procedure is the step of imposing constraints. We call
this method of imposing constraints the . We require that all physical
information is contained in @xmath . It is possible that @xmath is not
simple and in the case we adjust as in [ 41 ] p101. We have the
following connection

###### Theorem 7.4.4

There exists a @xmath -bijection between the Dirac states on @xmath and
the states on @xmath .

Although the @xmath -procedure is an abstract @xmath -algebra procedure
not dependent on the orginal representation, it can be helpful to work
in a representation to aid intuition and calculations. In fact as @xmath
is a hereditary subalgebra of @xmath , we can utilise results in [ 83 ]
chapters 1-3 in relation to the universal enveloping von Neumann
algebra. Denote the universal representation by @xmath on the universal
Hilbert space @xmath and let @xmath be the strong closure of @xmath and
make identification of @xmath with a subalgebra of @xmath , i.e. we
generally omit @xmath explicitly. Also if @xmath the we denote by @xmath
the unique normal extension of @xmath from @xmath to @xmath .

From [ 83 ] we have that

###### Definition 7.4.5

A projection @xmath is called open if @xmath is a closed left ideal of
@xmath .

From [ 83 ] Theorem 3.10.7, Proposition 3.11.9 and Remark 3.11.10 we
have bijections of open projections with:

-   hereditary ideals of @xmath given by @xmath .

-   closed left ideals of @xmath by @xmath .

-   weak @xmath -closed faces containing @xmath of the quasi-state space
    @xmath by

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

Using this we get the following results ( [ 41 ] Theorem 4, Theorem 5)

###### Theorem 7.4.6

For the constraint system @xmath there exists an open projection, @xmath
, such that,

-   @xmath ,

-   @xmath ,

-   @xmath

-   @xmath ,

-   @xmath

Now in the universal representation we define the physical space to be
@xmath . Then from the above theorem we that @xmath where @xmath is
projection in the statement of Theorem ( 7.4.6 ). That is, @xmath is a
condition that selects the same physical subspace as the constraints.
Note however that @xmath is not in @xmath in general and so we would
have to extend @xmath if we wanted to apply the @xmath -procedure using
@xmath as a constraint.

Still we have the decomposition of @xmath , and with resepect to this
decomposition using Theorem ( 7.4.6 ) (ii),(iii),(v) we may write

  ------ -------- -------- -- --
         @xmath   @xmath      
         @xmath   @xmath      
  and,                        
         @xmath   @xmath      
  ------ -------- -------- -- --

Now we define

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

From Theorem ( 7.4.6 ) (iii) we see that @xmath is a homomorphism on
@xmath and from Theorem ( 7.4.6 ) (v) we see that @xmath . Therefore we
have that,

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

###### Example 7.4.7

-   Suppose that @xmath is a Hilbert space, @xmath is a self-adjoint
    projection on @xmath and @xmath . It is straightforward to see that
    @xmath where @xmath is the projection in Theorem ( 7.4.6 ).
    Therefore @xmath and @xmath . Hence in this case we have that the
    @xmath -procedure gives that the observables are the same as the
    Dirac observables.

-   Suppose that @xmath is a seperable Hilbert space, @xmath are the
    compact operators on @xmath and that @xmath . Then @xmath (see) but
    @xmath as intersection of the kernel of all the finite rank
    operators is @xmath .

@xmath

### 7.5 Covariance for @xmath-Brst Ii

The Fock-Krein representation of the auxiliary algebra in Section 4.2.1
, @xmath , is faithful and the Poincaré transformations are defined
there by @xmath . Therefore it is natural to see if we encode the
Poincaré transformation on the auxiliary algebra via this
representation, and so for the remainder of this section we will assume
that we are working in the Fock representation and will identify @xmath
with @xmath . We will also use the notation @xmath .

An important point to note is that with respect to the IIP @xmath on
@xmath (see subsection( 4.1 )) @xmath is Krein-unitary, but not @xmath
-unitary, i.e. Hilbert unitary. Two important consequences of this are:

-   We have that @xmath will be a @xmath -automorphism on the unbounded
    algebra generated by the @xmath ’s, but that in general @xmath will
    not be a @xmath -automorphism.

-   @xmath is Krein unitary hence invertible and hence @xmath will
    define Krein unitary operator on the finite particle space @xmath .
    However, for @xmath where @xmath it follows from,

      -- -------- --
         @xmath   
      -- -------- --

    that @xmath is unbounded and so does not extend to @xmath .
    Moreover, there will be problems defining @xmath on all of @xmath .

To understand the problem of @xmath on @xmath more explicitly, we look
at its action on @xmath .

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (7.4)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

where the second last line follows from lemma ( 4.2.9 ) and @xmath .
This shows explicitly that @xmath will be a @xmath -automorphism for all
@xmath iff @xmath , which is when @xmath is a rotation and/or
translation.

Using this we can show that in fact that if @xmath is a Lorentz boost,
then @xmath can map resolvents to unbounded operators. First note that
if we define coordinates @xmath and @xmath is Lorentz boost in the
@xmath -direction, then

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (7.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is given in [ 77 ] p90-92, (Note that [ 77 ] uses the index @xmath
for the time co-ordinate and the order @xmath , while we use @xmath and
@xmath , which leads to a different arrangement for the entries of
@xmath ).

Let @xmath and @xmath be projections on @xmath . For @xmath then we see
that @xmath and @xmath . Hence by the definition of @xmath (equation (
5.37 )), we see that we can choose @xmath , such that @xmath . Now
@xmath so,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As @xmath @xmath -symplectically commute, we have @xmath , and so we
have joint spectral theory for @xmath . We can use this to calculate
@xmath . Take @xmath , then,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Now as @xmath has a singularity at @xmath then we have that @xmath is
unbounded, and so we cannot define @xmath abstractly on all of @xmath .

Although the Poincaré transformations as defined directly as in the
Fock-Krein representation do not define on all of the auxiliary algebra,
we can look for strategies to encode them in a way so that we can get
correct transformations back on the physically interesting objects.

One strategy to use is to see if we can find a homomorphism from @xmath
, define the Poincaré transformations on the auxiliary algebra via
Theorem ( 5.2.4 ) (v) and check that these give the same transformations
as in Subsection 5.3.2 when factored to the physical subspace.

A step in this direction begins with

###### Proposition 7.5.1

Define the real linear operator

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where @xmath is as Proposition ( 5.4.1 ). Then

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a real algebra isomorphism.

###### Proof.

By Proposition ( 5.4.1 ) (ii) we have

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Hence for all @xmath we have:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Moreover, for @xmath we have for all @xmath :

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and as @xmath , it is obvious that @xmath and so @xmath is a real
algebra isomorphism from @xmath . ∎

However @xmath and @xmath do not commute, hence @xmath does not extend
to a linear or anti-linear operator on @xmath . Hence we do not have
that @xmath extends to an isomorphism or anti-isomorphism of @xmath . So
although @xmath is the first step in implementing the above strategy of
mapping @xmath to @xmath , it is not clear at present how to continue.

Another strategy towards implementing @xmath is to reduce the problem to
implementing Lorentz in the @xmath -direction. There is no problem
implementing rotations and translations as these are both @xmath and
@xmath symplectic, and a general Lorentz transformations can always be
written as @xmath where @xmath are rotations and @xmath is a boost in
the @xmath -direction (see [ 77 ] (III),p93).

In this direction we begin by breaking the transformations @xmath into
more manageable pieces. Note that for @xmath , we have that @xmath
where,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

now it is easy to check that @xmath is both @xmath -symplectic, and
@xmath -symplectic, hence will generate automorphisms on and @xmath (and
@xmath ), and @xmath implements these autormorphisms in the Fock
representations. Therefore if we let @xmath , then,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

As @xmath , we use,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

to get,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So we only need to consider how to encode of @xmath for @xmath , in
@xmath .

Now @xmath where @xmath are rotations and @xmath is a boost in the
@xmath -direction (see [ 77 ] (III),p93). It is straightforward to check
that @xmath are both also @xmath symplectic and @xmath , @xmath , hence
as above,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So all we have left to do is to construct @xmath . @xmath is given by
the matrix in equation ( 7.5 ), and by equation ( 7.4 ),

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Furthermore, by ( 7.5 ) @xmath , so using @xmath and @xmath we get,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

So we get that,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

We summarize in

###### Lemma 7.5.2

Let @xmath be a boost in the @xmath direction. Then,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

where,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and @xmath .

From this lemma there are two directions to go:

Direction1: Mollify @xmath

This approach is taken in a different context in [ 17 ] p12. We can
calculate @xmath on @xmath via,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and so differentiating,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

which implies,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

where @xmath . Using the above we see that for any @xmath we can find a
monomial of resolvents @xmath to mollify @xmath . We have that @xmath
and so this encodes the Lorentz boosts on the auxiliary algebra in
infintesimal form. With this done we can the aim is to recover @xmath on
the auxiliary fields and then covariant fields in other representations
by using tools such as Theorem 5.2.7 . A problem with this is that the
mollifying monomial @xmath depends on the original @xmath and so the
‘mollified @xmath ’ is a difficult object to analyse.

Direction2: Use @xmath

The idea here is that @xmath is a self-adjoint operator with respect to
@xmath on @xmath . Therefore @xmath is unitary on @xmath and so @xmath
-symplectic on @xmath ( @xmath preserves @xmath so so does @xmath ).
Explicitly,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Therefore we can define the corresponding @xmath . In ‘nice’
representations (such as the Fock) we have that @xmath is unitarily
implemented by @xmath and we can differentiate to get a self-adjoint
generator @xmath with dense domain @xmath for @xmath . That is, for a
‘nice’ representation, @xmath ,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and so when the appropriate fields exist, we get

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Then we differentiate to get a @xmath -derivation,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

That is, under the appropriate regularity conditions, we we will have a
well defined derivation that is generated by a self-adjoint operator, ie

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Now if we let @xmath then we have that,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

is a well defined derivation for @xmath that preserve the appropriate
domain, and we have that,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

the exact relation we want for the infintesimal version of @xmath . Now
we can check by direct computation that @xmath and so we get that,

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Therefore @xmath and so given strong convergence of the fields in their
arguments, we get,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and so we can reconstruct @xmath . Also by the derivation property of
@xmath we can check that @xmath for appropriate @xmath (such as the
fields). Note that as @xmath is skew-self adjoint we will not have that
@xmath is a @xmath -automorphism or that it is even bounded, as in the
case for the Fock representation.

To summarize for direction 2, we start with @xmath and look for
restrictions on ‘nice’ representations such that we can strongly
differentiate and exponentiate and get convergence in the arguements for
the fields, etc. Given these conditions we construct the derivation
corresponding to the infintesimal version of @xmath exponentiate this on
the fields to get the @xmath . Once we have these it is straightforward
to get any covariant transform in the nice representations.

So we see that we have several strategies and directions for encoding
the Poincaré transformations directly on the auxiliary algebra. The
first strategy was mapping @xmath -symplectic transformations to @xmath
-symplectic transformations via some isomorphism @xmath and checking
that the automorphisms generated are then match those in Subsection
5.3.2 when factored to the physical algebra. At present such a @xmath
has only been constructed on @xmath a real subalgebra of @xmath . The
second strategy was to reduce the problem to encoding @xmath where
@xmath was a boost in the @xmath -direction. This is still a difficult
problem however we can instead encode the infintesimal version of @xmath
using @xmath . There were to approaches to doing this: one was
mollifying @xmath but this faced the problem that the ‘mollified @xmath
’ depended on the @xmath on which it was acting; The other was to use
@xmath and differentiate to get @xmath , which faces the problem that we
need to have nice representations where we can differentiate. Also, in
both of the infintesimal strategies, we would need to restrict to
representations where we could re-exponentiate @xmath .