In this thesis, I present an associative diagram algebra that is a
faithful representation of a particular Temperley–Lieb algebra of type
affine @xmath , which has a basis indexed by the fully commutative
elements of the Coxeter group of the same type. The Coxeter group of
type affine @xmath contains an infinite number of fully commutative
elements, and so the corresponding Temperley–Lieb algebra is of infinite
rank. With the exception of type affine @xmath , all other generalized
Temperley–Lieb algebras with known diagrammatic representations are of
finite rank. In the finite rank case, counting arguments are employed to
prove faithfulness, but these techniques are not available in the affine
@xmath case. To prove faithfulness, I classify the fully commutative
elements in Coxeter groups of types @xmath and affine @xmath that are
irreducible under weak star reductions. The classification of these
irreducible elements provides the groundwork for inductive arguments
that are used to prove faithfulness. The classification of the weak star
irreducible elements of type @xmath also verifies C.K. Fan’s unproved
claim about about the set of fully commutative elements in a Coxeter
group of type @xmath having no generator appearing in the left or right
descent set that can be left or right cancelled, respectively. The
results of this thesis will be used to construct a trace on the Hecke
algebra of type affine @xmath , which will then be used to compute
leading coefficients of certain Kazhdan–Lusztig polynomials in a
non-recursive way.
