# Introduction

Modern physical theories often contradict human intuition and this
especially applies to quantum physics. One of the most sensational
quantum phenomena was recognised by Einstein, Podolsky and Rosen in
1935. In their seminal work [ 1 ] they presented a physical situation in
which quantum theory seems to violate the principles of relativity.
Besides the fact that in such a situation best possible knowledge of the
whole does not include best possible knowledge of its parts, particles
seem to somehow influence each other at the point of measurement, even
if these are space-like separated. The theory here predicts a new type
of correlations which cannot be understood on the basis of a local
realistic description. These correlations have become known as EPR
correlations ¹ ¹ 1 or simply quantum correlations . At that time, their
conclusion was that quantum theory must be incomplete. It was thought
that this peculiarity can be eliminated through a more fundamental
theory based on local hidden variables. Such a formulation has never
been found. Furthermore, the existence of such a theory can be revised
experimentally via so-called Bell inequality tests. Experimental
evidence of EPR correlations in 1982 by Aspect et al. (see [ 2 ] ) has
led to a growing interest in this subject and a new research field named
quantum information has emerged. Many useful applications such as
quantum teleportation, quantum cryptography and algorithms for quantum
computers have been proposed. Entanglement and nonlocality are now being
accepted and investigated by various physicists.
Irrespective of intensive research within the last decades, there still
remain many open problems from a theoretical point of view and one of
the aims of this thesis is to outline several fundamental ones. In this
thesis we investigate bipartite qudit systems, i.e. two d-dimensional
systems, in order to gain deeper insight into the subject. The
motivation for studying such systems arises from the fact that those are
the most simple extensions of the two-qubit system to higher dimensions
(Another simple extension can be realised via multipartite systems,
where the number of qubits is increased). At this point we might
anticipate that investigations become more and more unfeasible with
increasing dimensions. Systems with continuous dimensions and/or a great
number of parties are almost impossible to analyse with current
mathematical tools.
The thesis is organised as follows: In Chapter 1, we first provide an
introduction to the mathematical framework necessary to study
entanglement, followed by a closer examination of how it can be
detected, quantified and classified. In Chapter 2, the focus is on the
existence of local realistic theories. We discuss Bell inequalities in
details, particularly, the CGLMP inequality. As it will be seen, in
order to reveal the nonlocality of a quantum state the measurement
setup, which can be expressed in the form of a Bell operator @xmath ,
has to be optimised. In general, this is a very demanding subject and we
contribute to the solution of this problem by presenting a
self-developed numerical search algorithm. We end this chapter with
further remarks on the comparison of entanglement and nonlocality. The
purpose of Chapter 3 is to expose the properties of quantum states in a
geometric context by applying entanglement detection criteria and our
algorithm. The analysis of the state space of bipartite qubits first
leads to a tetrahedron and motivated by its attributes we construct its
extension for higher dimensions: the magic simplex.

## 1 Entanglement

### 1.1 Basics

#### 1.1.1 Definition

In this section we introduce the mathematical definition of entanglement
using the most common notation of quantum physics - the Dirac notation ,
which utilises bra and ket vectors. As we do not go beyond bipartite
systems, we restrict all mathematical definitions to these in order to
simplify our considerations. Consequently, all state vectors are
elements of a composite Hilbert space @xmath , where @xmath and @xmath
are the Hilbert spaces of the two subsystems @xmath and @xmath . All
operators acting on @xmath will be elements of the corresponding
Hilbert-Schmidt space @xmath , that is the set of bounded linear
operators. We will utilise the Hilbert-Schmidt inner product defined by
@xmath , which induces the Hilbert-Schmidt norm @xmath . Usually the
operations on the subsystems @xmath and @xmath are attributed to the
fictive persons Alice and Bob, respectively. In 1935, Schrödinger
recognised that EPR correlations are related to states @xmath that
cannot be written as tensor products of state vectors @xmath and @xmath
. Consider an arbitrary state @xmath . By choosing a basis @xmath of
@xmath and @xmath of @xmath any state of @xmath can be written in the
form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath and normalisation @xmath . We call states that can be
written in the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

separable. There is a class of states that cannot be written that way
and we denote them as non-separable or entangled. A separable state can
contain only classical correlations while an entangled state can contain
quantum/EPR correlations. The definition implies that a state (of a
subsystem) in general cannot be described by a state vector. It follows
that open quantum systems need to be described by density matrices.
Those also enable us to take into account decoherence and imperfect
state preparations in experiments. For the density matrix formalism
however, a generalised definition of separability for mixed states is
required. If we suppose that a product state, regardless of whether it
is pure or mixed remains separable under local operations and classical
communication (see § 1.4.2 ) we can infer that a state is separable iff
it can be written in the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath and @xmath .

#### 1.1.2 The two-qubit system

We start with the two-qubit system which has the minimal number of
degrees of freedom essential for entanglement. The qubit stands for a
system with a two dimensional Hilbert space @xmath with an orthonormal
basis denoted by @xmath and is therefore the quantum mechanical
counterpart of a classical bit. Nevertheless, it should emphasized that
there are major differences between the classical bit and the quantum
bit. While a classical bit can either have the value 0 or 1 a qubit can
in principle store an infinite amount of information because of the
infinitely many superpositions of @xmath and @xmath . However, this
information is unusable since we cannot distinguish between two
non-orthogonal states with a single measurement. Hence, we can only work
with superpositions during information processing (quantum
computations), the outcome however should be in an eigenstate of the
measured observable. It should be mentioned that qubit systems are more
than just simple examples of low dimensional quantum systems. This is
because of their relevance in quantum optics (polarisation of photons in
horizontal @xmath or vertical @xmath direction) and experiments with
spin @xmath particles (spin up @xmath or spin down @xmath ). As we have
a two dimensional Hilbert space we need an operator basis with four
elements to declare an operator. In many cases it is useful to work with
the Pauli operator basis @xmath ² ² 2 @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , that is
an orthogonal basis according to the Hilbert-Schmidt inner product
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath . Any operator can be written in the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

with all @xmath . In the case of a density matrix @xmath we write

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (1.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

which is equivalent to ( ) and has advantages with respect to the
following restrictions

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.6)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.7)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.8)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

The first restriction follows from the condition @xmath . The second is
a necessary condition for @xmath to be hermitian. Since @xmath also has
to be positive semi-definite we get the third restriction by computing
@xmath . ( @xmath is a necessary condition for non-negativity, in our
case it is also sufficient because of @xmath it is not possible for
@xmath to have two negative eigenvalues). As shown from this, the
quantum state of a single qubit can be fully described by a three
dimensional real vector @xmath that lies within a three dimensional
sphere with radius 1. Vector @xmath is called the Bloch vector and the
sphere, Bloch sphere. If the vector lies on the sphere, the state is
pure; if it lies inside, the state is mixed. This follows immediately
from @xmath for @xmath , meaning one eigenvalue has to be @xmath . This
implies that the other eigenvalue has to be @xmath , and consequently
the state is pure.
In the following, we discuss systems of two qubits. To describe such
systems we need a four-dimensional Hilbert space @xmath and we can
choose, for example, an orthonormal basis of type @xmath . If there is
no likelihood of confusion we can get rid of the indices A and B and the
tensor products @xmath . Before we discuss the Pauli operator basis for
bipartite qubit systems in detail, we introduce the most well-known
entangled states, namely the Bell states

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (1.9)
     @xmath         (1.10)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

The reader may convince himself that these states are indeed entangled,
to be more precise, these states are maximally entangled as will be seen
in our subsequent discussion of entanglement measures in § 1.3 . One
(perhaps unexpected) feature is that they are all equivalent in terms of
local unitaries. The application of a unilateral Pauli matrix @xmath
onto a certain Bell state yields another Bell state (up to a
non-relevant global phase)

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.11)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.12)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.13)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.14)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

In the next section we systemize the above mentioned attribute to get
the generalised Bell states in higher dimensional systems. It is certain
that properties and applications of Bell states could be further
discussed. However, we continue with the analysis of our bipartite qubit
system by examining the operators acting on the Hilbert space. As
indicated before we now introduce the Pauli operator basis for the four
dimensional Hilbert space. Any operator can be written in the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . Due to the fact that Pauli matrices are hermitian, it is
apparent that @xmath for all hermitian operators (for example
observables or density matrices). Once again we change the notation
slightly

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

and specify the constraints for density matrices

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.17)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.18)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.19)
     @xmath               (1.20)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The first restriction has to be fulfilled because @xmath has to be 1.
Hermicity of @xmath requires restriction two. The condition @xmath
implies the third one, while the fourth condition is the non-negativity
condition. As a conclusion, we can say that for two qubits any density
matrix @xmath can be fully specified by two real vectors @xmath and
@xmath and a real 3x3 matrix with elements @xmath . The vectors @xmath
and @xmath determine the local characteristics of @xmath related to the
systems A and B, which can be seen by computing the reduced density
matrices

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.21)
     @xmath      (1.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

It can be seen that there is no dependence on the parameters @xmath ,
which can be regarded as correlation parameters since they reflect
correlations of classical or EPR type. For this reason, the matrix with
components @xmath is sometimes referred to as a correlation matrix. For
a given density matrix @xmath all parameters can be obtained by the use
of the associated algebra

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.23)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.24)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.25)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

#### 1.1.3 Bipartite qudit systems

The investigation of quantum systems with few dimensions with the aim of
gaining insight into the fundamental properties of quantum theory has
been one of the most seminal concepts of quantum information and has led
to interesting observations and countless applications of entanglement.
The two-qubit system has allowed us to study entanglement in the absence
of mathematical complexity caused by high dimensionality. However,
within recent years, the focus has been on entanglement in quantum
systems with more degrees of freedom. We now go beyond the familiar
two-qubit system and concentrate on the entanglement of bipartite
systems with arbitrary dimensions.
The four Bell states have been useful for many quantum algorithms and
seminal experiments. There is a very insightful way to generalise those
maximally entangled Bell states onto Hilbert spaces @xmath with any
desired @xmath . The analogue of the @xmath state in @xmath is a state
of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

with an arbitrary orthonormal basis @xmath of @xmath and @xmath of
@xmath . We briefly recall that Bell states are equivalent in terms of
local unitaries. Consider the application of any local unitary
transformation @xmath onto @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since the transformations @xmath and @xmath are basis transformations
giving the orthonormal basis @xmath of @xmath and @xmath of @xmath , the
resulting state is once again a Bell state

  -- -- -- --------
           (1.28)
  -- -- -- --------

If there are @xmath particular local unitaries that produce additional
@xmath mutually orthonormal Bell states starting from @xmath , we end up
with an orthonormal basis of @xmath Bell states. Local unitaries with
such properties are the Weyl operators , defined by the action

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.29)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.30)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

with @xmath , @xmath @xmath . The complete transformation on @xmath is
given by @xmath , producing @xmath orthonormal generalised Bell states

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

We give the explicit verification of orthonormality

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (1.32)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Weyl operators obey the Weyl relations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.33)
     @xmath      (1.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

Initially, the Weyl operators were rather contrived for the quantization
of classical kinematics instead of the construction of a basis of
orthonormal Bell states for Hilbert spaces @xmath . In § 3.2 we discuss
how this has to be understood and how this concept can help us
understand the symmetries and equivalences of quantum states. Since we
are now able to construct a basis of Bell states, we continue with
seeking a practical operator basis for @xmath . For qubits, the Pauli
operator basis has led to a simple presentation of density matrices via
Bloch vectors. For qudits, we once again expand operators in the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the @xmath matrices @xmath forming an orthogonal operator basis
@xmath . If we impose the operators @xmath to be traceless we can fix
the parameter @xmath for density matrices because of the constraint
@xmath , just as we did for qubits

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

It remains open to show which @xmath are beneficial for computations and
parameterisations. There are various candidates and we want to discuss
two of them, namely the generalised Gell-Mann matrix basis and the Weyl
operator basis . Both coincide with the Pauli operator basis for
dimension two. We start with the definition of the generalised Gell-Mann
(GGM) matrices. For every dimension @xmath we have @xmath matrices
divided into three groups:

1.  @xmath symmetric GGM matrices

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (1.37)
      -- -------- -- --------

2.  @xmath antisymmetric GGM matrices

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (1.38)
      -- -------- -- --------

3.  @xmath diagonal GGM matrices

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (1.39)
      -- -------- -- --------

The definitions imply that they are all hermitian and traceless. For
proof of orthogonality please refer to [ 6 ] . Due to hermicity of the
GGM matrices all expansion coefficients have to be reals @xmath for
hermitian operators, furthermore for density matrices we can again
assign a real @xmath dimensional Bloch vector

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

with Bloch vector @xmath and @xmath , with restrictions for @xmath given
in the definitions of the GGM matrices. The vector lies within the Bloch
hypersphere which precisely means @xmath , originating from the
constraint @xmath for density matrices. While for dimension two, all
vectors within the sphere result in positive semi-definite operators
@xmath , whereas in higher dimensions this is not the case. This means
that there are areas within the sphere that are restricted for density
matrices because of resulting @xmath . Unfortunately, until now no
general expression or parametrisation has been found to avoid the holes
within the sphere. Hence, this criterion has to be checked separately.
The alternative, namely the Weyl operator basis is given by the matrices
introduced in ( ) leading to

  -- -- -- --------
           (1.41)
  -- -- -- --------

Once again, we have the unity @xmath and @xmath additional matrices
forming a basis of mutually orthogonal operators. The proof of
orthogonality is very similar to ( ) and can be found in [ 6 ] . Hence,
in the Weyl operator basis the Bloch vector expression of any density
matrix is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

with a @xmath dimensional Bloch vector @xmath and a vector @xmath
containing all operators @xmath except @xmath . It is clear that one has
to take into account the arrangement of the vector components. The main
discrepancy between @xmath and the foregoing Bloch vectors is that the
components of @xmath can be complex and they have to satisfy @xmath (to
be understood modulo d) for hermicity of @xmath . This is implied when
comparing the definition ( 1.41 ) with hermicity @xmath . As before, the
constraint @xmath enforces the vector @xmath to lie within a Bloch
hypersphere @xmath . Equal to the vectors @xmath , not all vectors
@xmath within this sphere are permitted, since some lead to matrices
with negative eigenvalues. An expression in terms of the components
@xmath has not yet been established.
Finally we want to extend our Bloch-type operator expansion ( 1.35 ) to
bipartite qudit systems. We can do this by generalising the expression (
1.15 ) to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

### 1.2 Detection of entanglement

In § 1.1.1 we have introduced the definition of separability and
entanglement for pure and mixed states. Even though the distinction is
well defined, in practice it is difficult to either find a separable
decomposition or to prove that such a decomposition does not exist. For
this reason, it is preferable to find operational criteria. As it will
be shown, all known methods are either unfeasible or not sufficient to
solve the problem completely.

#### 1.2.1 Reduced density matrices of pure states

For all bipartite pure states, a necessary and sufficient criterion for
separability arises through the form of the reduced density matrices. It
is always possible to change the indexing of expression ( 1.1 ), using
one index running from @xmath to @xmath (dimension of @xmath times
dimension of @xmath ) instead of two indices running from @xmath to
@xmath and @xmath to @xmath , respectively,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

with elements @xmath and @xmath of some orthonormal bases. For a given
state @xmath one can minimise the number of nonzero coefficients @xmath
by the use of proper orthonormal vectors @xmath and @xmath (see [ 3 ] ).
If we change the order of the numeration starting with nonzero
coefficients @xmath for @xmath followed by @xmath for @xmath we end up
with the Schmidt decomposition

  -- -- -- --------
           (1.45)
  -- -- -- --------

with @xmath and @xmath known as the Schmidt coefficients . By computing
the partial traces we realise that @xmath are the eigenvalues of the
reduced density matrices

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.46)
     @xmath      (1.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

Obviously, the resulting density matrices are diagonal and have rank
@xmath . Consequently, r is called the Schmidt rank . By comparing ( 1.2
) with ( 1.45 ) we infer Schmidt rank @xmath for all separable states
and @xmath for all entangled states. Since the only density matrices
with rank 1 are pure states (they have only one eigenvalue @xmath ) we
come to the conclusion that all separable states result in pure reduced
density matrices, while entangled states give mixed ones. Note that for
practical purposes it is not necessary to construct the Schmidt
decomposition of @xmath before tracing out a system because the rank
will always be equal due to basis independence of the trace. Hence, we
have found a powerful tool to distinguish pure separable states from
pure entangled ones since it is trivial to examine the mixedness of a
density matrix. To summarise, a necessary and sufficient condition for
separability of pure states is given by

  -- -- -- --------
           (1.48)
  -- -- -- --------

#### 1.2.2 Detection via positive maps

As we know, in general a quantum state can only be fully described by a
density matrix. Here, for a given state it is more difficult to
determine whether it is separable or entangled. We begin with a rather
theoretical consideration of necessary and sufficient conditions which
was presented by the Horodeckis in 1996 [ 7 ] .
Consider an operator @xmath and a linear map @xmath : @xmath . We say
the map @xmath is positive (P) if it maps any positive operator in
@xmath into the set of positive operators in @xmath , in terms of
mathematics if @xmath implies @xmath for all projectors @xmath and
@xmath . Now, consider the extended linear map @xmath : @xmath . Here
@xmath stands for the set of the complex matrices n @xmath n and @xmath
is the appertaining identity. The map @xmath is said to be completely
positive (CP) if its extension maps any positive operator @xmath into
the set of positive operators @xmath , i.e. @xmath implies @xmath for
all projectors @xmath and @xmath and all @xmath . It might be a bit
surprising that positive maps are not necessarily completely positive.
All possible physical transformations are CP maps because the
transformation of a density matrix has to result in another valid
density matrix. For the solution of our separability problem we
recognise the following. Consider a separable state @xmath and a
positive map @xmath (not certainly CP) inducing @xmath . The mapping of
@xmath gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

According to our assumption @xmath being a positive map @xmath only has
non-negative eigenvalues and the same obviously holds for @xmath . All
in all, we have a sum of positive operators weighted with @xmath
yielding a positive operator. Hence for positive maps @xmath the
inequality @xmath is a necessary condition for @xmath to be separable.
Furthermore, it can be shown (see [ 7 ] ) that for every inseparable
state @xmath there exists a positive map @xmath so that @xmath . The
existence of such a map @xmath is an impressive matter from a
theoretical point of view, but for a given state @xmath there is no
recipe for how to construct such a mapping. Nevertheless, there are
several approved positive maps for the detection of entanglement. One of
them is the reduction map

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

The positivity of the map can be proven by

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

@xmath is the sum of all eigenvalues (all positive or zero for positive
operators) and @xmath can maximally yield the largest eigenvalue, thus
the map is positive.
Therefore the reduction criterion [ 8 ] signifies that a separable state
has to fulfill the inequalities

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.51)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the reduced density matrices @xmath and @xmath .
Another method based on positive maps is called positive partial
transpose (PPT) criterion [ 9 ] . For this criterion the well known
transposition is used to determine entanglement. For a given operator
@xmath , the transposition is defined by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.52)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.53)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

It is obvious that this map is positive

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (1.54)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

Choose the vector @xmath and compute

  -- -- -- --------
           (1.55)
  -- -- -- --------

due to ( 1.54 ) this is always true for all @xmath , thus transposition
is a positive map. As a result, we have found the positive partial
transpose criterion. For a given state @xmath the inequalities

  -- -------- -- -- --------
     @xmath         (1.56)
     @xmath         (1.57)
  -- -------- -- -- --------

are necessary conditions for separability. The PPT criterion is stronger
than the reduction criterion in all cases (see [ 8 ] ). It should be
mentioned that in the case of a two-qubit system @xmath or a
qubit-qutrit system @xmath it is also a sufficient criterion (see [ 7 ]
). Since PPT is not a sufficient criterion for higher dimensional
systems, there exist entangled states with positive partial transpose.
As shown in § 1.4 this feature leads to a phenomenon called bound
entanglement .

#### 1.2.3 Linear contractions criteria

Additional operational criteria can be constructed from contraction
mappings [ 10 ] . The concept behind those criteria also issues from the
extension of maps, but yields criteria that are independent from the
previously discussed ones. Consider an operator @xmath and a linear map
@xmath : @xmath . The map @xmath is a contraction iff it does not
increase the Hilbert-Schmidt norm, i.e. @xmath holds for all @xmath .
Once again we define the extension of @xmath analogous to the previous
section by @xmath : @xmath . A map @xmath is a complete contraction iff
it is Hilbert-Schmidt norm non-increasing for all possible extensions
@xmath , @xmath for all @xmath . Now, for a separable state @xmath and a
contraction @xmath we have

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (1.58)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

We have found a necessary condition for separability:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus, for the detection of entanglement, the relevant maps are the
contractions that are not complete contractions. For instance,
transposition is such a map. In general there is no common method to
construct the whole set of non-complete contractions. One noteworthy
criterion based on the idea of contraction surely is the so called
Matrix realignment criterion , which can detect PPT entanglement in some
cases. The basic principle is to use a map @xmath : @xmath that is a
contraction for all separable states within the composite Hilbert space
@xmath . While the contraction @xmath only affects a subspace, the
matrix realignment map @xmath affects the whole space @xmath in the
following way

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

As we can see realignment interchanges the basis vectors @xmath of
@xmath applied on the left-hand side with @xmath of @xmath applied on
the right-hand side. This map satisfies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

for all separable states @xmath (see [ 12 ] ). All states that violate
this inequality are necessarily entangled. Some entangled states that
slip through the PPT criterion can be detected via the realignment
criterion and examples can be found in [ 11 ] and [ 12 ] .

#### 1.2.4 Entanglement witnesses

The last method for the detection of entanglement we discuss are
entanglement witnesses . They originate from the Hahn-Banach theorem in
convex analysis stating that a convex set in a vector space (in our case
this is the Hilbert-Schmidt space @xmath ) can be fully described by
hyperplanes. In other words, there always exists a hyperplane that
separates the convex set from the complement. Based on the fact that a
hyperplane can always be expressed by a normal vector @xmath (in our
case the vector is an element of @xmath and therefore a matrix) and the
convexity of the set of separable states, we are able to comprehend a
theorem stated by the Horodeckis and B.M. Terhal : A density matrix
@xmath is entangled iff there exists a hermitian operator @xmath with
the properties

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.62)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.63)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

for all separable density matrices @xmath . A hermitian operator @xmath
accomplishing those requirements is termed an entanglement witness . As
a consequence, @xmath has to have at least one negative eigenvalue and
due to linearity of the trace, nonnegative expectation values on the
subset of product states

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

We can rank witnesses @xmath by comparing the sets of entangled states
they detect, that is @xmath . An entanglement witness @xmath is finer
than @xmath iff @xmath . It is optimal if there is no other entanglement
witness which is finer. Hence, an optimal witness @xmath defines a
tangent plane to the set of separable states which means that there must
be at least one separable @xmath with @xmath .

Further information for the optimisation of entanglement witnesses can
be found in [ 14 ] . It is evident that a single witness does not detect
all entangled states. We only know that for a given entangled state
@xmath there must be an appertaining entanglement witness @xmath , an
algorithm for the construction however has not yet been established. For
this reason entanglement witnesses cannot be seen as a satisfying
solution to the separability problem. Furthermore, it is also not clear
how many witnesses are necessary to describe the whole set of separable
states. Note that if the set is not a polytope then an infinite number
of witnesses is required. The geometry of the set depends on the
dimension of the considered space or subspace of @xmath .

### 1.3 Entanglement measures

The quantification of entanglement is another open problem. This is
beyond the separability problem, since the purpose is not only to
ascertain if a state is entangled or not, but also to quantify the
amount of entanglement within it. This amount should capture the
essential features that we associate with entanglement. Before we
mention some possible measures we state some requirements on the
attributes of a suggestive measure. Take into account that we restrict
ourselves to bipartite systems @xmath with arbitrary dimension @xmath .

#### 1.3.1 The postulates

In the first place, an entanglement measure @xmath is a mapping of
density matrices into the set of positive real numbers

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

Normalisation is not necessary but reasonable and we therefore set

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

for the Bell states @xmath . This should also be the highest value
reachable, because we anticipate them to be maximally entangled due to
maximal mixedness of their reduced density matrices @xmath , which is
unique for pure states

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

By definition, the outcome of @xmath must be zero for all separable
states @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

The most important requirement is monotonicity under LOCC . Entanglement
cannot be created by local operations and classical communication ( §
1.4.2 ), hence the contained amount has to be non-increasing under such
transformations

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.69)
  -- -------- -- --------

This implies that in the special case of local unitaries the outcome of
@xmath will be invariant [ 15 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

These postulates are the only ones necessarily required and universally
accepted. Some people tend to put further restrictions on entanglement
measures. Some of them seem very natural and others can bring
mathematical simplicity. One of them is convexity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

Convexity seems to be plausible as we cannot increase entanglement by
mixing states and mixtures of entangled states can result in separable
states (see § 3 ). Asymptotic continuity is another optional restriction

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

The interesting thing is that along with the next limitation called
additivity we can obtain a unique measure for pure states [ 15 ] . The
additivity is separated in three types. We first consider partial
additivity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is the weakest addivity criterion. It only reveals that the
entanglement content grows linearly with the number of pairs. We may
expect that it is reasonable to assume full additivity (following
formula with an equal sign). However, it turned out that this would
exclude some appreciated measure candidates. The weakened version is the
subadditivity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

A more detailed analysis of the postulates and thermodynamical analogies
can be found in [ 16 ] , [ 17 ] and [ 18 ] . As mentioned before, the
additional constraints of partial additivity and asymptotic continuity,
inevitably require the measure to coincide with the von Neumann entropy
@xmath of the reduced density matrix @xmath for a pure state @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is the uniqueness theorem of entanglement measures [ 19 ] .

#### 1.3.2 Measures based on distance

The most intuitive measures are the ones based on distance. The concept
is to regard the distance @xmath of a state @xmath to the closest
separable state @xmath as the contained amount of entanglement

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is apparent that those measures guarantee @xmath for separable
states. There are several types of possible distance functions @xmath .
They do not have to fulfill all criteria for a metric in a mathematical
sense, but should meet the requirements of an entanglement measure. Let
us consider the relative entropy of entanglement which was introduced by
Vedral et al. [ 20 ]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.77)
  -- -------- -- --------

The distance used here does not meet the requirements of a metric
because it is not symmetric and does not satisfy the triangle
inequality. This is acceptable since relative entropy satisfies all
criteria of an entanglement measure including asymptotic continuity and
partial additivity (see [ 21 ] ). Another distance is induced by the
Hilbert-Schmidt norm and was investigated in [ 22 ] . The resulting
measure is called Hilbert-Schmidt measure or Hilbert-Schmidt
entanglement

  -- -- -- --------
           (1.78)
  -- -- -- --------

This measure has a different scaling than most of the other candidates
because no logarithm is taken. For this reason, it is not common to
normalise this function in the foregoing way. Up to now it has not been
proven that monotonicity under LOCC is accomplished, meaning it is not
clear if it is a good measure of entanglement (see [ 21 ] , [ 23 ] ).

#### 1.3.3 Convex roof measures

The idea of convex roof measures is to use entanglement measures for
pure states @xmath and generalize them to mixed ones in the following
way

  -- -- -- --------
           (1.79)
  -- -- -- --------

where the infimum is taken over all possible decompositions of @xmath
with @xmath and @xmath . The decomposition yielding the infimum is then
said to be the optimal decomposition or optimal ensemble of @xmath . It
can be shown that if the utilised measure for pure states @xmath is
monotonous under LOCC then the induced convex roof measure has this
property too (see [ 5 ] ). The first measure of this kind was
entanglement of formation @xmath with the von Neumann entropy of the
reduced density matrices as a measure for pure states @xmath introduced
in ( 1.75 )

  -- -- -- --------
           (1.80)
  -- -- -- --------

When this measure was introduced by Bennett et al. [ 24 ] , the notion
was to quantify the amount of pure Bell states that is needed per copy
to construct @xmath . In other words, @xmath copies of @xmath can be
prepared out of a minimum of @xmath Bell states and @xmath separable
states. @xmath can then be regarded as the contained amount of
entanglement. The naming ”entanglement of formation” is referable to
this concept.

### 1.4 Bound entanglement

In the previous sections we frequently used the term local operations
and classical communication (LOCC) . Nevertheless, we neither explained
its meaning nor given an adequate mathematical definition. This section
will serve as an introduction to this issue. After introducing the class
of quantum operations , we consider the restrictions for the class of
LOCC. Consequences for the purification of entanglement will be briefly
discussed, enabling us to justify the term bound entanglement .

#### 1.4.1 Quantum operations

We investigate the fundamental quantum operations (see [ 19 ] , [ 25 ]
). Our objects of interest are the maps that transform a given state
@xmath into another @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.81)
     @xmath   @xmath      (1.82)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

As far as we know, any @xmath is a combination of four elementary linear
maps ³ ³ 3 It is true that the first two types of transformations are
not ”real physical” operations, but they are the conversion of
experimental operating principles into mathematical diction. :

-    Adding an uncorrelated ancilla @xmath to the original quantum
    system in the state @xmath

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (1.83)
         @xmath      (1.84)
      -- -------- -- --------

-    Tracing out part of the system in the state @xmath

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (1.85)
         @xmath      (1.86)
      -- -------- -- --------

    Here @xmath is the partial trace over the Hilbert-Schmidt space
    @xmath .

-    Unitary transformations of a state @xmath

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (1.87)
         @xmath      (1.88)
      -- -------- -- --------

    with a unitary operator @xmath .

-    Measurement of an observable @xmath

      -- -------- -- --------
         @xmath      (1.89)
         @xmath      (1.90)
      -- -------- -- --------

    Here @xmath is the set of the spectral projectors associated with
    the eigenvectors of the observable @xmath . It is useful to classify
    two types of measurements: Non-selective measurements , where we
    work with all outcomes of the measurement and selective measurements
    , where we filter outcomes. Non-selective measurements then yield
    @xmath , and selective measurements @xmath .

The point of the matter is, that the four maps themselves and their
compositions are all completely positive. According to Choi’s theorem
(see [ 26 ] ) any map of this type can be expressed in the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.91)
     @xmath      (1.92)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath (Hilbert-Schmidt space of dimension @xmath ), @xmath
(Hilbert-Schmidt space of dimension @xmath ) and complex matrices @xmath
of dimension @xmath . This expression is the Kraus representation of
@xmath and the matrices @xmath are the famous Kraus operators which obey
@xmath .

#### 1.4.2 Class of LOCC

The concept of ”local operations and classical communication” stems from
quantum communication theory and appears in quantum teleportation,
quantum cryptography and distillation protocols. Consider a source and
two distant parties A and B, commonly called Alice and Bob. Under
realistic circumstances they are able to perform arbitrary quantum
operations acting on the particular local Hilbert space @xmath and
@xmath and to communicate via classical information. They can neither
exchange their quantum systems nor perform ”global” transformations
involving the entire composite Hilbert space @xmath .

The transcription of this concept into restrictions for the quantum
operations § 1.4.1 implies that a LOCC operation is a map of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.93)
  -- -------- -- --------

with product Kraus operators @xmath where @xmath acts on Alice’s Hilbert
space @xmath and @xmath acts on Bob’s Hilbert space @xmath . The product
Kraus operators reflect that the quantum operations only act locally,
while the bilateral dependence of @xmath on @xmath reflect that both
parties can arrange their actions (they can be classically correlated).
While the form of ( 1.93 ) is comprehensible, the constraints for the
operators @xmath and their relations can be quite complex. Those depend
on the considered communication class, which can be ”no communication”,
”one-way communication” or ”two-way communication” (see [ 5 ] , [ 19 ] ,
[ 25 ] ). The form of ( 1.93 ) induces the definition of separable
density matrices ( 1.3 ).

#### 1.4.3 Distillation and bound entanglement

Outstanding procedures like quantum cryptography or quantum
teleportation require pure Bell states. In practice however, we cannot
completely neutralise the interaction with the environment that causes
decoherence. In the case of the two distant parties Alice and Bob, the
linking quantum channel is therefore said to be noisy. We expect that
the occurring state @xmath is no longer a pure Bell state, originally
emitted from the source, but a mixture. We characterise the state @xmath
by its fidelity @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.94)
  -- -------- -- --------

which can be regarded as the remaining content of @xmath in @xmath . In
order to reconstruct an almost pure Bell state with any desired fidelity
close to @xmath via LOCC operations we have to execute a so-called
distillation protocol . The first protocols for qubits were introduced
by Bennett et al. [ 27 ] . These are the recurrence, hashing and
breeding protocols. The hashing and breeding protocols were later
generalised for qudits by Vollbrecht et al. [ 28 ] . These will not be
discussed in detail, but it should be pointed out that they all have one
thing in common: They use several copies of @xmath and local filtering
to obtain a smaller number of nearly maximally entangled pure states.
For every protocol there is a lower bound for the fidelity @xmath in
order to work successfully. It is a challenging task to find more
universal (ones with a lower @xmath ) and faster protocols. Irrespective
of this intention, there will always be entangled states that cannot be
distilled. The conventional term therefore is bound entanglement (see [
29 ] ). We have already mentioned that in higher dimensional systems
there are entangled states which cannot be detected via the PPT
criterion. Let us consider how such a state behaves under a LOCC
transformation. According to the assumption @xmath being an entangled
density matrix with positive partial transpose we claim

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.95)
     @xmath      (1.96)
  -- -------- -- --------

A LOCC transformation of @xmath then yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.97)
  -- -------- -- --------

We know that transposition changes the sequence of operators according
to @xmath and in our case hermitian conjugation is simply the
combination of transposition and complex conjugation @xmath . Partial
transposition on @xmath then results in

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (1.98)
  -- -------- -- --------

wherein @xmath is a positive real number @xmath . Let us investigate
positivity

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
                          (1.99)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

This proves that @xmath is a positive operator. The conclusion is that a
LOCC transformation cannot transform a PPT density matrix into a density
matrix that is non-positive after partial transposition (NPPT) . We have
established that a pure maximally entangled state (NPPT) cannot be
distilled from a PPT state, even though it contains some entanglement.
This justifies the term bound entanglement . The existence of NPPT bound
entanglement is controversial and a subject of recent research.

## 2 Bell inequalities

### 2.1 Local realism versus quantum mechanics

Since the verification of (special) relativity principles most
physicists have believed that any fundamental theory is in compliance
with local realism.
Realism is the assumption of the existence of definite values for all
possible observables. That is, at each point of time these values
genuinely exist, whether we measure them or not. ”Ideal” measurements
with no or marginal disturbance could therefore reproduce these
pre-existing values. As a direct consequence, realistic theories are
non-contextual.
Locality reflects the key consequence of relativity, that is all
interactions between distant objects are limited to the speed of light.
Space-like separated objects are therefore independent of one another.
Local realism is the unification of locality and realism.
As obvious as these assumptions may seem, in 1935 Einstein, Podolsky and
Rosen showed that quantum mechanics rejects these principles (see [ 1 ]
). At this period of time, their conclusion was that quantum mechanics
must be incomplete, meaning there must be elements of reality that do
not appear in the theory. An introduction of such elements however,
should restore local realism. Due to their hiddenness they have been
called local hidden variables , regardless of whether they are hidden in
principle or just in experiments at that time. During this period,
evidence had not been found yet, demonstrating that all local hidden
variable theories (LHVT) are incompatible with the predictions of
quantum mechanics in particular experiments. In 1964, John Bell derived
that the correlation expectation values of local hidden variable
theories fulfill inequalities that can be violated by quantum mechanics
(see [ 30 ] ). Moreover, these Bell inequalities enable us to
experimentally revise the validity of either quantum mechanics or a
local realistic theory. Before going into further details, it is
essential to briefly reconsider why and under which circumstances
quantum mechanics is said to be non-local. Nonlocality can be ascribed
to entanglement and the measurement problem. This can be best understood
by considering the Bohm version of the EPR situation (see [ 31 ] ).
Here, two spin- @xmath particles, for example electrons or protons,
interact and their spins are in a maximally entangled singlet state
@xmath afterwards. Then both particles fly off in different directions
freely while the spins remain in the singlet state. Subsequently @xmath
spin measurements are performed on both particles.

According to the measurement postulate of quantum mechanics the spin
will no longer be a superposition of up @xmath and down @xmath though
either one or the other. The reduction of the state vector to one of the
eigenvectors of the observable @xmath of one particle forces the other
particle’s spin @xmath to be anti-correlated. Here appears a new type of
simultaneousness. The problem here is that if one measures @xmath on one
side, the particle’s spin on the other side is affected instantaneously,
irrespective of how far they are apart. If the wave function is regarded
as a real physical object this means that causality is violated, since
one particle affects the other with superluminal velocity. When we say
the measurements A and B are performed simultaneously then according to
relativity there are different inertial frames of reference, in which A
happens before B and vice versa. Fact is, quantum mechanics predicts
that the spins are always perfectly anticorrelated. This phenomenon can
be interpreted in different ways. When we accept the wave function as a
real existing physical object we have to reject locality, since the
reduction of the wave function is a non-local process. In the
conventional version of the Copenhagen interpretation where the wave
function is not a physical object of reality but rather a mathematical
tool, realism is rejected in order to preserve locality ⁴ ⁴ 4 ”There is
no quantum world. There is only an abstract physical description. It is
wrong to think that the task of physics is to find out how nature is.
Physics concerns what we can say about nature.” - Niels Bohr . In the
Bohm interpretation locality is given up to maintain realism. What can
be concluded from those interpretations is that, if nature really
behaves quantum mechanically, then it is not local and realistic at the
same time.

### 2.2 A Bell inequality for two-qubit systems: CHSH

As previously mentioned, local realistic theories are in contradiction
to quantum mechanics in certain experiments. In order to show this, we
derive a Bell inequality which holds for any local realistic theory but
can be violated by quantum mechanics. This will be the famous
Clauser-Horne-Shimony-Holt inequality (CHSH) , which is a modification
of the original Bell inequality permitting experimental revisal.

#### 2.2.1 Derivation of the CHSH inequality

We want to describe the Bohm-EPR situation with a local realistic
theory. In order to do this, we introduce the parameter @xmath , which
represents a hidden variable or a set of those. The spin of a particle
then depends on the measured direction represented by a vector @xmath
and the parameter @xmath . We know that a spin measurement on a particle
has only two possible outcomes. Without loss of generality we assign the
values @xmath and @xmath to them. In a local realistic theory the
observables of distant parties are then given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

with measurement direction @xmath on Alice’s side, and

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

with measurement direction @xmath on Bob’s side. Locality requires that
the outcome of A does not depend on @xmath and B does not depend on
@xmath . Without loss of generality we can say that the value @xmath is
achieved with probability density @xmath obeying

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

We define a correlation function for the joint spin measurement, that
yields the value @xmath when the spins are parallel and @xmath when the
they are antiparallel

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

The expectation value of this quantity therefore is

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

If we combine different expectation values of different measurement
directions in the following way

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

then the absolute value yields

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

We obtain the CHSH inequality by rewriting this in the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The derivation reveals that every local realistic theory has to fulfill
the CHSH inequality. Quantum mechanics however predicts a violation
under particular circumstances. Consider the quantum mechanical
expectation value of @xmath for the Bell state @xmath

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

with unit vectors @xmath and @xmath . A short evaluation yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

wherein the angles @xmath and @xmath substitute the vectors @xmath and
@xmath . Hence, we can write the CHSH inequality in the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

wherein @xmath and @xmath are the angles of the four vectors @xmath and
@xmath in a plane. For angles obeying @xmath and @xmath we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

As a result we have found that any local realistic theory cannot
reproduce the statistics of quantum mechanics. Experiments with
entangled photons confirm the violation of the CHSH inequality (see [ 2
] , [ 32 ] ).

#### 2.2.2 Horodecki violation criterion

The example with the singlet state @xmath demonstrates the violation of
the CHSH inequality. Now we want to work out the whole set of states
causing violations. For an arbitrary mixed state @xmath the expectation
value @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus, we can write the Bell inequality in the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

We call the operator in square brackets the Bell operator @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

It is obvious that for a given state @xmath one has to find the right
vectors @xmath and @xmath to show possible violation. Only if the global
maximum with respect to all Bell operators @xmath is less or equal to 2,
then the inequality is preserved

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since the Bell operator @xmath is expressed in terms of Pauli matrices,
it makes sense to express @xmath in the way we introduced it in ( )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

The computation of @xmath then yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

wherein @xmath denotes the @xmath correlation matrix with the
coefficients @xmath . We replace @xmath and @xmath by mutually
orthogonal unit vectors @xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now the maximum of @xmath has to be determined with respect to @xmath
and @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

The scalar products are maximal for parallel vectors. Consequently, we
choose the unit vectors @xmath and @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Maximisation with respect to @xmath yields

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since @xmath and @xmath are mutually orthogonal unit vectors, the
expressions @xmath and @xmath are maximal when @xmath and @xmath are
eigenvectors of the two largest eigenvalues @xmath and @xmath of @xmath
. Thus the CHSH inequality reads

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now we have proven that if and only if the two largest eigenvalues of
the matrix @xmath comply

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

then the state @xmath violates the CHSH inequality for particular
vectors @xmath and @xmath . This necessary and sufficient condition was
found by the Horodeckis in 1995 [ 33 ] .

### 2.3 A Bell inequality for bipartite qudit systems: CGLMP

The CHSH inequality is a Bell inequality for bipartite qubit systems. In
this section we present Bell inequalities for bipartite qudit systems
based on logical constraints established by Collins, Gisin, Linden,
Massar and Popescu (CGLMP) [ 34 ] .

#### 2.3.1 Derivation of the CGLMP inequality

Once again, we consider the standard situation with the two parties
Alice and Bob spatially separated, only having access onto their local
Hilbert spaces @xmath of dimension d, while the composite Hilbert space
is once again @xmath . Consequently, measurements on each side have d
possible outcomes. Let us assume again that we could reproduce the
statistical predictions with a local realistic theory. In analogy to the
CHSH Bell experiment, each party has two apparatuses with different
settings. Due to the fact that in a local realistic theory all
observables have definite values simultaneously, the state of a system
induces a probability distribution of form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

that apparatus @xmath gives measurement result @xmath , apparatus @xmath
gives @xmath and so on. In sum, we have @xmath values determining the
statistics of the system. As usual we normalise these probabilities

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

If we are only interested in measurement results of certain apparatuses
then we have to sum over all ignored observables. For example the
probability of @xmath giving j and @xmath giving @xmath is @xmath . We
introduce some variables @xmath and @xmath defined by relations of
measurement outcomes

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.27)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.28)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.29)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The definition induces the constraint

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

We introduce the quantity @xmath defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

with the probabilities @xmath that the outcome of @xmath differs from
outcome @xmath by k

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

Then @xmath is the sum of the probabilities that @xmath and @xmath .
Nevertheless, because of the logical constraint @xmath only three of
those four relations can be valid. Thus we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

for all local realistic theories. We introduce another quantity @xmath

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.35)
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Consider the following table which shows how the logical constraint
affects the maximum of @xmath .

In consequence

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

Additional quantities @xmath can be introduced ⁵ ⁵ 5 the bracket [ ]
stands for the floor function

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
              @xmath      (2.37)
              @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

For local realistic theories the upper bound is 2

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

Proof: We introduce the variables

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.39)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.40)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.41)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.42)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

that obey

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since all computations are done modulo d, without loss of generality we
can restrict @xmath and @xmath to lie in the interval

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath can be written as a function depending on @xmath and @xmath in
the following way

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.45)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is given by

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.46)
  -- -- -- --------

We now have to check all combinations of algebraic signs of @xmath and
@xmath . With help of ( 2.43 ) and ( 2.44 ) we find

-   @xmath :
    @xmath

-    three of @xmath are @xmath and one is @xmath :
    either @xmath
    or @xmath

-    two of @xmath are @xmath and two are @xmath :
    @xmath

-    one of @xmath is @xmath and three are @xmath :
    either @xmath
    or @xmath

-   @xmath :
    @xmath

Hence, @xmath . @xmath

In the following, we investigate the predictions of quantum mechanics
for this family of inequalities. First, we have to insert the quantum
mechanical probabilities

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.47)
  -- -- -- --------

wherein @xmath and @xmath denote orthonormal eigenvectors of the
observables with @xmath . To confirm the violation of these inequalities
consider the maximally entangled state

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

and orthonormal eigenvectors

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.49)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.50)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

with @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath . Then ( 2.47 ) becomes

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
              @xmath      
     @xmath               
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.51)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

With the values of @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath given above we
find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.52)
  -- -------- -- --------

Inserting this into @xmath and @xmath leads to

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.53)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.54)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

We obtain the following values for @xmath and @xmath
@xmath
As we can see, the CGLMP inequalities @xmath and @xmath are violated.
The table also reveals that by using @xmath instead of @xmath we achieve
much stronger violations. This is in close relation to the resistance
against noise. Before we analyse this, we present a concise notation for
@xmath and @xmath . Due to ( 2.47 ) the probabilities @xmath become

  -- -- --
        
  -- -- --

We rewrite @xmath by exploiting linearity of the trace in the following
way

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
                          
              @xmath      (2.55)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

We identify the sum of operators as our new Bell operator @xmath for
@xmath . In the same way we can define Bell operators @xmath for all
quantities @xmath so that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.56)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now, let us consider the state @xmath in presence of uncolored noise

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.57)
  -- -------- -- --------

wherein @xmath is the amount of noise. We obtain

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.58)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.59)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

@xmath contains @xmath projectors with prefactor @xmath , hence @xmath .
Whereas the addends in @xmath contain @xmath projectors with prefactor
@xmath and @xmath projectors with prefactor @xmath , hence @xmath . In
consequence, we obtain

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.60)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.61)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Above a certain amount of noise @xmath , the state @xmath ceases to
violate the Bell inequality. The values are given by @xmath and @xmath ,
and are summarised in the following table.
@xmath
We conclude that one should give preference to the inequalities @xmath
due to their higher resistance to noise.

#### 2.3.2 Optimisation of the Bell operator

The orthonormal bases given in ( 2.49 ) are optimal for the state @xmath
. In other words, there exists no better Bell operator for @xmath
causing higher violation. This has not been proven so far, though
numerical optimisation indicates that this is true (see [ 34 ] , [ 35 ]
). The lack of a proof lies in the fact that the finding of an optimal
Bell operator for an arbitrary @xmath is a nonlinear optimisation
problem: The finding of solutions for grad @xmath with respect to all
vector components is a nonlinear task and is further complicated by
nonlinear constraints since the vectors @xmath and @xmath have to form
an orthonormal basis (observables are hermitian operators and their
eigenvectors are orthogonal)

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.62)
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.63)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Using the Weyl operators or the Gell-Mann matrices to express @xmath and
@xmath does not lead to a simplification like in § 2.2.2 for the CHSH
inequality. For this reason, we have developed a numerical optimisation
algorithm which reliably finds optimal Bell operators for any @xmath .
Let us first investigate the number of variables of the Bell operator
@xmath . We have 4 orthonormal bases @xmath and @xmath with each d
vectors. Each vector is an element of @xmath and can be described by 2d
real numbers (d vector components, each described by 2 real numbers, one
for the amplitude and one for the phase). Altogether we have @xmath real
variables. Orthonormality restricts the values of the variables, thus we
have to optimise @xmath under the constraints ( 2.62 ) and ( 2.63 ). For
all practical purposes however this way is quite impractical. We now
show how to satisfy the constraints by choosing the right set of
variables. We begin with some mathematical considerations. Any basis
transformation can be realised via a unitary transformation, i.e. any
basis @xmath of @xmath can be transformed into any other basis @xmath of
@xmath by means of a certain unitary transformation @xmath . Since it is
our goal to find the right orthonormal bases @xmath and @xmath , we can
select arbitrary orthonormal bases and seek the unitary transformations
@xmath and @xmath that maximise @xmath and @xmath . These
transformations are elements of the unitary group @xmath . Due to the
fact that global phases do not affect probabilities and that @xmath can
be written as a semidirect product @xmath , it suffices to regard the
special unitary group @xmath . We use the generalised Euler angle
parametrisation of this group, wherein the Euler angles embody all
degrees of freedom (see [ 36 ] , [ 37 ] ). For this kind of
parametrisation the following antisymmetric and diagonal generalised
Gell-Mann matrices ( 1.38 , 1.39 ) are needed

  -- -------- -- -------- --
     @xmath      @xmath   
     @xmath      @xmath   
  -- -------- -- -------- --

In this notation the explicit form of the parametrisation of @xmath by
generalised Euler angles @xmath reads (see [ 36 ] , [ 37 ] ⁶ ⁶ 6 Note
that our notation differs slightly. We chose an indexing where all
indices are increasing and the sequence of the product is @xmath )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath and @xmath given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.66)
  -- -- -- --------

For instance, for @xmath we find

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.67)
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.68)
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.69)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

The parametrisation guarantees compliance with the constraints ( 2.62 )
and ( 2.63 ) and reduces the number of variables to @xmath without
discarding any solution. However, the optimisation of @xmath with
respect to the Euler angles still requires a numerical optimisation
algorithm. While popular algorithms like Differential Evolution ,
Simulated Annealing or gradient based methods have been very
time-consuming, the Nelder-Mead method [ 38 ] has performed this task
relatively fast and reliable. In general this method can be advantageous
when the number of variables is very large, because it manages to find a
maximum without computing derivatives, which can possibly be
computationally intensive. For maximisation the algorithm proceeds as
follows: Assume a function @xmath which has to be maximised with respect
to n variables @xmath . At the beginning a simplex with @xmath vertices
@xmath is created at random. In the first step (1) the vertices are
being arranged by their values @xmath and labeled according to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.70)
  -- -------- -- --------

According to this, @xmath is the best and @xmath the worst vertex. Then
a reflection of the worst point through the centroid of the remaining n
points @xmath is performed

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is called the reflection parameter. The next step of the
procedure depends on the value @xmath :

-    If @xmath is better than @xmath but not better than @xmath , i.e.
    @xmath then a new simplex with @xmath substituted by @xmath is built
    and step (1) is repeated.

-    If @xmath is the best point, i.e. @xmath then an expansion @xmath
    with expansion parameter @xmath is performed. If @xmath then a new
    simplex with @xmath substituted by @xmath is built and step (1) is
    repeated. Otherwise @xmath is used instead of @xmath .

-    If @xmath does not result in an improvement, i.e. @xmath then a
    contraction @xmath with contraction parameter @xmath is performed.
    If @xmath , then a new simplex with @xmath substituted by @xmath is
    built and step (1) is repeated. Else the simplex is being shrinked:
    The vertices are being replaced by @xmath and @xmath with shrink
    parameter @xmath for all @xmath , afterwards step (1) is repeated.

The rules are repeated until the convergence criteria @xmath and @xmath
are satisfied, where @xmath is the new and @xmath the old best point,
and @xmath are constants depending on the desired precision. As we can
infer from the rules, the Nelder-Mead method is a hill climbing
algorithm, which has the disadvantage that it could converge at a local
maximum. We cannot completely avoid this problem; however, by varying
the starting points we will find the global maximum in all likelihood.
The optimisation procedures for the Bell operators @xmath and @xmath via
the Euler angle parametrisation and the Nelder-Mead method have been
realised in MATHEMATICA 6 and can be found in the appendix B and C . To
achieve good results it was necessary to find proper values for the
parameters @xmath and @xmath . With the values @xmath and @xmath an
agreeable compromise between robustness against local maxima and time
exposure was attained (with the standard values the algorithm converges
at local maxima more often). We have chosen to execute the algorithm ten
times with different starting simplices to guarantee that the global
maximum is obtained. The accuracy/precision goal has been set to
MATHEMATICA 6 standard values @xmath .

#### 2.3.3 Properties

Before we discuss some properties of the CGLMP inequalities we show that
the inequality @xmath is equivalent to the CHSH inequality when the
regarded Hilbert space is two dimensional @xmath . Correspondingly, all
properties of the CGLMP inequalities @xmath likewise hold for the CHSH
inequality.
The proof of equivalence is straight forward. We write all terms of
@xmath explicitly

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

Since the expectation value ( 2.5 ) can be written as @xmath we can
summarise the terms of @xmath and find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

Due to the symmetry of positive and negative terms of @xmath for
dimension two, the inequality @xmath holds too. Hence, this is exactly
the CHSH inequality with @xmath and @xmath interchanged (which makes no
difference).
Now we quote some important properties: The CGLMP inequalities have been
proven to be tight Bell inequalities (see [ 39 ] ). For the
understanding of this, we have to return to the probability distribution
( 2.25 ) on which the CGLMP inequalities are based on. As noted before,
there are @xmath values determining the statistics of a local realistic
theory. In contrast, in quantum mechanics we have probability
distributions @xmath , with @xmath for each of the four settings @xmath
and @xmath . As we have seen, those cannot be reproduced by summing over
all unregarded observables of @xmath . To conclude, we only have @xmath
probabilities for each setting and @xmath in total. The quantum
mechanical probability distributions are restricted by normalisation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.73)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the non-signaling condition (quantum mechanics cannot be used for
superluminal communication)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.74)
  -- -------- -- --------

(it is clear, that the same has to hold for A and B interchanged) .
What have we gained? The quantum mechanical probabilities can be
specified by @xmath values, which can be regarded as entries of a vector
@xmath . Due to the constraints, all physical relevant vectors lie in an
affine space of dimension @xmath (see [ 39 ] ). In this context, the
normalisation coming from the local realistic description of the system
restricts a vector to belong to the convex hull of @xmath vectors @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.75)
     @xmath      (2.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

The extremal points @xmath then are the generators of a convex polytope.
Such a polytope can also be described by facets and their half-spaces.
Facets induce inequalities of form

  -- -- -- --------
           (2.77)
  -- -- -- --------

where @xmath is the necessary number of facets to define the polytope.
Hence, with this set of inequalities we can determine all states that
are in contradiction to local realism in an experiment with two
apparatuses on each side. The problem involved is, that computing the
facets of a high-dimensional polytope is a very difficult task that has
only been completely solved for d=2 (see [ 40 ] ). Let us now compare
this approach with our well-known Bell inequalities. We know that all
states that violate a Bell inequality do not belong to the convex hull
of @xmath . However, states that fulfill a Bell inequality do not
necessarily belong to it. This means that Bell inequalities define a
region (half-space, sphere, polytope, etc.) that contains the convex
polytope. The term tight Bell inequality is used if the boundary of the
generated region at least partially coincides with at least one of the
facets of the polytope. Hence, the inequalities ( 2.77 ) are themselves
tight Bell inequalities as well as the CGLMP inequality given by @xmath
. For the CGLMP it has been shown in [ 39 ] that it coincides with a
family of equivalent facets. However, we do not know if the CGLMP
inequality coincides with all facets of the polytope. Even though this
might be the case, we cannot infer from this that all non-local states
can be found with help of the CGLMP inequality because increasing the
number of observables per party could define an improved polytope that
could enable us to find even more non-local states. Please refer to [ 41
] for a more detailed discussion.
Now let us investigate another property of the CGLMP inequality
concerning the maximal violation . As we stated before, for the
maximally entangled state @xmath the violation is maximal when the
measurement setup is configured according to ( ). However, in this case
the largest eigenvalue of the corresponding Bell operator @xmath is
larger than the value @xmath for all @xmath . The largest eigenvalues
are summarised in this table (see [ 43 ] ):
@xmath
wherein @xmath ⁷ ⁷ 7 @xmath stands for ”maximal violation” denotes the
eigenvector of @xmath with the largest eigenvalue. Since all maximally
entangled states are equivalent in terms of local unitaries (as
discussed in § 1.1.3 ) the state @xmath must be non-maximally entangled
⁸ ⁸ 8 If @xmath then we could use the Bell operator @xmath to obtain
@xmath in contradiction to obtained values. . For instance, for qutrits
the eigenvector is the non-maximally entangled state @xmath with @xmath
and @xmath . Knowing that the states @xmath yield stronger violations,
we could ask if the above given values are the highest obtainable for
@xmath because the measurement configuration ( 2.49 ) has only been
intended to be the best for @xmath . Numerical investigations with
varying states and measurement configurations show that these values are
indeed the highest (see [ 43 ] ). How can we interpret this result? Does
the higher violation and the consequential higher resistance against
noise signify that the states @xmath are more non-local than @xmath ?
This and further questions on the comparison of nonlocality and
entanglement will be discussed in the next section.

### 2.4 Remarks on nonlocality and entanglement

A state @xmath is said to be non-local if it violates a Bell inequality.
Such a state is necessarily entangled, which follows from the fact that
separable states cannot violate any Bell inequality. This can easily be
seen by generalising the probability distribution ( 2.25 ). Recall that
ideal Bell inequalities correspond to the facets of the polytope of
local realistic correlations ( 2.77 ). The number of observables on each
site depends on the regarded Bell inequality but we do not want to
restrict ourself to the case of two observables. Thus, we generalise (
2.25 ) to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.78)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath . According to ( 2.76 ), the normalisation defines a
polytope and all local states belong to it. It is not difficult to
recognise that any separable pure state belongs to the polytope: Since
all probabilities are of product form @xmath (which is not the case when
a state is entangled) we can easily construct the above stated
probability distribution

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
              @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (2.79)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

which of course obeys the normalisation relation due to normalised state
vectors. Since separable mixed states are only convex combinations of
pure ones we conclude that they belong to the polytope as well. This
completes the proof that separable states cannot violate any Bell
inequality. As a consequence, the operator @xmath is a entanglement
witness because @xmath holds for all separable states. However, in
general this is not an optimal witness, even if @xmath is optimised for
@xmath .
Let us go back to the main subject of this section. Entanglement is a
necessary component for nonlocality, however not all entangled states
violate a Bell inequality. This will become more obvious when we discuss
the geometry of entanglement and nonlocality in § 3 . At this point, we
mention one famous example of an entangled state which does not violate
the CHSH inequality: The Werner state @xmath (for d=2 equivalent to the
isotropic state) is entangled for @xmath , however violation of the CHSH
inequality is obtained only for @xmath ⁹ ⁹ 9 The values of the parameter
p can easily be verified with the PPT criterion and the Horodecki
violation criterion . This means that for @xmath the statistical
predictions can be reproduced by a local realistic theory, even though
the state is entangled. This brings us to the notion of hidden
nonlocality . We can claim that any distillable state (§ 1.4.3 )
contains some amount of nonlocality since we could perform local
operations and classical communication (§ 1.4.2 ) until nonlocality is
revealed. Despite this argument, the distinction between nonlocality and
entanglement is not entirely clarified. Besides the fact that we do not
know if any entangled state behaves non-locally in a particular
measurement situation, there are some well-known examples that indicate
that they might not be exactly the same. Eberhard has shown that
non-maximally entangled states require lower detection efficiencies than
maximally entangled ones, in order to close the detection loophole (see
[ 42 ] ). We have also seen that some non-maximally entangled states
seem to be more non-local than the Bell states, due to their higher
violation of the CGLMP inequality. With regard to this issue, one might
argue that the resistance against noise is not a good measure of
nonlocality. Some remarks on this can be found in a publication by Acin,
Durt, Gisin and Latorre [ 43 ] . Nevertheless, they also suggest that a
Bell inequality with more than two measurement instruments on each site
could avoid this peculiarity. Another hint that entanglement and
nonlocality are different resources has been found by Brunner, Gisin and
Scarani (see [ 44 ] ). They have shown that the simulation of
non-maximally entangled states via non-local machines requires more
resources than the simulation of a Bell state. The hypothetical
non-local machine ¹⁰ ¹⁰ 10 other common names are PR box (named after
Popescu and Rohrlich) and non-local box was constructed to obtain the
algebraic bound of the CHSH inequality without violating the
non-signaling condition. Alice and Bob each have an input ( @xmath and
@xmath ) and an output ( @xmath and @xmath ). Alice can choose the value
of @xmath and gets @xmath in return, while Bob can choose the value of
@xmath and gets @xmath in return.

The machine creates a random output @xmath , though with @xmath and
@xmath correlated according to the rule

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

For instance, if @xmath then the output of the machine is @xmath in half
the cases and @xmath in the other half. Due to the local randomness this
box cannot be used for signaling. Let us investigate the violation of
the CHSH inequality. We assume that for any observable @xmath there is a
corresponding value for @xmath , and the same applies to @xmath and
@xmath . As before, we define a correlation function that yields the
value @xmath when the outputs @xmath and @xmath are identical, and
@xmath when they are different

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.81)
  -- -------- -- --------

For the case @xmath and @xmath the expectation values of the correlation
function are @xmath and @xmath . Under such circumstances, the CHSH
inequality yields the algebraic bound

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.82)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is the most non-local behaviour of a system possible. Thus, from a
information theoretical point of view, this machine can be seen as a
resource of nonlocality. Inspired by this idea, Cerf, Gisin, Massar and
Popescu have shown that quantum entanglement can be simulated without
communication by use of the non-local machine (see [ 45 ] ). Subsequent
work demonstrated that for the simulation of a Bell state only one
non-local machine is required, while at least two are required to
simulate non-maximally entangled states (see [ 44 ] ). This is another
fact that strengthens the conjecture that there is a difference between
nonlocality and entanglement. Further open questions concerning Bell
inequalities, including also the experimental point of view, can be
found in a publication by N. Gisin [ 46 ] .

## 3 Geometrical aspects of bipartite systems

As the state space in quantum physics is a complex Hilbert-Schmidt space
@xmath it is in general difficult to get a feeling for the properties of
density matrices. However, in some cases they can be represented by
vectors in a real vector space. For example, in § 1.1 we have shown that
density matrices can be described by real Bloch vectors. Due to the fact
that the dimension of this vector is @xmath , this representation is not
very helpful if we intend to investigate bipartite systems. This is
because even for the simplest case of two qubits the vector space is 15
dimensional. In this section we show that it is still possible to find
attractive illustrations when it comes to studying entanglement and
nonlocality of bipartite systems.

### 3.1 Geometry of the two-qubit system - the tetrahedron

#### 3.1.1 Introduction

As usual, we begin with the bipartite qubit system (the following
approach can be found in [ 47 ] and [ 48 ] ). According to ( 1.16 ), any
density matrix acting on @xmath can be written in the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Separability and nonlocality are invariant under local unitary
transformations @xmath , therefore we can define equivalence classes of
states

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

that have the same properties concerning separability and nonlocality.
We exploit the group isomorphism between @xmath and @xmath which induces
that for any @xmath there exists a @xmath that obeys

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

Under a transformation @xmath the vectors @xmath and the matrix @xmath
then become

  -- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.4)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.5)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -------- -- -------

According to the singular value decomposition , there exist orthogonal
matrices @xmath and @xmath so that @xmath becomes diagonal with real
entries. We choose density matrices @xmath with diagonal @xmath as the
representatives of the equivalence classes @xmath . Hence, for
determining separability and nonlocality it suffices to investigate the
set of states with diagonal @xmath which we denote by @xmath . We write
the diagonal entries in a vector @xmath , in this way a density matrix
@xmath is described by three vectors @xmath . Now, let us look through
the elements of @xmath . Non-negativity is a necessary condition for a
density matrix @xmath , i.e. @xmath for all @xmath . Consider the four
projectors @xmath and @xmath given by the Bell states @xmath and @xmath
. The Pauli matrix decomposition ( 1.23 ) yields @xmath and @xmath for
@xmath and

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.7)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.8)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.9)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

For two states @xmath and @xmath given in the Pauli matrix decomposition
we can compute @xmath easily, because it simplifies to @xmath . Thus,
the four inequalities @xmath with @xmath give

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
     @xmath      (3.12)
     @xmath      (3.13)
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

This restricts any @xmath of @xmath to belong to a regular tetrahedron
spanned by the Bell states at the vertices (see Fig. 3.1 ). Note that
only in the case where @xmath and @xmath the density matrices @xmath are
diagonal in the Bell basis @xmath and only then the constraints ( 3.11
)-( 3.14 ) are also sufficient for non-negativity. States with this
property define a subset @xmath and are called locally maximally mixed
because the respective reduced density matrices are maximally disordered
@xmath . The subset @xmath contains only four pure states, namely the
four Bell states, which can easily be seen by testing the purity
condition

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

Geometrically spoken this defines a sphere with radius @xmath that
intersects the tetrahedron at the vertices, which therefore are the only
pure sates of .

#### 3.1.2 Geometry of separable and entangled states

Now, let us study the separability of @xmath . In § 1.2.2 we stated that
the PPT criterion is a necessary and sufficient criterion for
separability for density matrices acting on @xmath . In the Pauli matrix
decomposition it is trivial to compute the partial transposition. @xmath
is a symmetric matrix and therefore invariant under transposition, the
same applies to @xmath which is diagonal. Only @xmath changes its
algebraic sign @xmath , since it is anti-symmetric. Consequently,
partial transposition results in a reflection of the tetrahedron where
the coordinates are transformed according to @xmath . All operators
@xmath belonging to the original tetrahedron are non-negative, while the
reflected tetrahedron contains operators @xmath with negative
eigenvalues. This means that all states @xmath belonging to the cross
section of the two tetrahedron are separable, while the other states are
entangled. This intersection is an octahedron (see Fig. 3.2 ). The
extremal separable points have the coordinates @xmath and @xmath and are
1:1 mixtures of two Bell states. A possible decomposition into a convex
combination of separable density matrices can easily be found. Consider
the mixture @xmath of the separable states @xmath and @xmath . A short
computation gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

With the vectors @xmath and @xmath , where @xmath stands for the unit
vectors @xmath , @xmath and @xmath , we can explicitly demonstrate the
separability of the extremal points of the octahedron, thus all states
within the octahedron because they are just convex combinations of these
points.

#### 3.1.3 Geometry of non-local states

We intend to find the non-local states within the tetrahedron, i.e.
states that violate the CHSH inequality ¹¹ ¹¹ 11 CHSH is equivalent to
CGLMP for d=2 . For the bipartite qubit system this is not demanding
because we can exploit the Horodecki violation criterion ( 2.24 ).
First, we have to compute the eigenvalues of the matrix @xmath . Since
@xmath is already diagonal we get @xmath and @xmath . A sufficient
condition for nonlocality is that the sum of two eigenvalues is larger
than 1 which implies the validity of at least one of the three
inequalities

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.18)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.19)
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Each of the inequalities defines a cylinder with radius @xmath in the
geometric picture and a density matrix @xmath that lies outside of one
of them is non-local. The union of the exterior regions of these three
cylinders is the set of non-local states (see Fig. 3.3 ).

This descriptively illustrates that not all entangled states violate the
CHSH inequality and that Bell operators @xmath are non-optimal
entanglement witnesses for states.

### 3.2 Geometry of bipartite qudit systems - the magic simplex

#### 3.2.1 Introduction

The derivation of the octahedron was direct and straight forward. In
seeking a similar geometric object for qudits we definitely try to
proceed analogously. The first step is to express @xmath in the
generalised form of ( 1.16 ) which is ( 1.43 )

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.21)
  -- -- -- --------

As we require a real vector space for a geometric structure, we use the
generalised Gell-Mann matrices for @xmath . In order to use the same
notation as for qubits, we express @xmath with generalised Bloch vectors
@xmath , @xmath and a correlation matrix @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

The next step would be the diagonalisation of the matrix @xmath via two
orthogonal matrices @xmath and @xmath . However, here we are confronted
with the problem that the relation @xmath is invalid for Gell-Mann
matrices. For example, consider the state @xmath with @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is obviously a valid density matrix. Let us assume that there
exists a unitary transformation @xmath that corresponds to the
orthogonal matrix @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

This transformation turns the state @xmath into @xmath

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.25)
  -- -- -- --------

As we can see the eigenvalues of @xmath and @xmath are not the same,
which in other words means that the orthogonal transformation @xmath
results in a non-unitary transformation ¹² ¹² 12 Eigenvalues are
invariant under unitary transformations of @xmath . Hence, the relation
@xmath cannot be valid. Even if @xmath can be diagonalised by product
unitary transformations @xmath for a subset of LMM states there is
another problem. Consider a locally maximally mixed state @xmath ¹³ ¹³
13 @xmath with diagonal @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the qubit case the eigenvectors of @xmath are the Bell states for an
arbitrary choice of @xmath , thus the non-negativity condition leads to
a simple geometric figure, namely the tetrahedron. For qudits the
situation is different because the eigenvectors of @xmath depend on
@xmath implying that the geometric figure given by non-negativity is
much more difficult to determine. Due to this and the fact that the set
of states whose correlation matrices @xmath can be diagonalised via
local unitaries are merely a subset of LMM, we choose another subset of
LMM whose properties concerning entanglement are interesting and whose
non-negativity is easier to handle.
At this point we adopt the way of B. Baumgartner, B.C. Hiesmayr and H.
Narnhofer, who introduced a generalisation of the tetrahedron for qudits
[ 49 ] . As the octahedron is spanned by the four Bell states, the
expansion for higher dimensional systems is the so called magic simplex
spanned by generalised Bell states @xmath with @xmath given by the Weyl
operators ( 1.31 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

This simplex is a convex set located in a @xmath dimensional hyperplane
in a @xmath dimensional real vector space of hermitian operators spanned
by the operators @xmath . When the element @xmath is expressed in the
basis @xmath it becomes obvious that the only pure states in @xmath lie
at the vertices @xmath (diagonal @xmath ). Before we investigate the
states within the magic simplex let us specify the subset of LMM states
belonging to it. One requirement for the existence of a representative
in @xmath surely is that @xmath must be decomposable into orthogonal
Bell states. However, we now show why this is only a necessary and not a
sufficient condition. Consider the unitary transformation @xmath
transforming a Bell state @xmath into another orthonormal Bell state
@xmath . Orthogonality implies @xmath meaning the sum of all eigenvalues
@xmath has to be zero. Without loss of generality, we can set one of the
eigenvalues @xmath because we are free in choosing a global phase. This
implies the rest of the eigenvalues for qubits and qutrits, while for
@xmath there are various ways for complying @xmath . The Weyl operators
@xmath have the eigenvalues @xmath with @xmath and if a state is
decomposable into certain Bell states their intertwiners must have the
same eigenvalues in order to have a representative in @xmath .

#### 3.2.2 Symmetries and equivalences inside @xmath

We focus on local (anti-)unitary transformations @xmath mapping @xmath
onto itself. In particular we are interested in equivalence classes
@xmath of states within the magic simplex having the same properties
concerning separability and nonlocality. These equivalences can best be
studied when the group structure of the Weyl operators and the concept
of a finite discrete classical phase space are used. The Weyl operators
originate from the quantization of classical kinematics where they are
used for translations between discrete states in a phase space. Each
point within this phase space corresponds to an index pair @xmath ,
where @xmath denotes the quantum number of the position and @xmath the
quantum number of the momentum.

Due to the fact that the Weyl operators have been used as the
intertwiners between the vertices @xmath of the simplex we can exploit
this phase space structure for our investigations, i.e. to each point
@xmath of the lattice in the phase space we assign a Bell state @xmath .
We know by construction that any Bell state @xmath can be mapped onto
any @xmath by use of a certain Weyl operator @xmath with @xmath and
@xmath , meaning there are no restrictions on translations @xmath in the
phase space

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

There are even more local unitary transformations mapping @xmath onto
itself such as @xmath with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

Under this transformation the Bell states @xmath become

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

Thus, this is a quarter rotation around the origin in the phase space
picture

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

The next transformation we consider is @xmath with

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.32)
  -- -- -- --------

This affects the Bell states in the following way

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the phase space this is a vertical shear

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

Another realisable mapping is the vertical reflection @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

The corresponding anti-unitary transformation on the Hilbert space
@xmath is the tensorial product of local complex conjugation C

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

The composite application @xmath of this anti-unitary transformation
onto the @xmath yields the desired vertical reflection

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

The three transformations @xmath , @xmath , @xmath together with the
translation @xmath are the generating elements of an arbitrary phase
space transformation of form (see [ 49 ] )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath or @xmath . For @xmath the corresponding transformation
acting on the Hilbert space @xmath is unitary, for @xmath it is
anti-unitary. Hence, further transformations as for instance horizontal
shear, squeezing, horizontal or diagonal reflection with varying origins
can be decomposed into @xmath , @xmath , @xmath and @xmath and a
representation acting on @xmath can be constructed out of them.
Transformations that cannot be written in the form ( 3.38 ) or that do
not obey @xmath (or @xmath ) are excluded because they do not possess
local (anti-)unitary representations. A detailed proof of this fact from
a group theoretical point of view can be found in [ 49 ] .
Let us briefly point out some major consequences of these equivalences.
In most cases we study low dimensional sections of the simplex. These
slices are mainly mixtures of particular @xmath ’s and the unity @xmath
which is an equally weighted mixture of all Bell states @xmath and can
be regarded as uncolored noise. The transformation rules imply that all
one parameter states @xmath with arbitrary @xmath but same @xmath have
the properties in terms of separability and (non-)locality (Identity
@xmath is mapped onto itself for all unitary transformations and the
single Bell state @xmath can be translated freely). These are the
so-called isotropic states . The same applies to two-parameter families
of states of form @xmath with arbitrary @xmath . We translate the first
point @xmath to the origin @xmath and then bring the second point @xmath
to @xmath . This can be done by the matrix @xmath with @xmath . As a
result we have found that such states with different @xmath and @xmath
but same @xmath and @xmath are equivalent and furthermore they are
symmetric in @xmath and @xmath (i.e. apply the same procedure but
interchange the roles of the points). For three-parameter states @xmath
the situation changes. We can proceed as before bringing two points to
@xmath and @xmath . If the third point was on a line @xmath then it is
now on the line with @xmath due to linearity of @xmath , for instance
for d=3 this point takes on (0,2). If it was not an element of this line
it can be brought to @xmath with horizontal shear and vertical
reflection without influencing the points on @xmath . However, it cannot
be brought to @xmath without transforming the other two points. This
shows that not all three parameter states with same @xmath and @xmath
necessarily possess the same attributes. We do not discuss cases with
more than three points in detail but want to stress that all complete
lines @xmath are equivalent because they can all be mapped onto the line
@xmath by transforming two of the points onto @xmath and @xmath with the
above stated method.

#### 3.2.3 Geometry of separable and entangled states

Theoretical strategies for determining the separable and entangled
states within @xmath are discussed and applied onto sections of the
simplex for @xmath . We begin with entangled states @xmath that can be
revealed by the PPT criterion (see § 1.2.2 ) and provide some
simplifications for determining definiteness of operators @xmath that
are inferred from the structure of the simplex @xmath . The explicit
form of a projector @xmath is

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.39)
  -- -- -- --------

Therefore the elements of @xmath are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.40)
  -- -------- -- --------

and partial transposition on subsystem A gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

We substitute the running index @xmath by @xmath which leads to the
expression

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.42)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

As we observe, each operator @xmath acts on a subspace @xmath spanned by
the vectors @xmath . Thus, for determining definiteness of @xmath it
suffices to consider the definiteness of the @xmath matrices @xmath
having the entries

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

Relations between the matrices @xmath lead to further simplifications of
this problem. For example

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.44)
  -- -------- -- --------

holds for even and odd @xmath and signifies that @xmath and @xmath are
unitarily equivalent. Moreover, for odd @xmath all @xmath are unitarily
equivalent which can be proven by using the periodicity (modulo @xmath )

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.45)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Since unitarily equivalent matrices have the same eigenvalues it
suffices to compute the eigenvalues of a single @xmath when the
dimension @xmath is odd and two @xmath (one with odd @xmath and one with
even @xmath ) when the dimension @xmath is even.
As we already know, we can exclude states @xmath with non-positive
@xmath from being separable but positivity @xmath does not guarantee
their separability. We now show which states @xmath are separable with
certainty. Consider functions @xmath and @xmath with @xmath defining
complete lines @xmath . We state that all states that are equally
weighted mixtures of states forming a complete line are separable (in
particular these are the outermost separable states of @xmath as is
shown in [ 50 ] ).

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.46)
  -- -------- -- --------

We have to prove this for one particular complete line only, for
instance @xmath and @xmath because of their equivalence in terms of
local unitaries (§ 3.2.2 )

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
                          (3.47)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Once again we use @xmath and get

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.48)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is obviously separable. All possible convex combinations of all
line states @xmath ( 3.46 ) form the kernel polytope (KP)

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

a subset of separable states of PPT @xmath ¹⁴ ¹⁴ 14 When we speak of PPT
as a set we mean PPT= @xmath } .
At this point the separability of states within the kernel polytope and
the non-separability of NPPT states are ensured. For the remaining
states that are PPT but do not lie within the kernel polytope we have to
construct optimal entanglement witnesses @xmath if we want to completely
clarify the question of separability. As we already know for all states
@xmath that lie on the boundary of the convex set of separable states
@xmath SEP there exists an optimal entanglement witness with @xmath (§
1.2.4 ). To determine the boundary states of SEP @xmath and their
witnesses the symmetry of the simplex is of great help. Consider a state
@xmath which is invariant under the symmetry group @xmath of unitary or
anti-unitary operators @xmath , meaning @xmath for all @xmath . Thus,

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

shows that the symmetries @xmath of a state @xmath are reflected in its
witnesses. In other words we can restrict the search for witnesses on
@xmath -invariant operators @xmath (for all @xmath ). This is a
significant restriction on the form of the witness when the regarded
state @xmath is of high symmetry. In our case where all states belong to
the magic simplex @xmath all states are invariant under the symmetry
group @xmath and the most general form of an @xmath -invariant @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.50)
  -- -------- -- --------

According to ( 1.64 ) W must have non-negative expectation values for
all product states

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
              @xmath      
     @xmath               
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath      (3.51)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Here we have introduced a matrix @xmath that depends on the vector
@xmath which is merely an anti-unitary transformation of @xmath (complex
conjugation of the expansion coefficients of @xmath in the basis @xmath
). Consequently, if non-negativity of @xmath holds for all @xmath then
it also holds for all @xmath and vice versa. Iff @xmath is not only an
entanglement witness but also optimal, then there exists a product state
@xmath so that

  -- -- -- --------
           (3.52)
  -- -- -- --------

Since @xmath is non-negative the eigenvalue for @xmath must be zero and
if this is the case then @xmath is an optimal entanglement witness for
@xmath and all incoherent superpositions that are compatible with the
symmetry of @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.53)
  -- -------- -- --------

It follows that the boundary of SEP @xmath is determined by the
innermost states of the set @xmath obeying @xmath , where @xmath is an
operator @xmath whose associated non-negative matrices @xmath have at
least one vanishing eigenvalue, i.e. @xmath . Finding those innermost
states is still a very difficult task even though symmetries have
narrowed down the search for their optimal witnesses and in many cases
one must perform a numerical variation of the parameters @xmath and the
vector @xmath . Analytical solutions can be obtained for states @xmath
with further symmetries. For instance, if we intend to find the boundary
of the one-parameter family of states

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.54)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is invariant under all phase space transformations except
translations, we can restrict the search for an optimal witness on
@xmath having the same symmetries. For this witness the associated
matrix @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.55)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here the eigenvalues do not depend on @xmath and are @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath so one must choose @xmath and @xmath in order to get an optimal
@xmath ( @xmath ). The state on the boundary of SEP is then given by

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.56)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

which is achieved for @xmath . It follows that all isotropic states
@xmath have this bound for @xmath due to their equivalence by local
unitaries (see § 3.2.2 ). Their optimal entanglement witnesses @xmath
with @xmath define the enclosure polytope. For an arbitrary state @xmath
we compute

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.57)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

This implies that any @xmath that has at least one component @xmath is
detected to be entangled by one of the isotropic witnesses @xmath .
Consequently, separable states lie within the so-called enclosure
polytope (EP) defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.58)
  -- -------- -- --------

We now study two and three dimensional sections of the simplex for
@xmath (qutrits) in order to illustrate regions of separable and
entangled states that result from these concepts. The first family of
states we consider is a mixture of two Bell states which are all locally
unitarily equivalent to @xmath . This means we have @xmath , @xmath and
all other components are @xmath which implies @xmath , @xmath and @xmath
for positivity of @xmath . We obtain the boundary of PPT by setting
@xmath which yields @xmath (details on this and other computations
regarding @xmath can be found in the Appendix D ). Due to invariance of
@xmath under horizontal reflection we restrict on entanglement witnesses
of form @xmath . As it has been shown in this section, line states for
example @xmath are separable. Hence, @xmath must always be valid and
therefore @xmath cannot be negative. When we set @xmath (which only
fixes the scaling of the witness) the associated matrix @xmath becomes
@xmath . A numerical search for solutions of @xmath by varying the
parameters @xmath and the vector @xmath was done in . It is shown in [
52 ] that there exist optimal witnesses @xmath so that @xmath yields the
boundaries @xmath and @xmath . Graphically this is illustrated in the
following figures.

Next, we consider three-parameter families of states of form @xmath with
@xmath . In section § 3.2.2 it has been shown that for fixed parameters
@xmath any state of this family is either locally unitarily equivalent
to the state @xmath or @xmath depending on whether the index pairs
@xmath form a line or not. In both cases positivity restricts @xmath to
lie within the region @xmath (and all parameter permutations of this
term) and @xmath . The PPT boundary for states on a line reads (see
Appendix E )

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

and for states off a line we get (see Appendix F )

  -- -------- --
     @xmath   
     @xmath   
  -- -------- --

Like in the previous case, the state @xmath is invariant under
horizontal reflection and for this reason the search for optimal
witnesses can once again be restricted on @xmath with @xmath . In [ 52 ]
a choice for the parameters @xmath in compliance with the constraints
for optimal witnesses was found that yields

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

for the boundary @xmath . Unfortunately, for states off a line there
exists no such solution because obtaining it is much more difficult due
to the fact that all nine parameters @xmath of @xmath have to be taken
into account because the state has fewer symmetries. Regardless of this,
for both states the boundaries of positivity and PPT are graphically
illustrated in the following figures.

#### 3.2.4 Geometry of non-local states

Our purpose is to determine the set of states @xmath of the magic
simplex @xmath that violate the CGLMP inequality. For any state of this
kind there exists a Bell operator @xmath such that @xmath and thus a
state @xmath for which the inequality @xmath holds is an element of the
complementary set. This means that the complement and thereof the set
itself can be determined by use of the optimisation procedure that has
been introduced in § 2.3.2 . In general, it is computationally intensive
to determine the boundary with high precision because states of @xmath
have to be parameterised and varied until a required precision @xmath of
@xmath is reached. However, in the case when for a given state @xmath
the maximal value of @xmath is known with high accuracy it is not
necessary to perform further numerical investigations in order to obtain
the state on the boundary for the family @xmath because of the relation
@xmath (see § 2.3.1 ),

  -- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath      
              @xmath      (3.59)
  -- -------- -------- -- --------

Hence, @xmath lies on the boundary of (non-)locality for @xmath . For
our numerical investigations of the three families of states @xmath ,
@xmath and @xmath this fact is of great help because out of any
numerical obtained value @xmath we can derive a state on the boundary.
More precisely, for a certain choice of @xmath and @xmath ¹⁵ ¹⁵ 15
@xmath =0 for the first family @xmath with resulting value @xmath it
implies that the state with the parameter values @xmath , @xmath and
@xmath lies on the boundary. For instance, the subsequent illustrations
of the boundaries of
(non-)locality were deduced from values @xmath of states on the
boundaries of positivity ( @xmath (and all parameter permutations of
this term) and @xmath ). For the two-parameter family we calculated
@xmath for @xmath such equally spaced points and for each of the two
three-parameter families we calculated @xmath for @xmath of them.

The result of the calculations for the state @xmath is illustrated in
the above figure. The calculated points on the boundary are connected
through lines and the area of non-local states is filled red. The
boundary of (non-)locality seems to describe a circle for @xmath and a
line if one of the parameters is negative, i.e. @xmath or @xmath .
Suggestions on their specifications are given after the next figures
illustrating the family @xmath .

The result of the calculations for the state @xmath is illustrated in
the figures on the previous page. The calculated points on the boundary
tendentially describe a spherical surface that is intersected by planes
in the region of negative parameters. Based on symmetries and the facts
that the boundaries of positivity, PPT and (non-)locality meet at the
point @xmath and that the suggested analytical ideal measurements ( 2.49
) yield the boundary parameter @xmath for the isotropic states, we were
able to derive the radius @xmath and the center of the sphere @xmath .
These specifications coincide with the numerical data up to the order
@xmath and we believe that these discrepancies should decrease for
better accuracy and precision goals of the numerical optimisation (see §
2.3.2 ). We suppose that the intersecting planes are given by the
functions @xmath (and permutations @xmath , @xmath ) because of
compliance with the boundaries of the isotropic states and the numerical
data (also up the order @xmath ). It should be noted that the circle and
line boundaries in figure 3.10 can easily be obtained on the basis of
these specifications because it solely illustrates the special case
@xmath .
For the remaining family @xmath the geometric form of the boundary seems
to be more complex and therefore we do not want to make any uncovered
suggestions on the exact form. To get an impression of this, we have
illustrated the raw data points in the following figures. Besides the
complex shape of the boundary, we recognised an interesting peculiarity,
namely, in contrast to the mixtures of states on a line where there is
only one state @xmath on the boundary of positivity @xmath that does not
violate the CGLMP inequality, here we have a whole region of local
states for @xmath . Moreover, in comparison the entire region of
non-local states is smaller while the region of entangled states is
larger. This can be seen as a further example for the diverging
behaviour of these properties.

### 3.3 Geometry of multipartite qubit systems (publication)

In this section we present a paper that was published on Physical Review
A 78 in collaboration with Beatrix Hiesmayr, Marcus Huber, Florian Hipp
and Philipp Krammer. In this, we discuss a generalisation of the
tetrahedron for multipartite qubit systems. We investigate separability,
nonlocality and distillability with regard to a multipartite
entanglement measure. In the context of this diploma thesis, this should
be regarded as a further example of a geometric investigation of the
state space. We emphasise that, because it contains several concepts for
the study of multipartite systems that have not been introduced. Most of
them should be self-explanatory or easily comprehensible with the
knowledge gained in this thesis. Nonetheless, we recommend to read the
cited publications.

[]

[]

[]

[]

[]

[]

[]

[]

[]

[]

## Summary and outlook

It is one of the most seminal discoveries that quantum physics
contradicts local realism. This characteristic can be ascribed to
quantum entanglement and manifests itself through the violation of a
Bell inequality. Closer considerations within recent years have raised
the question of whether there is a discrepancy between entanglement and
nonlocality. The clarification of this question is of great importance
for our understanding of the theory, and also might have consequences
for future applications. The aim of this diploma thesis was to give an
overview on the latest state of knowledge in this field, and to confront
entanglement with the violation of the CGLMP inequality for a certain
set of states that is called the magic simplex.
We began our study in Chapter 1 with an introduction to the mathematical
framework including important operator bases such as the Pauli operator
basis for qubits and its generalisations for d-dimensional systems, that
is the Gell-Mann and the Weyl operator basis. Afterwards, we discussed
several issues concerning entanglement. We showed that it is very
demanding to establish whether a mixed bipartite qudit state with @xmath
is separable or entangled, because of the fact that all known practical
criteria (e.g. PPT and matrix realignment) are only necessary but not
sufficient for separability. We reviewed the requirements for
entanglement measures and presented possible candidates based on
distance and convex roof. In addition, we provided the proof that
entangled PPT states cannot be distilled via ”local operations and
classical communication”.
In Chapter 2 we made clear the contradiction of quantum physics with
local realistic theories. In particular, we explicitly derived that any
local realistic description of a bipartite d-dimensional system obeys
the CGLMP inequality, whereas quantum physics predicts a violation for
the maximally entangled state. We investigated the problem of
determining if a given state @xmath is able to violate the CGLMP
inequality and therefore non-local. This is a high-dimensional nonlinear
optimisation problem where all possible measurement settings of both
parties have to be taken into account. An analytical solution has been
found only for the case @xmath . In order to study the nonlocality of
higher dimensional systems, we have developed a numerical optimisation
algorithm which utilises the generalised Euler angle parameterisation of
@xmath and the Nelder-Mead method. The advantages of our method are its
robustness against local maxima and its adaptability to other Bell
inequalities. The chapter concluded with an overview of recent
approaches for clarifying the possible discrepancy between nonlocality
and entanglement, such as a discussion on hidden-nonlocality, tight Bell
inequalities, the maximal violation of the CGLMP inequality through
non-maximally entangled states and the non-local machine.
In Chapter 3 we studied the state space of bipartite qubits with the aim
of finding simple representatives of locally unitarily equivalent
states. We showed that all locally maximally mixed states can be
represented by elements of a tetrahedron spanned by the Bell states. We
discussed the difficulties with regard to finding an extension for
qudits. We introduced a possible generalisation in form of the magic
simplex, which is a mixture of maximally entangled two-qudit states.
Afterwards we considered the problem of separability for this set of
states, and showed how it can be simplified by exploiting symmetries.
Considering two- and three-parameter families of qutrit states @xmath ,
we used these concepts to determine PPT states and to construct optimal
entanglement witnesses. In order to reveal the non-local states of this
families, we applied our numerical optimisation algorithm. As expected,
we found that there is a large region of entangled states that do not
violate the CGLMP inequality. We made a supposition about the exact form
of the boundary of CGLMP violation for the three-parameter family of
states on a line, which coincides with the numerical data up to the
order @xmath . Comparing two three-parameter families, we revealed that
for the mixtures off a line, the region of nonlocality is smaller while
the region of entanglement is larger. This has demonstrated that
entanglement and nonlocality do not behave conformably in any case. In
addition we presented a publication of our group, where we investigated
a generalisation of the tetrahedron for multipartite qubit systems.
Investigating separability, we realised that all entangled states in
this tetrahedron are bound entangled. We showed that there is a relation
between distillability and the available type of entanglement. In the
multipartite case, entanglement can be shared in many different ways. In
our publication we argued that bipartite Bell states cannot be distilled
from the occuring entangled states, due to the fact that they only
possess n-partite @xmath entanglement.
We conclude with some remarks regarding future research. As we have seen
in this thesis, there is an abundance of open problems that make further
considerations desirable. In order to solve them, progress is needed in
the theory of nonlocality and entanglement. This means that Bell
inequalities have to be improved, or alternatively it has to be shown
that this is impossible. In addition, it is necessary to find more
advanced techniques to solve the separability problem. Without
developments in this field high-dimensional and/or multipartite systems
are almost impossible to study. Once this has been achieved, we might be
able to fully understand the relation between nonlocality and
entanglement.

## Appendix A MATHEMATICA notebook: Partial transposition of
multipartite density matrices

[]

## Appendix B MATHEMATICA notebook: Optimisation of @xmath

[]

[]

[]

## Appendix C MATHEMATICA notebook: Optimisation of @xmath

[]

[]

[]

## Appendix D Computation details on @xmath

PPT:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

## Appendix E Computation details on @xmath

PPT:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --

## Appendix F Computation details on @xmath

PPT:

  -- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- --