Several aspects of the star formation processes can be studied from the
conditions of the ionized gas that surround the young massive stars
formed in the core of the giant molecular clouds in successive episodes.
The emission and absorption lines present in their spectra can give us
clues about the physical conditions of the gaseous media, such as metal
abundances, temperatures and ionization degree, as well as information
about the ages, masses and composition of the stellar populations and
the properties of the ionizing stellar clusters. Nowadays, with the
advent of modern telescopes and new instrumentation with greater
capability to collect the information that arrives to us from celestial
bodies, we are able to use and develop innovative techniques that allow
us to study the star-forming regions in a way without precedent in the
history of Astrophysics.

The present thesis deals with the study of two very different
environments where star formation is taking place. One, associated with
low metal irregular dwarf galaxies, called H ii galaxies, has low
density gas of relatively high temperatures and shows evidence for at
least one recent violent episode of star formation. In contrast, the
second environment, associated with circumnuclear star-forming regions
(CNSFRs) in ring patterns located in the central zones ( @xmath 1 kpc)
of some early type barred spiral galaxies, has low temperature and
relatively high density and metal rich gas. In Chapter § 1 we give a
brief summary of the general properties of these two different king of
objects and the studies made on them.

In Chapter § 2 we propose a methodology to perform a self-consistent
analysis of the physical properties of the emitting gas of H ii
galaxies, adequate to the data that can be obtained with XXI century
technology. This methodology requires the production and calibration of
empirical relations between the different line temperatures that should
supersede currently used ones based on very simple, and poorly tested,
photo-ionization model sequences.

As a first step to reach this goal, we have obtained simultaneous blue
to far red longslit spectra with the double-arm spectrograph of the
William Herschel Telescope (WHT) of three compact H ii galaxies selected
from the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS) Data Release 2 (DR2) spectral
catalog using the INAOE Virtual Observatory superserver. These spectra
cover the range from 3200 to 10500 Å, including the Balmer jump, the [O
ii ] @xmath 3727,29 Å lines, the [S iii ] @xmath 9069,9532 Å doublet as
well as various weak auroral lines such as [O iii ] @xmath 4363 Å and [S
iii ] @xmath 6312 Å. In addition, we observed seven luminous H ii
galaxies using the 3.5 m telescope at Calar Alto, obtaining high
signal-to-noise spectrophotometric observations. We also used a
double-arm spectrograph (TWIN) which provides spectra with a wide
wavelength coverage, from 3400 to 10400 Å free of second order effects,
of exactly the same region of a given galaxy.

The analysis of these observations allowed the design of a methodology
to obtain accurate elemental abundances of oxygen, sulphur, nitrogen,
neon, argon and iron in the ionized gas. For all the objects we have
measured at least four line temperatures, T @xmath ([O iii ]), T @xmath
([S iii ]), T @xmath ([O ii ]) and T @xmath ([S ii ]), and an electron
density, N @xmath ([S ii ]), from the observed forbidden line ratios
using a five-level atom approximation. For our best objects, errors of
1% in T @xmath ([O iii ]), 3% in T @xmath ([O ii ]) and 5% in T @xmath
([S iii ]) were achieved. For three objects also measured the Balmer
continuum temperature T(Bac). These measurements and a careful and
realistic treatment of the observational errors yielded total oxygen
abundances with accuracies between 5 and 9%. These accuracies are
expected to improve as better calibrations based on more precise
measurements, both on electron temperatures and densities, are produced.

For the objects observed with the WHT we have compared the measurements
obtained for our spectra with those performed on the spectra downloaded
from the SDSS DR3 finding a satisfactory agreement.

The ionization structure of the observed nebulae can be mapped by the
derived oxygen and sulphur ionic ratios, on the one side, and the
corresponding observed emission line ratios, on the other – the @xmath
and @xmath ’ plots –. The combination of both is shown to provide a
means to test photo-ionization model sequences currently applied to
derive elemental abundances in H ii galaxies. The ionization structure
found for the observed objects from the O @xmath /O @xmath and S @xmath
/S @xmath ratios points to high values of the ionizing radiation, as
traced by the values of the “softness parameter” @xmath which is less
than one for all the objects. The use of line temperatures derived from
T([O iii ]) based on current photo-ionization models yields for the two
highest excitation objects much higher values of @xmath which would
imply lower ionizing temperatures. This is however inconsistent with the
ionization structure as probed by the measured emission line intensity
ratios.

Finally, we have measured the T(Bac) for three of the H ii galaxies and
computed temperature fluctuations. Only for one of the objects, the
temperature fluctuation is significant and could lead to higher oxygen
abundances by about 0.20 dex.

In Chapter § 3 we present a study of the strong optical collisional
emission lines of Ne and Ar in an heterogeneous sample of ionized
gaseous nebulae for which it is possible to derive directly the electron
temperature and hence the chemical abundances of neon and argon. We
calculated, using a grid of photo-ionization models, new ionization
correction factors for these two elements and we studied the behavior of
the Ne/O and Ar/O abundance ratios with metallicity. We find a constant
value for Ne/O, while there seems to be some evidence for the existence
of negative radial gradients of Ar/O over the discs of some nearby
spirals. We have studied the relation between the intensities of the
emission lines of [Ne iii ] at 3869 Å and [O iii ] at 4959 Å and 5007 Å.
This relation can be used in empirical calibrations and diagnostic
ratios extending their applicability to bluer wavelengths and therefore
to samples of objects at higher redshifts. Finally, we propose a new
diagnostic tool using [O ii ], [Ne iii ] and H @xmath emission lines to
derive metallicities for galaxies at high z.

In Chapter § 4 we present the measurements of gas and stellar velocity
dispersions in 17 circumnuclear star-forming regions (CNSFRs) and the
nuclei of three barred spiral galaxies: NGC 2903, NGC 3310 and NGC 3351
from high dispersion spectra. The stellar dispersions have been obtained
from the Ca ii triplet (CaT) lines at @xmath 8494, 8542, 8662 Å, while
the gas velocity dispersions have been measured by Gaussian fits to the
H @xmath @xmath 4861 Å and to the [O iii ] @xmath 5007 Å lines.

The CNSFRs, with sizes of about 100 to 150 pc in diameter, are seen to
be composed of several individual star clusters with sizes between 1.5
and 6.2 pc on Hubble Space Telescope (HST) images. Using the stellar
velocity dispersions, we have derived dynamical masses for the entire
star-forming complexes and for the individual star clusters. Values of
the stellar velocity dispersions are between 31 and 73 km s @xmath .
Dynamical masses for the whole CNSFRs are between 4.9 @xmath 10 @xmath
and 1.9 @xmath 10 @xmath M @xmath and between 1.4 @xmath 10 @xmath and
1.1 @xmath 10 @xmath M @xmath for the individual star clusters.

We have found indications for the presence of two different kinematical
components in the ionized gas of the regions. The narrow component of
the two-component Gaussian fits seem to have a relatively constant value
for all the studied CNSFRs, with estimated values close to 25 km s
@xmath . This narrow component could be identified with ionized gas in a
rotating disc, while the stars and the fraction of the gas (responsible
for the broad component) related to the star-forming regions would be
mostly supported by dynamical pressure. To disentangle the origin of
these two components it will be necessary to map these regions with
higher spectral and spatial resolution and much better signal-to-noise
ratio in particular for the O @xmath lines.

The radial velocity curves of the central zones of the studied galaxies
seem to have turnover points at the same positions as the star-forming
ring, and the velocity distribution is consistent with that expected for
this type of galaxies.

In Chapter § 5 we present longslit observations in the optical and near
infrared of 12 circumnuclear H ii regions in the early type spiral
galaxies: NGC 2903, NGC 3351 and NGC 3504 with the aim of deriving their
chemical abundances. Only for one of the regions, the [S iii ] @xmath
6312 Å was detected providing, together with the nebular [S iii ] lines
at @xmath 9069, 9532 Å, a value of the electron temperature of T @xmath
([S iii ]) = 8400 @xmath K. A semi-empirical method for the derivation
of abundances in the high metallicity regime is presented.

We obtain abundances which are comparable to those found in high
metallicity disc H ii regions from direct measurements of electron
temperatures and consistent with solar values within the errors. The
region with the highest oxygen abundance is R3+R4 in NGC 3504,
12+log(O/H) = 8.85, about 1.6 solar if the solar oxygen abundance is set
at the value derived by Asplund et al. (2005), 12+log(O/H) @xmath = 8.66
@xmath 0.05. Region R7 in NGC 3351 has the lowest oxygen abundance of
the sample, about 0.6 times solar. In all the observed CNSFR the O/H
abundance is dominated by the O @xmath /H @xmath contribution, as is
also the case for high metallicity disc H ii regions. For our observed
regions, however also the S @xmath /S @xmath ratio is larger than one,
contrary to what is found in high metallicity disc H ii regions for
which, in general, the sulphur abundances are dominated by S @xmath /H
@xmath .

The derived N/O ratios are in average larger than those found in high
metallicity disc H ii regions and they do not seem to follow the trend
of N/O vs. O/H which marks the secondary behavior of nitrogen. The S/O
ratios span a very narrow range between 0.6 and 0.8 of the solar value.

As compared to high metallicity disc H ii regions, CNSFR show values of
the O @xmath and the N2 parameters whose distributions are shifted to
lower and higher values respectively, hence, even though their derived
oxygen and sulphur abundances are similar, higher values would in
principle be obtained for the CNSFR if pure empirical methods were used
to estimate abundances. CNSFR also show lower ionization parameters than
their disc counterparts, as derived from the [S ii ]/[S iii ] ratio.
Their ionization structure also seems to be different with CNSFR showing
radiation field properties more similar to H ii galaxies than to disc
high metallicity H ii regions.
