# 1 Introduction

Supersymmetric sigma models in two dimensions have played central roles
in a number of important physical and mathematical developments during
the past few decades. A key concept underlying much of the developments
is that of chiral rings of sigma models with @xmath supersymmetry [ 1 ]
. These finite-dimensional cohomology rings are basic ingredients of
topological sigma models [ 2 , 3 ] , and intimately connected to, among
other things, Gromov–Witten invariants [ 2 , 4 ] , Floer homology [ 5 ,
6 , 7 , 8 , 9 ] , and mirror symmetry [ 1 , 10 , 11 ] .

While the chiral rings of @xmath models are clearly very interesting, we
also know that some of the beautiful structures of two-dimensional
supersymmetric sigma models arise in essentially infinite-dimensional
contexts. For example, the elliptic genera encode infinite series of
topological invariants of the target space [ 12 , 13 ] . It is then
natural to ask whether there are infinite-dimensional analogs of the
chiral rings. The answer is “yes”. They are the chiral algebras of sigma
models with @xmath supersymmetry [ 14 , 15 ] .

The chiral algebra of a @xmath model is the cohomology of local
operators with respect to one of the supercharges, graded by the
right-moving R-charge and equipped with operator product expansion
(OPE). As a consequence of @xmath supersymmetry, its elements vary
holomorphically on the worldsheet and form a structure analogous to the
chiral algebra of a conformal field theory (CFT), the operator product
algebra of holomorphic fields. It is well known that one can twist
@xmath models to obtain topological field theories characterized by
their chiral rings. For @xmath models, one can perform a similar
quasi-topological twisting that turns them into holomorphic field
theories characterized by their chiral algebras.

Classically, the chiral algebra of a twisted @xmath model is isomorphic,
as a graded vector space, to the direct sum of the Dolbeault cohomology
groups of a certain infinite series of holomorphic vector bundles over
the target space. Quantum mechanically, this isomorphism gets deformed
by quantum corrections. Like the chiral rings, the chiral algebra is
independent of the choice of the metric on the target space, hence can
be computed in the large volume limit where the theory is weakly coupled
and the path integral localizes to instantons. But unlike the chiral
rings, it receives perturbative corrections as well as instanton
corrections, because the contributions from bosonic and fermionic
fluctuations do not cancel due to the lack of left-moving supersymmetry.
This complication leads to the interesting subject of perturbative
chiral algebras.

At the level of perturbation theory, the physics of a sigma model is
governed by the local geometry of the target space. On the other hand,
we can always deform the target space metric to make it locally flat
without affecting the chiral algebra. Combining these observations, we
reach a surprising conclusion: the perturbative chiral algebra can be
described locally by a sigma model with flat target space, therefore
reconstructed by gluing locally defined free theories globally over the
target space.

This fact was exploited by Witten [ 16 ] to show that in the absence of
left-moving fermions, the perturbative chiral algebra of a twisted
@xmath model can be formulated as the cohomology of a sheaf of chiral
differential operators on the target space, a notion introduced earlier
in mathematics by Malikov et al. [ 17 ] . In this picture, the moduli of
the perturbative chiral algebra are encoded in the different possible
ways of gluing relevant free CFTs, whereas the anomalies of the theory
manifest themselves in the obstructions to doing so consistently. When
left-moving fermions are present and take values in the tangent bundle
of the target space, it was shown by Kapustin [ 18 ] that the
perturbative chiral algebra is given by the cohomology of of the chiral
de Rham complex [ 17 ] . The theory of perturbative chiral algebras has
been further developed along these lines by Tan [ 19 , 20 , 21 , 22 ] .

Nonperturbatively, instantons can change the picture radically [ 16 , 23
, 24 , 25 ] . A particularly striking example is the model with no
left-moving fermions whose target space is the flag manifold @xmath of a
complex simple Lie group @xmath . The perturbative chiral algebra of
this model is infinite-dimensional and has the structure of a @xmath
-module of critical level [ 17 , 26 , 27 ] . In the presence of
instantons, however, the equation @xmath holds in the cohomology and the
chiral algebra vanishes .

One clue to the existence of such a nonperturbative phenomenon lies in a
conjecture made independently by Höhn and Stolz [ 28 ] in the mid 1990s.
The Höhn–Stolz conjecture asserts that the elliptic genus of a
supersymmetric sigma model with no left-moving fermions vanishes if the
target space @xmath admits a Riemannian metric of positive Ricci
curvature.

Stolz gave a heuristic argument for his conjecture based on the geometry
of the loop space @xmath , the space of smooth maps from the circle
@xmath to @xmath . It goes as follows. Let us assume that the scalar
curvature of @xmath is given, at each loop @xmath , by the integral of
the Ricci curvature of @xmath along @xmath . Then, @xmath has positive
scalar curvature if @xmath has positive Ricci curvature. By analogy with
the Lichnerowicz theorem, this would imply that @xmath has no harmonic
spinors. Meanwhile, supersymmetric states of the theory may be
identified with harmonic spinors on @xmath . Hence, the theory would
have no supersymmetric states, and since the elliptic genus counts the
number of bosonic supersymmetric states minus the number of fermionic
ones at each energy level, it would vanish then.

If Stolz’s reasoning is correct, the positivity of the Ricci curvature
implies not only the vanishing of the elliptic genus, but also the
spontaneous breaking of supersymmetry. Flag manifolds have positive
Ricci curvature, so supersymmetry should be broken in the models into
these spaces. Supersymmetry breaking is indeed triggered whenever the
chiral algebra vanishes — instantons tunnel between infinitely many
perturbative supersymmetric states and lift all of them at once.

In fact, what happens for the flag manifold model is a special case of a
more general phenomenon: the chiral algebra of a @xmath model with no
left-moving fermions vanishes nonperturbatively if the target space is a
compact Kähler manifold with positive first Chern class and contains an
embedded @xmath with trivial normal bundle.

This vanishing theorem — or rather, “theorem” with quotation marks — is
the main result of this paper, which we will “prove” by a physical
argument. As a “corollary”, the “theorem” implies that supersymmetry is
spontaneously broken. Therefore, for this particular class of Kähler
manifolds, it suggests that there are no harmonic spinors on their loop
spaces and gives a physical proof of the Höhn–Stolz conjecture.

The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we introduce the chiral
algebras of @xmath models and discuss their general properties. Section
3 is devoted to the sheaf theory of perturbative chiral algebras.
Finally, in Section 4, we establish the vanishing “theorem” and explain
its relation to supersymmetry breaking and the geometry of loop spaces.

## 2 Chiral algebras of @xmath models

We now begin our study of the chiral algebras of @xmath models. The
focus of this section is on general properties of these algebras that do
not depend on specific details of the target space geometry.

### 2.1 @xmath models

Two-dimensional sigma models have @xmath supersymmetric extension when
the target space is strong Kähler with torsion (strong KT) [ 16 ] . A
Hermitian manifold is called strong KT if the @xmath -form @xmath
associated to the Hermitian metric satisfies @xmath . Kähler manifolds
are strong KT since the Kähler form satisfies @xmath . In this paper we
will only consider @xmath models with Kähler target spaces. Let us
review how these models are constructed.

Let @xmath be a Riemann surface and @xmath a Kähler manifold of complex
dimension @xmath . The bosonic sigma model with worldsheet @xmath and
target space @xmath is a quantum field theory of maps @xmath . Imposing
@xmath supersymmetry requires the introduction of two right-moving
fermions, @xmath and @xmath . These are worldsheet spinors with values
in the holomorphic and antiholomorphic tangent bundles of @xmath :

  -- -- -- -------
           (2.1)
  -- -- -- -------

Here @xmath is a square root of the antiholomorphic canonical bundle of
@xmath . The simplest @xmath model is constructed with this minimally
@xmath supersymmetric field content.

In the field space, @xmath supersymmetry is realized as the
transformation

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.2)
              @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where @xmath and @xmath are sections of @xmath . We define the
right-moving supercharges @xmath and @xmath so that @xmath acts by this
transformation. The supercharges then satisfy

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

and generate the @xmath supersymmetry algebra together with the
generators @xmath , @xmath of translations, @xmath of rotations, and
@xmath of the right-moving @xmath R-symmetry. Under the last symmetry,
@xmath has charge @xmath and @xmath has charge @xmath ; thus @xmath has
charge @xmath and @xmath has charge @xmath .

To construct a @xmath supersymmetric action, we choose a Kähler metric
@xmath on @xmath and make the operator @xmath of R-charge @xmath . Then
the action

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

is invariant under the R-symmetry and, by virtue of the relation @xmath
, under the symmetry generated by @xmath provided that @xmath is
antiholomorphic and so commutes with the @xmath inside. This action is
also invariant under @xmath for antiholomorphic @xmath , as becomes
clear if we rewrite it as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

Expanding the anticommutators and using the Kähler condition, one can
check that the two expressions ( 2.4 ) and ( 2.5 ) both coincide with

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here the covariant derivative @xmath is the @xmath operator coupled to
the pullback of the Levi-Civita connection @xmath on @xmath .
Explicitly, @xmath .

We can add a topological invariant to the action. For a closed two-form
@xmath on @xmath , the functional

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

depends only on the cohomology class of @xmath and the homotopy class of
@xmath . As such, it is invariant under any continuous transformations,
especially the supersymmetry transformation and the R-symmetry. The
topological invariant @xmath vanishes at the level of perturbation
theory, where one deals with homotopically trivial maps, but affects the
dynamics nonperturbatively.

We have obtained a @xmath supersymmetric action. To complete the
construction, we need to make sure that a sensible quantum theory based
on this action exists. It turns out that @xmath must satisfy two
topological conditions for that. First, @xmath must be spin, or
equivalently, its first Chern class must be even:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

As we will see, this condition ensures that the fermion parity @xmath is
well defined. Second, the second Chern character @xmath , which is also
a half of the first Pontryagin class @xmath , must be zero:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (2.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

This is the condition for the absence of sigma model anomaly [ 29 , 30 ]
, the obstruction to finding a well-defined path integral measure. From
the viewpoint of the loop space @xmath , the first condition means that
@xmath is orientable [ 31 , 32 ] , while the second condition (given the
first) is interpreted as the condition for @xmath to admit spinors [ 33
] .

There is also a geometric condition. The renormalization group generates
a flow of the target space metric. At the one-loop level, the metric
@xmath renormalized at an energy scale @xmath obeys the equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Ricci curvature of @xmath [ 34 , 35 , 36 , 37 ] .
From this equation, we see that @xmath gets larger as @xmath gets larger
if the Ricci curvature is positive. Since the theory is weakly coupled
when the target space has large volume, we have asymptotic freedom in
this case. In contrast, if the Ricci curvature is negative, the theory
is strongly coupled for large @xmath and does not have a well-defined
ultraviolet limit. Hence, for the microscopic theory to exist, the Ricci
curvature should be semipositive.

When the above conditions are satisfied, the action ( 2.6 ) plus ( 2.7 )
defines the simplest version of @xmath models. The supercharges are
given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

and satisfy the reality condition @xmath .

If one has a holomorphic vector bundle @xmath over @xmath , one can
extend the model by adding left-moving fermions with values in @xmath .
This extended model is called the heterotic model. Since the left-movers
contribute to sigma model anomalies in the opposite way as the
right-movers do, their presence changes the anomaly cancellation
condition to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is trivially satisfied if @xmath , in which case the model actually
has @xmath supersymmetry. It is also possible to add superpotentials [
38 ] . For brevity, we will not consider these extensions in this paper.
We refer to Tan [ 19 ] for perturbative aspects of the heterotic model.

### 2.2 Chiral algebras

Having formulated @xmath models, let us introduce the notion of their
chiral algebras. Among the two supercharges we will use @xmath
exclusively, so simply write @xmath . Then @xmath .

Consider the action of @xmath on local operators @xmath given by
supercommutator @xmath . The @xmath -action increases the R-charge of
@xmath by one, and squares to zero. Therefore, given a @xmath model, we
can define the @xmath -cohomology of local operators graded by the
R-charge.

Since @xmath is @xmath -exact by the @xmath supersymmetry algebra, it
acts trivially in the @xmath -cohomology: if @xmath is @xmath -closed,
then @xmath is @xmath -exact. Thus @xmath -cohomology classes vary
holomorphically on @xmath . Moreover, two classes can be multiplied by
@xmath . From these facts, it follows that the @xmath -cohomology of
local operators inherits a holomorphic OPE structure from the underlying
theory:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

The coefficient functions @xmath are holomorphic away from the diagonal
@xmath where there can be poles.

The holomorphic @xmath -cohomology of local operators, equipped with
this natural OPE structure, is the chiral algebra of the @xmath model.
We will denote the chiral algebra by @xmath , and its R-charge @xmath
subspace by @xmath . As is clear from the construction, the chiral
algebra of a @xmath model has the structure of a chiral algebra in the
sense of CFT, except that the grading by conformal weight is missing. We
will see later that it carries a similar (but possibly reduced to @xmath
) grading after the theory is twisted.

The chiral algebra forms a closed sector of a @xmath model in the
following sense. Consider the @xmath -point function of @xmath -closed
local operators:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

If one of the operators is @xmath -exact, @xmath , then the @xmath
-point function becomes @xmath . Computed with a @xmath -invariant
action and path integral measure, this is the integral of a “ @xmath
-exact form” on the field space and vanishes. The @xmath -point function
( 2.14 ) thus depends only on the @xmath -cohomology classes @xmath . In
particular, it is a holomorphic (more precisely, meromorphic) function
of the insertion points.

So far, we have considered the chiral algebra of a fixed @xmath model,
defined by a fixed @xmath -invariant action. Of course, different
choices of the action lead to different chiral algebras in general.
Imagine deforming the theory by perturbing the action:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

For this deformation to preserve the @xmath -invariance, @xmath must be
@xmath -closed. If, however, @xmath is @xmath -exact, the chiral algebra
remains unchanged. To see this, express the matrix elements of @xmath as
path integrals on a cylinder of infinitesimal length, with a contour
integral of the supercurrent sandwiched between various boundary
conditions. One can show that for a @xmath -exact perturbation, the
matrix elements of @xmath in the deformed theory are equal to those of
@xmath in the original theory for some operator @xmath . But this latter
operator is related to @xmath by the conjugation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

hence defines an isomorphic chiral algebra. The @xmath -point function (
2.14 ) is also unchanged because the perturbation just introduces @xmath
-exact insertions.

Looking back at the action ( 2.4 ) of our model, we see that
deformations of the target space metric just give @xmath -exact
perturbations. Therefore, the chiral algebra is independent of the
Kähler structure of the target space. It does depend on the complex
structure, however. For this enters the very definition of the
supersymmetry transformation.

### 2.3 Instantons

An important property of the chiral algebra is that it receives
contributions only from instantons and small fluctuations around them.
In the case of our model, instantons obey

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

so they are holomorphic maps from @xmath to @xmath . It is this
localization principle that makes the chiral algebra effectively
computable.

To prove the localization, we rescale the target space metric and make
it very large. In this large volume limit, the path integral localizes
to the zeros of the bosonic action

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

namely holomorphic maps, or instantons, as promised. Incidentally, there
is another situation in which the same localization arises. That is when
the path integral computes the correlation function of @xmath -closed
operators [ 3 ] . This situation is not really relevant for us, though.
In order to determine the chiral algebra, we have to ask, in the first
place, whether a given local operator is @xmath -closed or not.

The space @xmath of holomorphic maps from @xmath to @xmath is called the
instanton moduli space. It decomposes into disconnected components
labeled by the homology class @xmath that the image of @xmath represents
in @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Correspondingly, the path integral splits into distinct sectors each of
which integrates over the neighborhood of a single connected component
of @xmath . In sigma model perturbation theory, one expands in the
inverse volume of the target space in the zero-instanton sector.
Instantons of @xmath are constant maps, whose moduli space @xmath .

When @xmath , instantons induce two important nonperturbative effects.
One is the violation of the R-charge conservation, which breaks the
R-symmetry down to a discrete subgroup. The other is the appearance of
powers of a dynamical scale @xmath generated via dimensional
transmutation, which allows objects of different scaling dimensions to
show up as quantum corrections.

The anomaly in the R-symmetry is due to a nontrivial transformation of
the fermionic path integral measure under this symmetry. The complex
conjugate of @xmath is a section of @xmath , while @xmath can be
identified with a @xmath -form with values in the same bundle. Thus, we
can define @xmath and expand these fields in the eigenmodes of @xmath
and @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath , @xmath are zero modes, @xmath , @xmath nonzero modes, and
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath anticommuting coefficients. The
fermionic path integral measure is the formal product

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

The nonzero mode part of the measure is neutral under the R-symmetry
because of the pairing of nonzero modes. The zero mode part has R-charge
equal to the number of @xmath zero modes minus the number of @xmath zero
modes, i.e., minus the index of the @xmath operator. For a compact
Riemann surface @xmath , the index is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

which (recalling @xmath mod @xmath ) is equal to @xmath for some integer
@xmath . The R-charge is violated by this amount in an instanton
background. We see that the R-symmetry is broken to a @xmath subgroup in
the presence of instantons, where @xmath is the greatest common divisor
of the integers @xmath .

Instantons produce powers of @xmath when @xmath because the @xmath field
is renormalized as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

with @xmath a fixed class in @xmath . We will derive this formula at the
end of this section. Accordingly, instanton corrections violating
R-charge by @xmath units are weighted by the topological factor

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

An extra factor of @xmath should come from somewhere else to cancel the
dependence on @xmath . Altogether, these corrections are proportional to
@xmath and can relate objects of scaling dimensions differing by @xmath
.

For instanton corrections to be under control, we should choose @xmath
such that the factor ( 2.24 ) is exponentially suppressed for
nonconstant holomorphic maps. The Kähler form is a good choice, for
example.

### 2.4 Twisting

The action of our model is invariant under supersymmetries whose
transformation parameters are antiholomorphic sections of the bundle
@xmath . If @xmath is topologically nontrivial, this bundle may not
admit any global antiholomorphic sections. In that case the
supersymmetries exist at best locally on @xmath , hence so does the
chiral algebra. However, what we need to define the chiral algebra is
really one of the two supersymmetries, not both. So it would be nice if
we can somehow globalize one in return for giving up the other. This is
achieved by twisting the theory.

Let us modify the spins of the fermionic fields so that @xmath becomes a
@xmath -form on @xmath , while @xmath becomes a zero-form. To make this
point clear, we rename them as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

The action of @xmath is then given by

  -- -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
        @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (2.26)
        @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Thus @xmath becomes a scalar and generates a global supersymmetry. On
the other hand, @xmath becomes a @xmath -form and in general does not
exist globally. In this way, we obtain a theory with global
supersymmetry on any Riemann surface @xmath , described by the action

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

Discarding half the original supersymmetries also allows us to consider
complex target spaces which may or may not be Kähler.

Besides globalizing the supersymmetry, the twisting does one more
important thing: it makes the components @xmath and @xmath of the
energy-momentum tensor @xmath -exact. This is because the global
supersymmetry commutes with infinitesimal diffeomorphisms @xmath ,
@xmath up to a quantity involving @xmath , but not @xmath , @xmath , or
@xmath . Hence, one can take the variation of the action inside the
@xmath -commutator when computing these components. Quantum mechanically
the action gets renormalized, but the renormalization can be done by
@xmath -exact local counterterms and the conclusion is unchanged. ¹ ¹ 1
This is not a precise statement. When @xmath is curved, one needs to
introduce a worldsheet metric to impose a meaningful cutoff length. This
produces an anomalous term in @xmath proportional to the Ricci curvature
of @xmath [ 37 ] . Such a c-number anomaly does not affect the structure
of the chiral algebra.

The generators @xmath , @xmath being @xmath -exact, antiholomorphic
reparametrizations act trivially in the @xmath -cohomology. Therefore
after the twisting the chiral algebra has no antiholomorphic degrees of
freedom — it defines a holomorphic field theory.

A local operator @xmath is said to have dimension @xmath if inserted at
the origin it transforms as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

under the rescaling @xmath , @xmath . An immediate consequence of the
decoupling of antiholomorphic degrees of freedom is that the chiral
algebra is supported by local operators with @xmath , because those with
@xmath transform nontrivially under antiholomorphic rescalings. The
holomorphic dimension, @xmath , is then equal to the spin @xmath , so it
is an integer and protected from quantum corrections (assuming that they
are small). Thus, the chiral algebra of the twisted model is graded by
the dimension as well as the R-charge.

If @xmath , the grading by the R-charge is violated by instantons as we
discussed already. The same is true of the grading by dimension.
Instanton corrections are accompanied with powers of @xmath . When
multiplying a local operator in the untwisted model, @xmath is best
thought of as a section of @xmath , having dimension @xmath . In the
twisted model, it is more natural think of it as a section of @xmath
with dimension @xmath , compensating the change in the dimension of the
fermionic path integral measure. Instanton corrections violating
R-charge by @xmath units are proportional to @xmath , so violate
dimension by @xmath . The grading by dimension is therefore reduced to
@xmath nonperturbatively when that by the R-charge is reduced to @xmath
.

With the grading by dimension at hand, we can now write the OPE of the
chiral algebra in the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath have dimension @xmath and @xmath are constants. The @xmath
-cohomology group of dimension @xmath vanishes for @xmath since there
are no local operators of negative dimension classically.

The @xmath -cohomology classes of dimension zero are special: they have
regular OPEs, as one can see by setting @xmath above and noting @xmath .
Hence, they form an ordinary ring, much like the chiral rings of @xmath
models. This ring is called the chiral ring of the @xmath model [ 16 ,
39 ] .

We have seen advantages of the twisting. It has one drawback, however.
Twisting the fermions amounts to tensoring with @xmath to which the
@xmath operator couples. This changes the anomaly cancellation
condition: @xmath and @xmath must now satisfy

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.30)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath and @xmath are pulled back to @xmath . Thus, the twisting
introduces an additional anomaly which affects the choice of @xmath . If
@xmath , we must choose @xmath with @xmath , i.e., @xmath must be
trivial. This was actually implicit in our discussion when we
interpreted @xmath as a nowhere vanishing section of @xmath .

### 2.5 Classical chiral algebra and quantum deformations

To determine the chiral algebra of a given model, what one can usually
do is to first identify its elements in the classical limit, then
include quantum corrections order by order. What guarantees the validity
of this procedure is the following principle: small quantum corrections
can only annihilate, and never create, @xmath -cohomology classes.

This statement is justified as follows. Local operators that are not
@xmath -closed at a given order cannot become @xmath -closed by
higher-order corrections. So the kernel of @xmath can never become
larger. At the same time, the image of @xmath can never become smaller,
because adding quantum corrections order by order defines an injection
from the image of @xmath at a given order to the image of @xmath at the
next order. Then the cohomology, which is the kernel modulo the image,
can only become smaller.

In this respect, the chiral algebra is similar to the space of
supersymmetric ground states (of supersymmetric quantum mechanics, say).
There, small quantum corrections can lift supersymmetric ground states
by giving a small positive energy, but not create ones because they
cannot push positive energy states down to zero energy as long as there
is a gap in the beginning. Likewise, small quantum corrections can
“lift” @xmath -cohomology classes by making them @xmath -exact or no
longer @xmath -closed, but not create ones because of a “gap” to the
@xmath -closedness or non- @xmath -exactness.

The analogy goes further. Supersymmetry yields a one-to-one
correspondence between the bosonic positive energy states and the
fermionic ones, so supersymmetric ground states are always lifted in
boson-fermion pairs. The same principle applies here: small quantum
corrections always annihilate @xmath -cohomology classes in
boson-fermion pairs. More precisely, one can show that when a @xmath
-cohomology class @xmath is annihilated by quantum corrections at some
order, there is another class @xmath that is annihilated together at the
same order either via the relation @xmath or @xmath . ² ² 2 To prove
this, let @xmath be a small parameter that controls the strength of
quantum effects, and @xmath a local operator that is nontrivial in the
@xmath -cohomology to order @xmath . First, suppose that @xmath is no
longer @xmath -closed at order @xmath ; thus @xmath for some @xmath ,
and no corrections to @xmath can make it @xmath -closed again. Then
@xmath is @xmath -closed, but cannot be @xmath -exact at order @xmath
for any @xmath . For if there exists @xmath such that @xmath , then
@xmath and @xmath is @xmath -closed to order @xmath . Next, suppose that
@xmath becomes @xmath -exact at order @xmath ; thus @xmath for some
@xmath . Then @xmath is @xmath -closed to order @xmath , but cannot be
@xmath -exact to the same order. For if there exist @xmath and @xmath
such that @xmath for some @xmath , then @xmath and @xmath is already
@xmath -exact at order @xmath .

Keeping the above principles in mind, let us study the chiral algebra of
the twisted model in a little more detail.

The chiral algebra is supported by local operators whose antiholomorphic
dimension @xmath . Since @xmath and @xmath -derivatives of any fields
have @xmath , these do not enter the chiral algebra. Furthermore, we can
replace @xmath by other fields using the equation of motion @xmath .
Thus, relevant local operators are linear combinations of operators of
the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

Identifying @xmath with the differential @xmath , we can regard such
operators with R-charge @xmath and dimension @xmath as @xmath -forms
with values in a certain holomorphic vector bundle @xmath over @xmath .

For example, an @xmath operator @xmath is a @xmath -form on @xmath ,
hence @xmath , the trivial bundle of rank @xmath . At @xmath , there are
two types of operators, @xmath and @xmath . These are @xmath -forms with
values in @xmath and @xmath , thus @xmath . At @xmath , we have five
types, giving @xmath . Here @xmath is the symmetric @xmath th power. In
general, @xmath is given by the series

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . We will write

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

At the classical level, we can easily find the action of @xmath on these
operators. As an example, take @xmath . Acting on it with @xmath gives
@xmath . On an @xmath operator of the other type, @xmath , acting with
@xmath gives @xmath plus @xmath , but the latter vanishes by the
equation of motion. From these examples, we see that @xmath acts as the
@xmath operator. ³ ³ 3 General local operators of dimension greater than
one are constructed using covariant derivatives. On such operators,
@xmath acts by @xmath plus terms involving the curvature of the target
space. Classically, these additional terms which vanish for a flat
metric do not change the @xmath -cohomology. This point will become
clear when we develop a sheaf theory approach to the perturbative chiral
algebra in Section 3 . Classically, the @xmath th @xmath -cohomology
group of dimension @xmath is therefore isomorphic to the @xmath th
Dolbeault cohomology group @xmath , and

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

as graded vector spaces. It is clear from this formula that the chiral
algebra is generally infinite-dimensional.

Quantum mechanically, the action of @xmath is deformed by quantum
corrections. Because of this deformation, some of the classical @xmath
-cohomology classes can disappear.

A notable example is the disappearance of the energy-momentum tensor.
Classically, our model is conformally invariant and @xmath is @xmath
-closed on-shell. We expect that it is no longer @xmath -closed
perturbatively if the Ricci curvature is nonzero, since conformal
invariance is broken at one loop in that case. To determine @xmath , we
note that @xmath commutes with @xmath . Thus

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

where we have used the fact that @xmath is @xmath -exact. This suggests

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

for some @xmath . Presumably, @xmath is a @xmath -closed local operator
of R-charge one and dimension one, constructed from the target space
metric. To leading order, @xmath and for a generic choice of the metric
there is only one possibility:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

So, as expected, @xmath would cease to be @xmath -closed unless the
Ricci curvature vanishes. In Section 3.3 , we will compute @xmath
explicitly in perturbation theory and find that it is indeed
proportional to @xmath up to higher-order corrections.

If @xmath , then @xmath is @xmath -exact and we can add corrections to
@xmath that make it @xmath -closed again. But if @xmath , there is no
way to do this, so @xmath is annihilated together with @xmath by
perturbative corrections. The chiral algebra is a little exotic in this
case: it is analogous to the chiral algebras of CFTs, but lacks an
energy-momentum tensor and hence invariance under holomorphic
reparametrizations.

Except for the possible lack of energy-momentum tensor, perturbatively
the structure of the chiral algebra is not very different from its
classical description. The basic fact about perturbative corrections is
that they are local on the target space, because one only considers
fluctuations around constant maps in perturbation theory. Moreover, the
gradings by the R-charge and dimension are not violated perturbatively.
Thanks to these properties, at the perturbative level the action of
@xmath still defines differential complexes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (2.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

and the chiral algebra is given by the direct sum of their cohomology
groups. How to compute these cohomology groups using a sheaf of free
CFTs on @xmath is the subject of the next section.

Beyond perturbation theory, the physics is no longer local on the target
space. Rather, it is local on the instanton moduli space @xmath since
quantum fluctuations localize to instantons. So presumably the chiral
algebra can be formulated nonperturbatively as a cohomology theory on
@xmath , but exactly how this should be done is not clear. At any rate,
in principle one can always compute the instanton corrections to the
action of @xmath by path integral and determine the exact chiral
algebra. Instanton effects often lead to surprising results. Later we
will see examples where the whole chiral algebra is annihilated by
instanton corrections.

Let us tie up the loose ends from Section 2.3 by explaining why the
@xmath field should be renormalized as asserted there. Consider the case
where the twisted and untwisted models are isomorphic. Suppose that
instantons annihilate perturbative @xmath -cohomology classes @xmath and
@xmath through a relation of the form @xmath . If this relation violates
R-charge by @xmath units, the left-hand side contains @xmath more @xmath
fields than the right-hand side does, while the both sides have
antiholomorphic dimension equal to zero. Viewed in the untwisted model,
this means that these instantons relate operators whose antiholomorphic
dimensions differ by @xmath . Since the dynamical scale @xmath is the
only dimensional parameter available and has antiholomorphic dimension
@xmath , to match the scaling dimensions a factor of @xmath must appear
in the right-hand side. For that, the @xmath field must obey the
renormalization group equation ( 2.23 ).

## 3 Sheaf theory of perturbative chiral algebras

As we have explained in the last section, the chiral algebra can be
understood as a quantum deformation of the Dolbeault cohomology of an
infinite-dimensional holomorphic vector bundle over the target space. At
the perturbative level, there is an alternative formulation of the
chiral algebra, which involves a sheaf of free CFTs. The goal of this
section is to develop the sheaf theory of perturbative chiral algebras.

### 3.1 Perturbative chiral algebra from free CFTs

The chiral algebra of the twisted model is classically the Dolbeault
cohomology of the holomorphic vector bundle @xmath . By the
Čech–Dolbeault isomorphism, this cohomology is isomorphic to the
cohomology of the sheaf of holomorphic sections of @xmath .
Perturbatively @xmath gets corrected, but still acts as a differential
operator on the target space due to the locality of sigma model
perturbation theory. In such a situation, there is an analog of the
Čech–Dolbeault isomorphism: the perturbative @xmath -cohomology is
isomorphic to the cohomology of the sheaf of perturbatively @xmath
-closed sections of @xmath . The proof is completely parallel to the
classical case. ⁴ ⁴ 4 The key ingredients are the @xmath -Poincaré lemma
and the existence of partitions of unity on the sheaf of @xmath -forms
with values in @xmath . The former follows from the @xmath -Poincaré
lemma since small quantum corrections cannot create @xmath -cohomology
classes. As for the latter, “quantum” partitions of unity can always be
constructed by renormalizing “classical” partitions of unity.

This “Čech- @xmath isomorphism” may seem to have little practical value.
To compute the sheaf cohomology, first of all one needs to know the
general form of perturbatively @xmath -closed local sections of @xmath .
But this requires understanding beforehand how perturbative corrections
deform the classical expression @xmath precisely, which is generally
very hard if not impossible. However, we can circumvent this difficulty
if we adopt a different approach.

Let us recast the Čech- @xmath isomorphism in a slightly more abstract
form. Choose a good cover @xmath on @xmath ; thus all nonempty finite
intersections of @xmath are diffeomorphic to @xmath . On each @xmath ,
the space of perturbatively @xmath -closed sections of @xmath is
isomorphic to the chiral algebra of the twisted model into @xmath . For,
the zeroth @xmath -cohomology group is isomorphic to this space, while
the higher @xmath -cohomology groups vanish as @xmath is topologically
trivial. Since Čech cohomology is defined by taking the direct limit as
the open cover becomes finer and finer, and every open cover has a
refinement by a good cover, it follows that the perturbative chiral
algebra can be computed via the cohomology of the sheaf of chiral
algebras @xmath on @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

Rewriting the Čech- @xmath isomorphism this way makes it clear that the
perturbative chiral algebra can be formulated without reference to any
globally defined metric on the target space.

When one computes the cohomology of @xmath , say using a good cover
@xmath , one can endow @xmath with any metric. In practice, we will put
@xmath on all the @xmath . The point is that the twisted models with the
flat target spaces @xmath are free theories — their chiral algebras
receive no quantum corrections.

In the free twisted model @xmath exactly, so sections of @xmath are
represented by local operators of the form @xmath . Introducing bosonic
fields @xmath of dimension one and @xmath of dimension zero by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

we can conveniently write them as @xmath . These are observables of the
free @xmath system, a free CFT with action

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

whose OPEs are

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.4)
  -- -------- -- -------

Hence, @xmath may be considered as a sheaf of free @xmath systems. We
conclude that the perturbative chiral algebra can be reconstructed by
gluing free @xmath systems over @xmath and computing the Čech
cohomology.

This construction is exact to all orders in perturbation theory since
the spaces @xmath are free of quantum corrections. Where did the
perturbative corrections go? They are now encoded in the transition
functions @xmath for the sheaf @xmath . Instead of equipping flat
metrics on the @xmath , one may as well start with a globally defined,
curved metric on @xmath . One can then flatten it over each @xmath to
obtain a free @xmath system. In this process the perturbative
corrections disappear locally, but the transition functions change by
@xmath for some operators @xmath . These operators carry the information
on the perturbative corrections.

But then, how can we find the @xmath ? Here we come back to the original
problem: to do that, we need detailed knowledge of the perturbative
corrections. Instead, what we can do is take a collection of locally
defined free @xmath systems and glue them using various choices of the
transition functions. In doing so, we are effectively parametrizing the
theory by the way this gluing is done. This is the strategy we will
adopt.

### 3.2 Gluing @xmath systems

We are thus led to the problem of listing the possible sets of
transition functions for @xmath . The first step is to classify the
automorphisms of the free @xmath system. Automorphisms are generated by
currents of dimension one. There are two types of such currents.

Let @xmath be a holomorphic vector field on @xmath . Then @xmath is a
good current. (Here and below, normal ordering is implicit in
expressions containing both @xmath and @xmath .) From the OPEs

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

we see that @xmath generates the infinitesimal diffeomorphism @xmath and
@xmath transforms as a @xmath -form under this symmetry. We denote the
corresponding conserved charge by @xmath .

With a holomorphic one-form @xmath on @xmath , we can also make @xmath .
This has the OPEs

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath , so generates the transformation @xmath . For any closed
holomorphic two-form @xmath , there is a holomorphic one-form @xmath
such that @xmath . Moreover, @xmath if and only if @xmath . The
automorphisms of this type are therefore labeled by the closed
holomorphic two-forms @xmath . We denote their charges by @xmath .

One can readily work out the commutators between the conserved charges.
Computing the relevant OPEs, one finds

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here, @xmath . The last two of these relations show that the @xmath
generate an abelian subalgebra on which holomorphic reparametrizations
act naturally.

Now, suppose that the complex manifold @xmath is built up by gluing open
patches @xmath using transition functions @xmath . Transition functions
for @xmath are constructed by lifting @xmath to automorphisms @xmath of
the @xmath system compatible with the cocycle condition. So we choose
@xmath such that they act on @xmath by @xmath and satisfy @xmath on
@xmath .

Naively, one might think that the cocycle condition is satisfied if one
picks a cocycle @xmath of closed holomorphic two-forms and let @xmath
act on @xmath by the pullback @xmath followed by @xmath . The situation
is actually more complicated. The commutator between two @xmath s
differs from the expected form by a @xmath term, implying

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

for some @xmath . We need to adjust @xmath so that @xmath disappear. The
freedom at our disposal is to transform @xmath , which shifts

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

Unless @xmath can be canceled by an appropriate choice of @xmath , the
gluing cannot be carried out consistently. In other words, there may be
an obstruction to the existence of a sheaf of @xmath systems.

The obstruction has a natural physical interpretation. It is not hard to
show that @xmath are totally antisymmetric in @xmath , @xmath , @xmath
and obey @xmath , hence define a cocycle. The freedom ( 3.9 ) then means
that the obstruction is encoded in the cohomology class

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the sheaf of closed holomorphic two-forms on @xmath . It
can be shown [ 40 ] that this class is mapped to @xmath under the
Čech–Dolbeault isomorphism. Thus, the obstruction vanishes if and only
if @xmath . This is the condition for the perturbative cancellation of
sigma model anomaly. Since the obstruction arises in lifting the
diffeomorphisms used to construct the underlying manifold @xmath , in
this way we see that the sigma model anomaly causes a gravitational
anomaly on the target space. The cancellation of the anomaly by
adjusting @xmath is a kind of the Green–Schwarz mechanism.

Given @xmath , the choice of @xmath is not unique. Suppose that we
choose different transition functions, @xmath . Then the two sets of
transition functions are related by @xmath for some cocycle @xmath . If
this cocycle is exact, @xmath , then we have @xmath and these define the
same gluing. Hence, inequivalent choices of the transition functions are
parametrized by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

The origin of this moduli space can be understood as follows. For any
closed form @xmath of type @xmath , locally we can find a @xmath -form
@xmath such that @xmath . ⁵ ⁵ 5 By the Poincaré lemma, locally @xmath
for some @xmath -form @xmath and @xmath -closed @xmath -form @xmath . By
the @xmath -Poincaré lemma, locally @xmath for some @xmath -form @xmath
. Then @xmath . Thus, we have the short exact sequence

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and @xmath are the sheaves of @xmath -forms and closed
@xmath -forms on @xmath , respectively. Since @xmath for @xmath , the
long exact sequence of cohomology implies

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is the space of closed forms @xmath of type @xmath modulo those
that can be written as @xmath with a globally defined @xmath -form
@xmath . It actually parametrizes the conformally invariant @xmath
-closed term

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

which depends on @xmath only through @xmath perturbatively. We can add
this term to our action. Then the chiral algebra is deformed unless
@xmath is globally defined. Still, we can always set @xmath to zero
locally by subtracting a globally defined @xmath . Combined with
flattening the metric, this turns the action locally into the free
theory form. Therefore, the effect of this term can be treated — and is
necessarily included — in the present framework.

Up to this point, we have implicitly worked in some coordinate
neighborhood of @xmath . The sheaf @xmath of chiral algebras in this
case (or when @xmath ) is known as a sheaf of chiral differential
operators [ 17 , 40 ] . In order to reconstruct the chiral algebra
globally on @xmath , one has to glue sheaves of chiral differential
operators patch by patch over @xmath . This amounts to gluing free
@xmath systems over @xmath . The obstruction thus takes values in

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

A part of it depends on both @xmath and @xmath , and corresponds to the
@xmath anomaly. Likewise, the moduli are parametrized by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

### 3.3 Conformal anomaly

Previously, we claimed that the chiral algebra lacks invariance under
holomorphic reparametrizations when @xmath , arguing that in that case
perturbative corrections would annihilate the classical @xmath
-cohomology class @xmath together with another class @xmath via the
relation @xmath . However, we could not really exclude the possibility
that @xmath turns out to be zero and @xmath remains @xmath -closed. Let
us check that this does not happen using the tool developed in this
section.

Let @xmath be a good cover of @xmath . On each @xmath , we put a free
@xmath system with energy-momentum tensor @xmath . The OPE

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

shows that @xmath transform as @xmath under infinitesimal
diffeomorphisms @xmath . The finite form of this transformation is [ 40
]

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath is the Jacobian matrix. We define a cocycle @xmath by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

so that it satisfies @xmath . Via the Čech- @xmath isomorphism, this
equation translates to @xmath for some local operator @xmath .

The explicit form of @xmath can be found as follows. Write @xmath ,
where @xmath is the quantity @xmath evaluated in the coordinate patch
@xmath . Since @xmath transform by holomorphic transition functions,
@xmath is globally defined. This gives @xmath as a global section of the
sheaf of free @xmath systems (on which @xmath acts by @xmath ). Noting
@xmath , we find

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

As a globally defined local operator of the original theory, this
formula gets higher-order corrections since @xmath only to leading
order. The form of @xmath is in accord with the previous discussion.

We introduced the perturbative @xmath -cohomology class @xmath through
the action of @xmath on @xmath . We can also construct it as follows,
mimicking the definition of the first Chern class. Let @xmath be
transition functions of @xmath . The cocycle condition @xmath implies
that @xmath are integer multiples of @xmath . Thus, by applying @xmath
on @xmath , we obtain an element of @xmath . It is @xmath . To obtain an
element of the chiral algebra, we apply @xmath instead. This gives
@xmath , which represents @xmath .

### 3.4 @xmath model

To conclude the discussion of the sheaf theory approach, let us compute
the perturbative chiral algebra of the twisted model with target space
@xmath for the first few dimensions. We will work locally on @xmath .

The target space @xmath is covered by two patches, @xmath with
coordinate @xmath and @xmath with coordinate @xmath , related to each
other by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Classically @xmath transforms as @xmath , but this formula gets
corrected quantum mechanically. The quantum transformation law turns out
to be

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

The additional term is needed to keep the @xmath OPE regular under this
transformation. Since the moduli space @xmath , this is essentially the
only way to glue the two free @xmath systems.

We first look at the zeroth @xmath -cohomology group @xmath . The
elements of @xmath are represented by global sections of the sheaf
@xmath of chiral algebras on @xmath .

At dimension zero, relevant local operators are holomorphic functions.
Since a holomorphic function on a compact complex manifold must be
constant, the dimension zero subspace of @xmath is one-dimensional and
generated by the cohomology class @xmath , represented by the identity
operator @xmath .

At dimension one, the possible local operators are those of the form
@xmath and @xmath , where @xmath is a holomorphic one-form and @xmath is
a holomorphic vector field. There are no global holomorphic one-forms on
@xmath . For holomorphic vector fields, we have three independent ones,
@xmath , @xmath , and @xmath . Hence, at the classical level we have
three cohomology classes, represented by @xmath , @xmath , and @xmath .
These survive to the perturbative chiral algebra. Their quantum
counterparts are

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

generating the affine Lie algebra @xmath at the critical level @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

The existence of these currents in the perturbative chiral algebra is a
reflection of the fact that @xmath admits an @xmath -action.

We now turn to the first @xmath -cohomology group @xmath . The elements
of @xmath are represented by sections of @xmath that cannot be written
as the difference of a section of @xmath and a section of @xmath .
Extended over the whole target space @xmath , such sections necessarily
have poles at both @xmath and @xmath .

Meromorphic functions with poles at @xmath and @xmath can always be
split into a part regular at @xmath and a part regular at @xmath . Thus
the dimension zero subspace of @xmath is zero.

At dimension one, we can try operators of the form @xmath , which have a
pole at @xmath . However, they are all regular at @xmath . The other
possibilities are @xmath . Requiring they have a pole at @xmath , we
find that only @xmath can represent a nontrivial cohomology class.
Indeed, it does. This cohomology class is @xmath since @xmath .

At dimension two, sections with poles at both @xmath and @xmath are
linear combinations of @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , and
@xmath . Among these, the combinations @xmath and @xmath are regular at
@xmath , so vanish in the cohomology. (In verifying this assertion, one
should keep in mind that the latter operator is normal ordered.)
Moreover, @xmath also vanishes due to the perturbative relation @xmath .
Thus the dimension two subspace of @xmath is at most three-dimensional.
From the cohomology classes we already have, we can construct three:
@xmath , @xmath , and @xmath .

Let us summarize. The dimension zero subspace of @xmath is generated by
@xmath and the dimension one subspace of @xmath is generated by @xmath ,
whereas the dimension one subspace of @xmath is generated by @xmath ,
@xmath , @xmath and the dimension two subspace of @xmath is generated by
@xmath , @xmath , @xmath . Therefore, for the first two nontrivial
dimensions, we find an isomorphism @xmath given by the map

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

It has been shown [ 17 ] that this isomorphism persists in higher
dimensions. This is as though @xmath and @xmath are vacua of CFT — both
of them are annihilated by @xmath — and the elements of @xmath are
creation operators acting on these classes to generate the rest of the
@xmath -cohomology classes. It is remarkable that such a structure
emerges despite the lack of conformal invariance. In order to understand
where this structure comes from, we must go beyond perturbation theory.

## 4 Nonperturbative vanishing of chiral algebras

In the previous sections we have seen that quantum corrections deform
the classical chiral algebra, but perturbatively the deformation can be
understood within the framework of a cohomology theory on the target
space. This is because in perturbation theory, one considers
fluctuations localized around constant maps.

Instantons are not quite like constant maps, but have a finite size in
the target space. Their presence may therefore lead to deformations of
different kinds. In this section, we will see a particularly striking
example: instantons annihilate all of the perturbative @xmath
-cohomology classes, making the chiral algebra trivial
nonperturbatively. The existence of such a phenomenon was first
predicted by Witten [ 16 ] , and subsequently confirmed by Tan and the
author [ 23 ] ; see Arakawa and Malikov [ 41 ] for a mathematical
interpretation of Witten’s prediction. Here we generalize the results of
[ 23 , 24 , 25 ] and establish a vanishing “theorem” for chiral
algebras. We then explain how the vanishing of the chiral algebra
implies the spontaneous breaking of supersymmetry and the absence of
harmonic spinors on the loop space of the target space.

### 4.1 @xmath Model, with instantons

The simplest example of a vanishing chiral algebra is provided by the
@xmath model which we studied in Section 3.4 . As we saw there, the
perturbative chiral algebra of the @xmath model has the structure of a
Fock space: @xmath and @xmath play the role of “ground states”, on which
infinite towers of bosonic and fermionic “excited states” are
constructed by acting with “creation operators”, namely bosonic @xmath
-cohomology classes. In view of this suggestive structure, one may
expect that instantons “tunnel” between the “ground states” and “lift”
them out of the chiral algebra. This is indeed the case.

We now show that the perturbative @xmath -cohomology classes @xmath and
@xmath are annihilated together by instantons via the relation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

This relation says that the equation @xmath holds in the @xmath
-cohomology. Therefore the chiral algebra of the @xmath model vanishes
nonperturbatively. A half of the perturbative @xmath -cohomology classes
are annihilated because their representatives become @xmath -exact. For
classes @xmath in this category, we have @xmath . Thus @xmath are
annihilated together with @xmath , and the latter should constitute the
other half of the perturbative chiral algebra. This explains the
observed Fock space structure.

Since @xmath , instantons of degree @xmath (which wrap the target space
@xmath times) violate R-charge by @xmath and dimension by @xmath . Then
the instanton corrections to the action of @xmath on @xmath take the
form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

with @xmath being local operators of R-charge @xmath and dimension
@xmath . Here, @xmath is the topological invariant @xmath evaluated for
instantons of degree one at the dynamical scale @xmath . There are no
local operators of negative dimension, hence @xmath for @xmath . The
remaining operator, @xmath , is perturbatively @xmath -closed. From the
fact that for R-charge zero and dimension zero, @xmath is the only
perturbative @xmath -cohomology class and there are no perturbatively
@xmath -exact local operators, it follows @xmath . So if we can show
@xmath , we establish the relation @xmath .

To see whether @xmath is zero or not, we put it on a disk (embedded in
the worldsheet) and evaluate the path integral for suitable boundary
conditions. For our purpose, we can compactify the disk to a sphere and
consider those boundary conditions that can be represented by vertex
operators at @xmath . We will therefore compute the correlation function

  -- -- -- -------
           (4.3)
  -- -- -- -------

on @xmath for some local operators @xmath . We anticipate that @xmath ,
expressed here as the contour integral of the supercurrent @xmath around
@xmath , will be replaced by @xmath in the final result. To obtain a
nonvanishing answer, then, we should take @xmath to be local operators
of R-charge zero and dimension zero, i.e., functions on @xmath .

The contributions to this correlation function should come from
instantons of degree one. These are biholomorphic maps from @xmath to
@xmath , whose moduli space @xmath . At @xmath , the number of @xmath
and @xmath zero modes are, respectively, given by the zeroth and first
Hodge numbers of the bundle @xmath . Note that we have untwisted the
theory before compactifying, because the twisted @xmath model is
anomalous on @xmath . Since @xmath and @xmath , there are two @xmath
zero modes and no @xmath zero modes. These zero modes can be absorbed by
the @xmath fields in @xmath and @xmath without bringing down interaction
terms. Then, up to the ratio of the bosonic and fermionic determinants,
the correlation function is computed to leading order by dropping
quantum fluctuations and integrating over the fermion zero modes as well
as the instantons:

  -- -- -- -------
           (4.4)
  -- -- -- -------

Here @xmath is the measure on @xmath , and @xmath , @xmath are the zero
mode coefficients of the mode expansion of @xmath . We can ignore
subleading contributions.

Of course, we must evaluate the contour integral before dropping quantum
fluctuations. (Without short distance singularities this would vanish!)
It turns out that this seemingly straightforward task is actually very
tricky. We are looking for an antiholomorphic single pole @xmath in the
OPE

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

It may appear that one can obtain such a pole by contracting @xmath with
@xmath . However, this does not work because the residue is just the
classical action of @xmath on @xmath and vanishes. We must find
additional antiholomorphic poles that emerge nonperturbatively.

At this point, we recall that the fermionic fields take values in the
pullback of the tangent bundle of @xmath by the bosonic field. Thus, the
eigenmodes in which they are expanded depend on the bosonic field, which
is itself subject to quantum fluctuations. As a result, the fermion
modes — even the zero modes — can produce short distance singularities
when the bosonic field is present at the same location.

We can try to extract this bosonic dependence of the fermionic fields as
follows. Consider a tubular neighborhood @xmath of @xmath ,
diffeomorphic to the normal bundle of @xmath in the space of maps from
@xmath to @xmath . Let @xmath be local coordinates on @xmath and
parametrize the normal directions by coordinates @xmath such that @xmath
on @xmath . For @xmath , we denote its projection to @xmath by @xmath .
An instanton @xmath maps the points of @xmath to the points of @xmath in
a one-to-one manner, so we can invert @xmath to obtain @xmath and write
@xmath . Computing @xmath with this last expression, we find

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.6)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the zero mode part of @xmath evaluated at @xmath . So we
have extracted, partially, the dependence of @xmath on the bosonic
fluctuations.

In fact, the leading term of the formula ( 4.6 ) is all we need. The
reason is that the fermion nonzero modes will be discarded in our
computation and, up to the nonzero modes and the equation of motion for
the bosonic field, the leading term represents the zero mode part of
@xmath . Indeed, it correctly reduces to @xmath at @xmath and the
equation of motion implies

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

which vanishes if the fermion nonzero modes are dropped since there are
no @xmath zero modes.

As desired, @xmath from @xmath can now be contracted with @xmath in the
@xmath field from @xmath to produce an antiholomorphic double pole. This
gives

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

The result may look strange, but will become more natural after the
@xmath zero modes are integrated out.

To proceed, we need to specify the path integral measure. On instantons,
the action of @xmath is realized as the superconformal transformation
@xmath . Thus the zero mode part of @xmath can be expanded as

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

If we choose @xmath to be conformally invariant, it is @xmath -invariant
up to terms involving @xmath or @xmath . Then the product @xmath is a
@xmath -invariant measure since @xmath is @xmath -invariant by itself.
There is a unique conformally invariant measure on @xmath up to a
factor. In terms of the points @xmath , @xmath , @xmath to which @xmath
, @xmath , @xmath are mapped by instantons, it is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

The parametrization of @xmath by @xmath @xmath , @xmath provides a
compactification of @xmath to @xmath , but @xmath is singular on the
compactified moduli space.

Let us return to the integral ( 4.4 ). After the integration over the
@xmath zero modes, the contour integral

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is the pullback of the Ricci form by instantons. Using the formula

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.12)
  -- -------- -- --------

what is left can be written as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

The @xmath -integral is the evaluation of @xmath on @xmath , which gives
@xmath . The @xmath -integral diverges, reflecting the noncompactness of
@xmath . One way to regularize it is to impose a lower bound @xmath on
the distance between @xmath and @xmath measured with the target space
metric. For @xmath , this restricts the domain of @xmath to the region
where @xmath . The regularized integral is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

From this and the renormalization group equation ( 2.23 ) for the @xmath
field, we find that the integral ( 4.13 ) contains a factor @xmath . We
can take a limit such that @xmath and @xmath keeping @xmath finite. The
end result is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

up to an overall numerical factor.

We see that the resulting @xmath -integral is performed over @xmath with
respect to a natural volume form. Therefore, the one-instanton
computation of the correlation function ( 4.3 ) has reduced to the
zero-instanton computation of the expected one-point function:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

This shows @xmath .

### 4.2 Vanishing “theorem”

The vanishing of the chiral algebra is not unique to the @xmath model.
It seems to be a feature shared by many @xmath models. In fact, we have
the following vanishing “theorem”. Let @xmath be a compact spin Kähler
manifold with @xmath and @xmath . Suppose that there is an embedding
@xmath with trivial normal bundle. Then, the chiral algebra of the
@xmath model with target space @xmath vanishes nonperturbatively in the
absence of left-moving fermions.

As before, we will establish the vanishing by demonstrating that
instantons annihilate the perturbative @xmath -cohomology classes @xmath
and @xmath together. Since @xmath , every instanton violates R-charge by
@xmath and dimension by @xmath for some integer @xmath . Then @xmath can
only be annihilated by instantons with @xmath , in which case it is
paired with a class of R-charge zero and dimension zero. Such a class
must be proportional to @xmath on the compact complex manifold @xmath .
Thus, it suffices to show @xmath .

Consider the correlation function ( 4.3 ) again. The leading
contributions to this function come from instantons that give precisely
two @xmath zero modes and no @xmath zero modes. These are embeddings
@xmath whose normal bundle is trivial. (The normal bundle @xmath of a
curve @xmath is a holomorphic vector bundle over @xmath defined by the
short exact sequence @xmath .) To see this, note that given instantons
wrapping a @xmath once, there are already the right amount of zero modes
from the tangent direction. So there should be no additional zero modes
from the normal directions, which is the case if and only if the normal
bundle of the @xmath is trivial.

But if the normal bundle is trivial and the fermion zero modes come only
from the tangent direction, the contribution from each such @xmath can
be computed essentially in the same way as in the @xmath model; the
result is a function on @xmath supported on the @xmath . By assumption,
there is at least one @xmath that makes a contribution, hence the
correlation function is nonzero. ⁶ ⁶ 6 In case the contributions from
all the instantons add up to zero, we can insert delta functions
supported on a particular @xmath at various points on @xmath so that the
target space effectively becomes that @xmath . The correlation function
is still nonzero. It follows that @xmath and the chiral algebra
vanishes.

One may wonder how the existence of a single @xmath with trivial normal
bundle, whose contribution to @xmath is confined on the @xmath itself,
can possibly tell something about the behavior of @xmath in the other
region of @xmath . This point can be understood if we consider
deformations of the @xmath . Infinitesimal deformations are given by
holomorphic sections of the normal bundle. Since the normal bundle is
trivial, the @xmath in question can be moved in every direction in the
target space. Then the family of @xmath s generated by deformations
sweep out the whole target space, and their contributions can add up to
a nonzero constant.

### 4.3 Flag manifold model

An example in which the above deformation argument is beautifully
demonstrated is the flag manifold @xmath of a complex simple Lie group
@xmath with Borel subgroup @xmath [ 24 , 25 ] . For @xmath , we have
@xmath and @xmath with @xmath . Thus, the @xmath model is well defined
and has the R-symmetry broken to @xmath nonperturbatively. The simplest
case is when @xmath , for which @xmath .

What makes the @xmath model interesting is that its perturbative chiral
algebra contains currents generating the affine Lie algebra @xmath of
critical level [ 17 , 26 , 27 ] . The critical level makes an appearance
here because the Sugawara construction must fail; otherwise, it would
contradict the fact that the chiral algebra lacks an energy-momentum
tensor when @xmath . Nonperturbatively, these currents disappear from
the chiral algebra along with everything else.

Pick a @xmath and call it @xmath . Choose linearly independent normal
vectors @xmath , @xmath , @xmath at a point @xmath . Under @xmath ,
these are mapped to @xmath , @xmath , @xmath , which are again linearly
independent. Varying @xmath , we obtain a global frame of @xmath .
Therefore @xmath is trivial, and the chiral algebra vanishes. In this
example, the @xmath -action generates a family of @xmath s with trivial
normal bundle that covers the target space.

### 4.4 Supersymmetry breaking and the geometry of loop spaces

The vanishing of the chiral algebra of a @xmath model has important
implications for the dynamics of the theory and the geometry of the loop
space @xmath of the target space: supersymmetry is spontaneously broken
and there are no harmonic spinors on @xmath . These conclusions are
obtained by studying the @xmath -cohomology of states rather than
operators.

Since @xmath has R-charge one and satisfies @xmath , one can consider
the @xmath -cohomology graded by the R-charge in the Hilbert space of
states. This is naturally a module over the chiral algebra: on elements
@xmath of the @xmath -cohomology of states, @xmath acts by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

As a graded vector space, it is isomorphic to the space of
supersymmetric states, the kernel of @xmath which is generally
infinite-dimensional since @xmath is not bounded. If @xmath , it is
further isomorphic to the @xmath -cohomology of local operators by the
state-operator correspondence.

To unravel the geometric meaning of the @xmath -cohomology of states,
take @xmath to be a cylinder @xmath with coordinates @xmath and regard
@xmath as time. The theory may now be viewed as supersymmetric quantum
mechanics on @xmath , so let us canonically quantize it and see what we
get. The fermionic fields are quantized (for @xmath and with respect to
a local orthonormal frame) to obey

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is a loop space version of the Clifford algebra, with the
continuous index @xmath parametrizing the direction along the loop.
States are thus spinors on @xmath . The supercharge is quantized as

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the covariant functional derivative on @xmath . From
this expression, we see that @xmath is almost a half of the Dirac
operator on @xmath . But not quite, since it has extra pieces coupled to
@xmath .

We can eliminate these extra pieces without changing the @xmath
-cohomology. To do this, we define a functional @xmath as follows. ⁷ ⁷ 7
This functional is not single valued if the cohomology class @xmath does
not vanish on some two-cycles. However, one can always go to a covering
space of @xmath in which it becomes single valued, and define the theory
in this space. See [ 42 ] for more discussion on this point. First, we
pick a base loop in each connected component of @xmath . Then, given
@xmath , we choose a homotopy @xmath from the base loop of the relevant
component to @xmath . Finally, we set

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

Under a variation of the end point @xmath , this functional changes by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

Writing @xmath for a half of the Dirac operator obtained by dropping the
extra pieces from @xmath , we have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

Therefore, the @xmath -cohomology of states is isomorphic to the @xmath
-cohomology, which is the cohomology of the spinor bundle over @xmath .

Now suppose that the chiral algebra is trivial: @xmath . Then

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

for any @xmath -cohomology classes @xmath , so the @xmath -cohomology of
states is also trivial. Since supersymmetric states are in one-to-one
correspondence with the @xmath -cohomology classes, there are none. In
other words, supersymmetry is spontaneously broken. Furthermore, we just
saw that the @xmath -cohomology is nothing but the cohomology of the
spinor bundle over @xmath . Hence, there are no harmonic spinors on
@xmath either.

## Acknoweldgments

This work is based on the author’s Ph.D. thesis. First and foremost, I
would like to thank the Department of Physics and Astronomy at Rutgers
University for providing a stimulating environment during my graduate
studies. I am also grateful to the Center for Frontier Science at Chiba
University for their support while this paper was written. I am indebted
to my advisor Gregory Moore, whose deep understanding and original
thinking have always been a great inspiration to me. Last but not least,
my gratitude goes to Meng-Chwan Tan for being such a wonderful colleague
and friend.