# Acknowledgements

Special thanks to my supervisor, Fay Dowker, without whose support this
work would not have been possible. Thanks are also due to Rafael Sorkin,
whose ideas provided much of the inspiration for this work. I would like
to thank Steven Johnston, Joe Henson, and Sumati Surya for helpful
discussions throughout the course of this research. Thanks are also due
to Steven Johnston for proofreading parts of this thesis. Thanks to
David Rideout for making the Cactus CausalSets arrangement available and
for taking the time to assist me with its use.

This research was funded by a Tertiary Education Commission of New
Zealand Top Achiever Doctoral Scholarship and an FfWG Foundation Main
Grant.

Finally, many thanks to my parents for their unfailing support, and to
Richard for proofreading large parts of this work and for all his
patience, support, and encouragement.

###### Contents

-    Declaration
-    Abstract
-    Acknowledgements
-    Notation
-    1 Introduction
-    2 A brief introduction to causal set theory
    -    2.1 What is a causal set?
    -    2.2 The causal set hypothesis
    -    2.3 Sprinklings
    -    2.4 Causal set phenomenology
-    3 Swerves
    -    3.1 Models for massive particle propagation on a causal set
        -    3.1.1 The swerves model
        -    3.1.2 Intrinsic models
    -    3.2 The swerves diffusion equation
        -    3.2.1 Stochastic evolution on a manifold of states
        -    3.2.2 Diffusion in proper time
    -    3.3 Diffusion in cosmic time
    -    3.4 Finiteness of the diffusion constant
        -    3.4.1 Proofs of Lemmas 3.4.1 and 3.4.2
    -    3.5 Consequences and bounds
    -    3.6 Simulations of particle models
        -    3.6.1 Example trajectories in 1+1 dimensions
        -    3.6.2 A close investigation of Model 1
    -    3.7 Concluding remarks
-    4 Massless particles
    -    4.1 Diffusion in affine time
    -    4.2 Diffusion in cosmic time
        -    4.2.1 Power law equilibrium solutions
    -    4.3 Diffusion and drift in the cosmic microwave background
        -    4.3.1 Modelling diffusion in the CMB
        -    4.3.2 The expanding universe
    -    4.4 The shifting of spectral lines
    -    4.5 Concluding remarks
-    5 Polarisation
    -    5.1 The polarisation state space
        -    5.1.1 Polarisation under Lorentz transformation
        -    5.1.2 Stokes parameters
    -    5.2 Polarisation diffusion in affine time
    -    5.3 Polarisation diffusion in cosmic time
        -    5.3.1 The solution to the diffusion equation
    -    5.4 Observational constraints
        -    5.4.1 Constraining the drift parameter with radio galaxy
            data
        -    5.4.2 Polarisation diffusion and drift in the cosmic
            microwave background
    -    5.5 Concluding remarks
-    6 Conclusions and future directions
-    A Explicitly Lorentz invariant polarisation diffusion
    -    A.1 Invariant vectors
    -    A.2 The diffusion equation

###### List of Figures

-    2.1 Hasse diagram
-    2.2 A diamond lattice
-    2.3 An example sprinkling
-    3.1 The swerves model for particle propagation
-    3.2 Intrinsic models for particle propagation
-    3.3 Flowlines in @xmath
-    3.4 Hyperbolic coordinates
-    3.5 An example of a Model 1 particle trajectory in 3+1 dimensions
-    3.6 Examples of intrinsic particle trajectories in 3+1 dimensions
-    3.7 An example of a Model 1 particle trajectory in 1+1 dimensions
-    3.8 An example of a Model 2 particle trajectory in 1+1 dimensions
-    3.9 Examples of Model 3 particle trajectories in 1+1 dimensions
-    3.10 Multiple Model 3 trajectories
-    3.11 An invalid Model 1 trajectory
-    3.12 Example position and momentum histograms for Model 1
-    3.13 @xmath vs. @xmath and @xmath vs. @xmath
-    3.14 @xmath vs. @xmath and @xmath vs. @xmath
-    4.1 Example Planck spectrum evolved according to the diffusion
    equation
-    4.2 Varying @xmath with @xmath
-    4.3 Varying @xmath with @xmath
-    4.4 Varying both @xmath and @xmath
-    4.5 Varying both @xmath and @xmath for an expanding universe
-    4.6 Example quasar spectrum
-    5.1 The Bloch sphere
-    5.2 Polarisation of radio galaxies
-    5.3 CMB correlation spectra
-    5.4 @xmath and @xmath spectra under rotation
-    5.5 @xmath and @xmath spectra under rotation

## Notation

  ------------------------------------------------------------------ -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  @xmath                                                             The ‘precedes’ relation on a causal set.
  @xmath                                                             The ‘link’ relation on a causal set.
  @xmath                                                             The length of the longest chain between elements @xmath and @xmath on a causal set.
  @xmath                                                             The derivative of @xmath with respect to time.
  @xmath                                                             The complex conjugate, adjoint, and Hodge dual of @xmath , respectively.
  @xmath                                                             4-dimensional Minkowski spacetime with metric @xmath .
  @xmath                                                             The mass shell, momentum state space for massive particles.
  @xmath                                                             The massless particle momentum state space.
  @xmath                                                             The Bloch sphere polarisation state space.
  A metric signature @xmath is used throughout.                      
  Planck units with @xmath and Boltzmann constant @xmath are used.   
  ------------------------------------------------------------------ -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Chapter 1 Introduction

  …I shall admit a system as empirical or scientific only if it is
  capable of being tested by experience.

Karl Popper [ 1 ]

Is there really a singularity inside a black hole? Did the universe have
a beginning? These are just two of the many questions that can’t be
answered until a theory of quantum gravity is developed. Quantum gravity
isn’t demanded by any unexplained experimental results. The predictions
of general relativity and quantum theory agree with experiments wherever
they have been tested. The main motivation behind the long standing
search for quantum gravity is a philosophical desire for a single
unified approach to physics. General relativity and quantum theory
provide entirely different world views: is the universe a dynamic four
dimensional Lorentzian manifold, or is there a fixed background
spacetime on which fields exist? Or is reality stranger than either of
these options? Not only are our main theories of physics seemingly
incompatible, they contain within themselves the signs of their own
breakdown. The singularity inside a black hole is not so much a
prediction of general relativity as an indication that we are attempting
to use the theory in a realm where it doesn’t apply. Renormalisation and
the associated problems in quantum theory suggest to me, at least, that
a key part of our understanding is lacking.

The search for quantum gravity has become not merely a search for a
mathematical method of tying the theories together, but a search for a
completely new understanding of the fundamental nature of spacetime. A
number of approaches to quantum gravity exist. Most, including the
prominent approaches of string theory and loop quantum gravity, give
some preference to quantum theory, attempting to literally ‘quantise
gravity’ to fit it into a unified framework. Others, such as the causal
set approach that will be discussed in this thesis, begin with a
completely new fundamental structure and hope that general relativity
and quantum theory will arise in the appropriate limits of the theory.
No approach to quantum gravity, as yet, can be considered complete.

This thesis will focus on the possibility that spacetime may be
fundamentally discrete and, more importantly, whether such a hypothesis
is testable. If the explanation of experimental results has not yet
required any theory of quantum gravity, how are we to test the many
theories that are being developed? If no effort is made to test
developing theories they risk becoming only interesting mathematical
constructs and losing any connection with a description of reality. As
research areas expand and it becomes more and more difficult for an
individual to comprehend an entire subject, it is crucial to remind
ourselves that if we claim to be physicists we should be attempting to
check our theories against the real world at every step.

Since theories of quantum gravity must reproduce the results of general
relativity and quantum theory in all areas where they have been shown to
hold, and introduce new phenomena only on very small spacetime scales
(or large energy scales), directly testing them is, at least in the near
future, impossible. To test quantum gravity we need to seek ways in
which such small effects could become amplified and result in deviations
from the standard predictions of general relativity and quantum theory.

It may seem strange to seek a signature for fundamental spacetime
discreteness in large scale phenomena. Consider, however, the
discreteness of matter. When Einstein provided an explanation for
Brownian motion, he provided the last piece of evidence necessary to
convince any doubters of the atomic nature of matter. That matter was
made of atoms and molecules was, of course, not a new idea at that
point. Einstein did not resolve the question of the discreteness of
matter by directly observing atoms or molecules, but by recognising that
the already observable phenomenon of Brownian motion demonstrated their
existence. Likewise, to determine if spacetime is discrete we should not
look to magical future technology that may let us see spacetime ‘atoms’
directly, but rather seek some currently observable phenomena that
reveals the answer.

Investigations into quantum gravity phenomenology have thus far focused
overwhelmingly on producing and observing small violations of Lorentz
invariance, often by introducing modified dispersion relations. As yet
there is no evidence that Lorentz invariance is violated at all. This is
not to say that Lorentz violating quantum gravity phenomenology should
not be explored: Lorentz violations can be investigated by current
experiments and thus offer a very useful way of testing quantum gravity
theories. It is often unclear, however, whether Lorentz violations are a
necessary consequence of any particular quantum gravity theory, or
simply a possible outcome that happens to be the only one that can
currently be tested. Observations have forced very tight constraints on
Lorentz violating models, for a recent review see [ 2 ] . Violations of
Lorentz invariance can never be ruled out, as experiments can only
constrain the effects to be smaller. While it is important to explore
these constraints to experimental limits, it is clear that Lorentz
invariant quantum gravity phenomenology deserves more attention than it
currently receives. This thesis attempts to begin to remedy this
problem.

Causal set theory, a Lorentz invariant, discrete theory of quantum
gravity, provides the primary motivation for the phenomenology discussed
in this thesis. Although the work in this thesis is discussed within the
framework of causal set theory, it should be noted that many of the
conclusions are more generally applicable.

To investigate Lorentz invariant phenomenology, I focus on the effect
spacetime discreteness would have on the propagation of particles.
Particles travelling through a spacetime with an underlying discreteness
are expected to deviate from the continuum geodesics predicted by
general relativity. For massive particles this was first considered by
Dowker et al. [ 3 ] , who found the propagation of massive particles
could be described by a diffusion equation in the proper time of the
particle. This thesis extends the work of Dowker et al. to derive a
diffusion equation in observable laboratory time (‘cosmic time’) and
also numerically investigates causal set models for massive particle
propagation. A phenomenological model for massless particles travelling
in discrete spacetime is also developed and astrophysical and
cosmological data allow the free parameters in the model to be
constrained. The models discussed here do not, unfortunately, make
falsifiable predictions. Stronger and stronger constraints could be
placed on the free parameters without ever ruling out the effects,
unless, of course, there is an indisputable observation of Lorentz
invariance violation. It is hoped that future developments in causal set
theory will allow ‘natural’ values for the phenomenological parameters
to be derived. Observations that conclusively rule out the models would
then be possible. In the meantime the models help us determine where to
look for the signature of discreteness. The questions raised by the
investigations into phenomenology will hopefully also contribute to
progress in the underlying theory.

Chapter 2 introduces causal set theory and provides the basic
definitions that will be required later in the thesis. Chapter 3
discusses the effect of spacetime discreteness on the propagation of
massive particles. This chapter begins by reviewing the swerves
diffusion model proposed by Dowker et al. in [ 3 ] , while the remainder
of the chapter consists of original work. In Chapter 4 massless
particles are considered and found to also experience diffusion. Chapter
5 develops the work on massless particles further by considering the
effect of discreteness on photon polarisation.

Portions of Chapter 3 , together with a large part of the content of
Chapter 4 appear in

  F. Dowker, L. Philpott, and R. Sorkin. Energy-momentum diffusion from
  spacetime discreteness. Phys. Rev. , D79:124047, 2009, 0810.5591.

Section 3.6 appears in

  L. Philpott. Particle simulations in causal set theory. Class. Quantum
  Grav. , 27:042001, 2010, 0911.5595.

The majority of the work in Chapter 5 appears in

  C. Contaldi, F. Dowker, and L. Philpott. Polarisation Diffusion from
  Spacetime Uncertainty, 1001.4545.

Throughout this thesis Planck units defined by @xmath will be used.
Unless otherwise specified Boltzmann’s constant is also set to one:
@xmath .

## Chapter 2 A brief introduction to causal set theory

  …in a discrete manifold the principle of metric relations is already
  contained in the concept of the manifold, but in a continuous one it
  must come from something else. Therefore, either the reality
  underlying space must form a discrete manifold, or the basis for the
  metric relations must be sought outside it, in binding forces acting
  upon it.

Riemann (translated in [ 4 ] )

  The continuity of space apparently rests upon sheer assumption
  unsupported by any a priori or experimental grounds.

Whitehead [ 5 ]

Given that both general relativity and quantum theory are based on
continuum spacetimes, it may seem slightly strange that spacetime
discreteness is invoked in attempts to reconcile the two. Why throw away
the one thing these theories have in common? In brief, the singularities
and associated infinite curvatures of general relativity could indicate
that the continuum is not a good description of spacetime on very small
scales; in quantum field theory discreteness would give a natural cutoff
and allow issues with renormalisation to be avoided.

Discrete spacetime is by no means a new idea. Riemann (as quoted above)
points out the elegance of a discrete manifold: a discrete manifold
actually contains more information than a continuum. Einstein, in view
of the discrete nature of matter, suggested that ‘‘the continuum of the
present theory contains too great a manifold of possibilities’’. ¹ ¹ 1
Einstein to Walter Dällenbach, November 1916, excerpts published in [ 6
] . Schrödinger also discusses the subject, stating that the continuum
“may very well turn out to be out of place for physical space and
physical time” [ 7 ] . A comprehensive review of the history of discrete
spacetime would fill a thesis in and of itself; for an interesting
discussion of early ideas see [ 8 ] . One further historical aspect
should be mentioned briefly: the first Lorentz invariant ‘quantised
spacetime’ was described by Snyder in 1946 [ 9 ] . It is, however, a
rather different approach to the one discussed here.

A considerable difficulty in formulating a discrete theory lies in the
fact that many of the mathematical tools we are accustomed to using in
the description of physics rely on the existence of the continuum. What
is the analogue of a differential equation of motion in a discrete
spacetime? Developing a discrete theory of spacetime involves not only
new physics, but a new language to describe that physics.

Causal set theory, first proposed by Bombelli et al. in 1987 [ 10 ] , is
a discrete, Lorentz invariant approach to quantum gravity. Although
there are a number of approaches to quantum gravity that are in some
sense discrete (Regge calculus, causal dynamical triangulations, loop
quantum gravity, to name a few), the exact nature of the discreteness
varies greatly. Causal set theory draws its primary motivation from
theorems proved by Malament [ 11 ] and Levichev [ 12 ] , and based on
the results of Hawking, King, and McCarthy [ 13 ] : for a past and
future distinguishing spacetime, the causal ordering together with a
four-dimensional volume element provides sufficient information to
determine all metric, topological, and differentiable structure of a
spacetime. If spacetime is discrete, this result translates to (in a
phrase coined by Sorkin):

order + number = geometry.

Number here is just the equivalent of volume – in a discrete spacetime
the volume of a region is determined by counting the elements within it.
In other words, a collection of elements endowed with a causal ordering
should be all that is needed to describe all the complexities of
spacetime to the discreteness scale. Early proposals for a theory based
on discrete spacetime, endowed only with a causal ordering of events,
were made independently by both Myrheim [ 14 ] and ’t Hooft [ 15 ] in
1978. These theories remained apparently undeveloped until causal set
theory was put forward in 1987. For comprehensive reviews of the field
see, for example, [ 16 , 17 , 18 , 19 , 20 ] .

### 2.1 What is a causal set?

Specifically, a causal set is a set @xmath endowed with a binary
relation @xmath satisfying:

1.  transitivity: if @xmath and @xmath then @xmath , @xmath ;

2.  reflexivity: @xmath , @xmath ;

3.  acyclicity: if @xmath and @xmath then @xmath , @xmath ;

4.  local finiteness: @xmath the set @xmath of elements is finite.

The relation @xmath is commonly called ‘precedes’. This definition seems
a little more intuitive if one considers, for a moment, a standard
continuum Lorentzian manifold, @xmath . The usual causal future
relation, @xmath , satisfies the first three of the above points. The
causal future @xmath , is the union of @xmath with the set of all @xmath
that can be reached from @xmath by a future-directed, non-spacelike
curve in @xmath . This relation is clearly transitive, reflexive (
@xmath ) and acyclic (provided the spacetime has no closed causal
curves). The condition that the causal future relation does not satisfy
is local finiteness. Local finiteness provides the discreteness of the
theory – in any causal interval of the causal set there are only
finitely many elements.

Causal sets can be visualised using Hasse diagrams (see Figure 2.1 ).
Here time runs vertically, elements are drawn as points and relations as
lines. Relations implied by transitivity are omitted to avoid
over-complicating the diagram. Even so, visualising a causal set using a
Hasse diagram is only feasible for very small causal sets. Although
Hasse diagrams will not be used in the remainder of this thesis, Figure
2.1 provides useful examples for the following important definitions.

Let @xmath be a causal set.

1.  A chain is a totally ordered subset of @xmath , e.g. @xmath in
    Figure 2.1 .

2.  A longest chain between two elements @xmath is a chain whose length
    is longest amongst chains between those endpoints, e.g. @xmath is a
    longest chain between @xmath and @xmath . There may be more than one
    longest chain between two elements. The length (i.e. number of
    steps) of the longest chain between elements @xmath will be denoted
    @xmath . For example @xmath .

3.  A link is an irreducible relation: elements @xmath and @xmath are
    linked if and only if @xmath , e.g. @xmath is a link. If two
    elements @xmath are linked, it will be denoted @xmath .

4.  A path is a chain consisting of links, e.g. @xmath .

### 2.2 The causal set hypothesis

Above I provided a mathematical definition of a causal set. Causal set
theory is based on the hypothesis that spacetime is a causal set (or,
indeed, a quantum sum-over-causal sets). The observed continuum
Lorentzian manifold, it is assumed, arises as an approximation to an
underlying causal set. The partial order gives rise to the causal
ordering of events in the approximating continuum spacetime, and the
number of elements comprising a spacetime region gives the volume of
that region in fundamental units. The fundamental volume unit is
expected to be of the order of the Planck volume (where necessary in the
later chapters of this thesis, it will be assumed that the fundamental
volume is equal to the Planck volume). Note that any continuum manifold
that approximates a causal set is necessarily Lorentzian, as only a
Lorentzian metric can give rise to a partial order on spacetime points.

The central, and as yet unproved, conjecture of causal set theory is
that if two continuum manifolds are in some sense a ‘good approximation’
to a given causal set, then those two continuum manifolds should
themselves be approximately the same. The idea here is simply that
although multiple manifolds could approximate a given causal set, the
manifolds should capture all the significant information from the causal
set and only vary between themselves on very small scales. It is far
from simple to mathematically define what is meant by ‘approximate’ in
this situation. Some intuitive understanding can be gained by working
backwards: constructing causal sets from manifolds via a process called
‘sprinkling’.

### 2.3 Sprinklings

A causal set can be constructed by selecting points from a Lorentzian
manifold. The causal relations between the points on the manifold induce
the order relations between the elements in the causal set. The most
obvious way to select points from a manifold is to construct a regular
lattice, but this does not provide the features needed in causal set
theory. Consider choosing a frame and selecting points from two
dimensional Minkowski spacetime in a diamond lattice. If a Lorentz boost
is applied the points are no longer a good sampling of the manifold, as
is shown in Figure 2.2 . In the boosted frame the number of elements in
any region is clearly not a good approximation of the volume of that
region.

Consider, instead, selecting points at random from a manifold via a
Poisson process in which the probability measure is equal to the
spacetime volume measure in some fundamental units – this process is
called ‘sprinkling’. The number of points chosen from any region of the
manifold will be approximately equal (up to Poisson fluctuations) to the
volume of that region in fundamental units. If a Lorentz boost is
applied to points selected this way, the distribution remains of uniform
density (see Figure 2.3 ). For a proof that the sprinkling process is
Lorentz invariant, see [ 21 ] . Sprinklings prove very useful in
analytic and numeric studies of causal sets – Chapter 3 will make use of
them in both ways.

Earlier in this section, the longest chain between two elements @xmath
in a causal set was defined. For a causal set generated by sprinkling
into Minkowski spacetime, the length of the longest chain, @xmath , is
found to be proportional to the proper time between @xmath and @xmath in
the limit of large distances [ 22 ] . The constant of proportionality is
dependent on the spacetime dimension. A longest chain in a causal set is
thus a close approximation to a timelike geodesic. For a numerical
investigation of this correspondence in conformally flat spacetimes see
[ 23 ] .

### 2.4 Causal set phenomenology

As discussed in Chapter 1 the majority of current research in quantum
gravity phenomenology focuses on violations of Lorentz invariance.
Causal set theory, on the other hand, provides a way of investigating
Lorentz invariant quantum gravity phenomenology. The difficulty of
course, is that causal set theory is incomplete, and obtaining testable
predictions from an incomplete theory is far from simple. Although much
will have to wait until the development of a quantum dynamics for causal
sets, the concreteness and simplicity of the causal set hypothesis allow
considerable progress to be made even at our early state of research.

Before moving on in Chapter 3 to the particle phenomenology that forms
the basis of this thesis, another significant result in causal set
phenomenology should be mentioned. As early as 1997 Sorkin [ 24 ]
suggested that causal set theory could give rise to a cosmological
constant of the order @xmath – a number that matches current
observations (see also [ 25 , 26 ] ). This prediction for, in fact, a
non-constant cosmological constant relies on the simple idea that a
discrete spacetime leads to fluctuations in volume. As discussed above,
the sprinkling procedure places @xmath points in a continuum volume
@xmath with fluctuations of the order @xmath . Although there are
questions that remain to be addressed [ 27 , 28 ] this model illustrates
the powerful results that can be obtained from causal set theory.

## Chapter 3 Swerves

  quare etiam atque etiam paulum inclinare necessest
  corpora; nec plus quam minimum, ne fingere motus
  obliquos videamur et id res vera refutet.

Lucretius, De Natura Rerum, ll. 243-245

  Wherefore it is necessary that bodies swerve a little perpetually,
  Not more than a little, lest we seem to imagine sideway motions, and
  the facts confute our conjecture. ¹ ¹ 1 Translation courtesy of
  Dr. R. M. Pollard, who notes that inclinare would be better translated
  as ’move back and forth’, which is somewhat less succinct yet even
  more fitting for our context.

General relativity predicts that a free, massive particle will travel
along a timelike geodesic – a prediction well tested by observations. If
the underlying structure of spacetime is discrete rather than
continuous, particles will no longer be able to travel along perfect
geodesics. Discreteness, one expects, will introduce some random
fluctuations into a particle’s trajectory. Of course, given how well
tested general relativity is, if such fluctuations exist they must be so
small as to have escaped notice. Spacetime discreteness is likely to
occur on the Planck scale, so it is certainly reasonable to suppose that
an effect on particle trajectories exists that has not yet been
observed.

In [ 3 ] Dowker et al. consider this problem in the context of causal
set theory. Motivated by a simple model of particle motion on a causal
set (see Section 3.1 ) they suggest that particles travelling through a
discrete spacetime will be subject to swerves : random fluctuations in
momentum. From a simple random walk on @xmath we can derive the standard
diffusion equation in the continuum limit: similarly, a basic stochastic
process that gives random fluctuations in momentum is found in the
continuum limit to lead to a diffusion equation.

The swerves diffusion equation given in [ 3 ] does not depend on any
specific underlying particle model – nor, in fact, does it explicitly
depend on the hypothesis that spacetime is a causal set. The power of
the swerves diffusion equation lies in it being the unique Markovian
Poincaré invariant diffusion equation on the state space. Any underlying
process that gives small random fluctuations in momentum will be
described by this equation in the continuum limit.

A full derivation of the swerves diffusion equation, first stated in [ 3
] , is given in Section 3.2 . The diffusion equation, as derived by
Dowker et al. in terms of the proper time of the particle, is not the
most useful form. To make contact with observations an equation in terms
of an observable cosmic time is needed. In [ 3 ] Dowker et al. suggest
the form of such an equation in the special case of a homogeneous
distribution of particles. Here this work is extended and a full
derivation of the inhomogeneous case is given in Section 3.3 .

I begin, however, by investigating models for particle propagation on
causal sets more fully. Three models, including the model first
described in [ 3 ] , are discussed in Section 3.1 below. The connection
between fundamental models and the diffusion equation is investigated in
Section 3.4 , where it is shown that the swerves model on the causal set
gives rise to a finite nonzero diffusion constant. The work in Sections
3.1 , 3.2 , 3.3 appears in [ 29 ] and together with Section 3.4 is work
done in collaboration with Fay Dowker and Rafael Sorkin. Section 3.5
discusses the observable consequences of the swerves diffusion equation
and reviews the bounds placed on the diffusion constant in [ 3 , 30 ] .
Lastly, the models introduced in Section 3.1 are investigated
numerically in Section 3.6 , and the behaviour is compared with that
predicted by the swerves equation. The work in Section 3.5 appears in [
31 ] .

### 3.1 Models for massive particle propagation on a causal set

What is a particle in causal set theory? It must be admitted that this
is not a question that can currently be answered. In general relativity
matter determines spacetime curvature. In the context of a causal set
this curvature must be encoded in the structure of the causal links –
perhaps a particle is some pattern or knot of causal links? Of course,
if the mass of the particle is a manifestation of a tangle of links
between causal set elements, what about the other particle properties,
the charge or spin? Approaching from the direction of quantum field
theory we could assign amplitudes for a particle to be ‘on’ a particular
causal set element and to move from one element to another. For work on
developing quantum field theory on causal sets, see [ 32 , 33 ] .

An understanding of particles in causal set theory will really require a
theory of quantum causal set dynamics (QCSD). If QCSD takes the form of
a ‘sum-over-causal sets’, will a particle trajectory be some sum over
all trajectories in all possible causal sets? Even without a theory of
QCSD an intuition into the effect of discreteness can be gained by
considering simple models. Massive particles will be considered as
classical point particles located ‘on’ a causal set element, a particle
trajectory will consist of jumps from one element to another. The models
discussed in this section are clearly not physically realistic, but they
do capture the important aspects of the causal set approach and
therefore provide one very useful way of investigating observable
consequences of discrete spacetime. The models introduced in this
section will be investigated numerically in Section 3.6 .

#### 3.1.1 The swerves model

This model was introduced in [ 3 ] .

##### Model 1

Construct a causal set @xmath by sprinkling into Minkowski spacetime. A
massive particle trajectory is taken to be a chain of elements @xmath in
the causal set, i.e. a linearly ordered subset of @xmath . It is assumed
that the trajectory’s past determines its future, but that only a
certain proper time @xmath into the past is relevant. When this
‘forgetting time’ @xmath is small the process should be approximately
Markovian. @xmath is also assumed to be much larger than the
discreteness scale. The particle trajectory is constructed iteratively.
Suppose the particle is currently located ‘on’ an element @xmath , with
a four-momentum @xmath . The next element, @xmath is chosen such that

-   @xmath is in the causal future of @xmath and within a proper time
    @xmath of @xmath ,

-   the momentum change @xmath is minimised.

Here the momentum @xmath is defined to be proportional to the vector
between @xmath and @xmath , and thus this model relies on knowledge of
the embedding of the causal set into Minkowski spacetime. The constant
of proportionality is chosen such that the mass of the particle remains
fixed, i.e @xmath . This method for determining the trajectory is
illustrated in Figure 3.1 , where the frame has been chosen to be the
rest-frame of the particle at @xmath . Heuristically, the requirement
that the momentum change be minimised creates a trajectory that stays as
straight as possible at each step. If we work in the rest-frame of the
particle, this method chooses the next element to be as close as
possible to the @xmath axis within the forgetting time. At each step
there is a small random fluctuation in the momentum of the particle.
There is no direct dependence on the mass of the particle in this model.
Any nonzero mass will result in the same trajectory, although we could
imagine that the forgetting time @xmath is mass dependent.

This model is clearly not a realistic fundamental law of motion for a
particle on a causal set. It requires information not contained in the
causal set – the embedding of the elements into the approximating
Minkowski spacetime. This issue is overcome in the ‘intrinsic’ models
described below. All these models treat particles as classical and zero
size.

#### 3.1.2 Intrinsic models

For a model of particle propagation to be intrinsic to a causal set, it
cannot refer to a continuum forgetting time @xmath . Instead, a
‘forgetting number’ (an integer @xmath ) must be defined. The forgetting
number can be interpreted as the number of discrete steps into the past
of the trajectory that are relevant in determining the future trajectory
(although in Model 2 below this number is in fact @xmath ). If the
embedding into a continuum spacetime was known, @xmath could be roughly
written @xmath , where @xmath is the discreteness scale. It is important
to note, however, that the models are defined on a general causal set
and it is not assumed here that the underlying causal set can be
faithfully embedded into a ‘reasonable’ spacetime.

In defining these intrinsic models there is no reference to the mass of
the particle. As above, the forgetting number could be taken to be mass
dependent. The models discussed cannot, however, be considered as models
of particle propagation for massless particles – these models give
trajectories whose long time behaviour approximates a timelike geodesic,
rather than the null geodesic appropriate to massless particles.

Two slightly different intrinsic models will be described in this
section, to give an idea of the wealth of possibilities available. First
recall some causal set definitions from Chapter 2 :

-   @xmath denotes the length of the longest chain between two elements
    @xmath and @xmath ,

-   a path is a chain consisting of links @xmath , i.e. @xmath .

##### Model 2

A massive particle trajectory is taken to be a chain of elements @xmath
. Given a partial particle trajectory @xmath the next element @xmath is
chosen such that

-   @xmath ,

-   @xmath is maximised subject to @xmath ,

(see Figure 3.2(a) ). These requirements do not guarantee the existence
of a unique @xmath . There will, however, almost surely be finitely many
eligible elements and the trajectory can be constructed by choosing an
element uniformly at random from these. Note that this model is slightly
different from the first intrinsic model presented in [ 29 ] (where
equalities in the above conditions were given). Model 1 of [ 29 ] does
not guarantee the existence of an @xmath under reasonable conditions.

Under this model the particle trajectory should swerve a little, but
remain approximately straight so long as @xmath is large. It is easiest
to see this if we consider the ‘ideal’ case where there exist @xmath
such that @xmath and @xmath . The elements have been chosen such that
@xmath ; since @xmath and @xmath we know there exists some chain between
@xmath and @xmath of length @xmath and hence the equality @xmath must
hold. In other words, the chain we have chosen between @xmath and @xmath
is a longest chain, and thus the trajectory is approximately geodesic
over @xmath segments. In practice it will not always be possible to
choose an @xmath such that @xmath and @xmath , necessitating the
inequalities.

In this model the trajectory can be considered as composed of just the
elements @xmath or of the ‘filled in chain’ consisting of a (randomly
chosen) longest chain (of length @xmath ) between @xmath and @xmath ,
another between @xmath and @xmath , and so on. Variations on this model
can also be constructed. One possibility is to choose the forgetting
number at random at each step from a distribution with a mean @xmath and
some fixed variance.

##### Model 3

The trajectory is constructed as a path in this model, i.e. @xmath for
any @xmath . Given a partial particle trajectory @xmath the next element
@xmath is chosen such that

-   @xmath ,

-   @xmath is minimised,

(see Figure 3.2(b) ). Note that this minimisation does not necessarily
yield a unique @xmath , in which case we construct the trajectory by
choosing an element uniformly at random from those eligible. Also, if
the trajectory has length less than @xmath the minimisation is done over
all elements available.

In this model each element is linked to the previous, i.e. @xmath , and
thus we know there exists a chain (our trajectory) of length @xmath
between @xmath and @xmath . The longest chain length, @xmath , must
therefore be greater than or equal to @xmath . If we choose @xmath to
minimise @xmath we ask that the trajectory be as close as possible to
geodesic between @xmath and @xmath while fulfilling @xmath . Minimizing
the sum of the partial lengths distributes the geodesic property along
the path.

### 3.2 The swerves diffusion equation

Although the intrinsic models described in Section 3.1 are defined on
any causal set, the process is really only of interest when the causal
set is a good approximation to Minkowski spacetime (or another
physically relevant spacetime, such as Friedmann-Robertson-Walker). The
universe we live in is approximately Minkowskian, and thus even though
the behaviour of particles on nonembeddable causal sets may be very
interesting, it is of little relevance when investigating the observable
phenomenology of discrete spacetime. If it is assumed that the causal
set can be produced by sprinkling into Minkowski spacetime, the particle
models can be thought of as defining piecewise linear curves in
Minkowski spacetime. The particle’s momentum – which cannot (currently)
be defined in a manner intrinsic to the causal set – is then defined
everywhere on the curve except at the vertices. It is clear here that in
the continuum limit the intrinsic models lead to random fluctuations of
momentum (defined, as usual, in Minkowski spacetime).

Rather than choosing a specific particle model on a causal set and
investigating its continuum behaviour, an entirely general situation
will be considered. Motivated by the models for particle trajectories on
a causal set, it is assumed that there exists some underlying Markovian,
Poincaré invariant process that causes random fluctuations in momentum
(and consequently position). The process takes place in the proper time
of the particle. Note that the models described above are approximately
Markovian when the forgetting time (number) is small. If the
discreteness scale is of the order of the Planck scale, the forgetting
time can be many orders of magnitude greater than the discreteness scale
and yet still small compared to the trajectory length.

#### 3.2.1 Stochastic evolution on a manifold of states

The swerves equation is obtained using the general formalism of [ 34 ]
for stochastic evolution on a manifold of states. Chapters 4 and 5 also
draw on this framework, and thus for completeness the main points in
this work will be discussed here.

Consider a ‘mesoscopic’ process occurring on a manifold of states @xmath
. The current state of the system is described by a probability density
@xmath . It is assumed that the future of the physical system depends
only on its present state and not its past, i.e. the evolution is a
Markov process. It is also assumed that the system traces a continuous
path through @xmath . Such a process can be described by a linear, first
order in time equation

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath , the probability density for the system to be in a state
@xmath at time @xmath , is a scalar density in @xmath . The indices
@xmath . @xmath , @xmath are functions of @xmath (and possibly @xmath ).
For extensive justification of this assumption see [ 34 ] . Note that if
Equation 3.1 were to contain higher order terms it would allow
unphysical negative probability densities, @xmath , proof of this is
given in Appendix A of [ 34 ] .

The requirement that the probability density @xmath be nonnegative leads
to a constraint on @xmath in the above, general equation. Suppose the
initial distribution, in some neighbourhood of the origin, is given by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.2)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath must be positive by the requirement @xmath . Clearly @xmath
and in order for @xmath we must have @xmath . From Equation 3.1 we can
conclude @xmath . Suppose @xmath . This implies @xmath , i.e. @xmath is
a (symmetric) positive semidefinite matrix (a matrix @xmath is positive
semidefinite if @xmath ).

We can also impose the conservation of probability

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

With @xmath given by Equation 3.1 , integration by parts implies @xmath
. Substituting this expression back into Equation 3.1 gives

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.4)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Equation 3.1 can therefore be written in terms of a current, @xmath ,
and a continuity equation:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.5)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath . Note that @xmath is a vector density (see pg. 124 of [ 34
] ) and the vector density transformation implies that while @xmath is a
tensor, @xmath is not. The above equations can be expressed in terms of
a true vector @xmath if the density of states, @xmath , is introduced.
The vector @xmath is defined by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.7)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the entropy scalar

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.8)
  -- -------- -- -------

Here @xmath is the Boltzmann constant (note that in the sections that
follow @xmath ). Equations 3.5 and 3.6 can then be written in the form

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (3.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

In the sections that follow, it will often be useful to use the
following relations for @xmath and @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.11)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.12)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath denotes the expectation value. These equations give a way of
relating the abstract objects @xmath and @xmath to the basic properties
of the physical stochastic process – the ‘spatial’ step @xmath and the
time step @xmath . Equations 3.11 and 3.12 are derived in Appendix B of
[ 34 ] .

#### 3.2.2 Diffusion in proper time

The state space, @xmath , of a swerving particle of mass @xmath is
@xmath , where @xmath is the mass shell. A point on @xmath thus
represents a position in @xmath and a momentum in @xmath . The
coordinates on @xmath are the usual Cartesians @xmath , @xmath and
indices are raised and lowered with @xmath , the Minkowski metric. The
spatial coordinates on @xmath will be written as @xmath . Cartesian
coordinates in momentum space are @xmath , where @xmath is subject to
the constraint that it lies on the mass shell, i.e. the hyperboloid
@xmath in momentum space defined by @xmath . @xmath is the energy (taken
to be positive) and @xmath is the norm of the three momentum. The three
coordinates on @xmath will be written abstractly as @xmath . Coordinates
on @xmath are denoted collectively as @xmath and in what follows capital
letters @xmath will be used to indicate general indices on @xmath ;
@xmath are indices on @xmath ; @xmath are spatial indices on @xmath ;
@xmath are indices on @xmath .

The metric on @xmath is the product of the Minkowski metric @xmath on
@xmath and the Lobachevski metric @xmath on @xmath . This is the unique
Poincaré invariant metric on @xmath (up to an overall constant). The
‘density of states’, @xmath , plays a role in the formalism of [ 34 ] ,
and by symmetry, it must be proportional to the volume measure on @xmath
, so @xmath where @xmath .

As described above, a process that undergoes stochastic evolution on a
manifold of states, @xmath , in time parameter @xmath , can be described
by a current, @xmath and a continuity equation [ 34 ] :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.13)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.14)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

or alternatively by the equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

To find the diffusion equation for the swerves particle process, it is
necessary to determine @xmath and @xmath . The requirement that the
equation be Poincaré invariant is a very stringent condition and allows
@xmath and @xmath to be determined up to the choice of one constant
parameter.

Consider the process in terms of @xmath , the proper time along the
worldline of the particle. From Equation 3.11 in Section 3.2.1

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

Recall @xmath is a symmetric, positive semidefinite matrix, and here is
also required to be Poincaré invariant. Looking first at the spacetime
component of this matrix,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath at every step of the process and so @xmath . Given @xmath ,
@xmath is required by the condition that @xmath be positive
semidefinite. To see this, first recall that a matrix is positive
semi-definite if all the principal minors of the matrix are nonnegative.
Consider a symmetric 2x2 matrix of the form

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

To be positive semi-definite the matrix must have @xmath , i.e. @xmath .
Similarly, beginning with

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

we can consider all the @xmath principal minors and determine @xmath .

The only Lorentz invariant tensor on @xmath is proportional to the
metric, @xmath , and the coefficient is independent of @xmath by
translation invariance, thus @xmath , where @xmath is a constant. This
gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

To determine @xmath first recall Equation 3.12 :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

The spacetime component

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

is simply @xmath . The components of the true vector @xmath are equal to
@xmath since @xmath . There is no Lorentz invariant vector on @xmath and
so @xmath , giving

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

The proper time diffusion equation can now be written down from Equation
3.15 :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

This can be seen to be equivalent to Equation 1 of [ 3 ] if a scalar
@xmath is defined:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.26)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the Laplacian on @xmath .

### 3.3 Diffusion in cosmic time

Given an initial distribution of particles, for instance from an
astronomical source, the equation derived above is not very useful for
predicting the results of observations. Even if particles all leave the
source at the same time with the same momentum, the momentum variation
induced by the swerves will result in particles arriving after different
proper times and at different observatory times. The proper time that
elapses along the particles’ worldlines from source to detector is not
observable. To compare the swerves model with experiment and observation
it is necessary to describe the evolution of the distribution in time in
the rest frame of our detector, which time will be referred to as cosmic
time . One may ask why the equation was derived in terms of proper time
if it is more useful to obtain a cosmic time equation. The reason
becomes clear if one considers that when working with proper time, the
explicit Lorentz invariance makes it simple to determine @xmath and
@xmath . The result can then be easily transformed to a specific frame,
as shown here.

A first step in this direction was to look at the nonrelativistic limit
of the proper time diffusion equation, when proper time and cosmic time
are comparable. The nonrelativistic limit in fact proves sufficient to
place very strong bounds on the value of the diffusion constant and
severely limit any observable effects (see [ 3 ] and [ 30 ] and Section
3.5 ).

In the fully relativistic case, Dowker et al. wrote down the diffusion
equation in terms of cosmic time for the special case of an initially
spatially homogeneous distribution [ 3 ] . The derivation of the cosmic
time evolution equation for the general case of a spatially
inhomogeneous distribution will be given here.

The conversion between proper time and cosmic time is possible because
both are good time parameters along all possible particle worldlines,
which are causal. If the diffusion process is visualised as a collection
of worldlines through spacetime and momentum space, both cosmic time,
@xmath , in our chosen frame and proper time @xmath increase
monotonically along each trajectory. Assume that the particle starts at
parameter @xmath and cosmic time @xmath . Proper time can be added to
the state space and the process is represented by flowlines in @xmath
(see Figure 3.3 ). Along each flowline, both @xmath and @xmath are good
time parameters. The proper time diffusion equation, Equation 3.25 ,
describes the evolution of the distribution on constant @xmath
hypersurfaces in @xmath . What is needed is a diffusion equation for
evolution of the distribution on constant @xmath hypersurfaces
integrated over all proper times.

First, working in the larger space @xmath , define a new current
component

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.27)
  -- -------- -- --------

If coordinates on this extended space @xmath , are denoted by @xmath
then the continuity equation ( 3.6 ) can be written

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

Using Equation ( 3.5 ) (and still treating @xmath as the time parameter)
the @xmath component of the current can be expressed in terms of @xmath
(equivalently @xmath ).

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.29)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath is the usual relativistic gamma factor.

The remaining components of the current can now be written in terms of
@xmath . The spatial components are:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.30)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

In the case of the @xmath components the algebra is simpler if Equation
3.5 is expressed in the form (see Equation 3.15 )

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

and so

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.32)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The metric @xmath that appears here is the Lobachevski metric on @xmath
.

Since @xmath is unobservable we need to integrate @xmath over @xmath :
the current @xmath describes the flow through a region @xmath at any
point @xmath ; what is needed is the cumulative flow through @xmath at
any given @xmath over all proper times. The integrated current will be
denoted @xmath . Integrating the @xmath component of the current over
proper time from zero to infinity gives the probability density on a
hypersurface of constant t:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.33)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The components of the new current can be written:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.34)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.35)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Integrating the continuity equation over @xmath gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath is zero for all @xmath and @xmath tends to zero as @xmath goes to
infinity for finite @xmath . So for all @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

Finally, substituting Equations 3.34 and 3.35 into Equation 3.37 and
recalling @xmath , gives the cosmic-time diffusion equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

This is a powerful phenomenological model because it depends on only one
parameter, the diffusion constant @xmath . Data can therefore strongly
constrain @xmath .

### 3.4 Finiteness of the diffusion constant

The swerves diffusion equation derived in Section 3.2 is independent of
the details of the underlying particle model. To make clearer how the
underlying model on the causal set gives rise to a diffusion equation on
@xmath the swerves model (Model 1) will be investigated more fully.
Specifically, in this section it will be shown that Model 1 gives rise
to a finite nonzero diffusion constant in the macroscopic limit.

Recall that a process undergoing stochastic evolution on a manifold of
states can be described by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.39)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.40)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is a symmetric, positive semi-definite matrix given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.41)
  -- -------- -- --------

In Section 3.2 it was shown that due to the constraint of Lorentz
invariance @xmath has the form:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is some constant, irrespective of the underlying model. It
is not immediately clear, however, that the constant of proportionality,
@xmath , need be finite and nonzero for any particular model. For the
specific case of the swerves model, the component @xmath is indeed
nonzero and finite (and thus @xmath is given by Equation 3.42 ).
Demonstrating this is the task of this section.

In the swerves model there are two length scales: the discreteness scale
@xmath , and the forgetting time @xmath , where @xmath . The trajectory
length (or total proper time of the particle) must also be much greater
than @xmath . It is only in the continuum limit @xmath that the model
can be described by a diffusion equation.

Suppose, for the swerves model, that @xmath . From Equation 3.41 we also
have

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.43)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath is the change in the momentum component @xmath in a single
swerves step and @xmath is the change in proper time for that step. Note
that in the swerves model @xmath is not constant for each step: it is a
random variable in the range @xmath . We wish to determine @xmath as
@xmath . First note the following two lemmas for the swerves model:

###### Lemma 3.4.1.

If @xmath and @xmath is fixed then @xmath .

###### Lemma 3.4.2.

If @xmath is fixed and @xmath then @xmath .

Section 3.4.1 below contains the proofs of these lemmas. From these two
lemmas it is clear that as we take the continuum limit @xmath we can
also take @xmath (and thus @xmath ) in such a way that @xmath remains
fixed at some finite nonzero value. Thus, if @xmath the diffusion
constant @xmath is finite and nonzero, i.e. the swerves model results in
the diffusion equation.

#### 3.4.1 Proofs of Lemmas 3.4.1 and 3.4.2

##### Hyperbolic coordinates

For ease of calculation, hyperbolic coordinates @xmath in four
dimensional Minkowski spacetime can be defined:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.44)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.45)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.46)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.47)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . These coordinates are illustrated in Figure 3.4 : @xmath
defines hyperbolae and @xmath defines radial directions, varying from
@xmath on the @xmath -axis to @xmath at @xmath .

##### Calculating volumes in hyperbolic coordinates

Before addressing the Lemmas 3.4.1 and 3.4.2 it is useful to calculate
the volume of the shaded region shown in Figure 3.4 : the volume of
4-dimensional Minkowski spacetime such that @xmath and @xmath . The
first step is to determine the volume element in coordinates @xmath . It
is easiest to begin with spherical coordinates @xmath defined by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.48)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.49)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.50)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.51)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The spherical coordinates can then be expressed in terms of hyperbolic
coordinates

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.52)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.53)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.54)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.55)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The Jacobian determinant for this change of variables is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.56)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The volume element is thus given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.57)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The volume of the shaded region is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.58)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

This result will be used repeatedly in the calculations below. To prove
Lemmas 3.4.1 and 3.4.2 the following property of sprinklings is
required: if points are sprinkled with a density @xmath into a region,
the probability that @xmath points are sprinkled into a volume @xmath is
given by the Poisson distribution

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.59)
  -- -------- -- --------

For example, the probability that no points are sprinkled into the
shaded region in Figure 3.4 is simply

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.60)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

To prove Lemmas 3.4.1 and 3.4.2 it is necessary to calculate the
expectation value @xmath . In fact, since it is known that @xmath it
suffices to calculate a single component, @xmath .

Working in terms of polar coordinates @xmath on @xmath , the metric
@xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

Consider a swerves trajectory in the rest frame of the particle after
@xmath steps (see Figure 3.1 ). In this frame the metric component
@xmath and thus @xmath . Since the three momentum @xmath is zero, the
change in momentum in the next step is simply @xmath . Working in
Cartesian coordinates for a moment, the momentum at step @xmath is
proportional to the coordinates @xmath of the point @xmath in this
frame: @xmath , where @xmath is the proper time between @xmath and
@xmath . Thus the magnitude of the three momentum is given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.62)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The expectation value

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.63)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the probability of the particular value occurring. The
probability @xmath is the probability that the element @xmath has
(hyperbolic) coordinates
@xmath , @xmath . Recall that in the swerves model @xmath is chosen such
that @xmath and the momentum change is minimised. @xmath is thus the
probability that there are no points in the region @xmath and there is a
point in the region @xmath . The probability that there are no points in
the region @xmath is simply

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.64)
  -- -------- -- --------

from Equation 3.60 above. The probability that there is a point in the
region @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.65)
  -- -------- -- --------

from the integral in Equation 3.58 and Equation 3.59 (the exponential
term can be neglected as the volume is very small). The expectation
value is therefore (dropping the primes on @xmath and @xmath )

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.66)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Integrating by parts, this reduces to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.67)
  -- -------- -- --------

The proofs of the Lemmas now follow without difficulty.

##### Proof of Lemma 3.4.1

If we take the discreteness scale @xmath to zero, while keeping the
forgetting time, @xmath , fixed, then @xmath .

Taking @xmath is equivalent to taking the sprinkling density @xmath to
infinity. To determine the effect of @xmath on Equation 3.67 , the
integral can be divided into two parts. There exists some @xmath such
that, for all @xmath , @xmath . Let

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.68)
  -- -------- -- --------

where

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.69)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

@xmath can be written

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.70)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Thus

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.71)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now consider the integral @xmath and the standard result

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.72)
  -- -------- -- --------

Let @xmath , noting that @xmath . For any @xmath there exists some
@xmath large enough that @xmath for all @xmath . Thus

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.73)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

@xmath therefore also tends to zero in the limit @xmath . Thus in the
limit @xmath , the expectation value @xmath , proving Lemma 3.4.1 .

##### Proof of Lemma 3.4.2

If we take the forgetting time @xmath and keep the discreteness scale
@xmath fixed then @xmath .

First note that for all @xmath , @xmath . The expectation value,
Equation 3.67 , can therefore be written

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.74)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Thus in the limit @xmath , the expectation value @xmath proving Lemma
3.4.2 .

### 3.5 Consequences and bounds

It is important to reiterate that the swerves diffusion equation is very
general: any Lorentz invariant process for massive particles that
results in fluctuations in energy-momentum will be governed by this
equation. Deriving such an equation is of little use, however, unless we
investigate the observable consequences. Ideally, a new phenomenological
model should agree with all current observational data and, in addition,
make predictions for new, feasible, experiments. In reality, models will
always contain free parameters that limit their predictive powers. The
swerves diffusion equation contains only one free parameter, the
diffusion constant @xmath , and is thus a strong phenomenological model.
The usefulness of this model is unfortunately still limited. It will
never be possible to prove that swerves do not occur – null observations
only allow the parameter @xmath to be constrained to smaller values. It
is hoped, of course, that experiments will actually observe the swerves
effect; or that swerves will provide an explanation for some already
observed, unexplained phenomena. The difficulty is (as discussed in the
Introduction) that quantum gravitational effects are inherently very
small and to make positive observations we must think of ways in which
these tiny effects could have been amplified. For swerves the first step
is thus to consider how the magnitude of the diffusion constant can be
constrained by current data. Strong constraints have been placed on
@xmath by both Dowker et al. [ 3 ] and Kaloper and Mattingly [ 30 ] .
These constraints are reviewed in this section. Lacking the inspiration
of an astrophysical or cosmological problem swerves may solve, it seems
unnecessary to seek tighter bounds at this stage.

For simplicity and consistency with [ 3 , 30 ] I will work in terms of a
scalar distribution @xmath rather than the scalar density @xmath . In
terms of the scalar @xmath the homogeneous cosmic time diffusion
equation becomes:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.75)
  -- -------- -- --------

The swerves model predicts the spontaneous heating of a nonrelativistic
gas. To see this, consider the nonrelativistic limit of Equation 3.75 .
Working in polar coordinates on @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.76)
  -- -------- -- --------

and thus

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.77)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

In the nonrelativistic limit @xmath this becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.78)
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath is the standard Laplacian on @xmath , i.e. in the
nonrelativistic limit the swerves diffusion equation reduces to the
standard three dimensional diffusion equation. The general causal
solution to Equation 3.78 can be derived using Greens’s function
techniques. The result is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.79)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the initial distribution @xmath . Consider an initial
distribution of particles at rest in our frame, i.e. @xmath . In this
case, the solution of the diffusion equation simplifies to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.80)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

This is just the Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution with a temperature
@xmath , where @xmath is the Boltzmann constant. The temperature is
dependent on the length of time the diffusion process has been occurring
– in other words, the nonrelativistic limit of the swerves diffusion
equation describes a spontaneous heating of a thermal nonrelativistic
gas. It is also clear that an initially thermal distribution will remain
thermal. Suppose the initial distribution is a thermal distribution with
a temperature @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.81)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The solution is then

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.82)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath , i.e. a thermal distribution remains thermal, with the
temperature changing at a rate of @xmath .

Dowker et al. [ 3 ] placed a bound on the diffusion constant @xmath by
considering the spontaneous heating (or rather, the lack of spontaneous
heating) of hydrogen gas in the laboratory. They assumed that a heating
rate of @xmath degrees a second would have already been detected if it
existed. This resulted in the bound

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (3.83)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

or equivalently

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.84)
  -- -------- -- --------

The average energy of a thermal distribution at temperature @xmath is
given by

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.85)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Constraints on @xmath can thus also be expressed in terms of the maximum
energy gain allowed

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.86)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

To more tightly constrain @xmath it is therefore necessary to consider
systems that have been around for a long time without much gain in
energy. Kaloper and Mattingly [ 30 ] looked at astrophysical clouds that
have existed for roughly the age of the Milky Way without significant
energy gain. They found, however, that energy loss due to radiation
cannot be neglected and the result is a bound on @xmath roughly
comparable to that given above. They obtained a much stronger bound of
@xmath by considering cosmic neutrinos. When heated by swerves, the
cosmic neutrino background would appear as hot dark matter. The
diffusion constant is thus bounded by observations that suggest dark
matter is mainly cold.

In attempting to bound the diffusion parameter, @xmath , it is assumed
that @xmath is the same for all particles. Other than for simplicity,
there is no reason to believe this is the case. A strong bound on @xmath
for neutrinos does not, therefore, rule out observable swerves for other
particles. Without an underlying model for particles on a causal set (a
model for the particles themselves, not just their propagation) it is
unlikely any progress will be made determining the dependencies of
@xmath .

It is also interesting to note that, although Lorentz invariant, swerves
could give rise to an apparent signal of Lorentz violation [ 35 ] . This
is because many investigations into Lorentz violation rely not only on
the details of the Lorentz violating model, but also on the assumption
of energy-momentum conservation. A violation of energy-momentum
conservation could be incorrectly interpreted as a signal of Lorentz
violation. Consider, for example, a time-of-flight experiment where a
particle is measured to arrive with energy @xmath . If the particle is
subject to swerves, the arrival energy, @xmath , is not the energy of
the particle throughout its propagation, and the propagation time will
therefore be miscalculated if swerves are neglected. Mattingly [ 35 ]
concludes, however, that any false signal of Lorentz violation that
appears due to the energy-momentum violation of swerves would be
considerably smaller than current limits of experimental sensitivity.

### 3.6 Simulations of particle models

The diffusion equations derived in this chapter do not rely on any
particular model for particle propagation on a causal set. The diffusion
parameter @xmath is, however, likely to depend on the underlying
propagation mechanism. Simulating the particle models discussed in
Section 3.1 shows explicitly that the models lead to diffusion like
behaviour. It also allows an initial investigation into how the
continuum diffusion parameter might depend on characteristics of the
underlying physical process.

To simulate the particle models causal sets are constructed via
sprinkling into Minkowski spacetime (as discussed in Section 2.3 ),
using the Cactus numerical relativity code [ 36 ] and the CausalSets
arrangement written by David Rideout. In this environment, code was
developed to implement the three particle trajectory algorithms
discussed in Section 3.1 . The causal sets generated in this manner can
of course be considered as partially ordered sets independent of
Minkowski spacetime. Here the information about the coordinates of the
points in Minkowski spacetime will be retained to allow the causal sets
to be easily visualised. The particular frame to which the coordinates
of the sprinkled points in Minkowski spacetime refer will be called the
embedding frame.

The results discussed here are, for the most part, in 1+1 dimensions.
The code is, however, completely general and can also be run in 3+1
dimensions (example trajectories in 3+1 for each particle model are
shown in Figures 3.5 and 3.6 ). While simulations in 3+1 are more
physically relevant, they require much larger causal sets to obtain the
same discreteness scale and the necessary time and computer resources
were unfortunately not available during the writing of this thesis.
Simulations in 1+1 dimensions in fact prove to be more than adequate to
investigate the link between the continuum and discrete processes.

Several important aspects of the simulations need to be noted. Firstly,
an element is added to the sprinkling at the origin to allow a fixed
beginning point for the trajectories. Also, the models all assume a
partial particle trajectory already exists and is being extended – in
these simulations the trajectories start with a single element and thus
the development of the first part of the trajectory needs to be
carefully considered. For Model 1, the swerves model, the matter is very
simple. An initial momentum, @xmath is defined and no further
information is needed to construct the future trajectory. In these
simulations @xmath is taken as @xmath , i.e. the particle is initially
at rest in the embedding frame.

Model 2 relies on knowledge of @xmath as well as @xmath to determine
@xmath . Unfortunately it is not possible to just define an @xmath to
begin the trajectory. In this case, when constructing the first step,
the condition @xmath is simply ignored. The element @xmath is chosen
such that it maximises @xmath . Points satisfying this condition will be
close to the hyperbola defined by a proper time @xmath , where @xmath is
the discreteness scale of the causal set. Again, the particle should be
initially at rest (or as close as possible) in the embedding frame. To
impose this, instead of choosing @xmath at random from those eligible,
the element with the smallest time coordinate in the embedding is
chosen. The rest of the trajectory is constructed as per the algorithm.

Model 3 presents a slightly more complicated situation. Here the future
trajectory from @xmath depends on elements @xmath . In simulations of
Model 3, I first construct a longest chain between the element at @xmath
and an element at @xmath (also artificially added to the sprinkling).
This longest chain forms the beginning of the trajectory: essentially,
it imposes the condition that the beginning of the trajectory is as
close to geodesic as possible, and again the particle is initially at
rest in the embedding frame. The rest of the trajectory is constructed
as per the algorithm. Note that the initial longest chain may have less
than @xmath elements, in which case minimisation is over all elements
until @xmath elements are reached.

A second important point to note about the simulations is scale: the
causal set models give rise to the continuum diffusion equation when
@xmath where @xmath is the trajectory length. In other words, the causal
set must be large enough that the trajectory involves many @xmath steps,
and @xmath itself must be much larger than 1. This is quite difficult to
obtain. Suppose @xmath and we want the trajectory length to be @xmath
steps (or in the case of Model 3, 100 elements). In 1+1 dimensions this
requires a causal set of roughly 10000 elements – quite manageable. If
@xmath , however, a causal set of roughly @xmath is needed for @xmath .
² ² 2 In 3+1 dimensions you would need the absurd number of @xmath
elements. This is certainly not manageable with the current code, so it
is not really possible to explore realistic values of @xmath and
trajectory length. Despite this limitation the simulations clearly show
diffusion behaviour, as will be demonstrated below.

#### 3.6.1 Example trajectories in 1+1 dimensions

Simply constructing an example trajectory for each of the three models
in 1+1 dimensions reveals something of the relationship between the
parameters of the model and the diffusion parameter in the continuum.
Figure 3.7 shows a trajectory constructed in a causal set of size @xmath
, using the swerves momentum model, Model 1. ³ ³ 3 The causal sets are
generated by a Poisson process with a mean of @xmath , the actual number
of elements varies. For this trajectory @xmath in embedding coordinates,
and the final length of the trajectory is @xmath elements. Clearly this
trajectory does not have a forgetting time, @xmath , many orders of
magnitude greater than the discreteness scale, or a total trajectory
length much greater than @xmath . The result is, however, very very
close to the expected straight line in the continuum.

Model 2 also gives a reasonably straight line for comparable parameters.
Figure 3.8 shows a trajectory constructed in a causal set with @xmath
and @xmath . Note that @xmath is approximately equivalent to @xmath for
a causal set of size @xmath . Recall, however, that Model 2 actually
relies on information @xmath into the past of the trajectory: it would
be more correct to compare a @xmath Model 2 trajectory with a @xmath
Model 1 trajectory. Regardless, it is clear that with roughly comparable
forgetting times Model 2 results in more fluctuations in position and
momentum.

A comparison of the two intrinsic models, Model 2 and Model 3, is also
interesting. In Figure 3.9 two trajectories constructed using Model 3
are shown: one with @xmath and one with @xmath . As mentioned above,
Model 2 relies on information @xmath steps into the past, so we might
expect similar trajectories from @xmath Model 2 and @xmath Model 3. The
trajectories from Model 3, however, swerve much more. Given that the
values of @xmath and @xmath are not really in the realm @xmath , where
the continuum diffusion is expected to hold, care should be taken in
drawing conclusions about the continuum behaviour of Models 2 and 3.
Even so, it seems reasonable to conclude that a simple universal
relation between the forgetting number of an intrinsic particle model
and the diffusion parameter in the continuum does not exist (a concrete
relation between the forgetting time of Model 1 and the diffusion
parameter will be found in Section 3.6.2 ). Of course, the models here
are not physically realistic. It seems likely, however, that when
physically realistic models are developed, the determination of the
diffusion constant @xmath from the ‘fundamental’ parameters of the
underlying model on the causal set, will be model dependent.

The diffusion-like behaviour of the models is most obvious if multiple
trajectories are generated. Recall that the intrinsic models do not
define unique trajectories – an element is chosen at random from the
eligible elements at each step. For a fixed causal set and initial
trajectory, multiple trajectories can thus be generated. Figure 3.10
shows 30 (distinct) Model 3 trajectories in a fixed causal set, @xmath ,
@xmath . Note that from @xmath to @xmath the trajectory is a fixed
longest chain for all 30 trajectories. Although diffusion-like behaviour
is clear, it is difficult to determine whether it is exactly the
diffusion given by the swerves diffusion equation. The values of @xmath
and @xmath are nowhere close to the continuum limit, and 30 trajectories
is simply insufficient. To compare more directly with the swerves
diffusion equation, I will look instead at the non-intrinsic model,
Model 1.

#### 3.6.2 A close investigation of Model 1

##### Simulating trajectories

Unlike the intrinsic models, for a given causal set and fixed initial
position and momentum Model 1 defines a unique trajectory. To say that
Model 1 results in diffusion is, in a sense, saying that the exact
underlying causal set is unknown. To simulate this I generate many
different sprinklings into the same region of Minkowski spacetime, and
calculate the unique trajectory in each. As above, the starting point of
each trajectory is fixed at @xmath , an extra element artificially added
to each sprinkling. For each trajectory a final position and momentum
can be calculated at @xmath . This is done by identifying elements
@xmath and @xmath in the trajectory such that @xmath is the last element
with @xmath and @xmath is the first element with @xmath . Note that
there is a vanishingly small probability that any element has @xmath .
The final position is found by linear interpolation between @xmath and
@xmath . The final momentum is simply the usual momentum at @xmath ,
i.e. it is proportional to the vector between @xmath and @xmath .

The first step in the analysis is to reject some trajectories – if a
trajectory is close to the boundary of the region of Minkowski spacetime
at any point, it will ‘bounce’ back and distort the results. An example
of such a trajectory is given in Figure 3.11 . Provided only a small
fraction of the trajectories are invalid, the invalid ones can be safely
rejected without much loss of information about the trajectory
distribution. The parameter values investigated in this section are
chosen such that there are indeed few, if any, invalid trajectories.

Once the invalid trajectories have been removed, histograms of final
position and final momentum can be generated from the remaining
trajectories. These histograms clearly show diffusion behaviour, but to
truly test the model the results must be compared with the distributions
expected from the swerves diffusion equation.

##### The swerves equation

The inhomogeneous, 1+1-dimensional swerves diffusion equation is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

As this does not have an exact solution, it must be evolved numerically.
For the results shown here this numerical evolution is conducted with
NDSolve in Mathematica . The initial distribution of the simulated
trajectories is a @xmath -function: all trajectories begin with @xmath
and @xmath . To numerically evolve Equation 3.87 with a @xmath -function
initial distribution is not possible – instead, the initial distribution
is taken to be a highly peaked Gaussian

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.88)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here, @xmath and @xmath are not fixed: they are chosen such that
Equation 3.88 is a good approximation to a histogram of the initial
position-momentum data constructed with the same bin size as used for
the final data, and such that Equation 3.87 evolves smoothly without
numerical artifacts. To obtain final position and momentum distributions
the evolved @xmath is summed over momentum and position, respectively.

##### The matter of units

To compare the simulated trajectories with the swerves diffusion
equation a consistent set of units needs to be chosen: Equation 3.87 ,
above, is expressed in terms of Planck units; the simulated trajectories
are expressed in terms of ‘embedding’ coordinates. As mentioned earlier
in this thesis, the discreteness scale in causal set theory is expected
to be of the order of the Planck scale. For concreteness I assume the
two are the same, and thus Equation 3.87 can be considered as expressed
in ‘discreteness units’. A discreteness length @xmath , where @xmath is
the volume of the region of Minkowski spacetime in embedding units and
@xmath is the mean causal set size, can be calculated from the simulated
causal sets. The position, time, momentum, and mass in the simulations
are then re-expressed in terms of discreteness units.

##### Comparing the simulations to the swerves equation

Equation 3.87 is evolved for a range of values of @xmath and the
resulting distributions are compared to the position and momentum
histograms for given values of the model parameters ( @xmath , @xmath ,
and particle mass @xmath ). A best fit value of @xmath for each set of
model parameters is found by minimising the reduced @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.89)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (3.90)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the observed frequency, @xmath is the expected frequency
(i.e. that given by the evolution of the diffusion equation), and @xmath
is the number of degrees of freedom (here, @xmath number of data points
- 1). The reduced @xmath is calculated for the distribution in momentum
rather than the full momentum-position distribution. The momentum
distribution is chosen for comparison as it drives the position
diffusion. Care must be taken when calculating the value of the reduced
@xmath – if a significant proportion of the frequency values are less
than five, @xmath is no longer a good measure of fit (see, for example [
37 ] ). In situations where the frequency in a given bin is less than
five, multiple bins are combined to resolve this problem. A reduced
@xmath value of @xmath is usually taken to indicate a good fit (see, for
example [ 38 ] ), i.e. the evolved diffusion equation is a good
description of the simulated trajectories.

##### Results

The goal of these simulations is not just to demonstrate that the model
gives diffusion behaviour, but also to determine the relationship
between the continuum diffusion parameter @xmath and the parameters of
the underlying discrete model. The relationship between @xmath and the
forgetting time @xmath can be determined by running simulations for a
range of values of @xmath (with fixed @xmath and @xmath ) and
determining the best fit value of @xmath in each case.

A causal set of size @xmath was used in these simulations. The particle
mass in embedding units is taken to be @xmath . Five hundred
trajectories were evolved for each value of @xmath in @xmath (in
embedding units). The results are summarised in Table 3.1 . Several
things need to be considered when interpreting these results, as
discussed below.

Table 3.1 shows the simulated values of @xmath in both embedding units
and multiples of the discreteness length @xmath . In units of @xmath ,
@xmath varies between @xmath and @xmath – clearly not the many orders of
magnitude greater than @xmath that is expected in reality. The average
trajectory length (this is the number of ‘steps’ in the trajectory
rather than the number of elements) is also well out of the realistic
range, reaching a maximum of only @xmath . Unfortunately realistic
values are simply not feasible with the current computing facilities.
What is remarkable is that, even with these values of @xmath and @xmath
, the distribution of the simulated trajectories is extremely well
modelled by the diffusion equation. The best fit values of the diffusion
parameter and corresponding @xmath values are given in Table 3.1 . As
mentioned earlier, @xmath is usually considered a good fit. It is easy
to see just how good the fit is when the evolved diffusion equation is
plotted together with the simulation histograms. Examples of both the
position and momentum histograms for four of the values of @xmath are
shown in Figure 3.12(d) . The particular values of @xmath shown are not
special in any way, and are merely chosen to illustrate the results.

As Table 3.1 shows, invalid trajectories are an issue only for the
smallest two values of @xmath and even in the worst case only comprise
@xmath of the 500 trajectories. As such, they don’t influence the
results given here. They do, however, become significant for values of
@xmath smaller than @xmath lessening the utility of simulations for
those values.

Although the best fit values of @xmath and corresponding @xmath
calculated here are fairly robust, it should be noted that the best fit
values of @xmath are determined by calculating @xmath for various values
of @xmath and choosing the one that minimises @xmath . A truly
systematic search of the parameter space is not undertaken, and a
measure of the error in @xmath is not calculated. The exact values of
@xmath depend slightly on the bin width chosen when generating the
histograms. They also vary slightly if @xmath and @xmath in the initial
Gaussian distribution are changed. A further point is that for some
@xmath there are a range of values of @xmath that give @xmath and thus
all could be considered a good fit. For the results that I have
obtained, @xmath vs. @xmath is plotted in Figure 3.13 . The dependence
of @xmath on @xmath is clear in the @xmath plot, where the best fit line
to the data, @xmath is also shown. Despite the considerations mentioned
above, it seems clear that @xmath .

The diffusion parameter @xmath also depends on the particle mass @xmath
. In Model 1 the trajectory is independent of the particle mass – the
mass is only used to correctly normalise the momentum. The momentum
histogram for trajectories of a particle of mass @xmath can therefore be
obtained simply by scaling the original momentum histogram by @xmath .
Looking at Equation 3.87 , if both @xmath and @xmath are scaled by
@xmath and @xmath is scaled by @xmath the equation remains unchanged.
Thus it can be determined, without reanalysing the simulations, that
@xmath .

There is one remaining parameter that @xmath can depend on: the
discreteness length itself. From dimensional analysis of Equation 3.87
it can be deduced that @xmath has units of @xmath (since Planck units
are used, @xmath ). Since @xmath the dependence on @xmath must be @xmath
. This dependence can be checked through simulations. In this case
everything needs to be expressed in terms of embedding units rather than
discreteness units. Five hundred trajectories are calculated for four
different values of @xmath (and thus @xmath ) and the same values of
forgetting time @xmath and mass @xmath . The value of @xmath was chosen
to avoid too many invalid trajectories in the causal sets considered. As
above, the best fit values of @xmath and the corresponding @xmath can be
calculated. The results are summarised in Table 3.2 . Again, a @xmath
plot (see Figure 3.14(a) ) allows the dependence of @xmath on @xmath to
be determined. The result is as expected: @xmath .

The analysis of the simulations leads to the relation @xmath . The
constant of proportionality can in fact also be determined. Looking back
at the results for varying @xmath and noting that in terms of
discreteness units @xmath and @xmath the relation @xmath vs. @xmath can
be plotted (see Figure 3.14(b) ). The best fit line is found to have the
equation @xmath . Thus, it can be concluded that

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (3.91)
  -- -------- -- --------

Causal set theory contains not only a discreteness scale, but also a
hypothesised ‘nonlocality’ scale below which physics cannot remain local
[ 39 , 40 ] . The forgetting parameter that appears in the massive
particle models may be a measure of this nonlocality scale. Sorkin [ 39
] estimates the nonlocality scale to be of the order @xmath in Planck
units. Although the simulations here use forgetting times nowhere near
this estimate, and there is no theoretical reason why the forgetting
time should be exactly the nonlocality scale, it is interesting to
consider the value of the diffusion constant that arises if the above
results are extrapolated. Taking the particle to be a proton with mass
@xmath , @xmath , and @xmath , Equation 3.91 leads to the estimate
@xmath .

As discussed in Section 3.5 , tight constraints have already been placed
on @xmath through observations. In particular (see Equation 3.83 )
@xmath due to the lack of spontaneous heating of hydrogen in the
laboratory. The diffusion parameter estimated from the nonlocality scale
is thus many orders of magnitude smaller than the current constraint
(the factor of two mass difference between the proton and a hydrogen
molecule is inconsequential here). This rough calculation should not be
given too much weight, but it does suggest that @xmath could be well
outside our current observable range.

### 3.7 Concluding remarks

Following the proposal by Dowker et al. of the swerves model, and their
derivation of the proper time swerves diffusion equation, the question
arose of how an underlying model of particle behaviour on a causal set
could be formulated without relying on information about the
approximating continuum spacetime. The association between longest
chains in a causal set and geodesics in the continuum allowed such
models to be created, two examples were given in Section 3.1 . The
intrinsic models described in this thesis are by no means the only
options, and simply give an idea of the wealth of possibilities
available. The models proposed here (including the original swerves
model) make no attempt to be physically realistic. A true description of
particle motion in causal sets will have to await many further
developments in the theory. The first step might involve developing a
quantum mechanical rule for the trajectory evolution, or modelling
particles as wavepackets. The models proposed do capture the crucial
features of causal set theory – they could, in a sense, be interpreted
as a coarse grained description. Just as modelling a gas as an
unrealistic collection of hard spheres proved enormously useful, so too
do these models prove useful in determining continuum behaviour.

The proper time swerves diffusion equation, first given in [ 3 ] and
derived in full in Section 3.2 , is the unique continuum diffusion
equation given an underlying Markovian, Poincaré invariant process
causing random fluctuations in momentum. It is independent of the
particular underlying models discussed – those models and many more
would result in continuum behaviour described by the swerves diffusion
equation. One query that remained, was whether a given model was
guaranteed to result in a finite diffusion constant. In Section 3.4 it
was shown analytically that the swerves model does lead to a finite
diffusion constant.

The swerves diffusion equation, expressed in terms of proper time, is
difficult to compare with observations. Although bounds had been placed
on the diffusion parameter by considering the non-relativistic limit,
bounds in the fully relativistic case could not formerly be considered.
The full inhomogeneous swerves diffusion equation in terms of cosmic
time was derived in Section 3.3 . With this equation complete comparison
with observations will be possible.

After exploring swerves analytically, the second task of this chapter
was to explore the models numerically. The underlying models give rise
to diffusion in the continuum limit. With simulations limited to quite
small causal sets (far from the infinite sprinkling density of the
continuum limit) it was not expected that the full diffusion behaviour
of the models would be apparent. The results were, in fact, far better
than anticipated. All three models clearly show diffusion like
behaviour. A close investigation of the swerves model shows the model
behaviour perfectly matches the swerves diffusion equation. It was even
possible to determine an expression for the continuum diffusion
parameter in terms of the parameters of the underlying causal set model.
That the diffusion behaviour occurs even this far from the continuum
limit is very interesting. There are also wider implications for causal
set simulations – the results here show that despite computational
limits on causal set sizes, useful information about the continuum
appearance of discrete spacetime can be obtained.

## Chapter 4 Massless particles

  Die ganzen 50 Jahre bewusster Grübelei haben mich der Antwort der
  Frage „Was sind Lickhtquanten” nicht näher gebracht. Heute glaubt zwar
  jeder Lump, er wisse es, aber er täuscht sich.

  A total of fifty years of careful reflection has not brought me any
  closer to answering the question ‘what are the quanta of light?’. It’s
  true, today, that many a fool believes he knows the answer, but he’s
  mistaken.

Einstein to Besso, 12th December 1951 ¹ ¹ 1 Published in [ 41 ] ,
English translation from the French translation in [ 41 ] courtesy of
Dr. R. M. Pollard.

An underlying spacetime discreteness results in diffusion in momentum
and spacetime for massive particles. Does a similar diffusion occur for
massless particles? For massive particles concrete models of particle
propagation on a causal set were constructed, motivating the derivation
of the swerves diffusion equation. For massless particles such
underlying models are unfortunately elusive. Consider a sprinkling into
Minkowski spacetime: for any given element, @xmath , there will almost
surely be no element sprinkled on the future lightcone of @xmath . A
trajectory constructed, as in the massive case, by jumping from one
element @xmath to another @xmath , where @xmath , will rarely be close
to null. A close analogue to the future lightcone of @xmath can,
however, be defined simply as the set of all elements @xmath linked to
@xmath : @xmath . These elements @xmath lie near the hyperboloid with
proper time one Planck unit from @xmath . This suggests that the
simplest analogue of a null ray is a single link. More generally, @xmath
is a good approximation to a section of a null ray if the causal
interval between @xmath and @xmath is totally ordered [ 40 , 12 ] , but
it is still hard to see how a discrete Markovian process resulting in a
close-to-null trajectory might be defined. It may be that options such
as allowing particles to also move backward in time need to be
considered. More generally, it is not surprising that attempts to model
massless particles as classical point particles run into trouble. It is
hoped that the study of massless fields on a causal set [ 39 , 42 ] and
general quantum field theory on a causal set [ 32 , 33 ] will eventually
lead to a model for massless particle propagation at a discrete level.

The current lack of an underlying model does not, fortunately, exclude
the investigation of the potential effect of discreteness on photons in
the continuum approximation. A massless diffusion equation can be
derived in one of two ways: following the stochastic evolution on a
manifold of states procedure, as for the massive case; or, simply taking
a @xmath limit of the massive particle diffusion equation. As will be
discussed in the following section, it turns out that the second method
gives an incomplete result.

In Section 4.1 the massless particle diffusion equation in terms of
affine time is derived. As for massive particles, in order to make
comparisons with observations an equation in terms of cosmic time is
needed – such an equation in derived in Section 4.2 .

The resulting massless particle model has two free parameters. In
Section 4.3 the effect of massless particle diffusion on the cosmic
microwave background is studied, and bounds are placed on the values of
the two free parameters. Finally, the consequences of the model for
astrophysical spectra are discussed in Section 4.4 , where it is found
that the strong bounds from the cosmic microwave background rule out
observable effects. The work in Sections 4.1 , 4.2 , 4.3 was conducted
in collaboration with Fay Dowker and Rafael Sorkin, and appears in [ 29
] .

Note that the massless particles considered in this chapter are assumed
to have no polarisation. The issue of polarisation is addressed in depth
in Chapter 5 .

### 4.1 Diffusion in affine time

The state space in the massless case differs from the massive case. For
massive particles there is a probability distribution on @xmath . For
massless particles @xmath becomes the light cone in momentum space
defined by @xmath . This cone will be denoted @xmath . Hereafter the
momentum of a massless particle will be denoted @xmath . Assuming that
the photons under consideration are well described in a geometrical
optics approximation (and thus have definite spacetime worldlines and
momenta), the state space will be @xmath .

Since proper time vanishes along a lightlike worldline, it is clearly
not a suitable time parameter for a massless diffusion process. Instead,
an affine time, @xmath , defined by

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.1)
  -- -------- -- -------

is used to parametrise the photon worldline.

In the massive particle case the density of microstates, @xmath , was
proportional to the determinant of the metric on the state space: @xmath
. In the massless case, the induced metric on @xmath is degenerate. A
volume element on @xmath can, however, still be defined. The four
dimensional volume element @xmath of momentum space, together with the
masslessness constraint, @xmath , gives the invariant volume element
@xmath on @xmath , i.e. @xmath in Cartesian coordinates. It turns out to
be more useful, however, to work in polar coordinates on @xmath : @xmath
where @xmath is the magnitude of the three momentum and @xmath and
@xmath are the usual polar angles in momentum space. In these
coordinates, the density of states is @xmath .

As with the massive particle case, the derivation of the massless
diffusion equation begins with the current and continuity equations,
Equation 3.5 and Equation 3.6 . The first step is to determine @xmath
and @xmath . To begin, note that there is a unique, up to a constant
factor, invariant vector field on @xmath which is the momentum itself,
@xmath , i.e. the vector with components @xmath in polar coordinates.
This is absent in the massive case, where the momentum vector does not
lie in the mass shell. Also, although there is no invariant metric on
@xmath , there is an invariant symmetric two-tensor, @xmath , again
unique up to a constant factor.

From Equation 3.11 , the spacetime component of @xmath is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.2)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

@xmath is positive semidefinite so @xmath . Finally, the requirement
that @xmath be Lorentz invariant and translation invariant fixes the
remaining component @xmath to be proportional to @xmath :

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.3)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is a constant.

The vector @xmath is easily determined by looking individually at the
components in spacetime and momentum space. As in the massive particle
case, the spacetime component @xmath by Equation 3.16 , and @xmath by
Equation 3.12 . In contrast to the massive case, there can be nonzero
components of @xmath in the momentum space directions because the
momentum itself is an invariant vector. The momentum direction
components are thus given by @xmath , where @xmath is a constant.
Working in polar coordinates the ‘position’ vector @xmath on the cone
@xmath is simply @xmath where @xmath . Thus @xmath on @xmath .

Substituting the forms for @xmath and @xmath into Equation 3.15 gives
the massless particle affine time equation:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.4)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

Lorentz invariance constrains the diffusion process such that, although
there is diffusion in the energy of the photon, the direction of the
photon is unchanged and it continues to propagate at the speed of light.
Note that there are two parameters, @xmath and @xmath , in this
phenomenological model, rather than the single parameter of the massive
particle model. There is not only a diffusion term but an independent
drift term, arising from the existence of an invariant vector on @xmath
. It will be shown further below that this extra term leads to the
existence of power law equilibrium solutions of the diffusion equation.

It is not unreasonable to expect that a diffusion equation for massless
particles could be obtained simply by taking the @xmath limit of the
massive particle diffusion equation, Equation 3.25 . This, however,
results in Equation 4.4 with @xmath , as there is no invariant vector in
the massive case. It is interesting to note that there is this
discontinuity in behaviour between very highly relativistic massive
particles, and massless particles. It suggests that massive and massless
particles are fundamentally different objects and will need to be
described in completely different ways in causal set theory.

### 4.2 Diffusion in cosmic time

As with massive particles, the massless particle diffusion equation is
more useful for comparison with observations when expressed in terms of
cosmic time. The massless cosmic time diffusion equation can be obtained
by following the same argument as in the massive case (Section 3.3 ). It
is assumed that the massless particle trajectory begins at @xmath and
@xmath . The first step is to define a new larger state space
incorporating the affine time: @xmath . In this larger space, a new
current component can be defined:

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (4.5)
  -- -------- -- -------

The @xmath component of the current @xmath can be expressed in terms of
@xmath , using Equations 3.5 and 4.5 .

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.6)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.7)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

The remaining components of the current can now be expressed in terms of
@xmath .

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.8)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.9)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where Equation 3.31 has been used. In polar coordinates the vector
@xmath , and thus there is only one nonzero component of @xmath in the
radial (energy) direction:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.10)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Since the affine time along the particle trajectories is unobservable,
it can be integrated over, and a new integrated current, @xmath , can be
defined. Integrating over the @xmath component gives

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.11)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The remaining current components can be integrated and re-expressed in
terms of @xmath :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.12)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.13)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

In the extended space @xmath , the continuity equation becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are coordinates on @xmath . Integrated over @xmath the
continuity equation becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath is zero for all @xmath and @xmath tends to zero as @xmath
approaches infinity for finite @xmath . So for all @xmath

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

If @xmath is renamed @xmath the massless particle cosmic time equation
can be written:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.17)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

#### 4.2.1 Power law equilibrium solutions

It is interesting to note that negative values of the drift parameter
@xmath allow for power law equilibrium solutions of the massless
particle cosmic time diffusion equation. For homogeneous distributions
Equation 4.17 becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.18)
  -- -------- -- --------

Equilibrium solutions of this equation must satisfy

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

Equation 4.19 has a power law solution

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.20)
  -- -------- -- --------

If a small energy cut off @xmath is assumed, this solution is
normalisable when the exponent is less than -1. Since the diffusion
parameter @xmath is positive this can only occur for negative values of
@xmath . It can be conjectured that if @xmath (equivalently @xmath ) any
normalised distribution will tend to this power law equilibrium solution
at late times.

### 4.3 Diffusion and drift in the cosmic microwave background

In developing a phenomenological model the aim is to provide a model for
currently unexplained observations or to suggest new observations that
might be made to test a theory. Before proposing new observations or
exotic experiments, however, one should constrain the model as tightly
as possible based on what is already known. The massless particle
momentum diffusion discussed in the preceding sections has two free
parameters: a positive diffusion constant @xmath and a ‘drift’ constant
@xmath , which may be either positive or negative. If the photons we
encounter in our everyday lives experienced large amounts of diffusion
or drift, it would of course have already been noticed. The motivation
for the massless momentum diffusion model, however, lies in the
underlying discreteness of causal set quantum gravity – the resulting
effects are expected to only be apparent on very small scales, outside
the range of current experiments. How then can the parameters be
constrained? The key is to look at photons that have been travelling
long enough for the diffusion and drift to ‘accumulate’ to an observable
level.

The cosmic microwave background (CMB) seems an ideal testing ground: not
only are its photons the ‘oldest’ we can observe, but its spectrum has
been determined with great precision. The photons in the CMB have been
‘free streaming’ since the surface of last scattering at a redshift of
@xmath – approximately @xmath billion years. When the universe became
transparent at recombination, the photons that are now observed as the
CMB would have had a blackbody spectrum with a temperature of @xmath
(see for example [ 43 ] ). As the universe expanded the photons were
both stretched and diluted, a process that neatly preserves the
blackbody nature of the spectrum and simply lowers the temperature.
Current observations of the CMB yield a temperature of @xmath and
measure the spectrum to be Planckian (blackbody) over the @xmath
frequency range to within a weighted root mean square (rms) deviation of
only 50 parts per million (ppm) of the peak brightness [ 44 ] . Any
diffusion and drift in energy would have distorted the CMB spectrum –
the fact that the CMB photons have travelled so far but remained so
perfectly thermal allows the parameters in the model to be constrained
very tightly.

#### 4.3.1 Modelling diffusion in the CMB

The derivation of the massless cosmic time diffusion equation assumed
spacetime to be Minkowskian. Although the expansion of the universe can
be incorporated into the model (and will be in Section 4.3.2 below) a
first bound on the parameters will be obtained by simply ignoring the
expansion. In a non-expanding universe the temperature of the CMB would
have remained constant from the surface of last scattering to today. To
allow comparison with data, it will in fact be assumed that the CMB was
emitted with the temperature observed today, @xmath .

If a blackbody spectrum is evolved according to the massless cosmic time
diffusion equation, the final distribution will no longer be blackbody.
The deviation from blackbody can be determined and, by requiring it to
be within the current deviation allowed by observations, bounds can be
placed on the drift and diffusion parameters. Specifically, the initial
Planckian spectrum, expressed as a number density of photons per unit
spatial volume per unit energy, is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.21)
  -- -------- -- --------

with a temperature @xmath . This distribution is evolved over a time
interval equal to that since the surface of last scattering ( @xmath in
Planck units) via the homogeneous massless cosmic time diffusion
equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

using the MATLAB numerical pde solver pdepe .

##### Boundary conditions

Some questions must be addressed when choosing a boundary condition at
@xmath for this integration. What happens to a photon as its momentum
approaches zero? Do photons leak away through the tip of the null cone
in momentum space? Physically, the photon concept employed by the model
breaks down as the wavelength tends to infinity, because the geometrical
optics approximation fails. This suggests that an ‘absorbing boundary
condition’, @xmath , is appropriate at @xmath . As it happens, the
current is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

and thus (so long as @xmath remains finite) the absorbing boundary
condition @xmath is equivalent to the ‘reflecting boundary condition’,
@xmath , at @xmath . In the simulations that follow, a reflecting
boundary condition is used at the upper boundary @xmath .

##### Calculating the deviation

The evolved spectrum was converted from a number density per unit volume
per unit frequency to a spectral radiance (energy per unit area per unit
time per unit frequency per steradian) as used in the analysis of the
COBE FIRAS data. This allowed the deviation from Planckian to be
compared with the quoted 50ppm of the peak brightness. The first step
was to fit a Planck spectrum to the evolved spectral radiance using the
least squares method. Specifically, the MATLAB function fminsearch was
used to find the temperature that minimised the sum of the squared
differences between the evolved distribution and the fitted Planck
spectrum. Looking for the best fit Planck spectrum rather than comparing
with the initial @xmath spectrum, allowed for the possibility that the
diffusion changes the temperature of the CMB in a way that may be
reconciled with observation. As it happens, it was found that the
temperature of the best fit Planck spectrum was very close to the
initial temperature in cases where the deviation is within the allowed
tolerance. For example the choice of parameters @xmath and @xmath gives
a best fit temperature of @xmath , indistinguishable from the current
observed temperature of @xmath .

Finally, the rms deviation between the fitted Planckian spectrum and the
evolved spectrum

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the value of the evolved spectrum at a point @xmath ,
@xmath is the value of the fitted spectrum, and @xmath is the total
number of data points, was calculated over the frequency range @xmath
@xmath @xmath (energy range @xmath ) with all points weighted equally.
After calculating the peak brightness of the evolved spectrum, this rms
deviation can be compared to the allowed tolerance of 50 parts per
million of the peak brightness. This process was repeated for a range of
values of the parameters @xmath and @xmath .

##### Results

For the evolved spectrum to be close enough to Planckian to be within
the allowed tolerance, the deviation must be essentially invisible to
the eye. Before placing bounds on @xmath and @xmath it is useful
therefore to get a general feel for how a blackbody spectrum evolves
under Equation 4.22 by looking at values of @xmath and @xmath that
result in deviations well outside the allowed tolerance. Figure 4.1
shows the evolved distribution and best fit Planck spectrum for @xmath .
The positive drift parameter @xmath clearly shifts the spectrum to the
right. With these large values of @xmath and @xmath the difference
between the best fit Planck spectrum ( @xmath ) and the initial Planck
spectrum ( @xmath ) is quite considerable. However, no amount of
temperature change will disguise the translation of the Planck spectrum
– the diffusion and drift are clearly visible.

To place bounds on the diffusion and drift constants they were first
examined separately, varying @xmath with @xmath and varying @xmath with
@xmath . When @xmath Equation 4.22 can be solved exactly:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.25)
  -- -------- -- --------

i.e. the spectrum just translates at a constant speed. For @xmath
negative, this is inconsistent with the boundary condition @xmath at
@xmath . However, in this case one can implement an absorbing boundary
condition trivially: simply cut off the translated distribution at
@xmath . The exact solution is also useful as a method of checking the
level of numerical error in the simulations. Since the deviations from
Planckian that are being investigated are so small there is the
possibility that the rms deviation calculated is significantly affected
by numerical error. Fortunately, this is not the case – the difference
between the exact solution and the numerically evolved solution for
@xmath is several orders of magnitude smaller than the deviation from
Planckian. ² ² 2 Rerunning all the simulations in this section using the
Mathematica numerical solver NDSolve yields identical results further
suggesting that numerical error and integration step size do not have a
significant effect on the bounds. For example, if @xmath the rms
deviation from the best fit Planck spectrum is @xmath ( @xmath peak
brightness) for both the exact and the numerical solution. The rms
deviation between the exact and numerical solutions is @xmath . This
also demonstrates that the @xmath boundary condition imposed on the
numerical solution, although inconsistent with the exact solution when
@xmath , does not introduce noticeable errors for the values of @xmath
that are of concern here.

The rms deviation over a range of values of @xmath with @xmath is shown
in Figure 4.2 (plotted from the exact solution).

For @xmath and @xmath the equation can only be solved numerically. The
results in this case are shown in Figure 4.3 . In both cases the
deviation from Planckian increases approximately linearly with
increasing magnitude of the parameters. The simulations suggest that for
the deviation from Planckian of the CMB to be within the allowed @xmath
of the peak brightness the diffusion constant @xmath must be less than
approximately @xmath if @xmath , and the drift parameter @xmath must
fall within the range @xmath if @xmath . Converting to SI units this
gives the bounds:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
              @xmath   @xmath      (4.26)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.27)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

If both @xmath and @xmath are nonzero the picture is somewhat more
complicated, but similar bounds result. The results in this general
situation are shown in Figure 4.4 . The allowed region (within the
@xmath contour) is seen to be not quite symmetric in the drift parameter
@xmath . Placing concrete bounds on @xmath and @xmath from Figure 4.4 is
difficult, since the allowed values of @xmath depend on the value of
@xmath and vice versa – the bounds are, however, of the order of
magnitude given above.

#### 4.3.2 The expanding universe

To determine the bounds on the drift and diffusion parameters, given in
Section 4.3.1 above, the effect of the expansion of the universe on the
CMB was ignored – it was assumed that the CMB had remained at a
temperature of @xmath from the surface of last scattering up to today.
This is of course not the case. At the surface of last scattering the
CMB had a temperature of about @xmath . As the universe expanded the
individual photons were stretched along with the space, and
correspondingly diluted, leaving the @xmath spectrum observed today. It
turns out that the expansion has essentially no effect on the model: the
distribution in the expanding universe can be deduced easily from the
nonexpanding one and the bounds derived from the nonexpanding simulation
change only slightly.

Before including the effect of cosmological expansion in the diffusion
equation, a differential equation that describes the cooling of the CMB
needs to be found; the following is a standard result in cosmology.
Consider the usual continuity equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.28)
  -- -------- -- --------

for flux @xmath . In this case we are interested in the flux in momentum
space of the CMB photons and thus @xmath has a single component in the
energy direction @xmath . This gives the continuity equation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.29)
  -- -------- -- --------

Under expansion the CMB photons are stretched such that @xmath , where
@xmath is the scale factor. Thus, @xmath , and the continuity equation
becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.30)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Consider the distribution

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.31)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the scale factor of the universe today. Photons in the
CMB are not only stretched, but also diluted by the expansion of the
universe. The distribution in Equation 4.31 can be seen as a Planck
spectrum where the normalisation depends on the scale factor @xmath , to
take into account the photon dilution. Equation 4.31 is indeed a
solution to the expansion equation, Equation 4.30 . This confirms, as
mentioned earlier, that the blackbody nature of the CMB is preserved
during the expansion of the universe.

If the expansion effect is included in the diffusion equation, Equation
4.22 , the equation becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

Now consider defining a new variable @xmath and a new density function
@xmath . Expressed in these variables the spectrum, Equation 4.31 ,
becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.33)
  -- -------- -- --------

which is constant in time.

Expressing Equation 4.32 in terms of @xmath and @xmath gives

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath   @xmath      
              @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.34)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Defining a new time variable @xmath such that @xmath reduces this to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.35)
  -- -------- -- --------

exactly the same form as the non-expanding diffusion equation, Equation
4.22 .

For a matter dominated FRW universe @xmath , i.e. @xmath , where @xmath
is the current value of @xmath . Since @xmath integration gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.36)
  -- -------- -- --------

Since the time since the surface of last scattering ( @xmath ) is of the
same order as the age of the universe @xmath , this effectively gives
@xmath . In other words, including expansion is essentially the same as
running the non-expanding simulations for @xmath of the time. As such,
the bounds found in Section 4.3.1 would not be expected to change
greatly. For completeness the simulations have been run for the
expanding case, and the results are shown in Figure 4.5 – the order of
magnitude of the bounds is indeed the same.

### 4.4 The shifting of spectral lines

The blackbody nature of the cosmic microwave background placed strong
bounds on the magnitude of the diffusion and drift parameters. It is
worthwhile, however, looking at other potential astrophysical
consequences of the diffusion and drift: are observable effects ruled
out by our current bounds, or do other sources allow even stronger
bounds to be derived? Here the effect of drift and diffusion on the
spectral lines of distant sources will be investigated.

Diffusion will result in a broadening of spectral lines. The energy
dependence of the diffusion term in Equation 4.17 implies higher energy
lines will experience greater broadening than low energy lines. The
difficulty is, however, that spectral lines from distant sources will
experience line broadening due to a number of other effects. For
example, the varying velocities of atoms in a gas cloud source will
result in thermal Doppler broadening of the spectral lines. A
calculation of the exact amount of broadening due to diffusion would not
be trivial. Given the very tight bound on the diffusion parameter @xmath
, together with broadening due to other effects and the inherent
spectral resolution (discussed further below), it seems unlikely that
broadening due to diffusion would be observable. In this section I will
instead concentrate on drift.

The drift term will shift all lines in a spectrum by a fixed amount.
Spectral lines from astrophysical sources are, of course, already
shifted with respect to laboratory spectra due to the expansion of the
universe. The expansion of the universe results in lines shifted by a
fixed ratio, the redshift @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the wavelength we observe, and @xmath is the wavelength
at which the light was emitted. Since the drift is independent of
wavelength, this effect could be easily distinguished from redshifting.
In fact, if drift occurs, the calculated redshift for a source would
depend on which spectral line was used. Assuming that the diffusion
constant is zero, the drift will shift spectral lines by an energy
@xmath , where @xmath is the time of travel of the photons. If the line
has also been redshifted the observed line will have energy

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.38)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

If drift occurs, but is not taken into account, observations would lead
to the calculation of an apparent redshift @xmath that differed from the
actual redshift:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.39)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

As an example, consider the quasar SDSSp J083643.85+005453.3 with
redshift @xmath [ 45 ] , whose spectrum is shown in Figure 3 . A
prominent line in the spectra of quasars is the hydrogen Lyman- @xmath
line, which has a wavelength of @xmath . For a quasar at @xmath this
line is redshifted to @xmath , or working in energies

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.40)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (4.41)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

To determine how much the Lyman- @xmath line would be shifted by the
drift, it is necessary to know the time it has taken for the light to
travel from the quasar. The cosmic time-redshift relation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (4.42)
  -- -------- -- --------

(see for example [ 46 ] ) gives the approximate age of the universe when
photons at a redshift of @xmath were emitted. Take the Hubble parameter
to be @xmath , the matter density to be @xmath and the current age of
the universe to be @xmath years [ 47 ] . The age of the universe when
the photons from the quasar were emitted is @xmath years ( @xmath in
Planck units), and thus they have been travelling for @xmath years (
@xmath in Planck units). In Section 4.3 the drift parameter was
constrained to be @xmath . These values give a drift of magnitude

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (4.43)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

This drift is seven orders of magnitude smaller than the redshifted
energy @xmath . When measuring the spectra of the quasar, Fan et al. [
45 ] note they have a spectral resolution of about @xmath Å. A
remeasurement of the spectra [ 48 ] gives a much better resolution of
about @xmath Å. If the measured Lyman- @xmath line is @xmath Å, this
corresponds in energy to approximately @xmath . The drift is thus much
smaller than even the improved spectral resolution.

If @xmath is the true redshift of the quasar, the measured redshift from
Equation 4.39 due to the shift in the Lyman- @xmath line would be
imperceptibly different. If one were to also consider the Lyman- @xmath
line at @xmath , the difference between the redshifts calculated using
Lyman- @xmath and Lyman- @xmath would be of the order @xmath , much
smaller than the stated uncertainty of @xmath .

The effect of drift would be more apparent for more distant objects. The
calculations given here for the high redshift quasar at @xmath do
however seem to rule out any observation of the drift in spectra in the
near future. It is certainly clear that the bounds placed on the drift
parameter through consideration of the CMB are much stronger than any
that could currently be obtained from spectral lines. This is of course
hardly surprising given the combination of the very accurate
measurements of the CMB and the redshift of @xmath .

### 4.5 Concluding remarks

The assumption of Lorentz invariance is very powerful: despite the lack
of an underlying microscopic model for massless particles, Lorentz
invariance allows a concrete diffusion model to be derived in the
continuum limit. Such models were derived in Sections 4.1 and 4.2 in
terms of affine time and cosmic time respectively. For massless
particles without internal degrees of freedom, the diffusion model is
found to have two free parameters – making the phenomenological model,
although powerful, slightly less powerful than the massive particle
case.

A distribution of massless particles initially peaked at some energy
will undergo a diffusion in energy at a rate governed by the diffusion
parameter @xmath , and also drift to a higher or lower energies
depending on the parameter @xmath . The direction of the photon is
unchanged, and light still travels at the speed of light.

The values of the two parameters will depend on properties of the, as
yet unknown, microscopic model. For massive particles the diffusion
parameter depended on the forgetting time, @xmath – for massless
particles it is likely there will also be some dependence on a
non-locality scale, such as that discussed in [ 39 ] . The parameters
could also depend on properties of the wave packet associated with the
photon. Future work on scalar field propagation may lead to progress in
this area. In the meantime, constraints can be placed on the values of
the parameters by comparison with observations.

The CMB, consisting as it does of the ‘oldest’ photons, provides the
perfect laboratory for constraining the drift and diffusion. As shown in
Section 4.3 , the blackbody nature of the CMB constrains @xmath and
@xmath very strongly. The tightness of the constraints is due not only
to time the photons have been propagating, but also to the accuracy with
which the CMB spectrum has been measured. Conceivably, future
measurements could narrow the deviation from blackbody even further and
thus result in even tighter bounds on @xmath and @xmath .

The drift and diffusion in energy of massless particles could have other
observable consequences. One possibility, as discussed in Section 4.4 ,
is the broadening and shift of spectral lines. The tight constraints
from the CMB do, however, appear to rule out the detection of the effect
in spectral lines with current technology.

As mentioned earlier, the work up to this point has considered only
particles with no internal degrees of freedom. The ideas here can,
however, be applied more generally. In particular, as will be seen in
the next chapter, the effect of an underlying discreteness on photon
polarisation can be modelled.

## Chapter 5 Polarisation

In the previous chapter the effect of spacetime discreteness on the
energy of massless particles was discussed, but the possible
polarisation of the particles was neglected. Here that omission is
remedied.

The study of polarisation is of particular relevance at present – the
polarisation of the cosmic microwave background (CMB) was first detected
as recently as 2002 by DASI. It has since been observed by a number of
experiments. Current and future experiments, such as the recently
launched Planck, will hopefully reveal even further information. As
such, the CMB polarisation is an ideal testing ground for quantum
gravity phenomenology at the moment.

If spacetime is discrete it is expected that the polarisation of a
photon travelling through spacetime will be subject to some
fluctuations. Unfortunately there is, again, no underlying model for
polarisation on a causal set. It is hoped that such a model will be
developed in the future. In the meantime, the expected continuum
behaviour of a polarised photon in an underlying discrete spacetime can
be found by following the stochastic evolution on a manifold of states
procedure.

Before deriving a diffusion equation for polarisation it is necessary to
choose, from the multitude of possibilities, a suitable way to describe
the polarisation. This choice is discussed in Section 5.1 . In Section
5.2 the affine time polarisation diffusion equation is derived. It is
found that restricting to linear polarisation is necessary for useful
concrete phenomenology. The cosmic time linear polarisation diffusion
equation is derived in Section 5.3 , and it is found that polarised
light will experience both a suppression in polarisation fraction and a
rotation in polarisation angle.

Section 5.4 discusses possible ways to constrain the free parameters of
the model. Rough constraints from radio galaxy polarisation data are
discussed, as is the effect of rotation and suppression on the CMB.

The majority of the work in this chapter appears in [ 49 ] .

### 5.1 The polarisation state space

The polarisation of a massless particle with momentum @xmath can be
described by a complex four-vector @xmath , that satisfies @xmath and
@xmath . This description is not, however, gauge invariant: if @xmath
satisfies these conditions then @xmath , for any complex number @xmath ,
will describe the same polarisation state. To avoid this problem, the
polarisation can be described in terms of a complex two-form @xmath .
This @xmath satisfies the following Lorentz invariant conditions:

1.  @xmath ;

2.  @xmath and @xmath ;

3.  @xmath ;

4.  @xmath .

Note that it is also the case that any @xmath satisfying these
conditions can be expressed in terms of some @xmath in the form above.
The antisymmetry condition @xmath reduces @xmath to six complex (12
real) degrees of freedom. The constraints @xmath reduce it further to 10
real degrees of freedom. @xmath and @xmath give six independent
constraints, leaving only four degrees of freedom. Finally, the
constraint @xmath is only one new condition, leaving @xmath with three
real degrees of freedom.

Consider the specific case @xmath where @xmath . The condition @xmath
requires @xmath , and thus:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.1)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

where @xmath . The overall phase of the complex vector @xmath is not
physically relevant for the description of the polarisation state of a
single photon (see for example [ 50 ] ), leaving a state space with only
two real dimensions. This state space is the Bloch (or Poincaré) sphere,
which will be denoted @xmath . The diffusion equations in the following
sections will be derived in terms of the angles on the Bloch sphere
rather than the polarisation two-form @xmath . The resulting equations
are of course still Lorentz invariant, despite this not necessarily
being immediately apparent. For further discussion of the explicitly
Lorentz invariant @xmath formulation see Appendix A .

The next step is to show that the state space given by @xmath is indeed
the Bloch sphere. Let @xmath and @xmath , corresponding to left and
right circularly polarised states, respectively. The vector @xmath can
be expanded in terms of @xmath , and an overall phase extracted to leave
the coefficient of @xmath real and positive:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.2)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.3)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.4)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

where @xmath and @xmath . Note that this slightly unnatural choice of
angles is made to match the standard Poincaré sphere description of
polarisation shown in Figure 5.1 (see, for example [ 51 ] ).

The north and south poles ( @xmath ) of the Bloch sphere correspond to

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.5)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.6)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- -------

right and left circularly polarised states, respectively. States on the
equator ( @xmath ) have

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.7)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.8)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

and thus the equator consists of the linear polarisation states. The
remainder of the sphere describes elliptical polarisation.

##### General @xmath

The above calculations showed that for the specific case of @xmath the
polarisation state can be described by the angles @xmath and @xmath on
the Bloch sphere. It remains to show that for a general @xmath the
polarisation state @xmath can be expressed in terms of the Bloch sphere.
This can be done by transforming @xmath by the Lorentz transformation
that takes @xmath to @xmath and then simply using the Bloch sphere
description for the special @xmath case. In general the Lorentz
transformation mapping @xmath to @xmath is not unique. A standard
Lorentz transformation taking @xmath to @xmath can, however, be defined
by (see, for example [ 50 ] ):

  -- -------- -- -------
     @xmath      (5.9)
  -- -------- -- -------

where @xmath is the boost along the @xmath -direction that takes @xmath
to @xmath , and @xmath is the standard rotation that takes the @xmath
-axis into the direction of the unit vector @xmath . If @xmath has
spherical polar coordinates @xmath then the standard rotation is defined
by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.10)
  -- -------- -- --------

i.e. a rotation by angle @xmath around the @xmath -axis followed by a
rotation by @xmath around the @xmath -axis. The transformation @xmath
takes @xmath to @xmath . Under the same transformation the polarisation
state, @xmath , gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.11)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath now has the same form as Equation 5.1 , with components @xmath ,
where @xmath and @xmath . Equation 5.11 will henceforth be written
@xmath for simplicity.

Thus, a general state @xmath is specified by coordinates @xmath , where
the angles @xmath and @xmath are determined by first Lorentz
transforming @xmath into the form of Equation 5.1 , and then using
Equations 5.3 and 5.4 .

#### 5.1.1 Polarisation under Lorentz transformation

Before moving onto the derivation of the diffusion equation, it is
necessary to know how the polarisation state @xmath changes under
Lorentz transformation. The photon state @xmath transforms as usual
under a Lorentz transformation @xmath : @xmath . For simplicity this
will be written @xmath . Under Lorentz transformation @xmath and

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.12)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where @xmath is an element of the little group of the Lorentz
transformations that leaves @xmath fixed.

The little group is isomorphic to the Euclidean group @xmath : the set
of rotations and translations of the plane. Following Weinberg [ 50 ] ,
an element of the little group can be written

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the ‘translation’

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath and @xmath are real numbers and @xmath . @xmath is the usual
rotation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.15)
  -- -------- -- --------

To see how the translations @xmath act on the polarisation consider the
infinitesimal transformation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.16)
  -- -------- -- --------

From Equation 5.1 it is clear that @xmath can be written

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.17)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath and thus @xmath . Recall @xmath . Thus

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.18)
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

using the relations @xmath and @xmath . The ‘translations’ therefore
leave the polarisation unchanged.

The rotation @xmath acts as usual, thus under a Lorentz transformation

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.19)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath . The transformation of the Bloch sphere angles can be
determined from Equations 5.3 , 5.4 :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.20)
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.21)
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

thus

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.22)
  -- -------- -- --------

i.e. Lorentz transformations act on the Bloch sphere as rotations around
the north-south polar axis.

#### 5.1.2 Stokes parameters

The Stokes parameters are a common method of describing polarisation,
particularly in cosmology and astrophysics. They have the advantage of
being quantities that can be directly measured by experiments. As such,
it is useful to understand the relationship between the Bloch sphere
coordinates @xmath and the Stokes parameters @xmath .

The first Stokes parameter, @xmath , is the total intensity of the
light. The Bloch sphere, in fact, only parametrises polarisation of a
fixed intensity (or more correctly a fixed polarisation intensity @xmath
where @xmath is the polarisation fraction). The parameters @xmath and
@xmath describe linear polarisation. Consider a set of orthogonal axes
@xmath in the plane perpendicular to the direction of propagation of the
light, and another set of orthogonal axes @xmath at @xmath in the plane
to @xmath . @xmath is the difference between the intensity transmitted
by a polariser that accepts light polarised in the @xmath -direction,
and the intensity transmitted by one that accepts light polarised in the
@xmath -direction. @xmath is given by the difference between the
intensity transmitted by a polariser that accepts light in the @xmath
-direction, and the intensity transmitted by one that accepts light in
the @xmath -direction. Note that the @xmath can be chosen freely within
the plane perpendicular to the propagation of the light. In practice
there are several standard coordinate conventions, for example the
International Astronomical Union coordinate convention defines the
@xmath -axis as pointing along the line of sight towards the observer,
the @xmath -axis points north and the @xmath -axis, east. The remaining
Stokes parameter, @xmath , measures circular polarisation.

The Stokes parameters obey the inequality

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.23)
  -- -------- -- --------

The polarisation fraction @xmath is defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.24)
  -- -------- -- --------

Consider a perfectly polarised beam with fixed intensity normalised to
one. The relationship between the Bloch sphere angles and the Stokes
parameters can be found by calculating the density matrix @xmath from
the vector @xmath . Equating

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.25)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

(see, e. g. [ 52 ] ), gives

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.26)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.27)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.28)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

More generally, if a collection of photons has a distribution of
polarisations given by a probability density @xmath on the Bloch sphere,
@xmath , the Stokes parameters are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.29)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.30)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.31)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Note that a given set of Stokes parameters @xmath does not correspond to
a unique distribution. For example, unpolarised light @xmath could be
modelled as a uniform distribution of linearly polarised states, or a
uniform distribution on the two circularly polarised states alone – or
any other distribution uniform in @xmath and symmetric in @xmath .

### 5.2 Polarisation diffusion in affine time

The state space of a photon with polarisation is @xmath . The affine
time @xmath is again the suitable time parameter for the trajectories.

Recall that the stochastic process on @xmath can be described by the
equation (Equation 3.15 ):

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.32)
  -- -------- -- --------

and thus to derive the affine time diffusion equation the Lorentz
invariant, symmetric positive semi-definite matrix @xmath and the
Lorentz invariant vector @xmath need to be determined. The microscopic
density of states, @xmath , on @xmath must also be known.

Unfortunately there are just too many choices when it comes to
determining invariant objects on the Bloch sphere. As discussed earlier,
Lorentz transformations act on the Bloch sphere as polar rotations.
Thus, any tensor, vector, or scalar that does not depend on @xmath is
Lorentz invariant. For example, @xmath could be the metric on a sphere,
or an oblate or prolate spheroid, or indeed any other such strange shape
generated by rotating a curve around the polar axis. It need not even be
invariant under reflection in the equatorial plane. The invariant
vector, @xmath , can be any linear combination of @xmath and @xmath ,
where @xmath and @xmath are arbitrary functions of @xmath . All these
free functions mean the model is not much use for phenomenology.
Predictive power can be regained if the model is restricted to linear
polarisation only. For astrophysical and cosmological applications this
is precisely the area of interest – the CMB, for example, is linearly
polarised. The matter is not quite so simple, however, as assuming the
initial distribution has no circular polarisation. An initially linearly
polarised distribution could become elliptically (or circularly)
polarised if @xmath or @xmath are not invariant under reflection in the
equatorial plane. To allow progress to be made, it will be assumed from
here on that circular polarisation be neglected. It is hoped that it
will be possible to determine if this assumption is justified when the
microscopic physics is better understood. In the meantime, useful
results can still be obtained.

Restricting to linear polarisation, the polarisation state space is just
the equator of the Bloch sphere: the unit circle, with coordinate @xmath
. In a slight abuse of notation the state space with linear polarisation
only will also be denoted @xmath . There is one Lorentz invariant
vector, @xmath , on the space of linear polarised states. The Lorentz
invariant density of states @xmath is constant on the circle. As in
Chapter 4 , it is convenient to work in polar coordinates @xmath on the
momentum space @xmath . The coordinates on the state space @xmath will
be denoted @xmath . As shown Section 4.1 there is the invariant vector
field @xmath , and invariant two-tensor @xmath on @xmath . The density
of states on @xmath is @xmath . We also know from Section 4.1 that the
spacetime components of @xmath are zero, and the spacetime component of
@xmath is simply @xmath .

Let @xmath and @xmath be the invariant vectors @xmath and @xmath on
@xmath . The most general symmetric, positive semi-definite invariant
two-tensor on the full state space @xmath is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.33)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

the invariant vector is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.34)
  -- -------- -- --------

Here @xmath are real constants. In order for @xmath to be positive
semi-definite the constants must also satisfy @xmath . On @xmath the
density of states is simply @xmath .

Substituting these forms for @xmath and @xmath into Equation 5.32 above
gives the affine time linear polarisation diffusion equation

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.35)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

At first glance this equation appears unwieldy, with still too many free
parameters to be useful for phenomenology. Recall, however, the massless
particle affine time diffusion equation, Equation 4.4 :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.36)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The parameters @xmath and @xmath in Equation 5.35 are just @xmath and
@xmath renamed. In Section 4.3 very tight constraints were placed on the
values of @xmath and @xmath . Because @xmath and @xmath are constrained
to be so small, they can be neglected in this discussion of linear
polarisation. Taking @xmath further requires @xmath . Finally, the
homogeneous polarisation affine time equation reduces to

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.37)
  -- -------- -- --------

A linearly polarised photon in an underlying discrete spacetime
therefore experiences a diffusion, determined by the parameter @xmath ,
and a drift, given by @xmath , in its angle of polarisation. Although
Equation 5.37 is Lorentz invariant, the Lorentz invariance is not
immediately obvious. In Appendix A the linear polarisation diffusion
equation is formulated in an explicitly Lorentz invariant way, using the
polarisation two-form @xmath . The resulting equation, although
equivalent to the equation above, provides less immediate physical
insight.

### 5.3 Polarisation diffusion in cosmic time

Again, to compare with observations the affine time polarisation
diffusion equation must be re-expressed in terms of cosmic time.
Following the arguments given in Sections 3.3 and 4.2 a larger state
space incorporating the affine time is defined: @xmath . The probability
density @xmath can be written as a component of the current in @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.38)
  -- -------- -- --------

The @xmath component of the current is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.39)
  -- -------- -- --------

where Equation 3.5 has been used. The remaining components of the
current, expressed in terms of @xmath are:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.40)
     @xmath   @xmath               (5.41)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.42)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The unobservable affine time can be integrated over, and a new
integrated current @xmath defined:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.43)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.44)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.45)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.46)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The continuity equation on @xmath can also be integrated over @xmath to
give:

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.47)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath is zero for all @xmath and @xmath tends toward zero as @xmath
approaches infinity for finite @xmath . Thus, renaming @xmath as @xmath
, the polarisation cosmic time equation is

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.48)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Neglecting the energy drift and diffusion as discussed in Section 5.2 (
@xmath ), and looking at the homogeneous case gives

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.49)
  -- -------- -- --------

where, for convenience, the diffusion parameter, @xmath , and drift
parameter, @xmath , have been renamed @xmath and @xmath respectively.
From this equation we see that the rates of drift and diffusion in
linear polarisation angle are energy dependent: the higher the energy of
the photon, the slower the rate of drift and diffusion. This result is
particularly interesting because, although there are other models that
predict drift in linear polarisation angle, most do not have this
particular energy dependence. This will be discussed further in Section
5.4 .

#### 5.3.1 The solution to the diffusion equation

Equation 5.49 is a standard equation describing diffusion with drift on
a circle. Solutions to this type of equation are well known, see for
example [ 53 ] . Here I will solve the equation using Fourier series.
First, note that the diffusion occurs on a half circle rather than a
full circle: @xmath . Physically, a polarisation angle @xmath and a
polarisation angle @xmath are equivalent. For simplicity I define a new
variable @xmath , @xmath . The distribution @xmath is a scalar density,
rather than a scalar, and thus under this rescaling transforms as

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.50)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Equation 5.49 becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.51)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.52)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Expand @xmath in a Fourier series:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.53)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.54)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The diffusion equation can thereby be written as an ordinary
differential equation

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.55)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Integrating by parts and recalling @xmath and @xmath gives

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.56)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.57)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Let the initial distribution be @xmath , then

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.58)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.59)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

where

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.60)
  -- -------- -- --------

is the fundamental solution (see for example [ 53 ] ). To be consistent
with the notation that appears in other papers (e.g. [ 54 , 55 ] )
@xmath can be expressed in a slightly different way. Making use of the
Jacobi identity

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.61)
  -- -------- -- --------

@xmath can be written

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.62)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.63)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The full solution to Equation 5.49 is thus

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.64)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.65)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

In the case of zero diffusion, i.e. @xmath , the fundamental solution,
Equation 5.60 , becomes

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.66)
  -- -------- -- --------

i.e. an initial distribution of @xmath will become rotated by @xmath ,
corresponding to an angle of @xmath . For an arbitrary initial
distribution @xmath , this gives a solution

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.67)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.68)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Thus, the drift term in the linear polarisation diffusion equation
simply rotates the plane of polarisation of light by an angle @xmath :
@xmath , where @xmath . In terms of the Stokes parameters, @xmath since
there is no circular polarisation and @xmath and @xmath become:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.69)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.70)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The diffusion term acts as an overall suppression of polarisation. To
see this, first note that given a collection of photons with a linear
polarisation distribution @xmath , the Stokes parameters are

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.71)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.72)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Consider a source with an initial distribution @xmath . This implies
@xmath , and the light is fully polarised, i.e. the polarisation
fraction is @xmath . Suppose @xmath evolves under some process, such as
the diffusion process, to a distribution @xmath , the fundamental
solution of the process. The Stokes parameters are then

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.73)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.74)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

The polarisation fraction is now

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.75)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Assuming that the process is homogeneous, i.e. @xmath , an arbitrary
initial distribution @xmath will evolve to @xmath . The Stokes
parameters are therefore

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.76)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.77)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.78)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.79)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- --------

Consider the linear polarisation diffusion equation with drift @xmath .
For zero drift the fundamental solution, @xmath , is given by Equation
5.60 with @xmath :

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.80)
  -- -------- -- --------

The @xmath Stokes parameter is therefore

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

The second sum vanishes and only the @xmath terms in the first sum
contribute, leaving

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.82)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Similarly, the @xmath Stokes parameter is

  -- -------- -------- -------- --
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
              @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- --

Here the first sum vanishes and the @xmath terms of the second sum give

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.84)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The polarisation suppression due to the diffusion is thus

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.85)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.86)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Both the suppression and rotation are independent of the current
polarisation angle, and thus in the general case of nonzero @xmath and
@xmath a linearly polarised beam in a spacetime with an underlying
discreteness will experience a rotation in polarisation angle and a
suppression of its polarisation fraction.

### 5.4 Observational constraints

The model discussed here is by no means the only mechanism for producing
rotation of the plane of linear polarisation. Such rotations, when
discussed in the context of the polarisation of astrophysical or
cosmological sources, are usually referred to as ‘cosmological
birefringence’. Rotation of polarisation is not merely hypothetical –
the polarisation from cosmological sources is well known to be subject
to rotation, namely the Faraday effect. Light travelling through the
interstellar medium is subject to rotation of the plane of polarisation,
because the presence of a magnetic field results in different refractive
indices for left and right circularly polarised modes. The angle of
rotation, @xmath , is dependent on the wavelength: @xmath .

Proposed methods for generating additional cosmological birefringence
include a loop quantum gravity motivated modification of the dispersion
relation [ 56 , 57 ] . This modification leads to circular polarisation
modes travelling at different velocities and thus can give
birefringence. In this case the rotation angle @xmath . Quantum gravity
motivated birefringence proportional to @xmath is also discussed in [ 58
] and [ 59 ] , where polarisation data from the Crab Nebula and CMB
respectively are used to constrain the model parameter.

Birefringence also arises in discussions of dark energy, specifically
the quintessence approach. The coupling of the quintessence scalar field
to the pseudoscalar of electromagnetism leads to birefringence
independent of wavelength [ 60 , 61 , 62 ] . Violating CPT symmetry
through the addition of a Chern-Simons term to the Maxwell Lagrangian
also results in rotation of the plane of polarisation independent of
wavelength [ 63 , 64 , 65 ] . Constraints on such polarisation rotation
come from radio galaxy polarisation data and CMB polarisation. Methods
of detecting polarisation rotation through radio galaxy data and the CMB
will be discussed further below.

None of the proposed effects discussed above have the @xmath dependence
of the polarisation diffusion model. One source of a @xmath rotation has
been suggested previously: according to Prasanna and Mohanty [ 66 ] ,
polarisation rotation could be induced by a gravitational wave
propagating in the same direction as the photons. This effect would only
be present where there is a source of strong gravitational radiation,
such as a binary pulsar, and thus it is unlikely to be confused with the
effect studied here. Note also that most models that predict
birefringence violate Lorentz invariance as well as parity. The
polarisation diffusion model of this chapter is particularly interesting
because it preserves Lorentz invariance.

Before discussing the bounds on the model parameters, it should be noted
that special care needs to be taken when searching for changes in
polarisation. Unless the method of generation of polarisation in a
source is completely understood, natural variations in polarisation at
the source could be mistaken for effects occurring over the travel time
of the light to us.

#### 5.4.1 Constraining the drift parameter with radio galaxy data

Radio galaxies emit linearly polarised light and often have an elongated
structure defining a natural axis against which their polarisation angle
can be measured. After subtracting the effect of Faraday rotation it is
found that the polarisation angle for radio galaxies is highly
correlated with the observed galaxy axis (radio axis), peaking at @xmath
to the radio axis (see, for example, [ 67 , 64 , 68 ] and Figure 5.2 ).
The linear polarisation of radio galaxies is due to the synchrotron
process. Although the cause of the correlation between polarisation
angle and radio axis does not seem to be fully understood it is likely
there is a physical basis for the alignment of the magnetic field. The
correlation holds over a range of redshifts and thus provides a method
of constraining a birefringence effect. If it is assumed that the light
has a polarisation of @xmath at the source, the difference from @xmath
in the measured polarisation angle constrains the amount of rotation,
and in the case of the model discussed here, the magnitude of the drift
parameter. Data also exists for polarisation fraction for radio
galaxies. Unfortunately there seems to be less understanding of what the
polarisation fraction is at the source and thus the change in
polarisation fraction (and the diffusion parameter) cannot be
constrained.

In this section I will use data from one particular galaxy to place an
order of magnitude bound on the drift parameter. In [ 68 ] the galaxy
MRC 2025-218 was studied. Cimatti et al. deduced a polarisation angle
(with respect to the galaxy axis) of @xmath and a polarisation fraction
of @xmath . They concluded that there is “strong evidence that the plane
of polarisation is not rotated by more than 10 degrees when the
radiation travels from @xmath to us”. Recall from Section 5.3 that the
angle of rotation is related to the drift parameter by @xmath . The time
of travel @xmath can be calculated from the redshift, @xmath , of the
galaxy. As mentioned in Section 4.4 the cosmic time - redshift relation,

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.87)
  -- -------- -- --------

gives the approximate age of the universe when photons at a redshift of
@xmath were emitted. Taking the Hubble parameter to be @xmath , the
matter density to be @xmath , and the current age of the universe to be
@xmath years (see [ 47 ] ), gives @xmath years, and thus the photons
have been travelling for a cosmic time of @xmath years.

Cimatti et al. observed the galaxy MRC 1015-218 in the @xmath band,
corresponding to a rest frame spectral region (i.e. non-redshifted
wavelength) of @xmath to @xmath Å. In the calculation below, I will
assume the photons were emitted with a wavelength of @xmath Å. As the
polarisation rotation angle, @xmath , depends on the wavelength, some
error is introduced by taking @xmath to be a fixed value within the
bandwidth. The variation of @xmath over this wavelength range is not
expected to be significant however, and should not affect the order of
magnitude bound obtained.

The polarisation diffusion model assumes Minkowksi spacetime, and thus
to correctly bound the drift parameter the change in energy of the
photons from the galaxy due to the expansion of the universe must be
taken into account. The inclusion of expansion into the model will be
discussed more generally in Section 5.4.2 , here I will only note that
the wavelength of photons in an expanding universe is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.88)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the wavelength the photons were emitted at, @xmath is
the scale factor, and @xmath is the scale factor at the time when the
photons were emitted. Assuming a matter dominated FRW universe, the
scale factor goes as @xmath , i.e. @xmath where @xmath is the current
age of the universe and the scale factor today is taken to be @xmath .
The total angle of rotation of the polarization is thus

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.89)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The drift parameter can be constrained to be

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.90)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

#### 5.4.2 Polarisation diffusion and drift in the cosmic microwave
background

The effect of polarisation rotation on CMB data has been well studied.
Suppression of polarisation, however, seems to have been little
considered. Before discussing the CMB we need to fully understand how
the expansion of the universe changes the diffusion equation. In fact,
an equation that includes expansion can be determined in a similar
manner to that discussed in Section 4.3 .

##### Including the expansion of the universe

The redshifting of the photons is given by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.91)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath is the emitted frequency, @xmath is the scale factor, and
@xmath is the scale factor at the time the photons were emitted. Note
that the expansion of the universe also dilutes the photons, but this
dilution does not change the diffusion equation. As mentioned in the
previous section, if a matter dominated FRW universe is assumed, @xmath
, where @xmath is the current age of the universe and the scale factor
today is taken to be @xmath . If the form for @xmath is substituted into
the diffusion equation, Equation 5.49 , it becomes

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.92)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

A new time variable @xmath can be defined by

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.93)
  -- -------- -- --------

and thus

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.94)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.95)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (5.96)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

If we further note @xmath , where @xmath is the energy observed today,
the equation becomes simply

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.97)
  -- -------- -- --------

In other words, the change in energy due to expansion can be compensated
for by fixing the energy at the observed energy and simply transforming
to a new time variable

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (5.98)
  -- -------- -- --------

For analysis of the CMB this is approximately equivalent simply to
evolving the equation for 3/5 the time since @xmath is so close to
@xmath .

##### The polarisation of the CMB

The cosmic microwave background is expected to be partially polarised
due to Thomson scattering off free electrons at the surface of last
scattering. Thomson scattering can produce only linear polarisation (and
only do so when there is a quadrupole anisotropy in the incident
radiation) and thus the CMB is expected to have no circular
polarisation. The CMB polarisation has now been detected by multiple
experiments, including WMAP [ 69 ] , BICEP [ 70 ] , and QUaD [ 71 ] .

The polarisation of the CMB is commonly discussed not in terms of Stokes
parameters, or angles on the Bloch/Poincaré sphere, but rather in terms
of @xmath and @xmath modes (see, e. g. [ 72 ] ). Instead of describing
the polarisation of a single photon, @xmath and @xmath modes describe
how the polarisation varies over a small area. The names ‘ @xmath ’ and
‘ @xmath ’ mode are drawn from an analogy with electric and magnetic
fields: the polarisation pattern on the sky (direction and intensity) is
decomposed into a curl-free component ( @xmath mode) and a divergence
free component ( @xmath mode). The exact method by which these
components are calculated is not important for the current discussion.
As mentioned above, a quadrupole anisotropy in the radiation at last
scattering is necessary for there to be polarisation in the CMB. This
anisotropy can arise from scalar, vector, or tensor perturbations.
Scalar perturbations, due to density fluctuations in the plasma, give
rise to @xmath mode polarisation; vector perturbations, due to vorticity
in the plasma, are expected to be negligible; tensor perturbations can
be caused by gravitational waves, and would give rise to @xmath mode
polarisation.

Analysis of the CMB is usually in terms of correlations between @xmath
mode, @xmath mode, and temperature @xmath . In all, there are six
cross-correlation spectra that can be examined: @xmath . In the absence
of a parity violating effect, the correlators @xmath and @xmath are
expected to vanish. The rotation of the polarisation angle can thus be
detected through the presence of a nonzero @xmath and @xmath . More
specifically, for an angle of rotation @xmath the exact change in the
correlators can be written as (see, for example [ 62 , 73 , 63 ] ):

  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.99)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.100)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.101)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.102)
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath      (5.103)
  -- -------- -------- -------- -- ---------

where @xmath are the spectra when there is no rotation. Note that the
@xmath correlation is unchanged by rotation. For the polarisation
diffusion and drift model discussed here the angle @xmath is dependent
on the energy, and thus the expected spectra above will depend on the
frequency band one is working in.

Example correlation spectra can be produced using the Code for
Anisotropies in the Microwave Background (CAMB). ¹ ¹ 1 Available at
http://camb.info/. Figure 5.3 shows @xmath and @xmath spectra for
standard parameters, without any polarisation rotation (recall @xmath
and @xmath vanish). Figure 5.4 shows the @xmath and @xmath spectra that
would result if a rotation of polarisation occurs; an arbitrary angle
@xmath has been chosen to illustrate the effect. The changes in @xmath ,
@xmath , and @xmath spectra under this rotation are shown in Figure 5.5
. Note that there is some difficulty determining what values of @xmath
are allowed by current data. For example, Xia et al. [ 74 ] give
differing (and seemingly contradictory at @xmath ) values of @xmath ,
@xmath , and @xmath depending on which subset of CMB experiments they
analyse. Note that as they assume @xmath is frequency independent these
values cannot be used to constrain the drift parameter @xmath . Recall
that @xmath when expansion of the universe is included. Taking @xmath ,
and choosing one of the WMAP observation frequencies, @xmath GHz, shows
that the (probably too large) angle @xmath in fact corresponds to @xmath
, already several orders of magnitude smaller than the bound placed on
@xmath with radio galaxy data in Section 5.4.1 .

The discussion above has all been concerned with the effect of the
rotation of the plane of polarisation on CMB data. Effects such as the
suppression of polarisation predicted by the polarisation diffusion
equation do not seem to have been discussed much in the literature. In
terms of the correlation spectra above, the diffusion will simply reduce
the amplitude of each spectra by some fixed, energy dependent, amount.
To properly constrain the drift and diffusion parameters, CMB data from
a single frequency band must be compared with the corresponding
predicted spectra generated by CAMB and modified for drift and
diffusion. Comparing over a range of drift and diffusion parameters will
allow the values that best fit current CMB observations to be found.
Unfortunately this process requires modifying the Markov Chain Monte
Carlo code, CosmoMC, and is outside the scope of this thesis. This work
has recently been undertaken by Carlo Contaldi and the results appear in
[ 49 ] .

### 5.5 Concluding remarks

When studying massless particles with polarisation in a discrete
spacetime, the assumption of Lorentz invariance turns out to be
insufficient to completely constrain the phenomenological model. To make
concrete predictions it is necessary to restrict attention to linear
polarisation – fortunately it is precisely linear polarisation that is
of interest in astrophysics and cosmology.

As yet there is no underlying microscopic model for polarised photons on
a causal set (or even, as discussed in Chapter 4 , unpolarised photons).
When particles in causal set theory are better understood it is hoped
that useful models including circular polarisation will be able to be
developed and the validity of the results obtained in the current
restriction to linear polarisation checked.

For linear polarisation a polarisation diffusion equation was derived in
Sections 5.2 and 5.3 in terms of affine and cosmic time respectively.
The tight constraints on energy diffusion and drift obtained in Chapter
4 allow the polarisation diffusion equation to be simplified to a
diffusion equation in terms of polarisation angle with two free
parameters. A distribution of linearly polarised photons is found to
experience a suppression in polarisation determined by the diffusion
parameter @xmath and a rotation of polarisation determined by the drift
parameter @xmath .

The suppression of polarisation over the travel time of photons from
distant sources to us does not seem to have been much considered.
Unfortunately it is, for the most part, a difficult effect to constrain
since the polarisation fraction at the source must first be well
understood.

There are a number of different proposed models that would generate
polarisation rotation over the travel time of photons. The model
proposed here is distinct, however, in the @xmath dependence of its
rotation and in that it preserves Lorentz invariance. The polarisation
rotation is easily constrained by existing data. A natural correlation
between the polarisation angle and the axis of radio galaxies allowed a
constraint of @xmath to be placed in Section 5.4 . The photons from the
CMB, having had more time to experience the underlying discreteness,
impose a tighter constraint on the rotation and also constrain the
suppression. These constraints are discussed in [ 49 ] .

## Chapter 6 Conclusions and future directions

Lorentz invariance is not optional in the causal set approach to quantum
gravity. It is an essential feature of the theory and proves a very
powerful constraint in the development of causal set phenomenology. A
surprising amount can be deduced beginning with only the simple
assumptions that spacetime is discrete and Lorentz invariant.

The behaviour of massive particles in a discrete spacetime was shown to
be described by a diffusion equation with one free parameter in the
continuum limit. The derivation of this equation did not rely on any
underlying particle model, but simply on the assumptions of discreteness
and Poincaré invariance. It could be argued that the derivation does not
guarantee a finite diffusion constant and thus a truly observable
effect. To rebut this objection it was shown analytically that the
continuum diffusion parameter was necessarily finite for the swerves
model of particle propagation on a causal set. Numerical simulations of
the swerves model and two ‘intrinsic’ models gave results that clearly
demonstrated diffusion behaviour, and in the case of the swerves model
it was possible to determine the relationship between the diffusion
parameter and the underlying model parameters.

In the causal set approach, spacetime discreteness is expected to be of
the order of the Planck scale. The constraints of computer memory limit
causal set sizes simulated on a standard computer to around @xmath
elements. We could question the point of even attempting to investigate
large scale behaviour in causal sets that correspond to such absurdly
small regions of spacetime (even a volume of @xmath would contain on the
order of @xmath elements). Yet remarkably, the simulations do agree with
the expected continuum behaviour. The results suggest that causal set
simulations will have an important role to play in the further
development of the theory and its phenomenology.

Lorentz invariance also allowed a useful phenomenological model for
massless particles in discrete spacetime to be developed. Massless
particles were shown to experience a drift and diffusion in energy in
the continuum limit. Crucially, all massless particles still travel at
the speed of light in this model. The accurate data available on the
cosmic microwave background allowed both the drift and diffusion
parameters to be tightly constrained. Whether the constraints are so
tight as to exclude all possibility of future observations of the effect
remains to be seen.

The common word ‘particle’ erroneously suggests massless and massive
particles are variations of the same fundamental object. The diffusion
experienced by massless particles is not simply the massless limit of
the massive particle diffusion, suggesting that massive and massless
particles will appear in quite different forms in any future complete
causal set theory. How exactly will particles fit into the causal set
approach? The massive particle models considered here were classical,
point particle models and, as yet, we have no candidate models at all
for massless particles. To produce any underlying model for massless
particles, it seems likely quantum behaviour will have to be considered.

Placing particles ‘on’ a fixed causal set seems highly unsatisfactory.
The causal set should be a dynamic structure, growing in number of
elements. On large scales the theory must reproduce the relationship
between mass and curvature, suggesting that the presence of particles
will influence the growth of the causal set. The need to reproduce
quantum effects suggests assigning amplitudes to each possible step in
the causal set growth. It would be nice if we could just devise a theory
now that satisfies all our requirements, but the problem is simply too
big. Progress is made by looking at what can be learned from
phenomenology, by developing quantum field theory on causal sets, by
looking at the structure of curves spacetime in causal sets, and so on.
Steps in the direction of a complete theory will hopefully lead to
further phenomenology and, ultimately, falsifiable predictions.

The power of the Lorentz invariance assumption has its limitations. When
considering the polarisation of massless particles, Lorentz invariance
proved insufficient to constrain the model. Identifying the assumptions
necessary to constrain the model further will have to wait for the next
step in understanding particles in causal set theory. In the meantime,
restricting to linear polarisation has allowed progress to be made. In a
discrete spacetime linearly polarised photons were found to experience
rotation in polarisation angle and suppression in polarisation fraction.
Rotation of polarisation angle is an effect predicted by a number of
other approaches to quantum gravity, but the particular energy
dependence of this model is unique. Again, cosmological data allowed the
free parameters of the model to be constrained.

It is important to remember that the results discussed here do not, for
the most part, call on specific features of causal set theory. They rely
on the assumptions of Lorentz invariance and discreteness and may,
hopefully, be generalisable to other quantum gravity theories. A lot has
been achieved looking at the large scale behaviour of particles in
discrete spacetime, despite the incomplete nature of the theory. Where
next can we look for signatures of spacetime discreteness?

The importance of phenomenology in the search for a theory of quantum
gravity should not be underestimated. It is crucial in the development
of the theories and, more importantly, reminds us to look out at the
universe once in a while and remember why it is we seek such a theory to
begin with.

## Appendix A Explicitly Lorentz invariant polarisation diffusion

The state space for a photon with polarisation is @xmath , where @xmath
is the polarisation state space. For an explicitly Lorentz invariant
formulation of the polarisation diffusion equation, @xmath is the
polarisation state space with coordinates @xmath , where @xmath is the
complex two-form satisfying the conditions set out in Section 5.1 . If
we wish to discuss only linear polarisation, @xmath can be taken to be a
real two-form satisfying the conditions

1.  @xmath ;

2.  @xmath ;

3.  @xmath ;

4.  @xmath .

Again, any @xmath satisfying these conditions can be expressed as @xmath
, where @xmath and @xmath . @xmath is now a real four-vector. Condition
(1) above provides six constraint equations, condition (2) a further one
constraint. Although condition (3) is four equations, it gives only
three new independent constraints. Finally condition (4), although 16
equations, gives only one new constraint. The state space @xmath
therefore has only one degree of freedom.

### a.1 Invariant vectors

Before writing down the diffusion equation, @xmath , @xmath , and the
density of states @xmath must be known. Consider the submanifold @xmath
. There are two Lorentz invariant vector fields on the submanifold:
@xmath and @xmath , where @xmath is the Hodge dual defined in the usual
way as @xmath . To see this, first consider the more general vector
fields @xmath and @xmath . These vectors are clearly Lorentz invariant,
as is the submanifold @xmath . It remains to show that the vectors are
tangent to the submanifold.

The normals to the submanifold are derived from the constraint equations
in the usual way:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.1)
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.2)
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.3)
                                @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.4)
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

The vector @xmath is clearly orthogonal to the first three normals:

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.5)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.6)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.7)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

For the last normal

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.8)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- -------

This equals zero only if @xmath . Thus the vector @xmath is normal to
the surface.

@xmath is also obviously orthogonal to the first three normals if it is
first noted that @xmath and @xmath if both @xmath and @xmath . These
results can be shown simply if @xmath is expressed as @xmath .

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.9)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.10)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.11)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

The remaining normal gives

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.12)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                       @xmath   @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

It turns out that @xmath , this is easily checked by choosing a specific
frame, say @xmath . Therefore @xmath is only tangent to the surface if
@xmath . Thus @xmath is an invariant vector.

### a.2 The diffusion equation

Given the above invariant vectors @xmath and @xmath , the most general
Lorentz invariant, symmetric, positive semi-definite matrix @xmath on
the submanifold @xmath is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.13)
  -- -------- -- --------

the general invariant vector is

  -- -------- -- --------
     @xmath      (A.14)
  -- -------- -- --------

where @xmath are constants and @xmath . The spacetime components of
@xmath and @xmath on the full state space @xmath are unchanged from the
zero spin massless particle case: @xmath , @xmath .

The diffusion equation can thus be written down from Equation 3.15 :

  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------
     @xmath   @xmath   @xmath            (A.15)
                       @xmath   @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
                                @xmath   
  -- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------

Although it explicitly demonstrates the Lorentz invariance of the
process, this equation is hardly user-friendly. To understand the
physical consequences of the diffusion, the equation derived in Section
5.2 using the Bloch sphere as the polarisation state space is far more
useful. It is important to confirm however, that these equations are in
fact equivalent. First consider polar coordinates on @xmath : @xmath .
In these coordinates the vector @xmath has components @xmath . As
mentioned earlier, the polarisation state space @xmath has only one
degree of freedom – specifically, it can be shown that the constraints
on @xmath reduce the polarisation state space to a circle. The density
of states, @xmath , on this circle is simply a constant and thus the
density of states for the full state space @xmath is @xmath . The
submanifold @xmath is thus the momentum space, a null cone, with a copy
of the polarisation space, a circle, at each point. The invariant vector
@xmath is simply the vector at a point on the cone that points along the
cone, away from the tip. The invariant vector @xmath is the tangent
vector to the polarisation circle. Denoting the coordinate on the circle
@xmath , @xmath and @xmath become @xmath and @xmath in coordinates
@xmath . Thus, this formalism is exactly the same as that used in
Section 5.2 .