Central to the development of any new theory is the investigation of the
observable consequences of the theory. In the search for quantum
gravity, research in phenomenology has been dominated by models
violating Lorentz invariance â€“ despite there being, at present, no
evidence that Lorentz invariance is violated. Causal set theory is a
Lorentz invariant candidate theory of quantum gravity that seeks not to
quantise gravity as such, but rather to develop a new understanding of
the universe from which both general relativity and quantum mechanics
could arise separately. The key hypothesis is that spacetime is a
discrete partial order: a set of spacetime events where the partial
ordering is the physical causal ordering between the events. This thesis
investigates Lorentz invariant quantum gravity phenomenology motivated
by the causal set approach.

Massive particles propagating in a discrete spacetime will experience
diffusion in both position and momentum in proper time. This thesis
considers this idea in more depth, providing a rigorous derivation of
the diffusion equation in terms of observable cosmic time. The diffusion
behaviour does not depend on any particular underlying particle model.
Simulations of three different models are conducted, revealing behaviour
that matches the diffusion equation despite limitations on the size of
causal set simulated.

The effect of spacetime discreteness on the behaviour of massless
particles is also investigated. Diffusion equations in both affine time
and cosmic time are derived, and it is found that massless particles
undergo diffusion and drift in energy. Constraints are placed on the
magnitudes of the drift and diffusion parameters by considering the
blackbody nature of the cosmic microwave background. Spacetime
discreteness also has a potentially observable effect on photon
polarisation. For linearly polarised photons, underlying discreteness is
found to cause a rotation in polarisation angle and a suppression in
overall polarisation.
